THE HEARTS EASE, OR A Remedy against all Troubles.

To which is added a Consolatory Discourse against the loss of our Friends and
those that are dear unto us.

By Simon Patrick B. D. Minister of Gods Word at Batersea in Surrey.

PSALM 94.19. In the multitude of my thoughts within me thy comforts delight my
soul.

M. Antoninus. (...). Happiness lies in a very few things.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Francis Tyton at the three Daggers in Fleetstreet
near the Inner Temple-gate, 1660.

To the Honorable Sr. Walter St. John Baronet, and the Lady Johanna St. John
his Wife; The Author wishes all the blessings of this life and that which is
to come.
THE first occasion of these meditations upon these words of our Savior to his
Disciples, (John 14.1.) is known only to my self and another person whose
contentment I exceedingly desired. But the occasion of their publication is
known to more then your selves, (for whose use they were first transcribed a
good while ago) which I will not trouble the world so much as to take an
account of. For it will believe (its like) that it comes from my own proper
motion and inclination to send them abroad: and the ordinary reason from the
importunity of friends can be understood by none but those who know that a
friend can do more with us then we our selves.

But the reason why they address themselves to you, is known best to my self.
For though you might know it if you pleased, yet your goodness teaches you to
forget the many obligations you laid upon me, which I ought always to
remember. So many they are that when I think how to discharge them, it puts me
in mind that there is one sort of trouble which I have made no provision
against in this Treatise, which is for want of ability both to pay what we owe
to those that love us, and also to express the sense which we have of their
goodness. But I consider that this is such a pleasing sort of trouble that one
would not be willing that it should be cured. We have no reason to find fault
that our friends will do us more good then we deserve, nor to complain that
their goodness is greater then we can speak of. And that ought not (I know) to
be the occasion of my trouble, which is your singular pleasure aad contentment.
And if this kind of acknowledgement will acquit me in any sort of ingratitude,
I am but beginning to discharge and exonerate my self: For I had designed,
before the publishing of this was thought of, to put a Treatise of another
nature into your hands. But I am well secured that I shall not trouble you by
beginning my addresses to you with a discourse of troubles, as if I did bode
some evil to you, because I believe that you desire rather to be prepared
against any crosses, then to have none befall you. I confess I discern some
defects in the first part of this Treatise, which if I had penned with an
intention to have sent abroad, I think that I should have taken some care to
have seen supplied. But it will not be the less aceptable to you who are able I
know out of the general truths here propounded, to raise such principles as
will be able to give you satisfaction in particular cases not here named. Yet
presuming that you will not be weary of reading any thing that comes from the
hand of one whom you love so well, I shall here take the liberty to instance in
some things which would have deserved some particular consideration.

There is no greater trouble to some ingenuous souls then to be requited with
injuries for the kindnesses they have done to others. But they may soon
consider that this befell our Master Jesus Christ himself. And though it be in
their power to do good to others, yet it belongs not to them to make them good.
And if there be any way to beget love in them, it is by love: and there is no
small contentment in loving those who have no love for us. For this is the very
height of love, and love it self is a thing so sweet that it is its own reward.

But some perhaps have this addition of trouble that their own friends do not
love them; and those whom God and nature do command to be kind, are ill
affected toward them. The same remedy will cure this disease. And let them
turn their love into pity, that any should be so unhappy as to be strangers to
the rarest pleasures in the world which arise from loving of others. And you
may see from hence the necessity of one Rule which I have commended, which is
not to hope for any thing here below. And particularly remember this, that you
may be disappointed if you look for any more satisfaction from your children,
then the pleasure of doing good to them, and seeing them do good to themselves.
For the old saying has had but few hitherto to cross it, That love (like your
inheritances) does descend, but uses not to ascend.

But there are others that may say they could easily brook any sufferings from
others, but that commonly it is the lot of those that suffer, to be thought
guilty of those crimes for which they innocently suffer. Quae perferunt,
meruisse creduntur. The world is so sottish that they commonly think men
deserve that which they endure; and we are deprived many times not only of our
enjoyments, but likewise of our fame; and we are denied not only our security,
but likewise all apology for our selves. But who can keep the world from
thinking what they please? Who knows not that it sees but with half an eye, if
it be not stark blind? And what shall we be the better if they think well of
us, seeing what they think either one way or other, is with so little reason.
If we deserve not well, their thoughts and speeches can do us no good; and if
we do, God will take care that they shall do us no harm.

But there is a little number of good souls perhaps who are troubled for what
others suffer, and are afflicted with the misery of their neighbors. There are
so few that complain of this grief, and it is a malady that men are so seldom
sick of, that I should scarce have thought it needful to have prescribed any
Physic for such a rare disease. If the hurt do not touch us in our own bodies,
relations or friends, we shall soon find comfort enough without any direction
to alleviate the grief which we sustain for others how heavy soever it may
happen to be. But if any be oppressed with this sort of trouble, Let them
consider what is said in the ensuing Treatise, that they do others no good, but
themselves harm by being troubled. And therefore let-them be sensible of their
miseries so far only as to pray for them, and relieve them (if they can) and to
make their hearts sensible of Gods mercies to them, that by that joy they may
cure the other trouble.

But men are troubled perhaps that Religion is like to suffer. I am very glad
of it if they be; for then I suppose such persons are so much in love with
Religion, that they will not let their trouble hinder any part of their duty.
And if they do their duty, they may leave it to God to have a care of the
interest of Religion; for he loves it far better then we can do.

But some are troubed that they are no more troubled. A sad thing that we
should be discontented at that, for which we should be thankful. For by this
trouble they moan nothing else but a confusedness of spirit which never did any
body any good. The rubbing of the eyes does not fetch out the moat, but makes
them more red and angry; no more does this distraction and fretting of the
mind, discharge it of any ill humors, but rather makes them more abound to vex
us.

But some are yet troubled because they fall from the height of their
resolution, and are more troubled now then once they were at what befalls them.
Whereas they once observed these rules well and kept themselves in peace, they
fall now into some discontent again; Whereas they did pray with some fervor,
they now abate of the height of their Zeal. Truly we must not expect while we
are here below in this Cave or Dungeon, to be quite free from all such damps.
And it may be some degree of pride, not to be able to endure some dullness and
coldness of spirit. Be not troubled if at all times you cannot do as well as
you would, but labor to do as well as you can. And especially take heed that
the not doing of what you did, do not breed in you a fearfulness that you shall
never do as you was wont again. This dispirits the soul and so disheartens it,
that it runs it self into that very thing which it is taking a course for to
avoid.

Remember well that rule which is the first that you meet-withall in the the
following book. Know your duty thoroughly and then do it. If you think it to be
less then it is, you will not do what you ought; and if you think it to be more
then it is, you cannot do what you think you ought: and if you think that
anxiety of mind for what is not in your present power, is any part of your
duty, you do not think as you ought. There was a great Master among the Jews
who bid his Scholars consider and tell him what was the best way wherein a man
should always keep; R. Jochonan in Pirke Xivoth. L. 2.
One came and said that there was nothing better then a good eye, which is in
their language a liberal and contented disposition. Another said A good
companion is the best thing in the world. A third said A good neighbor was the
best thing he could desire; and a fourth preferred a man that could foresee
things to come, i. e. a wise person. But at last came in one Eleazar and he
said A good heart was better then them all. True said the Master, thou have
comprehended in two words all that the rest have said. For he that has a good
heart will, be both contented, and a good companion, and a good neighbor, and
easily see what is fit to be done by him. Let every man then seriously labor
to find in himself a sincerity and uprightness of heart at all times, and that
will save him abundance of other labor.

But let me take upon me to be so far a Master as to tell you, that next to
this man the second said right, that a good friend is the greatest easement in
the world in this sort of troubles.

If a man therefore cannot quiet himself, let him get a good friend to whom he
may unbosome his heart; for two (says Solomon) are better then one: because if
they fall, the one will lift up his fellow.

Two small streams united in one channel, may be able to bear a vessel of some
burden: and so may the counsels and comforts of two friends meeting together be
able to support the weight of many troubles.

But if one will resolve to be troubled, I see there is no end of it; for a man
may be disquieted in his thoughts about the choice of such a friend.

Let such consider this, that perhaps God has given them one already, and the
person that lies in their arms may give the best advice unto them. Or their
spiritual Guide may be the most excellent friend. Or howsoever they may know
who will make one, by their love to piety, by the simplicity of their manners,
the innocence and modesty of their converse, their wise discourse, their
freedom from pride and captiousness and such like things. This likewise I may
add that though there be an inequality between that person and you, which is a
necessary thing to friendship, yet if other things be not wanting, love and
friendship will make you equal.

But how if this friend should die, will some say, how much then shall I be
troubled? and what remedy shall I use to give me comfort when I have lost him
that should comfort me! I told you there was no end of Questions, But yet the
resolution of this Question will satisfy all; for he that can bear this
trouble, will be able to support himself under all other. And therefore since I
resolved to let these meditations go further then your selves; I have composed
a little Tract to wait upon them, which administers comforts against the loss
of friends. It has indeed contrary to my first design outgrown that in bigness
which was born above two years before it: But yet the reason may be because
there is much of the other in it. For as it is in the Calculations of our
Almanacks which are referred exactly to some certain place, but fit without
sensible error the whole Nation; So I observe it is in this discourse, which
though it does most properly belong to those who have lost their friends, yet
has many things in it which may indifferently serve all other persons who are
troubled about worldly matters. And let me entreat you and all others that read
me, to remember always, tha^ God rules the world; and that those things which
are Accidents to us ar^ Providence with him; and it will give you much
satisfaction in your hearts. He has made all these things mutable, and
therefore it is a madness to think that they always stand as we would have
them: and yet he is so good that he has made something good for us in every
mutation, so that it is a Folly to be discontented that they continue not as we
would have them. Who would go and seek for Violets and Primroses in the Wood in
the Winter season? But then we may go and gather sticks to keep us warm. And in
the Spring who looks for Grapes and Plums and such ripe fruit? But yet we may
prune the Vines and lopp the Trees, and wait a while and have what we desire.
Assure your selves it is forgetfulness of God that makes us troubled, yea
forgetfulness of our selves also, who think we have lost our proper good, when
we are well enough. And I think it will not unbecome me to speak to you in the
words of a Heathen, and bid you Be confident, Arrian Epict. l. 2. cap. 16. L.
4. cap. 7.
and looking up to Heaven say, Hereafter I will use my self to what thou will;
I conform my thoughts wholly unto thee; I refuse nothing that seems good in
thine eyes. Lead me whether thou will; give me what garments thou please;
choose my food and provision for me, etc. I had always rather have that to be
which already is then any thing else: For I think that is better which God
wills, then that which I.

And yet upon a review of what I have writ concerning our friends death, I
think that there is one sort of persons that would have deserved a more
particular consideration then I have given them in that discourse.

Widows I mean, who esteem themselves so desolate that I ought to have pitied
them so much as to have addressed a few lines on purpose unto their comfort.
Though I do not know how to excuse my self if here I should enter upon that
subject; Yet there is a great person who has spoken words of consolation to
them so excellently sweet, that it cannot displease you if I give you the sense
of what He says. I have lost (says some sad soul) not only my companion, S.
Chrysostom. upon 1 These. Hom. 6.
but my guide, my stay, my shield, my second self. I doubt not of the
resurrection which Saint Paul discourses of; but what shall I do in the mean
time? Much business I have to do: but I am a fit prey for every Cormorant who
has a mind to be unjust. The Servants who reverenced me before, will now
despise a silly woman. If my husband have obliged any: alas! it will be soon
forgotten now that he can do them no more kindness; but if he did them any
wrong, they will be sure to take all the revenge upon me that they are able.
This is the thing that breeds me all my anguish; and set this aside, his death
would not so much trouble me.

What shall we answer? (says Saint Chrysostom unto this.) Truly I could
easily convince them that not what they pretend, but an unreasonable passion is
the cause of words so sad and doleful: If this were the cause of their
lamentation, then they must never cease thus to bewail themselves. But if after
a years time all these tears are dried up, then the want of their defense and
comfort which will be then most sensible, is not the only cause of them. But
let it be supposed that this is the fountain of all their sorrow, and consider
how much infidelity there is in it, that we should think it is They that take
care of us and not God: It cannot choose but provoke him to anger to see that a
creature of his is more beloved then himself; and therefore it is likely he
took away thy husband because he was more to thee then thy God himself. The
holy one of Israel is very jealous, and cannot endure to be so slighted, that
other things should have as much of our affections as his excellent goodness,
which is therefore to be beloved by us above all others, because it expresses a
love to us above all other creatures. What was the reason I beseech you that
Widdowhood and Orphanage were so rare in the Ancient times among good people?
Why did Abraham and his Sarah and Isaac live till a great old age? Truly I
think it was because Abraham loved God more then either of them: and when God
did but say unto him Kill thy Son, he was as willing to do it as to offer the
Sacrifice of a Lamb. But we are heavy and dull; we are carried so headlong into
the embraces of creatures, that God is fain even against our wills to draw our
affections to himself by drawing them away from us. Do but love God more then
thy husband, and I will undertake that thou shall not fall into Widdowhood, or
thou shall not feel it when thou fallest into it. And I have a good ground for
what I avouch: For thou have him for thy Husband and thy defense, that never
dies, and that loves thee infinitely more then any man can do. And if this
reason be not sufficient to convince thee, I have a comparison that will win
thy assent. Tell me, if thou had a husband who loved thee so much as if he
had no soul but thine, one that was as much beloved of others as he loved thee;
one so wise and discreet that he was as much admired as loved; one so gentle
and complyant as if he was but wax to thy impressions; one by whom thou did
shine as the Moon does with the rays of the Sun: and suppose thou had a
child by this dear person who dies before he comes to his full age; Would
thou be considerately grieved and touched with sorrow for its death while thou
did enjoy such a better love? No, in no wise. He that is so fair and
beautiful in thy eyes, would supply the want of it as the Sun does the absence
of the Stars. He that is more loved and esteemed, would obscure and quite hide
all the excellencies of the other. If therefore thou love God more then that
husband: if his glory put out the luster of all other things in thine eyes,
thou will be as little troubled at his death, as before then wast for the death
of thy child. Yea far less one would think, should thy trouble be, in as much
as God is infinitely more above that Husband, then he above thy child.

And beside, what is that thou receivest from thy Husband that is comparable to
what the love of God gives thee? Are they not pangs and labors, unkind words
perhaps and angry chideings? Or if thou can tell me of any goods, what are
they? What are fine clothes and Jewels, and honors and such like things to the
Son of God, to the Brotherhood and Adoption, to the Kingdom and eternal glory,
to the life of God and Coheirship with the only begotten? will thou after all
this tell me thou can not but be passionate for the loss of thy Husband? If
thou want him, thou have God. If thou want thy menial servants and
attendants, thou have the guard of spiritual powers; the dominions and
principalities of heaven are thy Ministers. If thou say thy children want a
Father; that cannot be, seeing God is the Father of the Fatherless. If thou
fear they shall want, tell thy self who gave them to thee, and whether the
life be not more then meat, and the body then raiment. Or if thou fear they
shall not be so well provided as otherwise they would have been; How many could
I tell thee of that have been bred by Widows and proved famous? How many that
have had Fathers and been good for nothing? Put the fear of God in their
hearts, and this will preserve them more then a Father. When the Guard is
within, they will less need one without. This will be better then riches and
glory and promotion to them: this will make them famous both in earth and
heaven. Do not set thine eyes then on the Youth, who by reason of his Fathers
greanness is girded with a golden Belt, and rides on a pransing Horse, and is
taken into Kings Courts, and has many Masters and Tutors following him at his
heels: But cast thine eye above, open the gate of heaven in thy thoughts; look
into that stately Palace; behold the King there sitting on his Throne; and if
He whom thou see on earth can be sooner admitted thither then thy child; then
fetch a great sigh and fill the heavens with noise and clamor. But seeing
neither riches nor birth nor any thing else is there preferred but only virtue
and goodness, think what reason thou have to be content: and think how certain
it is that nothing is sad, (...) if we will not be fools, but Philosophers. And
for thy self if thou complainest of being desolate and solitary: think what the
Apostle says, 1 Timothy 5.5. that such an one trusts in God. This is only an
opportunity of enjoying more of God. Thou have more time and liberty to please
God now that thou have none else to please. Thou art freed from all other
bonds, to be tied faster to him. There are no chains, no restraints upon thee
to keep thee from doing what thou would. Thou art separated from one husband,
to be united to a better. Thou have not the fellow servants, but thou have the
Master. Thou have not thy husband to talk with thee, but God is thy husband.
When thou prayest, do thou not talk with God? When thou read, tell me,
does not God speak to thee? And what does he say to thee? Words more desirable,
more sweet then can drop from an husbands lips. If he speak never so kindly, it
is no great matter, for he is but a fellow servants. But if the Master will be
pleased to embrace and speak sweetly to his handmaid, (...), This is a strange
piece of service. And observe I beseech you how he serves us and waits upon us:
Hear in what words he bespeaks us. Come unto me all you that are weary and
heavy laden, and you shall find rest to your souls. And again by the Prophet he
cries, Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have
compassion on the Son of her Womb? yea they may forget, yet I will not forget
thee. What charms and Philtrums are there in these words? And what can have
more of honey in them then these expressions in the Song of Songs, My Love, my
Dove, my fair one, my Paradise, etc.? and yet this is the language of God to
men. To this purpose speaks that Divine Person with an elegancy, that though I
cannot imitate, yet I could not but follow till I have run beyond the just
length of an Epistle.

And yet I cannot but tell you some more of my thoughts concerning the
following discourse, though I have acknowledged so many omissions already.
There are some general rules laid down at the latter end of the first Treatise,
which it would have pleased you perhaps if they had been more enlarged. I shall
take leave therefore to extend this address a little further; that if it be
possible, I my not let you want any thing which you may chance to desire.

And for direction of your prayers to God in these cases. Be sure first to
observe the cause of all your trouble, the fountain which casts forth the mire
and dirt into your fouls. When we know the cause of a malady, it is half cured.
And seeing this cause you will find to be within your selves, therefore
Secondly, Pray not so much against trouble, as the cause of the trouble. Pray
for a contented mind, a low esteem of the world, a new opinion of things, an
humble frame of heart and such like graces. If we merely pray not to be
troubled, and rest in General expressions, we shall find little ease to our
hearts. Thirdly, Pray not so much for removal of the thing that troubles you,
as for strength to bear it, and divine power to support you under it, and
heavenly wisdom to make an advantage of it. Fourthly, If you do pray for the
removal of any outward burden, and the prevention of any loss, yet let it be
with an indifferent mind, least you be more troubled when you find that God
does not hear those prayers. Fifthly, when you are troubled for one fault, be
troubled for all, and pray for a new heart. When you have done any evil, then
be humbled for the neglect of so much good, which may be the reason of that
evil. For when a malady does affect a particular part, the whole body must be
purged; or else if we apply the remedy only to that part, we shall but drive
the humor to some other place. And sixthly I would wish you to apply the remedy
presently before the trouble eat into the flesh. As soon as you see it it come,
fly to God, and take your Antidotes and beseech him to bless them to you. I
cannot but here again transcribe another excellent speech of an Heathen. Either
God can do something, M. Antonin. L. 9.. 40.
or he cannot: If he can do nothing, why do thou pray to him? If he can do
something, why do thou not pray that thou may not fear, nor desire, nor be
sad for any of these things, rather then that this or that thing should be or
not be to thee? If he can help us, then he can help us to be without a thing as
well as to have it: and not to fear a thing, as well as not to have it. Begin
therefore to beg these things of God by prayer, and thou shall see what will be
the issue of it. One prays that he may have such an one to wife; Do thou pray
that thou may not desire her. Another prays to be eased of a tyranny; Do
thou pray that thou may be able to bear it. O let not my child die, says
another; but do thou say, O let me not fear the loss of it. Turn thy prayers I
say all this way, and see what will come of it. Thus that Royal Philosopher.

And as for Faith which is another thing there mentioned, I entreat you to
believe, First, That God is not hard to please. Persuade your selves that he is
good and gracious, and accepts of the sincere, hearty and constant endeavors
of his Servants to do his will. Secondly, Believe that he would have us pleased
too, and delights in our contentment. It is not pleasing to him to see us
troubled, nor does he wish to see us full of perplexed thoughts N: either does
he willingly grieve us, or send such things upon us that should molest us, but
he loves to have all his children in peace. And Thirdly, Believe fully that he
has the greatest mind to give that which will remedy the greatest cause of
troubles, and that is his Divine Grace and Holy Spirit. Sin is that which makes
all our sores so angry; The Spirit of the most High is that which will enable
us to mortify it; and this Spirit we may have as readily from him, as a piece
of bread from the hands of our dearest parent. Go on courageously therefore,
and be confident; seeing there is nothing that God is more desirous to bestow
then that which will cure us of all our griefs.

Of these I shall say no more, and of the rest nothing at all, least I should
weary my other Readers, though not You, who have given me abundant testimony
that I can do nothing to displease you, and thereby laid a perpetual engagement
upon me to be

The most affectionate of those that love and serve you, Simon Patrick.
From your house at Batersea, October 4. 1659.
Reader, It was intended that the sum of this Discourse should have been given
at the head of every Chapter. But that being by an oversight neglected, it is
here presented to thee.
AN Intrduction, showing that all men's desires are seeking for quiet. In the
Gospel only it is to be found. Christ bequeathed it is a Legacy to his
Disciples. The design of this Treatise.

Cap. 1. Two Reasons against trouble, drawn from Christ's promises, and Gods
providence. Cap. 2. Three other Reasons, which show that we may be good,
whatsoever comes, and we may turn it into good; and if we do not, it will be a
double evil. Cap. 3. Some other reasons from the kindness that may be intended
us in every thing, from the nature of the world, and the nature of virtue. Cap.
4. Where we must lay our foundation of settlement, and how it must be laid.
Cap. 5. Two rules directing unto peace by understanding and doing and
distinguishing of our duty. Cap, 6. Two Rules more concerning the choice of
means and carelessness about events. Cap. 7. The knowledge of four selves,
together with consideration of the necessary consequents of every thing, are
two other remedies against trouble. Cap. 8. It is of great import to consider
well what we enjoy, and we should cast that in the Balance against our wants,
which is the substance of one rule more. Cap 9. Two Considerations more: one of
the wants of others: another of the uncertainty of our own enjoyments. Cap. 10.
Three Directions more, showing how we should shut the world out of our selves,
and avoid self-flattery, and take heed of rash anger at our own selves. Cap.
11. Humility and self-annihilation: knowledge and judgment; simplicity and
purity; constancy and fixedness in one thing: are four excellent means to keep
us from trouble. Cap. 12. A Caution, and the Conclusion, showing that these
things suppose the practice of some more general rules: and that we must not
have these truths to get when we have need of them.
The Contents of the second Discourse.
Sect. 1. IT shows the need of a Consolatory Discourse against the loss of our
friends. Sect. 2. The purpose of it is to show that we may grant nature leave
to ease it self by moderate tears: and two Advices are given to keep us from
making an ill use of this grant. Sect. 3. It shows rather what might be said,
then what is said in this present Treatise for moderating our sorrows. But yet
those examples which we have from others, may move us to follow their rules,
and so a brief touch is made upon them. Sect. 4. It teaches to consider what
death is First Common; Secondly, Necessary; Thirdly, Good. And if we thought
more of it, we should not be unwilling to part; neither does the manner of
parting make any considerable difference. Sect. 5. It contains comforts against
the loss of Children, Parents, Consorts, Friends, upon a due consideration what
every one of them is. Sect. 6. It directs how to quiet our selves by comparing
our selves, both with our selves and with others; and there are five ways of
comparison insisted on. Sect. 7. Several reasons are given against immoderate
sorrow, which are comprised in 14. Questions which we should make to our
selves. The reason and spirit of them you may see in the Margin, at the
beginning of every particular. Sect. 8, Some other things are proposed for the
perfect cure of the soul; The first of which is deadness to the world; and the
casting out false opinions. The second is the changing of our sorrow into
another kind. The third is the Life of our Lord Jesus. Sect. 9. The Conclusion.
It contains an advice to those that are in love with sorrow. And an advice for
the reaping profit by this book. And a brief recapitulation of the chief
matters in it.
ERRATA.
PAge 1. l. 10. r. the mind: p 4. l. 3. r. it brings: p. 6. l. 18. r have
admitted: p. 25. l. 19. r. thou have left: p. 32. l. 13. r. his arms: p. 51. l.
6. r. other men's trouble: p 59. Marg. r. non optet. p. 81. Marg. l. 3. r. 2
Cor. 4.17, 18. p. 98. Marg. r. (...): p. 119. l. 25. r. die, then as p. 158. l.
penult. r. here are ten. p. 175. l. 10. dele then: p. 188. l. 17. r. well call.

THE HEARTS EASE, OR A Remedy against TROUBLE.
JOHN 14.1. Let not your hearts be troubled --


IT is not either fineness of Wit, or abundance of Wealth, or any such like
inward or outward ornament that makes the difference between men, and renders
the one better then the other; but the firmness of good Principles, the
settledness of the spirit, and the quiet of mind: To the obtaining of which,
all the old Philosophers, many hundreds of years before our Savior, did wisely
summon all their forces; all whose lessons when they are summed up, amount only
to this, to teach a man how to be contented. Socrates was upon this score
accounted the best amongst them, because though he understood but a little of
the frame of nature, yet he well understood himself; and perceived that he was
not the wisest man that could read rare things in the Stars, and could follow
the paths of the Sun, and trace all the heavenly bodies in the course which
they run, but he that could tell how not to be troubled either for the want of
that knowledge, or for any other thing.

Christianity has not a new design in hand, but more rare and excellent
instruments to effect the old. What Heathens could speak of, it enables us to
do. And still it is as true as ever it was, That nothing betters a man's
condition, but that which rids him of all his griefs, and eases him of his
troubles. So a great Divine among the Ancients observes, Macarius Homil. 5
That Christians are not distinguished from others (...), (...), etc.
by outward fashions and modes, by their external forms and molds into which
they are cast, or by professing a body of Notions differing from others in the
world, but by the renewing of their minds, by the peaceableness of their
thoughts, by charity and heavenly love, etc. And if we behold in their minds,
as in other men's, (...).
great shakings or Earthquakes, unsettled thoughts and reasonings, unbelief,
confusedness, trouble, trembling, fearfulness (all these words he uses) they
are fast bound to worldly things, they have not attained the end of their
Christianity, and are but a little bettered by their new condition.

That Christ came to discharge the mind of all these troublesome guests, the
Text (and many other verses of the ensuing Chapters) plainly tell us: The sense
of which is this, Do but believe that I am from God, and that what I say is his
mind, and you need not be troubled. The Faith of Christ is an antidote against
all evil: Peace is the proper result of the Christian temper. It is the great
kindness which our Religion does us, that brings us to a settledness of mind,
and a consistency within our selves.

Our Savior when he spoke these words, was just going to leave his little
flock, and you must needs think that his Patients who were yet under his cure,
could not but take the news of his departure very heavily: therefore as a wise
and tender Physician, he prescribes them the best directions that he could, and
leaves them in their hands; assuring them that every precept of his was a
sovereign medicine, every promise of his a Cordial to relieve their fainting
spirits, and particularly telling them that he would send the Comforter, and
that they should be under the Regiment and care of the Holy Ghost. These
heavenly Recipe's they have transcribed and transmited unto all succeeding
Ages, so that over the Gospel we may write what the Egyptians did over their
great Library, (...), This is the Hospital for sick souls: after all our search
something will trouble us, unless we have recourse hither; or if nothing do,
our case is so much the worse; and that which now would be only trouble, will
hereafter be tribulation and anguish.

That which I intend for the Subject of my discourse, is this, That, A
Christian heart ought not to be troubled; Or, That it does not become a
Christian to be troubled.

By trouble I understand that disorder in the soul which arises from the
prevalency of these passions, Fear, Carefulness, Sorrow, Anger, and the rest of
their kindred, which have Evil for their object. These Passions are raised
either from something within us, or from something without us; our Savior
chiefly speaks of the latter, and so shall I also; yet so, as to have some
regard to the former, that so I may in all particulars leave the mind well
satisfied. That I may not spend so much time in other things, as to have none
remaining for that which I mainly intend, I shall not tie my self to the laws
of an exact method; but make my discourse consist only of these two general
parts. 1. Of some Reasons why a Christian should not be troubled. 2. Of some
Rules to keep our hearts from trouble.

CAP. I.
FOr the former, That trouble is a great disparagement to the Promises of the
Gospel, which give us ease in every case, unless we refuse to become Gods
Patients, and will not use his remedies. In the case of sins prevalency, it
says, Rom 6.14.
Sin shall not have dominion over you, Romans 8.2, 3.11,
etc. The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free, etc. 1
John 2.1, 2.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, etc. which supports our
spirits under the thoughts both of what we admitted, and what we fear we shall
admit. To the poor man and the persecuted it says, Heb. 13.5, 6.
Let your conversation be without covetousness, etc. So that we may boldly say,
the Lord is my helper, and I will not fear, etc. And, Mat. 6.33.
Seek you first the Kingdom of God, etc. Mat. 5.10, 11, 12.
Blessed are you when you are persecuted, etc. And (that I may not enumerate
all particulars) it says to every Christian, whatsoever condition he be in, Be
careful for nothing, Phil. 4.6, 7.
but in every thing by prayer, etc. And the peace of God which passes all
understanding, etc.

When we sit down therefore desponding either under the power or the guilt of
our sins, and think that they can never be forgiven, or never overcome; when we
murmur, or are dejected, because we are mean, despised and afflicted; when we
are impatient for the loss of our friends, or our goods, etc. we do only betray
our own Ignorance, or Unbelief, or Idleness: We either know not what the Gospel
speaks, or we do not believe it, or we resolve not to be the better for it, if
it will put us to any labor: either we or the Gospel must bear the blame of
our trouble and disquiet; either that cannot relieve us, or we do ill to behave
our selves as though it could not. I know every good Christian will accuse
himself, not that; but let him consider that he cannot do it nor his Savior
honor, but by ceasing his discontents; for others will think that He is no
better Physician then the rest, who has no better success in his cures.

It is a great disparagement to the Providence of God which rules the world. If
there were no providence, I confess we were destitute of the greatest reason
that man has against fears, and cares, and sorrows; and he that is troubled,
would be less unreasonable, because all the care would lie upon himself, and
his own shoulders must alone bear the burden of every accident. But seeing we
acknowledge an eternal wisdom, an infinite, unprejudiced understanding that
governs, and superintends in all affairs, it is the greatest folly to be
disquieted, and to deport our selves as if we and chance ruled all. Some have
satisfied themselves with this single thought, that it is in vain to be
troubled, since things must not be as we will, but as that Almighty Being
pleases: A cold comfort one would think, to be content upon necessity; and yet
this some Heathens have mainly insisted upon as their support. Thanks be to God
that we have something better for to quiet us, and that is this, That the World
is governed not merely by Gods will, but by his wisdom. He disposes all things
according to his pleasure, but it pleases him to do all things for the best.
He rules the world not as an absolute Lord, so that we should be sensible only
of his power; but as a Loving Father, so that we should be confident of his
goodness. And therefore his children should not be displeased, as if they were
none of his Family, nor within the verge of his care, and were wholly forgotten
by him; but they should comfort themselves that they are in such safe hands,
who will do nothing but with the greatest reason, and for the most excellent
ends. (...), Antonin. l. 2. sect. 3.
was a pithy saying of one of the better sort of Heathens; All Gods actions are
full of Providence; and therefore there is no reason that we should be
displeased, as if God did not do well, or we could do better. You would think
it strange if the Flocks and herds should make a mutiny, because their
Shepherd chooses their pasture for them, and will not let them wander into wild
deserts and barren places, nor stray one from another, they know not whether,
nor run in rank meadows and fat grounds that may breed a rot among them; and
yet such a thing is our trouble and vexation, because we cannot do as we list,
or are not as we would choose: it is a fond desire to have the rod and the staff
out of the hand of the Shepherd of Israel; and then we might soon walk into
dangerous paths, and when we had brought our selves into the valley of the
shadow of death, find none at all to afford us any comfort.

It is distrust of God to be troubled about what is to come; impatience against
God to be troubled for what is present; and anger at him to be troubled for
what is past. This temper of spirit finds fault with his wisdom, and blames his
goodness, and depresses his power, and reprehends his faithfulness in the
dispose of things, and therefore it is a sin, and speedily to be amended.

To be troubled, speaks as if God had provided better for the beasts then for
mankind; for they live in peace within themselves, and we hear not of their
murmurs and complaints. And by the same reason that thou art troubled, all the
men in the world may be vexed also; and so none think or speak well of God, but
behave themselves as if he cared not for his rational creatures. For thou may
consider that God has endowed thee with an understanding of such a size, with
abilities and capacities of such a proportion, and measured for thee such a
fortune and condition as now thou have; if thou be not contented, but fretst
within thy self that thou art not better, then so may another man, for he wants
something also; yea, so may all men, for they are all imperfect. And upon the
same grounds that thou art troubled for the want of one particular thing, thou
may at the next step be troubled that thou art not a King, or that thou art
not an Angel; and an Angel may also be troubled that he is not a Principality,
or one of the seven spirits that stand at the Throne of God; and one of those
may take it ill that he was not made to understand more, and so the best things
would be most miserable, because they understand best their own wants. Many
Arguments to this purpose might be heaped up from the consideration of Gods
Providence, but I shall only mention one more.

Gods Providence has so ordered the several degrees of things in the world,
that none of them should be troubled, but should mutually help and be assistant
unto each other in their several wants; and so there is not the greatest man
living but stands in needs of the meanest, as much as the meanest does of him;
just as none of us can live without the beasts, no more then many of them can
live without us.

What things we want, God has otherwise supplied us with: either in some
other kind, or else in that by some other help: Which is an observation that we
are so well acquainted withal, that we are not discontented because we need
clothes, and were born naked into the world; nor do we account the beasts have
a privilege above us, because they come well clad into being, and provided
with apparel for all their lives, or are armed with horns and hoofs, because
God has given unto us reason, which is a better thing, and has made them both
to cloth and to arm us. Now so it is in other cases; as God has made the
brutes to help us in lesser things; so has he made other men to relieve our
greater necessities, to comfort us in our sadnesses, to supply us in our wants,
to advise us in our straits, and to be eyes and hands unto us, if we have no
wisdom nor strength of our own: yea, his own Son has he given to make an
universal provision for us. Now when we ask and resolve our selves, Which is
better, to come into the world with clothes on our back, or to have reason? we
should ascend up a little higher in our thoughts, and put to our selves a
parallel case: which is best? to have all in thy own hands and sole disposal,
or to have a Supreme Providence, an infinite wisdom to govern all thy affairs?
When we find the difference between these two, let us not live as if God ruled
not at all, or as if it were better that we did rule then he.

CAP. II.
WE should not be troubled, We may be good in every condition: What should he
fear, who may always be what he should be? What need he be vexed, who need not
be miserable unless he will? What cause has he to be displeased, who may
always please God and himself too? The Philosophers used to comfort themselves
with this, The Tyrant may kill me, but he cannot hurt me; he may make me suffer
torments, but he cannot make me do a dishonest action. I may be poor, but still
I may be just, and I may be contented. I may be ill spoken of, but still I can
do well. I may be sick, but still I may be patient. I may be in prison, but
there I may pray and sing as Paul and Silas did. That which cannot hinder our
duty, should not be so sadly lamented; (...). M. Anton. L. 2. Sect. 11.
or (as the noble Philosopher and Emperor speaks) How should that make the
life of man worse, which does not make worse the man himself? If we can do what
becomes us both to God and men, why should we be disturbed at what men do to
us? If they should take away our lives, they cannot take away our Religion: We
may be holy, when they will not let us be men. Yea, there are some peculiar
virtues to be exercised in a suffering condition, which else we might not have
had occasion for, and so we have no reason to be angry if they have done us a
courtesy, and made us better then we should have been, when they intended to
have made us worse. And that is the fourth thing, which I desire may be
considered.

We may make an advantage of every accident; Romans 8.28.
All things shall work together for good to those that love God, viz. by our
prudence and observation, and taking those occasions which are offered us, and
Gods grace assisting of us. It is not in our power always to be in health, or
to be rich, etc. but when sickness or poverty comes, we can make a good use of
it, and turn it into health and riches otherwise. (...), etc. Plutarch. de
tranquil.
The life of man (says Plato) is like to a game at Tables, wherein two things
are considerable; the one within our power, and the other without; The chance
is not in us, but to play it well is. When we cannot have a good cast, it
remains that by our skill and art we make a bad one good. Si illud quod est
maxim opus jactu non cadit, illud quod cecidit forte, id art ut corrigas.
Terent.
What shall fall out is not within us to choose; but to manage and improve that
which happens, and turn it to our advantage, by the goodness and the grace of
God, is within our selves, and nothing that is without us can intermeddle, or
be an impediment to us in it. Zeno I remember, having lost all his goods by
shipwreck, sought for no Port but Athens, and betook himself from merchandise
to the study of Philosophy; and so he revenged himself on Fortune (as he
called it) by becoming a Scholar and an honest man, crying out, Jam been
navigavi, cum naufragium feci.
Now I made a good voyage when I lost all. Such a story Nicephorus tells us, of
one Cyrus a Courtier in the time of Theodosius the younger, who through the
envious accusations of some favorites being spoiled of his goods, of a Pagan
he became a Christian, and of a Christian a Priest of God, and at last attained
the degree of a Bishop. So true is that which a holy Father said, Those things
are good, Bona sunt ista, unde facias been, non quae te faciunt bonum, etc.
August. Conc. 236.
not which can make thee good, but by which thou may do good; not which can
do good, but by which good may be done: i. e. all things are as we use them,
and even prosperity cannot do us good of it self, but we may use it to our
good; Just so I may be bold to say of adversity, it can do us no harm, but we
make it do us harm; it is not an evil that can make us evil, but by which we
may do evil. There is reason then we should be of good cheer, since things are
as we please; We need not be troubled, since what befalls us to our cross, may
serve a better end then that which we pursued. If we be made better men, more
holy and severe in our lives, more certain of heaven, and more desirous to be
there; if we learn to know the world better, to place less confidence in it,
and to expect nothing from it, then there is no reason that we should accuse
our Fortune.

For who is a loser that parts with a friend, and gets God for his Father, and
commits himself to his providence? That loses a Husband or a Wife, and dwells
for ever after in the arms of God, and is enflamed with a greater love of
heavenly things? The world perhaps does not love us; have we not reason to
thank it, if it make us to place our comfort and contentment in God, and a pure
conscience? They are unkind whom we have most obliged; but we repent not that
we have done such ungrateful persons good; we still love them, and lay up
hereafter our hopes and expectation above, and then when we cast up our
accounts, we find that we are gainers by them.

Thus in all cases we may say as he did. O happy Providence, my good Master,
(...).
that teaches me better then I could do my self; who not only invites me, but
compels me unto virtue! Now I am well, because I was ill; I have lost one thing
and gained many, God, virtue, and my self. I have not what I desired, but I
have what I ought to have desired. Another has done for me, that which I
should have done my self.

Trouble makes every sad accident a double evil, and contentedness makes it
none at all. If we will, it can do us no harm; if we give way to it, we also
wound our selves, and join with it to make our selves miserable. There is a
perfect Emblem of our folly in the story of a simple rustic, who going home
out of the field, laid the plough upon the Asses back, and then got up himself
also; and observing the poor beast to be oppressed, could find no better way to
ease her, but by laying the plough upon his own shoulder, so loading himself,
and not at all alleviating her of her burden.

Our bodies are compared by the Ancients to the beast; (...).
the mind they call the man, the Soul is our self. When the body is oppressed
with many miseries, by cares and grief, we think to ease it, when as alas, we
take not the loads off from it, but only lay them upon our selves. The same
burden remains upon the poor beast, and the man also bears it upon his back.
Like a Bird in the limetwigs, the more we flutter, the more we are entangled;
and that which was but a single mischief before, by our own follies becomes
two, or a great many: But if we stir not at all, but be quiet and still, then
we are what we were before this evil came; only our souls have the addition of
the greatest joy and pleasure by the victory we have obtained; For it has no
small effect upon our souls, that we can be joyful when there is matter of
sorrow, and that we can overcome the world, and depend upon nothing for our
happiness but God and our own souls. Let us not sin then against reason, as
well as God, Providence and Religion, nor make our selves more miserable then
we need be. When we lose our estates, let us not lose our constancy, and our
cheerfulness too; if thou have lost thy health, do not lose thy patience also;
if thou must die a little sooner then thou thoughtest, do not die unwillingly;
if thou have no friend, be not also thine own enemy; if others vex thee, do not
also vex thy self; if thou be ill to day, be not also solicitous for to morrow;
Mat. 6. ult.
sufficient for the day is the evil thereof: which are almost the very words of
Ben Syra, who gives this reason against such vexatious thoughts, Perhaps to
morrow shall not be, and so thou afflictest thy self for that which nothing
belongs to thee: We multiply our evils by our trouble, and bring those upon our
selves which perhaps were never intended for our portion. But our quietness
disappoints the enemy, and will weary him in his assaults, when he sees that we
do but grow better by what befalls us, and turn it into victory and triumph. So
a wise man once said, No man ever reproached me more then once; for by patient
bearing of them the first time, I taught him to abstain the second.

CAP. III.
BE not troubled at that which may be sent to breed the greatest Joy. Heb.
12.11.) many sad accidents in men's account, have proved the greatest means of
temporal advantage, and ended in their outward prosperity. You know how it
fared with Joseph, and that the chains of Iron upon his legs were the occasion
of the chain of gold about his neck; his Prison was the way to a Throne. And
(as St. Jam. 5.11.
James speaks) you have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of
the Lord, that the Lord is very pitiful and of tender mercy. And Church
History tells us that Eudoxia the daughter of a Philosopher in Athens, being
cast out of her Fathers house by her unkind brethren, and coming to
Constantinople to beseech Theodosius jun. the Emperor, that he would right a
poor Orphan, found such favor in his eyes, that he made her his Queen, and
she got a Palace, who sought but for a House. So true is that which the
Heathen observed, Wrong oft-times makes way for a better Fortune. Majori saepe
fortunae locum fecit injuria, Sen.
A Fever ( Hippocrates observes) puts an end to some diseases, and delivers
those from death, who could no other way be cured; In Aphoris.
and so Cardan tells us that an imprisonment which once befell him, which he
looked upon as the greatest disgrace, did him at length the greatest honor, and
so wiped off all reproaches from his Name, L. de vita propria, cap. 33.
Vt nec suspitionis vestigium emicuerit, that there was not the least footstep
left of any suspicion. The same Author (who had as many strange and unusual
accidents in his life as ever any man I read or heard of) tells us elsewhere
this notable observation which he made; Fatale mihi est omne bonum ex malo
initium habere. Card. de libris propriis.
It is fatal to me, that all good which befalls me, begins in some evil.
Consider then, that what happens to one, yea to many, may happen to thee: Why
should thou be troubled, till thou know whether thou have reason to be
troubled or no? Wait, stay a while, thou can but be troubled at the last, and
perhaps thou shall have reason to rejoice both for that evil, and for that thou
wast not troubled. The conclusion of a matter is most to be regarded, and we
can know little in the beginning.

Moses his rod was a Serpent till he took it by the tail, and then it became
what it was before; and if we would lay hold upon things only by their end, we
should find many things that seem terrible and noxious, to be benign and
salutiferous. Finis rerum, caput est, as one wittily said, Begin therefore at
the end; Judge nothing, but hope well till thou see the conclusion. Why
should thou not entertain thy self with good hopes now, as well as at another
time? Why will thou keep up and maintain the old piece of folly, to hope for
much, when thou need hope for nothing; and to hope for nothing, when thou have
nothing to live upon but hopes? I mean, to be big with expectation in
prosperity, when thou have enough in present possession; and to be as full of
despair in adversity, when expectation is all thou have lost.

It is our grand fault, that we are affected presently according as every thing
appears in the face, and we stay not till it turn about and show us the other
side. So the pleasures of sin deceive us which come on with a Beauteous
countenance and smiling looks, with a painted face and flattering words, but go
off again with blushing and shame, with pain and sorrow, and all the ugliness
appears when they have but turned their backs upon us. And so the cross
accidents of the world do dismay us in such like manner, which come upon us
with a sad and cloudy look, but have a bright side behind; and if we would but
be patient till the shower or storm be over, we might behold the face of the
Sun breaking forth upon us.

But you will say, What if the black night do continue, and events do not
answer my expectation?

I answer: You will be glad that you have not been troubled, and have kept your
selves in comfort by good hopes for so long a time, wherein else you must have
lived in trouble: But then I say further, that if hope of better things in this
world can do so much to support a man so long; the hopes of incomparably better
things in heaven you may easily consider will make you never to be troubled to
your lives end. De vita prop. c. 52.
Cardan tells us that he used to cure little griefs by play and sports, and
great ones by false hopes and excogitations; if but imaginary and invented
hopes were found by him to be of some efficacy; we cannot reasonably doubt but
those which are real and certain will be of far greater, and far longer force.
Let us not therefore be troubled, seeing there may be cause (if we knew all) to
rejoice. To these reasons may be added many others which even Heathens have
light upon. As,

We should not be troubld at what is natural; Now our body is a part of the
world, and it is natural to it to feel the mutations and changes that are in
that thing of which it is a part; and if one member suffer, at least those
which are next to it will suffer likewise, and man has no reason to repine
that he fares as other pieces of this great body does. Antoninus calls him that
takes in all part what here befalls him, An imposthume, (...). l. 2. Sect. 16.
and tumor as it were of the world, one that has made an abscession and
departure from the whole, like a bag of suppurated blood that feels nothing,
and has no communion with the body.

Nor should we be troubled, at what is profitable; there is nothing happens but
what conduces some way or other to the good of the world, or is of advantage to
some part of it, though not to thee: Many changes are necessary to the natural
preservation of things; thy friends must die, else there would not be room for
others that are coming into being, and the world would be too little for its
Inhabitants: others to the preservation of Civil Government, and others for the
correction and amendment of men's manners. And as in all changes of the seasons
of the year, we see thereby that fruits, and the rest of things are the better
provided for: So they suppose that every other alteration that is in any part
of nature, (...).
tends to the preservation and continuance of it some way or other.

It is in vain likewise (as I touched before) in their opinion to be troubled;
Confilium ejus est, qui nullum habet consilium.
and patience is his remedy who has no remedy else.

It is also to be considered, That it is no great proof of virtue not to
trouble others, but this is excellent, quietly to bear the trouble they give to
us.

CAP. IV.
THese and such like Arguments I shall dismiss, and proceed rather unto the
second general part of my discourse which I propounded.

The rules we should observe to preserve us from trouble,

1. Let us seek for them in their right place where they are to be found. And
then,

2. Let us firmly settle our selves upon such principles; else we shall always
be shaking.

For the first, that we may find out the truest rules for the obtaining peace
and quiet, let us resolve that Evil is not so much in things, as in our selves;
and if the evil which disquiets us be not in outward things, neither is the
good which must give us rest, to be found in them. All unquietness arises from
the mind; and a plaster applied to the stomach will as soon cure a wounded
conscience, as riches or any thing in the world heal a discontented mind. All
the earth quakes, and shakings are begot within our own bowels, and proceed not
from the winds which blow without. This therefore is the first thing we must
do, get acquaintance with our own hearts, and see the cause of all our grief;
for nothing will heal us without our selves. Our Savior seems to intimate this
truth to us in that phrase in the Gospel, Joh. 11.33.
(...), he troubled himself (as the margent has it) which some think signifies
the perfection of our Savior, that nothing could trouble him; but it also
shows whence properly trouble arises, viz. from the motion of man's own spirit,
which our Savior could compose; but now he groaned, even to the troubling and
disturbing of himself. For want of this easy observation it is that men labor
for peace at endless expenses both of pains, money and time, yet never purchase
it. Some seek for it in Company and cheerful society, which they think can put
away the melancholy, but still they raind not that they carry the disease about
them, which cannot so be cured. Others seek for it in a contrary way of a
solitary life, by quitting the affairs of the world, and retiring from all
company into a Closet; but all this while they retire not into themselves, and
the evil spirit which is in them is not yet cast out: So while they thought
they had ended their trouble, they did but change it; while they shake off all,
they are disquieted, because they have not shaken off themselves. Their own
foolish opinions, appetites, passions and desires remain unmortified, and
though they should never see man, they will be vexation enough to themselves.
Others seek for it in travel, and seeing foreign parts; but this will not
effect the business neither, as long as they have themselves in company. Motion
will but stir and enrage the humor, and make it more turbulent and unquiet.
Others leave off some evil practices which they find do disturb them; but as
long as the body of sin is remaining, they are not settled. Nam luctata Canis
nodum arripit, etc. Pers. sat 5.
They are like the Dog who breaks his chain, but a great part of it still he
trails after him. They retain their ancient love and affection, and so are the
same men, though they do not the same things. And as some one I remember says,
He that retires out of the world, and thinks thereby to be at peace, but yet
desires the fame, or the glory of the world, or any thing else that is in it,
he has only his arm and his legs out of it, his heart and his mind is still in
it. Here therefore we must begin (as I said) in the mortification of our
selves. If we be not quieted within, every thing in the world will make us
miserable; if we be, then nothing can harm us. If our false opinions,
unreasonable desires, fond affection, ungrounded hope, etc. be alive, we are no
longer quiet then the world pleases. Our peace is at the mercy of every
report, of every man's mouth, and all the several accidents of evil that are in
the world: If we be sick and are afraid to die, if we be in pain and have no
patience, if we be scorned and are proud, if we be lessened in our estates and
are covetous, etc. then nothing can help us from being miserable; but on the
contrary, if we do not fear death so much as an ill life, if we think
impatience and murmuring a worse disease then the Gout; if we think pride to be
the greatest reproach and the highest disgrace, and take covetousness to be the
greatest beggary and basest poverty, there is no harm a man can feel by death,
or sickness, or scorn, or want; when all the alterations in the world will not
quiet us, one alteration will, and that is the change of our opinions
concerning things, and our estimate of them: by this one, more will be done
then by ten thousand changes. The Heathen could say, That no man can make
another a slave, unless he has first enslaved himself. (...), etc. (...)
Arrian. l. 3. cap 24.
Be not enthralled to pleasure or pain, to hope or fear, to life or death, and
thou art free. What he said in this case, we may say in all other; nothing can
overcome him, that is not first overcome by his own imaginations and passions.
Thou art poor perhaps and contemned; what of that, if thou have not this
beggarly thought also, that riches and honor make a man? Another has a bad
opinion of thee; but what then? if thou have not also a foolish opinion, then
men's censures are not much to be minded. In every thing rule but thy self, and
thou shall be at ease, because thou will be thy self, but never will thou till
then be eased. For remember this as a true saying, (which may be added to the
reasons foregoing.) A proud man has no God; an unpeaceable man has no
neighbor; a distrustful man has no friend, and he that is discontented has
not himself.

Not the rich man, or the wise man always possesses himself; but in your
patience (says our Savior) possess ye your souls. Luke 21.19.


We have found therefore where we must begin to lay a foundation for all our
rules: viz. in our selves. But then secondly, we must build and firmly seat our
selves upon these principles; for if we do not use them, notwithstanding all
that I can say, we shall be troubled. By the former discourse you may easily
perceive that we cannot be at peace without our own pains: There is nothing
that I can say will work as Physic does in the body by its natural force,
whether you think of it or no; but every thing must have the help of your
serious consideration, and you must frequently practice according to what you
think. As the things that will give us peace must be laid in our selves, so
they cannot be there laid without our selves, They cannot be applied to our
minds as a Salve or an Ointment to our bodies, but by the force of our own
thoughts we must work them into our souls.

One thing more of this nature I must add; but I will reserve it till the
conclusion, and now give you those rules that we must live by, telling you as I
pass along for what particular disease each one of them is a proper remedy.

CAP. V.
KNow thy duty and do it. never, because he can never do all that which he
thinks he ought; the other not always, because his conscience will sometime
rebuke him, and tell him that he is an hypocrite: i. e. a partial Christian. An
ignorant person, therefore, or an idle person can have no true peace. We must
be 1. inquisitive into the Gospel, and labor to understand what we have to do;
2. and then resolve heartily, and endeavor seriously to do it all; 3. and then
enquire what remedy there is if we fail and fall short after these hearty and
serious endeavors. The first and last of these do most concern our knowledge,
the middle our practice. And the knowing and doing according to our knowledge,
and making use of the Antidote when we have miscarryed, will keep us in peace,
from that trouble which arises from sin. A wicked man cannot be in peace if he
understand himself; and you must not think that I come to prescribe to any but
those who will be Christ's Disciples, and follow him (for to such the text
speaks) and a man of a weak understanding will not be in peace; therefore we
must grow in knowledge, if we would be without trouble; and a Christian that
walks carelessly, without observance of himself, ought not to be in peace till
he grow more watchful; and then if he be surprised, he knows where to take
refuge: But there is no sanctuary in Christ for a trifling and unguarded
spirit, without great sorrow, repentance, amendment, and after-care and
diligence. We must understand that every indisposition of body is not a sin,
and that our peace must not be broken, because we are not always in the same
temper, nor cannot so cheerfully do our duty, etc. We must know that a sudden
surprisal, a hasty passion, a sudden thought is not to break us all in pieces.
And on the contrary, we must know that our voluntary admission even of these,
or letting of them stay, our not watching against them, and our frequent
falling into that sin, which at first did but surprise us, must trouble us; and
there is no peace unless we grow better, and more seriously mind our duty.

Study therefore the Christian Religion, as it is contained in the Gospel, and
then thou will find there is but this one thing more to be done to keep thee in
peace, viz. a careful endeavor to live as thou art directed. And the sum of
the Gospel is this, Tit. 2.12.
Live soberly, righteously and godlily; and where after all our care we fail, 1 John, 1, 7, 9.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive our sins, and the
blood of Christ cleanses us from all unrighteousness. This first rule I
conceive will make very good way for all the rest into our souls, and will have
a kind of universal influence into us upon all occasions. We need be offended
at nothing, if we have a care not to offend God. And I think he said truly, who
affirmed, That there is no Joy but in God, and no sorrow but in an evil
conscience.

As thou must know thy duty, So labor to distinguish between thy own duty, and
another man's. And this will keep thee from being troubled at the actions and
carriage of men in the world toward thee and others. If men slight us, and
despise us, and speak evil unjustly of us, and take away our good name, yea, if
they take away our estates, etc. if we be not angry, nor filled with hatred and
despite, nor retaliate their wrongs, then it is not we, but they that ought to
be troubled: Our duty is secured, and therein we should rejoice. And I may take
occasion here to observe, that we may learn our duty by their ill behavior,
and study the more to avoid those things in our selves, which do so much
displease us in others. If we be at all troubled, let it be rather for the sin
of him that injures us, then for out own suffering.

This rule may be put into other words, which will make it perhaps
comprehensive of more cases. Let us consider what is in our own power, and what
is not.

There is nothing in thy own power but thy own will and choice; all other
things are in the hand of God, or in the power of other men. It was never in
thy power to be handsome, or witty, or born of noble or virtuous parents, etc.
why then art thou troubled about such things? But it is in thy power to be good
and virtuous thy self, to have a beauteous soul, and to be rich in good works,
etc. and if thou be not thus, then thou art concerned. If men's tongues be
unruly, and their hands be violent, and thou suffer unjustly by both, how
can thou help it? Thou art not troubled if a Dog bark, or an Ass kick,
because it is their nature, and thou can not rule their motions: And here the
case is not at all altered; for the tongues of men are as little in thy hands,
as the mouths of Dogs. Sir W. Raliegh.
These do always bark (as a judicious Author speaks) at those they know not,
and it is their nature to accompany one another in those clamours; So it is
with the inconsiderate multitude. Since these therefore are wholly in another
choice, they fall not under thy deliberation, and therefore are not fit for thy
passion. Our anger at him that reproaches us, etc. may make us miserable, but
it cannot prevent what he has in his power; Thou may do well, and none can
hinder it; but to meet with no opposition is not in thy choice. Do what thou
can, the world may make thee suffer, but do what they can, thou may suffer
contentedly. A Philosopher they say comforted himself on this fashion when his
daughter proved a wanton; It is none of my fault (said he) and therefore there
is no reason it should be my misery. If our children be not as we would have
them, if we endeavor they should be so, we may comfort our selves with such
arguments as these; It is in my power to instruct them, but not to make them
good; I can do my duty to them, but cannot make them dutiful to me. Consider I
beseech you what an unreasonable thing it is that we should depend upon the
will of other men for our peace, and not upon our own; or as a great
Philosopher phraseth it, That we should have no more reverence to our selves,
-- (...). M. Anton. l. 2. sect. 6.
then to place our happiness in other men's souls. If they have shown what is in
their hand and power to do, let us next show what is in ours, and that is, not
to be troubled, and so let the matter rest, unless they have a mind to renew a
vain attempt. By observing of this rule we shall reap sundry benefits. The
censures of men will not molest us, because it is no part of our duty that men
should speak well of what is well done. That we should have the approbation of
others, is not in our choice, and so it is not in our charge: It is not
incumbent upon us that nothing we do be not misinterpreted, and wrong
apprehended. In doing well is our comfort, and in speaking well of others; this
let us mind, and think our selves no further concerned. It will keep us
likewise from intermedling with other men's business, and engaging our selves in
matters that belong not to us, which breeds men no small trouble. It is our
duty to do well, but not censure other men's doings: When the Scholars of R.
Nechoniah asked him How he prolonged his days, to such an age? He answered, I
never sought my own honor by another disgrace; nor ever spoke evil of
another, and was liberal of the goods which God had given me. This was his way
to live in quiet which he thought was the way to live long: but it is too
common a fault among us, That we put our hands into other men's work, and so
trouble both our selves and them also. The business of a subject is to obey his
Prince, and of a servant to execute his masters Commands, etc. But men
foolishly disturb the world, by taking upon them the authority of calling their
prudence in question; and finding fault with that which they have nothing to do
with all.

This rids us likewise of curiosity, and enquiring into other men's affairs, or
matters done abroad, which as the wise man notes ( Eccles. 7.21.) may occasion
some disquiet unto us, unless we relieve our selves at last by this rule;
whereby we might have found help at first, by not hearkening to private talk.

CAP. VI.
IN the doing of thy duty, Prudence is proper to a man: For Angels have
something better ( viz. intuition) and brutes have nothing so good. Do
therefore like a man; be deliberate, and choose discreetly: which two are
opposed unto rashness and carelessness, which are the authors of no small
troubles. Prudence saves men a great deal of labor in the doing of their duty,
and a great deal of trouble for the doing of it, i. e. it keeps us from being
molested either by our selves or others; Eccles. 8.5, 6.
and therefore Solomon bids us not only keep the Command (which is doing of our
duty) but also discern time and judgment, which relates to our discretion.

Some men will bring to pass the same thing that others do but endeavor, with
more facility and less noise, because, as the same wise man says, Wisdom is
better then strength. As far therefore as is lawful, let us become all things
to all men, that we may live in peace and quietness, and let us not by a
tumultuous handling of any matter, give them an occasion to oppose themselves
unto us. Yea prudence will teach us to let some things alone, and not meddle
with them, being either needless or else dangerous. As Diogenes said to a man
that desired his letters of commendation, That thou art a man every one that
sees thee will know; and whether thou be good or bad, he will soon know that
has any skill to make a difference; but if he have no skill, he will not know
thee, though I write a thousand times unto him. But when it is fit to do any
thing, let us remember that there is a nearer way sometimes to the end of a
business, then that which is strait forward, and it will be less trouble to
seek it out, then to go on in the ordinary path. The purchase of peace is worth
all our study, and if we can obtain it by Art and prudent compliances, we shall
find that we are gainers by our labor. Rashness and violence sometime create
us more trouble then men would otherwise have brought upon us. We run our
selves into broils and tumults, and kindle flames about us with our own breath,
when other men would let us live in peace and not disturb us. Eccles. 10.10, 12.
Let us therefore not only be innocent, and mean well; but wise also, and
manage well. Next after honesty and integrity, let us study prudence and
discretion, so as not to be alike zealous in all things, Jam. 3.13.
nor passionate and hasty in any thing, but as St. James says, To show out of
a good conversation our works with meekness of wisdom. This prudence is a large
thing, and of great use in every action of our life; and therefore it must not
be expected that I speak to every part of it; but I shall conclude this
particular with a saying of one of the Hebrew Doctors, V. Buxtorf. Lex. Taim.
voc. (...).
There are three sorts of men whose life is no life; misericordes, iracundi,
melancholici; Those that pass by all faults; those that are angry at all, and
will pass by none; those that are melancholy, as though they were angry and
displeased not only with all others, but with themselves.

Be not solicitous about events. When one bade a friend to Gratilla to send her
no relief, because Domitian would take it away, she bravely said, I had rather
he should take it away, then I not send it. Duty, not success is to be
considered.
This would be a great preservative against fears of what may happen, and
against vexation for what is happened; For to what purpose should we trouble
our selves either with one or the other, when all our prudence and skill cannot
help it? Fear indeed betrays our succors, and disarms us of our weapons, and
makes us run into those dangers which our prudence might have prevented. If we
can therefore act prudently and discreetly, it supposes that we are not
dispirited, and will likewise secure us from so being. And if the doing as well
as we can, and as wisely as we are are able, will satisfy us before hand, and
make timorousness unreasonable, then so will it satisfy us afterward in cross
events, and not let us trouble our selves with a fruitless repentance. Eccles.
32.19.
The Council of the son of Syrach is excellently good, Do nothing without
advice, and when thou have once done, repent not. For I believe most men may
say the same, which that person did who had so many strange changes in his
life; Quod si non consuevissem non poenitere ullius rei quam voluntary
effecerim, etiam quae male cessisset, prorsus vi^issem insaelix. Cardan.
If I had not used not to repent of any thing I had voluntarily done, even of
that which fell out ill, I had lived altogether miserable. Do thy best
therefore, and then leave the success to God.

CAP. VII.
COnsider thy own sufficiency, and undertake no more then is fitting for thee.
If we did live by this rule, and hot strain beyond our ability, we should be
kept from trouble in our employments. (...). Arrian. l. 2. c. 6.
As one may, was a saying of Socrates, and a sentence of great import. Let
every one know what he can do, and let him not meddle with matters too high for
him, and so he may quiet himself, as David tells us by his experience, Psalm.
131.1, 2. Let our desires be according to our power, and let that also be the
measure of our actions, and then we shall not implicate and entangle our selves
in things beyond our reach. The Pie must not think to sing as well as the
Nightingale, nor the Parrot to talk like a man; every one is not made to govern
States, to distribute Justice, to resolve great doubts, etc. Some men must be
content to govern their Families and themselves, to understand plain truths and
practice them, leaving the rest to men of greater depth and learning. So
Siracides directs: Eccles. 3.21.
Seek not out things that are too hard for thee, neither search the things that
are above thy strength; that which is commanded thee, think upon with
reverence; for it is not needful to see the things that are secret. What he
says in that one instance, may be said in all other. Take not upon thee a
Calling that is above thy wisdom, and strength, and spirit; for when thou see
thou can not do those things which by thy place and office thou art engaged
unto, it will be a matter of infinite vexation, and endless distraction to thy
mind. It is of singular use here for every man to observe his own Genius and
disposition, and to follow that, being contented to be ignorant of, and unable
for other things that are without his capacity. It is enough for such a little
creature as a man to be good for one thing, and so we may stand in need of one
another. If he will venture upon things without his compass, at his own peril
and trouble it must be; and that were the less matter, if it would not hazard
other troubles also. Ver. 25.
Without eyes thou shall want light, faith that wise man in the forementioned
Chapter; and what wonder is it if thou do? If men weary themselves in vain,
when they have no apthess to such things, it is but natural, and may be amended
by the old rule, Know thy self. Eccles. 37.27, 28.
My son, (says Siracides) prove thy soul in thy life, and see what is evil for
it, and give not that unto it. For all things are not profitable for all men,
neither has every soul pleasure in every thing: And as an appendix to this
rule, give me leave to add this: Employ thy self in as few things as thou
can: (...), etc. M. Anton. l. 4. 24.
undertake not much business. This is the royal Philosophers rule, Do but a
little if thou would have much quiet; Peace arises not only from good
employment, but also from little: mind always needful things, and let the rest
alone. Therefore when we are going to do any thing, (...).
let us say, Is not this in the number of needless things? but then as he adds,
have a care not only to out off impertinent and unnecessary actions, but
thoughts and imaginations also. Our Savior seems to say the same in the Gospel
of St. Luke 10.41.
Luke; Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things. Flies
disquiet us not by their strength, but by their number; and so do great affairs
not vex so much as a number of businesses of little value: But if we must be
employed in many, let us not make too much haste to have done, for we shall but
incumber our selves, and let us dispatch them in due order, one after another,
or else we shall do none well to our own content.

Consider the consequent of every action, and of every thing; and either choose
all its appendant troubles and inconveniences, or else let it alone. There is
nothing in the world but it is as a Lilly among the Thorns; every Rose has its
prickles about it; and there is nothing so desirable but it has some
associates we could wish separate from its company. The best thing in the world
has its faults; and therefore if we would have peace, let us consider always
the (...), as Epictetus speaks, the things that follow or accompany every
action, and every condition; and either let us not choose the thing it self, or
else receive all its retinue together with it. By this means we shall save our
selves the trouble of repentance for a foolish choice, and we shall not be put
to the unwise man's complaint, Non putaram, I never dreamt of this; I imagined
not there had been all these unpleasing things mixed with what I desired. Who
should have thought of this but thy self? How like an Idiot do thou look in
thy own thoughts, when thou art thus surprised? How ridiculous does it appear
for a man to fit down and cry like a child, If I had known thus much, I would
never have made such a venture; I would not have meddled with this calling or
business if I had thought there would have been so much trouble in it? Thou
should have thought of this before, and then have made this choice. Honor
must be chosen, Gum suo onere, with its suitors and followers, and public
appearances, etc. And so marriage must be chosen with all its cares, the
diligence of pleasing another, the loss or undutifulness of children, etc. and
so every office, with its encumbrances and difficulties. Yea, the service of
God as well as service of men must be chosen in the same manner. Luk 14.28, 29.
We must in all our choises take all, or none, or else be miserable. And if we
have not had this forehanded care, it is so much the harder to relieve us,
because possibly we cannot do or endure all things in which we are necessarily
engaged; yet let us resolve to do them as well as we can, and make a virtue of
a necessity. If it be not now in our liberty to choose our condition, yet let us
now resolve to choose all its inconveniences, and make that light by patience
and constancy, which cannot otherwise be amended. And indeed it is the
unhappiness of most men to be involved in many things before they either can or
do consider, whereby they are in danger to lead a life full of miseries, unless
for the time to come they be better advised before they choose, and find means
to content themselves in regard of what is past.

CAP. VIII.
COmpare what thou have not with what thou have, and see which is better. This
will keep thee from trouble for what thou want, and thy desires shall not
disquiet thee. Tell all the joints of thy body, and compare them with the want
of a finger, or an eye, or any such member. Whether is a hundred or one more?
Thou art poor, but thou art well, and have many good friends, etc. or perhaps
thou have none; but thou have all the host of Heaven, the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
and all the Elements, and the providence of God, and the charity of all well
disposed people as much as another man; thou may walk in thy neighbors
field, yea in thy enemies ground, and enjoy all the pleasures of the morning,
and recreate thy self with all the sweet odours, and behold the beauty of all
Cods creatures, and delight in that which God delights in. Why then should
thou be so distracted? Thou go a journey and art disappointed of thy ends,
and do lose thy labor, but thou escapedst thieves and robbers; or villains
set upon thee, but they saved thy life, they have not robbed thee of thy land,
etc. Thou have lost a child perhaps, but how many have thou remaining? or is
not thy husband or wife well? or if they be gone, and thy estate also gone, and
thou thy self sick also, and the case be supposed as bad as can be, yet art
thou not alive? and what would thou not part withal rather then die? thou will not I know exchange thy hopes of staying in the world for all things else,
for they are nothing unto thee, if thou be not.

But you will say; This is very cold comfort to consider that a man lives.
Think then further that there are thousands of good people that pray for thee
every day, and all thy good neighbors pity thee, and will strive to relieve
thee; or if this will not do, consider that though thou want temporal
things, yet thou enjoyest spiritual. Thou art sick, but thy sins are pardoned,
(for to Christ's Disciples I speak) or if they be not (and I must say something
to others) then I say first, I cannot blame thee that thou art troubled; but
then why do thou trouble thy self that thou art poor, or sick, or any thing
else, but only this, that thou art a condemned sinner? What should a damned man
do with riches? why do thou trouble thy self about such little things as the
loss of a child, when thou have lost thy soul? yea why art thou troubled more
that thou art sick, then that thou art not like to be saved? What folly was it
in the man that complained his stocking was rent, and minded not the wound of
his leg? one would think the great trouble should swallow up the other, though
it cannot cure it, and thou should be most sollicitous how to get sin
pardoned, whether thou do live or die. But

Secondly, If thy sin be not pardoned, and therefore thou desire to be well,
yet it is a huge mercy that there is hopes it may be pardoned. And if thou do
understand thy self, thou would not lose these very hopes for all the riches
in the world, and the best state of health thou can imagine. But to return,
suppose thou art a person truly fearing God, but thou art troubled that thou
have not such sweet friends, and good company, and delightful society, and art
not so esteemed and regarded, or have not the fortune which attends upon
others, etc. Estne aliquid teips^ pretiosius? Nihil inquies. Igitur si tui
compos fueris, possidebis, quod nec tu amittere velis, nec fortuna possit
auferre. Boeth. l. 2. de Consol.
But thou have thy self, and thou have a good conscience, and thou have God,
and his Son and Holy Spirit, and the promises of the Gospel, and the hopes of
heaven, and joy in the Holy Ghost. Which now do thou judge greater? thy
wants, or enjoyments? Such a man who has deserved of thee, does not love thee
perhaps, nor regard thee, etc. But what then? he cannot take away the love of
God, nor the love of his children, no nor thy love to him neither.

Now if it be thus in these and all other cases, I pray tell me who will pity
him that has many soft pillows whereon to lay his head, and he will needs lay
it on a stone? that has many pleasant places wherein to repose himself, and
none will serve him but he will sit upon a bush of thorns? Surely they are in
love with sorrow and melancholy, who enjoy so many blessings and contentments,
and will forsake the pleasure of them, to pine away in the company of their
wants. Consider I beseech you, is there more cause to be troubled for the want
of those, or to rejoice for the possession of these other? or by what reason
shall the absence of some things spoil all the sweetness of those that remain?
why should those be more able to comfort us if we had them, then these we now
have? This is the most manifest cheat of our selves that can be; Quis est ille
tam soelix, qui cum dederit impatientiae manus, statum suum mutare optet? Boeth.
No man likes that which is his own, and yet every one thinks that he shall be
well pleased in the condition of another man. He thinks that he shall be
contented with that wherein the other man is not contented himself. By what
argument I pray you is this concluded? how foolishly do we suborn our desires
and hopes to betray our duty and comfort? If he be not contented in his
condition (but perhaps think ours to be better in which we also are not
contented) why should we think to find contentment in it? But if he be content
in his estate, then so may we be in ours. What any man is, that every man may
be. Therefore if thou can not cease complaining, I must advise thee to handle
thy self roughly; and when thy mind is troubled, whines and cries for such and
such a babble, do with it as we do by children when they cry they know not for
what; affright it with the representation of some terrible thing; show it the
pains of Hell; ask it how it likes to burn in eternal flames, and whether it
can be contented to be damned; let it see there is something indeed to cry for
if it cannot be quiet; and bid it tell thee whether it be an easy thing to
dwell with everlasting burnings; and when it starts at the thoughts of them,
bid it be quiet then, and be well pleased if it can fly from such a misery,
whatsoever else it do endure.

And to make this consideration the more efficacious, when thou considerest
what thou have, frame to thy self such an apprehension of that thing as thou
have of it when thou do want it. Understand now what thou do enjoy, as thou
would do if thou did not enjoy it. Consider how desirable health is to a
sick man, or friends to a poor man, etc. and so let them be in thy eyes. Thou
want plenty, but thou have enough; thou want riches, but thou have
health; thou want health, but thy sins are forgiven: Consider now, suppose
thou were sick, or thy sins were not pardoned, in what a case would thou then
be? what would thou most complain of? for the want of them, or for the want
of the things thou now groanest under? Answerable to the trouble thou should
have in the want of those things, let thy quiet be now in the possession of
them; and as thy grief for the want of such things would exceed all that which
is in thee at present for the want of others; so let thy present thankfulness
and contentedness be, that thou want them not, which is another way of
making this rule efficacious; Compare the want of the things thou have, with
the want of the things thou now have not.

CAP. IX.
compare thy self with all men, and not with a few: Or secondly, With the whole
condition of those few, and not with some part of it; and this will be a remedy
for the same kind of trouble from discontents and from envy with all evils of
like nature. First, I say look upon all men, and thou will see there are
thousands of persons with whom thou would not for any thing change
conditions. By what law then is it that thou must needs only gaze above, and
take no notice of those beneath? that thou must look on him only who is carried
on men's shoulders (as one did excellently resemble this folly) and think it is
a fine thing to be so mounted, and never think of the poor men that carry him,
in whose place thou would by no means stand. Thou art not alone in the
condition wherein thou art; yea there are thousands in a worse; and yet (which
is more) they are contented. Down with thy high looks, and stare not only upon
the great Mountains; be content to take notice a little of those that sit in
the Valleys, yea of those that embrace a dunghill. Or, Secondly, if thou can
not keep thy eyes off from those great men, then compare thy self with the
whole of them, and not with some one piece, and then tell me whether thou
would wholly change conditions with them, and be as they are. Are there not
many inconveniences in their condition which thou would not meddle withal?
thou would have his wealth, but not his cares, nor his fears, nor his
ignorance perhaps and folly, nor would thou be troubled with his vices. To be
short, Luke 16.
no man would have been the rich man in the Gospel for all the world: nay you
will searce fancy any man so complete, but there is something or other in our
selves that we fancy more, which we would keep, and have all that he has too.
But why must thou needs have all? why must every one else be deplumed for to
trim thee? why must none else be pleased but thy own single self? And besides
seeing there is something in thy self which thou love more then all the
world, and would still be that whatsoever else thou changest; why cannot that
content thee, and give thee rest, seeing it is so much worth to thee? he that
will go about to make an answer to me, will cure himself, unless he resolve to
be unreasonable. Let me subjoyn this one rule which tends to the same purpose
with the former, and will comprehend all of this kind. Distinguish between real
needs, and artificial; i. e. those needs which God made, and those which thy
own fancy has created. It is most certain that the needs which God has made
are but few, and soon filled, and God has made provision for them: therefore
all this kind of trouble flows from thy own fancy, which if it pleases, can
create a thousand of necessities to it self, which are indeed none at all; and
by the same reason that it makes a thousand, it may create ten times as many;
for there are no limits when once we are gone beyond nature and necessity. If
these needs therefore are a burden to thee, blame nothing but thy own folly,
and by the help of Gods grace, seek a cure in thy self. Reduce thy self to
nature and real needs, and thou will never be troubled about these matters,
because thou will always have what nature desires; yea the way to have that,
is not to desire any more. So a wise man among the Jews once said; Quaere id
quod tibi necessarium est, etc. Seek that which is necessary for thee, and
leave that which is not necessary: for by leaving to follow that which is not
necessary, thou will obtain that which is. I remember that when some blamed
Cato that such a man as he would be in want, (as we speak) he blamed them
rather because they could not want, viz. such things as those which are not
really needful for us, and I think he may blame them also upon this score, That
they were in want because they thought they were. And if we would but deny our
selves sometimes in unnecessary desires, even when it is in our hands to humor
our selves and gratify our desires, it would be of excellent use; for we must
remember that as long as the things of this world ate empty and finite, our
trouble will not end by satisfying, but by ceasing our desires.

Count nothing certain which is without thy self; and think thy soul, not thy
body to be thy self. Thou may be certain of thy own choice, if thou know
thy self; and thou can tell what thou will do; but thou can not be certain
what will be in the world, or what other men will do; and therefore reckon upon
nothing as constant and flable, but thy own resolution which may be constant if
thou please. And this will keep thee from trouble about what thou losest.
When health and riches, and such like things are gone, then thou can say, I
never made account that they would stay. It was accounted of old a piece of
great wisdom to wonder at nothing; (...).
and this is the way to it, which thing alone the Poet thought was almost
enough to make one happy and keep him so.

Nil admirari prope res est una, Horat.
Numici,
Solaque quae possit facere and servare beatum.
But he will not cease to admire that knows not the nature of things; and he
knows nothing, that does not see they are constant only in inconstancy.

CAP. X.
What is without thee, Let it not come in unto thee, nor do thou go out to it,
i. e. Let it not into thy heart by love, and let not thy heart go out to it by
desire. Make nothing to become a piece of thy self, which is without thy self;
For if thou love any thing of which as I said before thou can not be
certain, thou will be troubled at its loss, or at its danger. This rule may
serve also to fortify you against the same kind of trouble (among others) for
the relief of which I prescribed the former. Keep but every thing there where
it is, and all is safe. If the world change and alter, that is nothing unto us,
if it be not within us. If it have no hold of our hearts, how are we concerned
in its various mutations? We shall never suffer together with the world, if it
be not a part of us. But if we set open the door and entertain it, if we
embrace it, and let it dwell in us, by our love cleaving to it, then we shall
be as it is, and nothing can give us a remedy, but the casting of it out again,
and setting it where it was, quite out of our selves. It is a true rule, that
no good can bring us any pleasure, but that against whose loss we are prepared.
He that is in fear does not sincerely enjoy: and it is as true, that we shall
have no mind to lose that which we love dearly. Now what a miserable case is
this, to be troubled with fear while we have a thing, least we lose it; and to
be troubled with grief when it is gone, because we have lost it? But I have
taught you how to provide against both these, and against all sudden accidents
and changes that are in the world. Keep thy self as thou art. Let nothing in
which is without.

Do not promise thy self that which God never promised thee. any of them. Do
not entertain thy thoughts with promises of contentment in such a relation and
such a condition, nor of success in such an enterprise, no though thou go
about it wisely: But promise to thy self pardon of sin, and eternal life, if
thou do thy duty, and the grace of God to help thee for to do it, if thou
pray for it and wilt use it: for all these things God has promised to give us.
Solomon says, Eccles. 9.11. that the race is not to the swift, etc. but time
and chance happens to them all: Now because men know not the time when things
will alter; and which is worse, promise to themselves those things, as if there
were no time nor chance but what they fancy; therefore he says ver. 12. that
evil falls suddenly (and therefore sadly) upon them. Hope and fear are two
great instruments of our trouble, and we must cure them both, as I have
directed in this and the former rule. And if we will hope for any thing, let it
be (as I said before) in the days of our sorrow and adversity to support our
heaviness, not in the days of prosperity, to please our fancy. We have good
things enough then to comfort us; and if we will spend our thoughts in airy
hopes, we make our selves miserable two ways; We lose the pleasure of what we
have, and never enjoy what we look for. And therefore I think he made a good
answer, who being asked which man's grief never ceased, said Cujus cor non
acquiescit in praesentibus, -- Habitum nihil sperandi, cui adipiscendo 15.
perpetuis annis, maximo labor incubui, and obtinui. Cardan.
whose heart is not contented with what he has at present. And he likewise was
well employed, who for fifteen years together with great pains endeavored to
get the habit of Hoping for nothing; especially since (as he says) he did
obtain it; for no question he found a great ease to his spirit by it.

Think that thou art most angry at thy self when thou do amend. that trouble
for the sins we have admitted, if it hinder our duty. And this indeed is
oft-times the greatest inquietude and trouble of all other. Men roll their
souls in very vexatious and impatient thoughts, because they were vexed and
impatient, and so they commit that again which they should cure, and unless
they will cease it, the disease will grow more desperate. For they are
impatient if their trouble be not cured, and their disease instantly healed.
But alas! this which they take for the medicine is the very disease. Trouble
does but make the sore rancle and fester the more, and inflame the Feavour to a
greater heat; Therefore coolly and mildly seek to amend thy trouble by some of
the former rules that I have proposed. Remember the more thou vexest thy self,
the further thou art from being healed; and like a bird that is restless in a
net, thou art more entangled and perplexed. Go therefore seriously always, and
considerately about the cure, when thou art troubled at any accident, and think
that this is a signification of the greatest trouble when thou art amended, and
thy mind is again in peace. You may see how calmly David argues himself into a
stilness, Psalm. 42.11. Psalm. 43.5. Why art thou cast down O my soul, etc. If he
had fretted at this disquiet which was in him, and raised storms against
himself, the commotion would but have been like a new boisterous wind upon the
face of the Sea already troubled, which would but make it more rough and
restless. Let the Sun shine rather then the wind blow; I mean, with a clear
understanding labor placidly to compose and appease thy heart, and not by
fresh gusts of black passion bluster and rage against thy self.

CAP. XI.
THere are three or four Rules that are more General and Universal, which
perhaps may serve in stead of all the rest for to heal that trouble from
without, which because they are so large, I will superadde.

Have a little esteem of thy self. Tho. a Kemp.
says a devout Author, A proud man and a covetous never are at rest. The
leaves of the tall trees shake with every breath; and no man can open his mouth
to whisper an ill word, but a proud man is disturbed: Whereas the observance of
this rule, will make us say when we are contemned and despised, that they
cannot think so low of us as we of our selves, and then we shall not be moved.
It will help us in poverty, sickness and all misfortunes whilst we say less
then the least of all Gods mercies. Our conceit sure of our selves is the cause
that we quarrel at every thing that happens, as if we were such considerable
creatures that every thing must be done to please us, and God must rule the
whole world according to our humor, yea and no body else must be served and
gratified but our selves. Some things there are which fall out that are good
for others when they are ill for me; and therefore it is a high piece of pride
for me to be troubled, as if I were such a goodly thing that God should mind
none but me, and all creatures in heaven and in earth should wait upon me,
doing every thing according to my liking.

Away with this fond love of our selves and ridiculous overweening. I beseech
you let us know our selves, and all will be well. There is no reason that such
poor things as we are should take matters so ill and unkindly at Gods hands as
we do. We are well used, if we were in a worse condition.

Labor to understand the true nature and value of every thing: which a man can
live without, he need not covet. Such like rules as these will the
consideration of the nature of things teach us; and then when we have learnt
what they are, let us remember the usual saying of Epictetus, If thou love a
pot, remember it is a pot which thou love; i. e. a thing of a base nature,
and also brittle and soon broken, and it is no great wonder, nor no great
matter if it be. So in all other cases, if thou love a flower, or a man,
remember it is but a flower, but a man. If thou hopest for any thing, remember
thou have but only hopes. And thus doing thou will find much quiet from many
occasions of trouble.

Have but one end, (...). Anton. l. 4.
The true end, and that which is the greatest, is such an one that all things
will promote it; and that end is the glorifying God, (...). Arrian. l. 2. c.
23. Tell thy self what thou will be, and then be what thou will.
and saving our souls. Whatsoever falls out will advance this; and if we secure
our end, what need we be troubled? We may always have what we would, if we
would not have too many things, but only one. For nothing can hinder our doing
God honor, and advancing the good of our souls: yea without those things that
we account sad, sometimes we should not attend that end. So David said it, it
was good that he was afflicted, else he had gone astray. Howsoever it fares
with us, there is some grace or other to be exercised; and the exercise of
every one of them is in order to what we design; Gods glory and our good.
Remember therefore what our Savior says, Luke 10, 41. Thou art careful about
many things, but one thing is needful. Mind that and thou need not be
troubled, because thou may always mind it. The sum of this is; He that has
proposed but one great end at which he levels all his actions, the obtaining of
which nothing can hinder, but all things promote, and which he may always in
every condition pursue, need not be troubled. For every thing rests satisfied
in its end; and this he may always have, if it be that which it should be.

As we should have but one end, so let us have but one rule or principle of our
lives. I know you will be glad to hear what that one rule should be. I know not
how to comprehend it in shorter words then these; Let us always will, and not
will the same thing. I told you in the first Rule of all, that we must acquaint
our selves with the Gospel. Now let us will only those things that Christ has
commanded, and refuse only those that Christ has forbidden; and that is the
principle whereby we may guide our lives, and it will never fail us. The truth
is, that must needs be good, which a man can always will; and it is impossible
that any thing but what has no evil in it, should never cease to be chosen by
us. Let us resolve therefore what things we will ever choose, and what we will
ever refuse; and for the rest let them be as they will. Now Christ has said,
be holy, humble, meek, patient; but nowhere has he said be rich, be honored,
etc. The former therefore, and not these we must always will. He has bid us
likewise, that we should not speak evil of others, nor hate them, nor return
their injuries; but nowhere has he said, Do not suffer affliction, do not put
up those wrongs, etc. the former then are the things only that we must will not
to do. And by this course it is manifest what a great way we shall go to the
obtaining peace. For we shall always be certain of something. When a man's
estate is gone, and his friends deceased, or the like, he may say, but I am
here still, and I can do what I always could: Choose the good, and refuse the
evil. I never did will not to be poor, nor to be destitute of relations, etc.
They are other things that I make the matter of my choice; and I find that I am
where I was, because I can do those things which are the only things which I
choose to do. This will fortify us against what men say of us. Follow Scripture
and Reason, and let the world approve of what we do if they please. Nothing
more troubles us then an ambitious desire of every ones good word. Haud parum
artis opus est, si quis stulto placere velit, says the Proverb among the
Spaniards; He shall have enough to do that would please a fool. But how much
trouble he shall have that would please no body knows how many of them, is not
to be imagined. He must not will one thing but ten thousand; one thing this
moment, and another the next, and innumerable contradictions at the same time
to please diverse men. Content thy self therefore with this, God is sooner
pleased then men; resolve upon his will, to let that be thine and keep to it.
Choose that which no body can hinder, no accident can forbid; if thou can not do
Gods will, thou can suffer it; why then should thou be troubled, when thy
own choice remains entire, and thou have what thou would?

CAP. XII.
TO prevent all misunderstanding, I must desire you to consider, that all these
rules are such, as suppose the use of some other, that have an universal
influence upon all Christian practice, and these must be joined with them, not
severed from them. As first Prayer. Secondly, See Phil. 4.6, 7. Romans 2.4, 17,
18.
Giving thanks in every thing. Thirdly, Meditation of heaven and eternal
blessedness. Fourthly, Consider of Gods fullness, Psalm. 31.19.42.11. Heb. 2 17,
18. Heb. 4.15, 16.
and the glories of his attributes. 5. Of Christ's death and Intercession, with
such like; to all which religious exercises, if we add those rational and
natural considerations, we may be well eased.

What remains then but our hearty endeavor thus to settle and compose our
selves? I told you at the entrance, That these Rules are not like to Physic,
that will cure us without our thoughts and consideration: So now I must further
remember you, that we must not think to take this course as some men likewise
do Physic, just when the distemper is upon us, but when we are well and in
quiet. When the trouble once is begun, and the disease has seized upon our
spirits, it is not so easily cured, and we cannot so well consider, nor apply
these lessons to our minds; therefore we must use them as we do Food, which we
take every day to keep us in health, and not as Physic, which we take but at
certain times, when we find the humor stirring: i.e. We must work our souls to
such kind of reasonings and discourses as these are, we must bring our minds to
such a way of thinking as I have described, and make these rules so familiar to
our minds, that they may be a part of our understanding, and a piece of our
reason, not some foreign things to which we run for relief upon occasion of
need. We must strip out souls of their former conceits, and cloth them with
these notions. We must root out these weeds of bitterness, High esteem of our
selves, and of worldly things, earthly love, unreasonable desire, fond hopes
and expectations, rashness and inconsideration, and plant in their stead such
good principles as now have been commended to you, and take care that they grow
up there. The government of the soul must be altered from the rule of popular
opinions, and the tyranny of fancies and imaginations, to the sole command of
Christian reason. In this great alteration let us engage all our forces. Think
how shameful it is to get all knowledge, and not to know our selves, nor how to
enjoy our selves; and how miserable he is that incompasses all the world, and
searches into all things, only neglects his own peace, or seeks it among the
occasions of his trouble. Discharge thy self therefore with all speed of thy
passions, of rashness and hasty thoughts. Learn thy duty, do it, know God, and
thy self, and the world; and when thou art once humble, prudent, thankeful, and
heavenly minded, thou will not be displeased at what God or men do, nothing
will trouble thee, or if any thing do, it will be this, that thou do these
things no better, and art no more perfect in thy Art. But this is the happiness
of such a man's condition, that those who mourn shall be comforted; and it is a
pleasure to be so troubled; an ease to the mind, to be so aggrieved. No joys
here, like those of an ingenuous sorrow; no cup of blessing so sweet, as that
which is mingled with tears of true contrition for our ingratitude. With a good
saying therefore of a wise Doctor among the Jews I will conclude, who seeing a
man very sad and sorrowful, thus addressed his speech to him; If thy grief be
for the things of this world, I pray God diminish it: But if it be for the
things of the world to come, I pray God increase it.

A Consolatory DISCOURSE To Prevent Immoderate GRIEF For the Death of our
FRIENDS.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Francis Tyton at the three Daggers in Fleetstreet
near the Inner Temple-gate, 1660.

A Consolatory Discourse to prevent Immoderate Grief for the Death of our
Friends.
. 1. The need of this discourse.
IT is left upon record by St. Hierom concerning Paulina, that though she was a
Lady, whose passions were under admirable government in other things, yet when
any of her children dyed, she was oppressed with so great a sorrow, that he had
much ado to save her from being drowned in the floods of it. But it is not so
great a wonder that a person of the tenderer sex should feel such a tempest, as
that David a man of war, who had overcome so many enemies, should himself be
overcome with grief for a disobedient obedient son. It is said that a
Lacedaemonian woman having sent five sons to a battle, stood at the Gates of
Sparta to expect the event: and when she met one coming from the Camp, she asked
him what was done. All thy five sons (said the man) are slain. Away thou fool
(answered she again) I enquired not of this, but of the issue of the fight:
When he told her that her Countrymen had got the better; then farewell my sons
(said she) and let us rejoice that Sparta is saved. But David it seems had not
attained to this faeminine courage, 2 Samuel 18 24.
for he sat between the gates waiting for news of the success, and when he
heard of the loss but of one son, and he a Traitor to his Country, he could
not contain himself till he came into the house, but went up to the chamber
over the gate to lament his son, V 33.
as though he had lost the day by losing him. Nay he could not refrain so long
till he came into the chamber, but he watered the stai^^ with his tears, and
wept as he went up, saying, O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom, would God
I had dyed for thee, O Absalom my son, my son.

This lamentation of his cannot but call to mind the tears which Achilles,
another great warrior shed over the grave of his friend Patroclus, where
(...), (as Homer speaks) he wept most horribly as if he would have killed
himself.

This love is such a powerful thing, that if it have placed any object in our
heart, we can scarce suffer it to be taken from us, without rending and tearing
our hearts in pieces. Such a strange union does it make between two persons,
that we can scarce give that man any welcome that brings us the news of a
separation. And therefore some of the ancient Carthaginians (as I remember)
knowing how hard it is to love those who bring us the tidings of the death of
them that we love, would never send such a message but by the hand of some
condemned man, whom they were never like to see again. I am ready here to
interrupt my discourse, and in the very beginning to fall into a passion with
my self, when I think how patiently we can suffer our souls to be divided from
God whom we pretend to love. O love! how great things should we do if we did
but love! how angry should we be at the temptation which would draw him from us
whom our souls love!

Antonius Guevara had a Niece who was so passionately in love with a little
Bitch, that at the death of it she fell into a Fever, Epist. ad samil. pars 2a.
and was fain to keep her bed. The good man did well rather to chide, then to
comfort her, and to write a Satyr, rather then a consolatory letter to her; but
yet in that strange passion of hers, we may clearly see how incident it is unto
us to take heavily the loss of what we love.

Now there is no greater love then that which is between near kindred and
friends, and no man that knows the pleasure of it, would dissuade any from such
love, and yet it is necessary that we should not mourn for it as if we loved
nothing else; which will render it perhaps an acceptable piece of service unto
some, if I endeavor to ease them of this kind of sorrow; and though I have
touched but lightly upon other maladies (in the foregoing Treatise) yet I apply
some particular plasters to this great and general sore.

You must not think that it is in my design to take away your trouble,. 2. We
may mourn moderately.
by taking you off from all love and friendship, for that would be as
ridiculous as his device to cure drunkenness by cutting up all the Vines. I
would not have a man to love none but himself, out of a fear that he shall be
troubled at the loss of them, as much as at the loss of himself. This would be
to cure one evil by a greater, and to ease men of a short trouble, by letting
them want the constant easement and sweetest comfort of our lives, which is our
friends. Neither do I intend to write like a Stoic, and stupifie all your
passions, so that you should not mourn at all, for that is an impossible thing,
if we have any love. Grace does not root out nature, nor quite dry up all our
tears; but it rather makes our hearts more moist and tender, and causes it to
express it self in a becoming affection unto others: as David and that Lady may
teach us. They are sturdy, not generous, that are void of all grief: they are
rather hard then constant, rather unexperienced, then reasonable, that forbid
all sadness. But it is my design to bring you to a moderation both in love and
in sorrow, that you may do as much as becomes good friends, but no more then
becomes good men. Not to be sensible of evils, is not to be men; not to bear
them patiently, is not to be Christians. It is neither to be hoped nor to be
desired that we should shed no tears at all; but it is both necessary and
attainable, that we should let them flow in measure. Lacrymandum est, Seneca.
Epist. 63.
sed non plorandum. We may weep, but we must not wail. We must be natural, but
we must be also reasonable: We must approve our selves both to men and unto
God, that they may see we are loving friends, and that he may see, we are his
dutiful children. Est enim quaedam and dolendi modestia. For there is a certain
modesty even in mourning, and it is unseemly to weep immoderately, as it is not
to weep at all.

And let none think that by this concession unto nature and decency, the wound
will be made incurable; and that it is easier not to mourn at all, then to
mourn moderately. These are but the dreams of heavy souls, that think that none
can stand still, but they that are resolved never to stir. It is said indeed,
that we may more easily abstain from a thing of which we never tasted, then
refrain from it after a little acquaintance. But this must be understood of
pleasure, and not of grief: When we have mourned a little, we shall soon see
that there is neither pleasure nor profit in our mourning. Or if any one shall
think it to be some pleasure, yet it will notwithstanding be easily moderated;
because it is only the pleasure of being eased of our loads that oppressed us,
not of being satisfied with the pressure of any delightful object. It is but
the letting out of sadness, not the bringing in of any pleasure; and therefore
when the heart is once eased of its burden, it will soon be persuaded to mourn
no more; for that will be the bringing upon us a new burden.

But then on the other side, as we may grant something unto nature, so we must
be sure not to let it work alone. That we may weep moderately, it will be
necessary to make resistance to our sorrows, and muster up all the consolatory
arguments that are reposited in our minds. Nature will do its part without our
help. We need not study how to weep enough, nor use any arguments to persuade
our selves into tears. It is a superfluous employment to strive to magnify our
loss; for Fancy is apt to make it bigger then it is. It is a foolish trouble to
be careful how to mourn, for tears will flow from us without any bidding. All
our work must be to stop their passage as fast as we can, and to make them flow
leisurely, not gush forth with too great a violence. Our Reason and Religion
must be called up in all haste, to make as strong a dam as we are able to our
sorrow, or else if it have its course, it may overflow us.

He is a base Pilot that leaves his tackling in a storm, and suffers his ship
to run along with the tempest; and no less ignoble and abject is his spirit,
that permits himself to the gusts and Haericans of his own passions, and lets
them drive him whether they, and not whether he himself pleases. But it is a
degree of madness to use reason it self to make the blasts more terrible, and
when the storm is too furious, by art and skill to conjure up more boisterous
passions. Who would pity him that sets his reason against himself, and studies
how to be as miserable as his mind can make him? We need not be so in love with
grief, as to create it to our selves. Nature as I said, knows how to mourn
without our teaching. We had need think rather how to bear our natural
troubles, then how to lay more upon our shoulders.

But if we will make any opposition, we must begin before our passions are too
strong. They are too powerful of themselves, and we must not let them gather
more strength by our negligence. If we do not at the very first set our selves
in a posture of defense against them, they will seize upon our whole soul, and
get every thing into their possession. As soon therefore as our grief stirs, we
must strive to comfort our selves, and not either help forward or suffer our
grief. If we go and bewail our friends as much as we can, and think to cheer
our souls afterward; we shall soon find that our souls are drowned with a
flood, and that it will be a long time before it be soaked up. When we give the
least leave to these passions, they will ask no leave of us afterward, but the
soul will mourn like Rachel, and refuse to be comforted. As soon therefore as
thou hear of the death of thy friends, do not say, Alas! what a friend have
I lost! did ever any man part with such a friend? where shall I find one
comparable to him in wisdom, in love, in faithfulness, in all manner of
sufficiencies to make a friend? Do not, I say, after this sort aggravate thy
grief, but instantly say, Why should I grieve and torment my self? why should I
trouble my self with my own thoughts? why should wind and tide run together?
how many reasons have I to be contented? and spread them all before thine eyes
that they may dry up thy tears and cease thy sorrow. And so doing, thou will
weep as much as is fit, but no more then thou oughtst. Nature will be
satisfied, and thou thy self not ashamed. None will think that thou art not
grieved, and thou will feel that thy heart is comforted.

But what comfort are these (may some say) which you bring us?. 3. The best and
wisest persons have not mourned much.
with what reasons will you assist us?

I suppose it will be of no great effect to answer, that the wisest persons
have always made their mourning short, because I have already named two both
good and wise that were excessive. And therefore I must endeavor to make men
wise, and furnish you with such reasons as will not suffer them to be oppressed
with their sorrows. Yet me thinks it is observable, that the Egyptians mourned
ten times as long as the children of Israel. Seven days ordinarily contented
the people of God for their grief, (as you may see, Eccles. 22.12. Job 2.13.)
whereas they that were strangers to the God of Israel, extended their mourning
seventy days, as you may read, Genesis 50.3. yea the greatest mourning that the
Israelites used for their two famous leaders, Numb. 20.29. Deuteronomy. 34.8.
Moses and Aaron, was prolonged but to thirty days, which is not half the time
that those Heathens allowed. I think not fit neither to pass by the shortness
of Abraham's grief for his dearest wife Sarah, who dyed as some of the Jews
conjecture, for very grief when he was at Mount Moriah, thinking that her son
was offered. This they gather from that expression, Genesis 23.2, Abraham came to
mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her. From whence it was that he came I have
nothing to affirm, yet this note of theirs is considerable that in the word
(...) [to weep for her] there is a small Caph in the middle of great letters,
(...)
which may very well show that his weeping was little and moderate, and not of
the greatest size. That expression is likewise taken notice of by some, which
follows in the next verse, He stood up from before his dead, as if it
signified, that he turned his eyes from her that so he might not be overcome
with grief. We must not love to look on our losses; nor think that it becomes
us to weep as long as we can. But we should learn by the manners of Gods
people, to do all we can to make our mourning short. Yea I might teach you from
Heathens themselves, if examples would do us any good. Plutarch. in Lycurg.
Lycurgus ordained that none should weep above eleven days, and that they
should make no Funeral solemnities. Solon likewise took them away, (...). Plut.
in Solone.
that so he might ease men of those howlings and lamentations, which they use
to make at their friends Interment. Augustus as Seneca observes, though he lost
all his children and Nephews, and was fain to adopt an heir, yet he was so
little moved at their death, that he constantly went to the Senate, and
neglected no Public affairs. Pericles likewise having lost two sons of great
hope, within the compass of eight days, put on notwithstanding a white
garment, and with a great constancy of mind went to deliberate about the
necessities of the Commonwealth.

All stories are full of such great souls, that after they had conquered
others, at last conquered themselves also. I know it will cure no man to tell
him that his neighbor was cured; yet these examples do commend to us the
remedies which they used, and give us hopes that our griefs are not incurable.

The cure of this distemper does he chiefly in a fullness of considera^ions,. 4.
What it is that must ease us.
wherewithal our minds must be stored. Nothing can resist grief but a great
mind; no mind can be great that is not big with truth; nothing can impregnate
us with truth but serious advice and consideration in our selves; and therefore
we must provide our selves with sufficient Antidotes that may be ready at hand
when we have need of them. Our sou's must be as an Apothecary, and our heart
must be the (...), or shop where all medicines are in a readiness against any
grief or malady that shall invade us. If we have our remedies to gather, and to
compound when our sickness comes, the mind will be so weak that it will not be
able to make them. We have least power to consider when we are full of sorrow;
our affections are ready to overlay our reasons, and therefore we must have our
medicines made before, that then we may have nothing else to do, but only to
take them. And we shall find that to have so much labor in it (our stomachs
being squeamish and nauseateing) that we shall clearly see we need have nothing
else to do.

First then, I. The first means is to consider what it is that we lament.
Let us seriously consider What is it that we grieve for? It is soon answered
that we mourn for the Death of those that we love. For their Death? What is
that I beseech you? Is death such a strange and unusual thing that we should
take it heavily? are your friends the first that ever dyed? are you the only
persons that God has singled out to be left alone? Death is an usual thing.
Do you not see that every thing in the world can cause death? The wind, the
lightning, the fire, the smoke, the dust of the earth, the water, our meat and
drink, our own passions, our joy, our sorrow, and a thousand other things can
bring us to our graves. Why then should it be lamented, as if it were some
wonder at which all the world should be astonished? Men fill the air with
sighs, they beat the Heavens with their groans, they clothe themselves with
darkness, and they pour out floods as in a tempest. Why what is the matter? Is
the Sun fallen from its Orb? are all the lights of Heaven extinguished? are they
carrying out the worlds funeral? What is it then that causes this moan? A
friend is dead. There is one man less in the world then there was. O wonderful!
what a prodigy is this! One that was born to die, is dead! It had been a wonder
indeed, if he had not dyed. Then we might have filled the earth with noifes.
Then there had been some cause for a tumult. But now it is rather a wonder that
men should make such a stir at an ordinary and common thing, then that a thing
so common should happen unto them. One would rather look to see no tears, then
no death; and we might more easily excuse their not weeping at all, then we can
these doleful lamentations.

Is it not necessary that our friends should dye? Death is necessary.
yea, it is so necessary, that it is a thing past, and cannot be recalled, when
men weep most for it. If you can bring them back again with your tears, if
there be any hopes that with the noise you make they should revive to comfort
you; then you have leave to weep as much as you please. Is there any Elijah or
Elisha that can stretch forth themselves upon them, and recover them to their
warmth? Is there any Paul or Peter, or such great men that can raise them from
the dead? Go then, and entreat them for to pity you. Beat your breasts, tear
your hair, break your sleep with sorrow, macerate your selves with fasting that
they may take some compassion upon you. But if all this pains be lost, never
put your selves unto it, but say, Why should I have my labor for my pains? And
did not all those men die again that they raised? Were they made immortal here
upon the earth? what good would it do you to have them called to life again, if
they must again dye? How would you be able to part with them then if not now?
What an uncomfortable life would you lead out of fear every day to fall into
the same sadness? How desolate would you be even in their company, unless you
learnt not to be troubled nor distracted? And if that must be learnt, then let
us learn it now when it is as necessary as it would be then. Do you take it ill
that the Apple rots, and your trees decay, and your clothes grow bare, and that
any thing in this world is according to its nature? Why then do you bewail that
men die, which is as natural to them as it is to be born? Would you have God
make the world anew for your sakes? will you not be contented unless he make a
mortal thing immortal? Is it not sufficient that you know it must dye, and that
he gave it to you that it may be returned to him again? Did he ever promise you
how long you should have it? may he not call for his own when he thinks good?
do not other men pay this debt to nature as well as you?

Seeing then it is both a common and a necessary debt, do not repine as if you
did only pay it? He is an unworthy debtor, that returns what is lent with a
reproach to his creditor. And therefore give it up cheerfully, perhaps he may
entrust you with something better. 2 Samuel 12.
While David saw that his child was alive, he earnestly besought of God that it
might not die; but when once it had given up the ghost, he anoints his head,
and puts on other garments, because he knew God was not bound to work a
miracle, though he might be inclined to show mercy. While there was life there
was some hope of mercy: but when it was dead, there was no hope of a miracle.

And yet there is one thing that may be pertinently observed in that story of
David, which exceedingly argues our folly. Though God had said by a Prophet,
that his child should die, yet he earnestly begged that it might live. Men are
not so earnest for that which they may be assured God will do if it concern
their souls, as they are for that which they have all reason to fear he will
not do if it concern their bodies. Men would have him recall his word, and alter
his decrees in temporal matters, but they little mind the obtaining of his
promises, and the fulfilling of his Word in spiritual concernments. They would
have life as long as they please, which they know he will not bestow; but they
seek not for contentment which they may be assured he has a mind to give. They
would have him willing to let them enjoy their friends always, which cannot
be; but they feek not to him that they may be willing to part with them, though
they must part with them, and he would make them willing.

For shame let us not continue in this kind of folly, Death is not only
necessary but good.
to be angry at things necessary which we cannot avoid, and to neglect those
necessaries which we cannot want.

And since death is such a common thing, and so easy to be met with, that
every thing in the world may bring it to us; let us further consider, that it
cannot be very hurtful in it self; for all such things are more unufal and
rare. God is not so unkind unto the world as to let the most noxious and
poisonous things grow everywhere in the greatest plenty. Things of that nature
they are but thinly scattered through the world; they lie hid, and dare not
commonly appear. Since death therefore is in every thing, since it lurks not
for us like a Serpent in the grass, but the smallest thing in this world may
strike us with it, let us verily persuade our selves, that there is no such
great harm in it as we imagine; especially considering that there is another
life.

I am sure that some as wise as we that mourn so much, have thought that death
was the best thing that befalls the sons of men: And if we do not think so, it
is because we think not of death it self. Plutarch. ad Apollor.
It is a common story which Pindar was first Author of, how that Agamedes and
Trophonius, having built the Temple of Apollo, asked a reward of that God for
their service. He promised that after seven days he would pay them well for
their pains; at the end of which they both dyed in the midst of a sleep. This
the world believed was a lesson to them, that God could do men no greater
favor then to take them out of the miseries of life. Not long after this
Pindar himself exemplified the same truth that he had taught; For when by the
Ambassadors of Baeotia, he asked the Oracle What was the very best thing that
could befall men? The answer was, V. etiam Suidam in voc. (...).
that Pindar knew well enough, if he did not lie when he wrote the story of
Agamedes: but if he doubted, he should shortly know what it was. This he
interpreted to signify his death, which within a few days after happened.

But perhaps we are not of this mind, and I need not go to an Oracle to know
the reason, which is plainly this; We are acquainted with no other life but
this. If the world had not so much of our hearts, we shoul not find any fault
with the necessity of death, because it would become desirable. We should not
then be so sorry for our friends departure, as for our own stay. We should be
glad that neither they nor we were necessitated to dwell there always, where
there are so many troubles, that he is happiest who is soonest freed from them.

But there were many that thought not much of the goodness of death, who yet
were comforted with the bare thoughts of necessity. How many Heathens might I
tell you of who fled to this one truth for refuge, and found protection under
it against the assaults of sorrow? Nothing is happened to me, but what happens to
all. The first minute that we began to live, we began to dye. This is not the
first, but the last moment of death. It is now finished, but it was born when
we were born.

When one came and told Anaxagoras in the midst of a lecture that his child was
dead, Hold thy peace said he, I knew that I begat a son that was mortal, and
so proceeded in his Discourse without any accents of grief or a mournful tone.
And so another said to his friend when he saw him weeping for his wife; I
thought you had known that you married a woman and not a Goddess. Do but
remember then what the thing is that thou love, and thou must be willing
either to leave, or not to love it. As they used to stand behind them that
triumphed, and to admonish them, You are but mortal men; so let us say to our
selves when Love is in its greatest flames, Arrian. l. 3. cap. 24.
(...), I love a dying person. What hurt is there while we embrace and kiss a
child to say (...), to morrow it may dye? and so to discourse with our friends;
To think of their death does not make our lives uncomfortable.
To morrow either you or I may go away, and never thus embrace any more. Does
it make it our love the less? does it make us avoid their presence? No,
therefore we are so greedy of our friends society, because we know not how long
we may enjoy them. It makes love more fervently desirous to have all of them
now, because it knows that it may have none of them ere it be long. It teaches
us to use their friendship to the best advantages we can, because we are not
like to have the use of it as long as we please. The knowledge of our
departure, does not part friends now, but makes them cleave the closer until
they depart. Let us be willing they should die, and that will not abate of our
love; for we cannot be willing until we have loved them as much as we can. We
shall be loath they should go without the best testimonies of our love, and that
will make us only improve our time to have the benefit of them, and they of us.
Epist. 63.
Seneca tells in one of his Letters, that he who gave a great deal of good
counsel to others not to grieve, was himself almost made an example of one
overcome with grief. But the truth of it is (says he) there was no other cause
of that mourning which I must now condemn, but only this, I did not use to
think that my friend might die before me. I only had in my mind that he was
younger, much younger then my self; whereas I ought to have added, What is this
to the purpose? Though he ought (I imagine) to die after me, yet he may die
before me. Because I did not thus meditate, I received a stroke when I was
unarmed, which went to my heart. But now I think both that all things are
mortal, and that their is no certain order of mortality. That which may be at
all, may be to day. And if you think that your friend may die to day, then why
do you not begin to mourn, since his death is so near, unless you mean to take
it patiently when it comes? If you will lament the death of your friends so
sadly, why do you not prepare your lamentations, seeing death may be so near?
If you think it is not so near, then it is likely your sorrow will be violent
when it comes, because sudden: If you think it is, and yet do not mourn, then
why should you lament that so sadly at night, which you did not weep for at
all, at noon? Plutarch.
There were some creatures they say in Pontus, whose life lasted but one day;
They were born in the morning, and came to their full growth at noon, and grew
old in the evening, and at night dyed. If these animals had been masters of the
reason that we have, would they have lamented after our fashion? would they
have mourned for one that chanced to die at noon, when as it could not live
longer then night? No, that which is necessary, it is no matter when it comes.
And because we are of a longer life, our trouble at death is not to be the
greater, but the less; For it is a greater wonder that we did not die many
days agone, then that we die to day.

But some will say, The kind of death is not so considerable as death it self.
that it is not death it self, but the kind of death that so troubles them.
They could have been contented, if he had gone out of the world another way.
But I beseech you, do you know what will please your selves? Can you tell what
sort of death it is that would content you? are there any that do not blame
their hard fortune, and wail and mourn as if none were so miserable? are not
men equally troubled if one dye of a Feavour, and another of a Consumption, if
their love be equal? It is very plain, that he that persuades himself to part
with his friends, will not grieve for the manner of the parting. He that can
overcome himself in the greater cause of grief, will not suffer the less so
easily to overcome him. And therefore you see that men have always something
to find fault withal. If a friend die in a far Country, then they say, Alas!
that we should not see him before he dyed! how sad is it that we should not
take our leave? If he dye at home, then they say, who could endure to hear his
groans? how sad was it to see him in the agonies of death? If he die and speak
nothing, then they say, O if he might but have told us his mind, if he had left
us any remembrances, it would have been some comfort. If he did speak, then
they tell his speeches to every one, and say, O my sweet child, or friend, I
shall never forget thy words. Would you have me put out of my mind his dying
speeches? and so those sayings are a perpetual nourishment and food to their
grief. If he die on a sudden, then they lament, because he was snatch, rather
then went away. If he dye of a lingering sickness, then they say he was nothing
but skin and bone, a mere Anatomy: never any creature endured so much as he
did; and so they are sad they know not for what, for they would not have had
him gone away so fast.

And indeed men never want some causes or pretenses for their grief; but the
true reason is, that they would not have had them to have dyed at all.

Let us therefore digest these considerations well, and so proceed to the next,
which shall be this:

Let us consider well who it is for whom we make our lamentations. Who is it I
say,. 5. II. We must consider who the persons are that die.
that death has taken away from us? Perhaps it is an Infant, a poor little
weakling newly crept into the light. And this has the least of wonder in it of
all other things, that such a little spark of life should be blown out.
Comforts against the loss of children.
A greater wonder it is that it was not strangled in the gate of the womb. A
little while ago it had no life, and it is now but as it then was. We were once
content without it; why cannot we be content without it now? It never loved us,
nor was capable to show any affection to us, and therefore we may the better
part with it. It was scarce tied to our heart, and therefore it need not make
the strings crack. It was not unwilling to go out of the world; and if it had
lived longer, death would have been more against its will. It has lost no
great matter, for it knew not the benefits of life. It has cost us nothing,
and we have been at a small charge about it, and therefore we have lost nothing
neither but only it, a coffin and a winding sheet. If it could have known the
miseries of living, and it had been put to its choice, very likely it would not
have chosen for to live, but to be what now it is. It has not blotted its soul
by any sin, nor deflowred the Virgin purity wherein it was born. If it have any
thing to complain of, it is only this, that it was born. And therefore let us
be content, for it is better perhaps for it, and not much the worse for us. If
we weep so much for an Infant, what shall we do for a man? either let us now
let down the sluice, or else expect that we shall then be drowned. If he had
lived to be a man, it might have done as we do, miserably bewail the death of
its children. And therefore either let us not bewail it, or else think that it
is happy, that it lived not to be so miserable as we think our selves: and both
ways our grief will be cured.

But suppose it be a child of a larger growth, Unreasonable to mourn for one
when we have more.
whose death extorts these tears from us. Yet it is but one, and we may have
many more remaining. Shall we lose all the content of a great many, because we
suffer the wants of one? If the life of this one would have pleased us so much,
then how joyful should we be in the life of four or five? If it be such a grief
to lose a child, then let us be thankful that we lie not under the miserable
grief of losing them all. But if we cannot take this patiently, then I doubt we
shall run mad with impatience, if God should take them all away. We must learn
to part with more, by parting willingly with this one, for all must die too.
Can he bear a stone weight, who cannot endure the load of one pound? and yet
how justly may we fear that all the rest should shortly follow, seeing we fret
so much at Gods hand in this? Suppose that this was the most goodly child, yet
not fairer sure then all the rest put together. Or if he was most beautiful,
yet some of the others may be more wise. If this had all our love, then we may
learn now how to divide our love equally, and take pleasure in loving more. If
he loved us most, then he would have wished us (if he had thought of it) not to
make our selves miserable by mourning for him. Dion Christ. Orat. 30.
So Charidemus said to his friends when he was a dying; It is Gods will that I
should die, and there can nothing that is hurtful come from him. I am very
willing to die, and I beseech you believe me in what I say, for I have a
greater care to speak truth now, then any of you can have. Grieve not for me,
for I grieve not; do not make your selves miserable, for I think not my self to
be so. (...), As much as ever you are able refrain from all sadness, for no sad
thing has befaln me. Thus we should say to our friends if we love them, and
therefore their love to us should not make us sad, because they would have all
they love to be cheerful. If they could tell us their mind, they would
certainly bid us cease our mourning, and therefore let us do that our selves
which they would have us for to do.

But let it be supposed that it is an only child; Or when we may have more.
yet are there not many hopes that you may have more? who gave you this? cannot
he give you another? has not he that has the keys of the grave, the keys of
the womb also? If one die then, as long as the world lasts another shall be
born. And if we desire children for the good of the world, then so they be
born, it is no matter by whom. But if for our own sake, then we may have them
as well as others; but grief I will assure you is not the way to get them. Or
if God will give us none, then we may adopt one. Any child will love us, as if
it was our own, if it know not that it is any bodies else. Nay, any one will
love and serve us for what we have, and in stead of one, we shall have many
that will thank us (more then he perhaps) to be our heirs: but if we have
nothing, then why should we desire children for to leave them miserable? But as
I said, why should we not hope for more, and those better then him we lost? So
it is said 2 Samuel 12.24. David comforted Bathsheba his wife; and how did he
comfort her? he went in unto her and lay with her, and she bare a Jedidiah, a
man beloved of the Lord. If we count it such a strange thing to die, then it
should seem it is an ordinary thing to live, and so why should we not expect
the new life of another? But if it be no strange thing to die, then (as I have
said already) we may well be comforted. Or if we should have no more, yet this
may be some comfort, that then we shall have no more to mourn thus sadly for.
Yea, suppose thou art the last of thy family and name, (as was the great
Scaliger, and Lipsius also another excellent Scholar) it is no great matter,
seeing the world is not to last long. If thy name must have an end, what
need thou to trouble thy self when it ends? And if men can think it no harm
to suffer their name to die of it self (as Scaliger did who would not marry)
why should thou be troubled if thine perish, after thou have done what thou
could for to preserve it?

But then if thou had never so many children, Or when it is uncertain whether
they, or none at all be better.
yet who knows how they may prove? If they should be bad, then thou thy self
wilt say, that it had been better they had never been. They that thou mournest
for, because they are dead, might have given thee greater cause of mourning if
they had lived. If the death of a child be sad, his wickedness would have been
far sadder, for that is a worser death. He that dies does trouble his parents
but ouce; but he that is bad, is a perpetual torment to them. He that is dead,
cannot indeed help his parents, but then he does not hurt them, as many a bad
one does. For those that are dead we only grieve, we do not fear; but for those
that are bad we fear perpetually, and we grieve also: yea all the sorrow we now
conceive at their death, will not equal perhaps the mere fear which we should
have had from their infancy, lest their life should be bad.

It is said in the life of John the patriarch of Alexandria, that a Merchant
came to him to pray for a son of his that was at Sea, that he might be safe.
Within a month the child dyed, and his ship likewise was cast away. And when
he was much troubled at this double loss, he thought one night that he saw the
Patriarch standing by his bed, and saying to him, Thou desiredst me to pray
that thy son might be safe, and behold now he is safe, for he is dead. If he
had lived wickedly in his future course, then he could not have been safe. And
besides their badness, suppose our children should have dyed of some infamous
and base death, this would have troubled us more then death it self. Yea, some
there have been that have sought their parents death, and what a trouble would
this have been? Some have slain their fathers, and others their mothers, and
who was there left to mourn then? If you be affrighted at these strange
supposals (which yet sometimes have had a real truth) yet consider once more,
that if they had not been bad, yet who knows what miseries they might have
endured, worse then death? Can you tell what misfortunes might have befaln
them, which might have made them wish they had dyed sooner? They are now dead,
perhaps they have that which afterward they might have desired, and not so
easily have obtained. Who is there that desires any one should live, unless it
be in hopes that he shall enjoy more good then evil? But how few are there to
whom this happens, unless it be a fool who knows not what evil and misery
means? One of the Gymnosophists answered Alexander when he asked whether death
or life was stronger? Life sure, for that bears the most evils. And suppose he
that is dead should not have been miserable; yet now he is gone, if he might
rise again, it is likely he would not, lest he should know again the fear and
the pains of dying.

But it is the Death of our parents perhaps that we thus bewail: Comforts
against the death of parents.
they that brought us into the world, are themselves gone out of it. And what
wonder is there in this? If they had not been to go out, what need would there
have been of bringing us in? If they were designed to stay always, then there
had been no room for us. They might more easily remember their mortality then
we; for there is no act that puts us more in mind of death, then that whereby
we give another life. But it is but one of them it is likely that we have lost,
we may then love the other the more. Or if both, yet we have least reason to
complain about their death of all others; for both Nature, and they themselves,
and we also would have them die before us. We complain that people die when
they are young; and will we complain too when they die of old age? then it
seems we will have none die, and cannot be contented unless they live always:
Would they have been willing to have been left childless without you? if not,
then they have their choice to go first. Or are you so well in love with death,
that it would have been more acceptable to you to have gone before? or are you
so much in love with them, that on that account you had rather have dyed then
they? Then know that your death would as much more have troubled them, then
theirs does you, as the love of parents to their children transcends the love
of all children unto them. It is very well then as it is. It is not handsome
neither to complain when we are forty or fifty years of age, that our parents
are dead, for they could live no longer, or if they could, it would have been
but a kind of death. If we will not cease to complain when we are of age,
neither shall we ever cease when we grow older. For as Cardan tells us, a poor
woman once came to his door to beg an alms, and though she were seventy years
of age, yet she used this argument in her complaints, that she was a poor
fatherless and motherless creature, and had none to take any care of her. We
need the less of their care, when we can take care of our selves.

But perhaps they die before we are of age, and can take care of our selves.
Then we are least sensible of their loss; or if we are so considerate as to
know that, we may consider also such things as these; There is none fatherless
that has God for his Father: and he that has not, would be little better for
his earthly parents. If they were good, let us follow their example, and
remember their Counsel: If they were bad, they would not have been true parents
to us; and it is well perhaps that we had not such an example to follow. They
may live still in us, if they were good; if they were bad, we had need live the
better, and spend those tears for their sins (which may entail curses on us)
which we bestow upon them. But besides, it is observed by some, that the most
eminent persons that have been in the world did lose their parents when they
were young, or else it is like they had not proved so eminent. The great Caesar
and his successor Augustus, Alexander the Monarch of the World, Cicero the
famous Orator, Galen the most excellent Physician, Aristotle the great
Philosopher, are all examples of this truth. If these had enjoyed the support
of their parents to lean upon, they might not have tried their own sufficiency,
nor exercised their abilities; or else they might have been wholly eclipsed by
their luster, and done nothing to be taken notice of in the world.

But some will say that they have lost one half of themselves. -- And of
husband or wife.
Death has ravished an husband or a wife out of their bosoms: And it is very
well too (I assure you) seeing Death is so common, that he has left one half,
and not taken all. But did you not think of this before? did you not take one
another with this clause [till death us depart?] You did speak of parting when
you first came together; and now that you are parted, you are free again as you
were before. If you like this conditon so well, you are at liberty to seek
another self. If you do not like it, why do you mourn for nothing? or if you
liked that person so well as to think of no other, then you may stand among the
rare examples of love and friendship, and for one husband you may choose you
twenty friends.

But our friends you will say, And of friends. Epist. 63.
do die also. Very true. But let me borrow the words of Seneca for a leniment
of this evil, who speaks to this purpose. If thou have other friends besides
this, is it not a great reproach to them of their unworthiness, that all of
them are not able to comfort thee for the loss of one? If thou have no more,
then thou have done thy self a greater wrong then God has done thee, for he
has taken but one, and thou have made never an one. God makes men (as is said
by some) and we make friends. And if thou be desirous of more, and find
such need of them, thou have leisure now to go and seek them. He can never want
friends, that wants not virtue. He loved not one well, that cannot love any
more then one. Is it not a ridiculous folly for a man to shrug and cry when he
has lost his coat, rather then go to fetch another garment to cover him from
the cold? If he be taken away whom thou did love, seek another whom to love.
It is far better to repair thy loss, then to mourn for it. And if thou can
not find another to thy mind, How could thou be a friend to him that is dead,
if thou have no power to help thy self? why should not a good man find enough
in God and himself? The want of nothing, can make thee want virtue; and he that
has that, has enough. Nay, every good man is thy friend if thou be good:
and they that never see thy face before, if they see thy goodness, they will be
good unto thee. Apuleius de Philos. Mor.
Bonos omnes oportet inter se amicos esse, et si sint minus noti: All good men
ought to be friends, though they be not much acquainted.

I have passed over these last particulars (as you see) very swiftly, because I
observe my discourse begins to run to a greater length then I intended: and in
some of the following considerations you shall find satisfaction to every one
of these cases, if you will but concoct them.

Consider so far as to make comparisons.. 6. III. To compare our selves with
our selves and others, a way to be contented.
And first of all compare thy self now with what thou once wast, yea with what
thou once wast not. There was a time when thou thy self was not so much as
dead, for thou wast not at all, nor had any capacity of joy or sorrow. Has
God dealt unkindly with thee in giving thee a being capable of both? We were
not so well once, or not better; and yet not so grieved.
Would thou have resused a being (if we may suppose an offer to be made to
nothing) unless he would have given thee nothing but joy, and never taken away
what he gave thee? unless thou have a mind to be nothing, be contended with
what thou art. Then thou had not these relations, for thou had not thy
self. Why then should thou mourn that thou have them not, since thou have thy
self? Is there not more reason to be thankful for a being, though capable of
mourning, then to be troubled at the occasion of thy mourning? Surely thou do
not desire to cease thy mourning, by ceasing to be. Ease thy self then of thy
mourning by the being that God has given thee. If thou could not mourn
then, Do not mourn now. But then consider, that since thou had a being, there
was a time when thou had none of these relations, no wife, nor children, nor
friends which thou art deprived of. Yet thou did not then weep and lament,
and trouble thy self as now thou do. Seeing thou art what thou wast, be
contented as thou wast. What difference is there between that time and this?
Thou wast as much without then, as now thou art; why should thou not be as
much contented now as then? All the difference between those that want a thing,
and those that lose it, is only this; that they who lose it once had that,
which they that want it never had. Now shall we be the more troubled because we
once had it? one would think that their trouble should be the greatest that
neither have it, nor ever had it. We have reason to be more pleased that we had
it, if there were any good in it: and if there was no good in it, then we have
no reason to be displeased that we have it not. Say, had thou rather never
have enjoyed thy friends, then now be deprived of them? Was thy condition worse
or better heretofore? If it was but equal to thy present, then thou have reason
to be equally pleased. Remember how thou wast then, and be so now. If it was
worse then, why should thou be now worse troubled? If it was better then, why
did thou change it, seeing thou knew that all must die? No question it is
better to have enjoyed a good thing, then never to have known it. And therefore
seeing thou art no worse now then thou wast once, but have been better then
once thou wast, be not more troubled then thou wast once; yea, be less troubled.

But secondly, We may be worse.
compare thy present condition with what thou may be. This is not the worst
that may befall thee in such a world of miseries. Suppose then that thou
should lose all thy children as Job did, and then lose thy whole estate; that
the Sea should swallow one part, and the fire burn another, and thieves rob
thee of a third, and bad debtors quite undo thee. Suppose after all this, that
a fire should begin to burn in thy own bones, and that should break into boils,
and they should break into scabs, and thou should be poor, even to a Proverb,
as that holy man was. Must thou not be contented then? But how is that
possible, seeing thou can not be contented now: If such a shower of tears fall
from thine eyes for this little loss, then sure thou will make a flood or a
deluge. But what will thou do at last after all thy lamentations? will thou
kill thy self? Then it seems thou take death to be the end of all troubles;
and I wonder thou should be troubled at that which has cased thy friend of
all troubles. Or what else will thou do? comfort thy self? Try how thou can
do that now, for if thy stomach resuse cordials in this distemper, never expect
that it will digest them, when thou will be far more sick and apt to vomit them
up again. If Job had cursed the day wherein he was born at the first breach
that God made upon his estate, what expressions of grief (below a great sin)
had he left for himself when he sat upon the dunghill? The good man took the
first losses so patiently, that all the rest which befell him could not move
him to greater impatience. Do thou remember him; and say to thy soul, Come, be
quiet, this is not the worst that may betide us; we have no such cause to cry
as we may have; Let us learn patience against a time when we may have more need
of it.

And then if we should be brought to the very dust, and fall as low as the dung
of the earth, yet there is another way of considering what may be besides this.
We may be better.
We may be as happy again, as now we account our selves miserable. Our sorrow
may be turned into joy, as our joy has been turned into sorrow. Weeping may
endure for a night, but joy may come in the morning, according as I have said
in the former discourse; Job 42.12.
And so it was with Job whom God blessed in his latter end, more then in his
beginning. We have seen the end of the Lord (says the Apostle James) that the
Lord is very pitiful, Jam. 5.11.
and of tender mercy. But then this pity of his is to be obtained only by
patience. If we cannot be contented, it is needful we may think that he should
teach us it still by greater losses.

Thirdly, We have more then we want.
Compare what thou have lost, with what thou have not lost. God leaves commonly
more then he takes. He takes away thy children perhaps, but thou have thy
husband, and he is better then ten sons. Or if thou have lost thy husband also,
yet thou have thy self; and why should a living man complain? and thou have God
himself, whom nothing can take away from thee. Or if thou have him not, yet
thou may have him; and who knows but that therefore thou have lost thy
friends, because thou have not him? God has taken them away, that thou may
seek after him. Would thou have been willing that all thou have should have
been lost rather then this one friend? Shall God raise him from the dead, and
all the rest go into his tomb? Will thou have all, or else take comfort in
none? Then God may well take away all, and let thee have something to cry for.
Yea, who is there destitute of all friends and comforters? Job himself was not
so spoiled, that they had robbed him of his friends. Though they did add indeed
to his grief, yet it was their mistake, and not their want of love. And if we
should have no better, then we may give God thanks, that he lets us see more
then all our friends. Yea, it is a great mercy that God gives us time to cease
our grief and trouble. And perhaps we have riches, and a pleasant dwelling,
delightful walks, etc. or if we have not, and can bear that patiently; Barthol.
cent. 4. Hist. An. cap. 16.
then we may soon learn how to bear this. Do the poor people of Norway weep
when they eat, because their bread is made of the barks of trees, and sometimes
of chaff, not of corn as ours is? If there were no trees, nor chasse, nor no
such thing to fill their mouths, they might well cry, but as long as we have
what is needful, we should be content, for nothing is so needful as that. Let
us not then weep because we have not so many friends as we had, for we have
more then we deserve. Let us not mourn as though we were desolate, when we want
but one; no more then we do complain of hunger when we have all variety of
cheer, except one dish that we love most. But

Fourthly, We have more then many others.
Let us compare our selves (if you please) with others. In other cases this is
a thing we love to do, though there be so much danger in it that it may undo
us. If we be guilty of any fault, then we comfort our selves in comparisons,
and think that we are not so bad as others. Now that which we are apt to do
when we do ill, we ought to do when we think we suffer ill. Is God more unkind
to us then to any of our neighbors? Do not we see that many of our neighbors
children are dead as well as ours? Many of them have lost four or five, and we
have lost but one. Nay, many of them never had any, and yet they do not
therefore mourn, and besmear their faces with tears, and break their hearts
with sighs. Our case is the very same now that we have none, but only that it
is a little better, because we had once some. And how thankful should we be
that we had them so long, if it be desirable to have them at all? But then we
may say further to our selves, How many of them have lost their friends in the
late wars? How many has the sword made Widows, and the blood of how many of
their children has it drunk? Ours were taken away by the hand of God, but
theirs were taken away by the hands of men. Our friends dyed in their beds, and
theirs dyed in the field; Ours went, and theirs were driven out of the world.
Come, let us go comfort our neighbors that have lost more then we, for they
stand more in need of comfort. If they stand in need of none, then no more do
we.

It was very handsomely discoursed by Socrates (as Plutarch relates) That if we
could all agree to put all the troubles and calamities of men into one heap, on
this, De Consol. ad Apollon.
condition that after every man had brought his and thrown them there, then
they should all come again and take every man an equal portion of them, there
would be a great many that now complain, who would rather take up what they
brought, and go their ways contented with them.

And so Antimachus an Ancient Poet, when his wife dyed whom he loved
exceedingly, he went and writ a Poem bearing her name, wherein he reckoned up
all the calamities that he could remember had befaln any in the world. By this
means he did deter himself from grief; for how can one suffer the miseries
which others endure, if he cannot bear this light one of his own.

Fifthly, It is better with us then with those of former times.
Let us compare our selves with the Ancient Christians. Their children were
snatched out of their arms by the hands of tyrants. They see their brains dashed
out against the stones; their friends were buried in fires, or banished into
strange places, and they had no comforters left but God and themselves; and
their chiefest comfort was, that they must shortly die the same death. But
notwithstanding all this, and much more, they did not take it heavily, but
(...) (as Photius speaks) They bare it all thankefully, Epist. 234.
and blessed God who could tell how to govern the world beyond all the thoughts
of men. Let not us who suffer but common things, weep with an extraordinary
sorrow, when they who suffered most unnatural deaths did bear it with more then
natural courage. They might have been allowed to have wept blood, rather then
we to shed tears. And yet they rejoiced as if their friends had been offered in
Sacrifice to God; and we weep as if they had been put to some shameful torments
for their crimes. Shall we mourn more for the death of a friend then they for a
butchery? What arguments had they to comfort them which we have not? What
Scripture had they before their eyes to stay their tears, which we read not? If
either of us have more to comfort us then the other, it is we; for we have
their most excellent example. And when I think of the Mother of the seven
Brethren mentioned in the Macabees, Mac. 2.7.
she calls my thoughts back a little further then the times of Christ. Did she
wring her hands when she saw the skin of her son stead off from his head? Did
she cast any tears into the fire wherein another of them was fried? No, she
speaks as cheerfully as if they were not stripping them of their skins, but
clothing them with a royal robe. She looks upon them, not as if they lay upon
a pan of coals, but in a bridal bed. She exhorted them, being filled with a
courageous spirit, saying, V. 21, 22.
I cannot tell how you came into my womb, for I neither gave you breath, nor
life, neither was it I that formed the members of every one of you. But
doubtless the Creator of the world, who formed the generation of man, and found
out the beginning of all things, will also of his own mercy give you breath and
life again, as you now regard not your own selves for his sake. This mavelous
woman (as she is called, v. 20.) knew very well that she did not give them
life, and therefore why should she take so heavily their death? She considered
they were none of hers, and why should not the owner take them? She knew that
she did not lose them, but only restore them. That life sometimes is not worth
the having. That unless God will have us live, no wise man would desire to
live. That none gives any thing unto God, though it be his own, but he gives
them something better. And therefore she said, Die my sons, for that is the way
to live.

What poorness of spirit then is it, that we cannot see a soul put off her
clothes without so much ado? That a Jewish woman could see seven souls torn out
of their body with more courage, then a Christian man can see one soul quietly
to depart and leave its lodging? I would wish every one to save his tears till
some other time, when he may have some greater occasion for them. If he will
weep, let it be when he sees the bodies of his children or friends so mangled
as theirs were. But if he would not weep out his eyes then, let him weep
soberly, and not as if he were drunk with sorrow now.

After we have taken this course with our selves,. 7. IV. We must think with
what reason we weep.
, we shall be the more prepared to hearken unto reason. And let us proceed from
making comparisons, to ask our selves some Questions, and stay till they give a
good answer. Let us know of our selves why we are so sad and heavy? Let us
speak to our souls, and say, Tell me, what is the matter? what is the cause of
all this grief? thou art a rational creature, what reason have thou for all
this sorrow? Thou art not to be pittyed merely for thy tears, if thou can cry
without any cause. Hideous things appear sometimes before us to affright us;
but they are the Chimera's of a childish imagination, and not things really
existent. Let us bid fancy then to stand aside a while, and let reason speak
what it is that so troubles us. Children cry who cannot speak, and we are not
much troubled at it, because they cry for they know not what; Unless we
therefore can tell why we weep, no body will pity us, because it is not
weeping that we are to mind, but the cause of men's weeping. Let me then propose
these questions to be answered, some of which will discover that there is no
cause of lamentation when our friends die. And if there be no cause that the
fountain of tears should run, that is cause enough to stop it up.

I. For whose sake do thou weep? For the sake of him that is dead, or for thy
own? No cause of mourning for their sakes who are dead.
Not for him that is dead sure; for we suppose him to be happy. Is it
reasonable to say, Ah me* what shall I do? I have lost a dear friend that shall
eat and drink no more? Alas! he shall never hunger again; never be sick again,
never be vexed and troubled; and which is more, he shall never die again? Yet
this is the frantic language of our tears, if we weep for the sake of him that
is gone. Suppose thy friend should come to thee, and shake thee by the hand,
and say, My good friend, why do thou lament and afflict thy soul? I am gone
to the Paradise of God, a sight most beautiful to be beheld, and more rare to
be enjoyed. To that Paradise am I flown, where there is nothing but joy and
triumph, nothing but friendship and endless love. There am I where the head of
us all is, and where we enjoy the light of his most blessed face. I would not
live if I might again, no not for the love of thee. I have no such affection to
thy society (once most dear unto me) that I would exchange my present company
to hold commerce with thee. But do thou rather come hither as soon as thou
can. And bid thy friends that they mourn not for thee when thou dyest, unless
they would wish thee to be miserable again. If we should have such a short
converse with one of our acquaintance, what should we think? what should we
say? Should we fall a mourning and crying again? would it open a new sluice for
our tears to flow out? would we pray him to go to heaven no more, but stay with
us? would we entreat him to beg of God that he might come and comfort us? If
not, then let us be well content, unless we can give a better reason for our
tears, then our love to him. Holcoth reports of a learned man, In 4. sap. v. 7.
that was found dead in his Study with a Book before him: A friend of his was
exceedingly amazed at this sight when he first came into the room. But when he
looked a little further, he found his forefinger pointing at this place in the
book of Wisdom, c. 4. v. 7. (...). Though the just be prevented with death, yet
shall he be in rest. And when he observed this, he was as much comforted, as he
was before dejected. We have no reason to lament them who are made immortal,
and that live with God. If we respect them only, we should carry them forth as
the Egyptians did the great Prophet of Isis when he dyed, Heliod. l. 7.
Aethiop.
not with howlings and sorrow, but with hymns and joy, as being made an heir
(...), with our Betters, and gone to possess most glorious things.

The truth of it is, if it were rational love to him that expresses these
tears, then we should not begin them so soon, nor make such a noise, and cry
when men are a dying. For the sad countenances and the miserable lamentations
wherewith we encompass sick men's beds, make death seem more frightful to them,
then it is in it self. What misery am I falling into (may a man think) that
causes them to make such a moan? What is this death, that makes even them look
so ghastly who are not like to die? What a mischief is it to leave so many sad
hearts behind me, and to go my self (it should seem by them) to some sad and
dismal place also? I tell you, a dying man had need have a double courage, to
look both death and them in the faces, or else their indiscreet shrikes and
lamentations will make a poor soul fall into such dark and cloudy thoughts. Nor
for our own sakes that are alive.
Men are fain therefore to say that it is indeed love to themselves that forces
them thus to bemoan the death of their friends. But what are you, that cannot
be contented one should be made much better, by making of you a little worse?
Is this the great love you pretend to your friend, that you are sorry he is
gone to heaven? are you a friend, that look more at your own small benefit,
then at his great gain? Was he not much beholden to you for your love, that
would have had him lived till you were dead, that he might have been as
miserable in mourning for you, as you think now your selves to be? But what is
it I beseech you, that you thus bemoan your selves for? because that you are
now miserable? No, it seems that you are not miserable enough, and that makes
you weep so much. If you had some greater trouble befaln you, that would put
all your friends out of your mind. If you were sick, or in pains, or had lost
all your goods, these things could take your mind off from this loss; why then
cannot the enjoyment of them? When Joab did but threaten David that they all
would leave him, 2 Samuel 19.7.
unless he would be comforted, then he could wipe his face, and appear in
public as a man well pleased. Fear of losing his Kingdom, put away the grief
for the loss of his son. And therefore let us not speak of our being miserable
by this loss, for at last we find it is not so. Yea I must tell you that it is
not mere selflove that begets these tears. For suppose this person to have been
at a great distance from us for some years; Did we weep and mourn because he
was not with us? did not the mere thoughts that he lived comfort us? was he not
as good as dead when we neither saw, nor felt, nor heard him? What help could
he afford us at that distance? and did we account our selves miserable all that
time? we are now as we were then, in all things the same, but only in the
knowledge that he is dead. But was he not dead as to us before? did he do any
thing for us at that time that he does not now? Let us be quiet then; for the
truth is, it is not love to him, nor love to our selves that makes us sometimes
weep, but a mere natural affection that stirs within us, i. e. Men mourn
oft-times they know not why, but only it is natural so to do. They think they
are not as they were before. They feel that there is something wanting, as they
imagine. It is a thing of long acquaintance perhaps, and so nature is loath to
part with it: Get a new nature then, and that will mend all. And yet it is not
mere natural affection neither that makes us sad, For we our selves shall soon
forget it.
but the freshness and the presence of the object of our sadness. Time will
make us forget it; or if our parents had dyed a little after we were born, we
should never have wept when we came of age, to think that they were departed.
It is no hard matter then for a considerate person to cease his grief, seeing
it depends upon such small causes. And if any one shall say that it is love to
the good of the world that makes him mourn for the loss of an useful person; He
has reason to rejoice that he loves the good of men so much. For then he will
labor to do much good in the world himself; and he will persuade all the
friends he has remaining, that they would do all the good they can, and repair
that loss.

II. But let me further ask you, Was thy friend Gods friend also, Our friends
if Good, are not lost.
or was he not? If he was the friend of God, as well as a friend of thine, why
should not he have his company rather then thou? If he was not Gods friend,
then he could not be thine neither. No man can love us aright, that does not
love God; and if he do love God, why should we think much that he goes to God?
But supposing he was very dear to us; then I say, that if he was Bad, thou
ought to have mourned for him before this. For then thy tears might have
done some good, which now are altogether unprofitable. Eccles. 22.12.
Seven days (says the son of Sirach) do men mourn for him that is dead; but
for a fool, and an ungodly man, all the days of his life. But if he were a
Good man, then thou need not mourn now, for thou may hope to see him
again, if thou art Good. Thus thou may comfort thy self, My friend is not
gone, but gone before. He is separated from us, but not lost. He is absent, but
not dead. He has taken a journey into a far Country, and there I may go to
see him. What matter is it whether my friend return to me, or I go to him? None
but this, that if he be in a better place, then it is better that I go to see
him, then that he come to see me. Should we not desire to be better our selves,
and not to have him made worse? then let us contentedly follow as fast as we
can, hoping there where he is to embrace again. We cannot expect him in our
house, but he expects us in his. He cannot come down to us, but we may go up to
him. He cannot come back, but we may follow after. And there is no difference
(as I said) between his visiting of us at our home, and our going to see him at
his, but only this, that it is a great deal better for us to see him there
where he is, and not where we are now our selves. Let us not mourn therefore
for that which cannot be, but rejoice for that which may and will be. And let
it comfort us that we shall come together again, but in a better place then we
would have it; we shall have our desires fulfilled, but in a more excellent
manner then we desire. And if in the mean time he can do us any good, we may be
sure we shall not want it.

III. Ask your selves again, As they are not lost, so we have had them long.
Why should you mourn more for your loss, then be glad for your enjoyment? If
there be so much reason to lament the absence of this friend, then it should
seem his enjoyment was very valuable. Think therefore of the sweetness thou
had in that, which thou would purchase again with so many tears. Is there
no comfort but only in things present? Is it not a piece of our folly to forget
what we have enjoyed? Shall we only think what delight we have lost, and not of
what we have had? We do not know whether we have lost any, but only that which
we had; and that we may think of as much as if he were alive. Of what we have
enjoyed we are certain; but there is no certainty of what we should have found
in our friend for the time to come. Think then of the time past, and rejoice
that thou did find so sweet a friend. Imagine not how long thou might have
enjoyed him, but think how long thou did. It was but natural to lose him; but
it was supernatural to enjoy him. All men are born to die, but all men are not
born to live so long before they die. All men have acquaintance, but all men
have not friends. Therefore he that has a friend, and has him so long, he is
to acknowledge that God is very much his friend. He was not ours, but was given
us by God; or rather he was not given, but only lent. We had not the propriety,
but only the use. We have not lost any thing that was our own, but only
restored that which was another. And therefore now that he is taken away, we
are not to be angry that God requires his own, but to be thankful, that he has
lent us so long that which was none of our own. And assure your selves there is
nothing more unreasonable then to mourn that God gave us a thing no longer; and
not to rejoice that he gave us that which is so desirable, at all. Cease your
tears I beseech you, unless you will show that you deserved to have wept a
little sooner. Either say that he was not worth the having, and then you need
not weep at all, or else give God the thanks that you had a person so worthy,
and that will stay your immoderate weeping.

Nay, will some passionate person say, but this will rather augment our grief,
when we think that he was so much worth unto us, and yet is gone. But that is
our fault, if we will think more and oftener that he is not, then that he was.
How can any body help you, if you will needs look more upon his departure, then
upon his stay? Seeing there is more reason that you should please your self in
what is past, it is to be supposed that your thoughts will be more upon it; and
if they be, you cannot be sad: But if they be not, then you are not to be cured
by reason, but by something else. When you are apt to fetch a sigh, and say, Oh
my dear friend is gone! call it in again, and say, Thanks be to God that I had
such an one to lose. Who would not be willing to spend some tears after so much
joy? But then the remembrance of the joy will command that the tears do not
overflow. It is an excellent saying of Seneca, I ever think of my friends with
joy; For I had them as if I should lose them, Habui illos tanquam amissurus,
amisi tanquam habeam. Epist. 63.
and I have lost them as if I had them. If we could but think of them as dying
while they are alive, then we should more easily think of them as alive when
they are dead. If we could be willing to part with them when we have them, we
should think that we have them, when we have parted with them. And the truth
is, we cannot please our selves long in the remembrance of them, unless it be
accompanied with some joy. I do not advise you to forget your friends, and put
them out of mind, but to temember them, and keep them in your thoughts. But how
short a remembrance (says the same Seneca) must that be, which is always
joined with grief and sorrow? If we would remember one always, we must
remember him with pleasure; For no man will return willingly to that, which he
cannot think of without his torment. And if there be any little grief
intermixed with our thoughts, yet that grief has its pleasure. As the
sharpness of old Wine does make it more acceptable to men's palates, and as
Apples are more grateful for their sharp sweetness; so Attalus was wont to say,
That the remembrance of our friends is the more pleasant, for that little
sorrow that is mingled with it.

IV. Ask your selves again, And we have many more remaining.
Why so many mourn for one? could that one have mourned more for you all, then
every one of you do for him? If you will weep, weep only your part, and do not
weep as if there was none else to weep but your selves. If a man that was not
acquainted with the world, should see ten, or twenty, or perhaps a greater
number sitting in a room, and miserably bemoaning of themselves, would he not
ask what Town was burnt, or what family was dead that caused so many mourners?
How much then would he be astonished when he heard the Answer, that you had
lost a friend, a child, or some one of your other relations? What? are there so
many tears due (would he think) from every one of these for one? must so many
be ready to die for the death of one? can there be no comfort found among so
many of you against the death of one single person? Me thinks you should all of
you together weep no more for the death of one, then that one would have wept
for you if you had been dead altogether. Look therefore upon one another, and
say, You are still left behind, and I am left, and here are twenty more of our
friends alive; how is it then that we are discontented, as if we had not lost
one, but every one of us had lost one? If there had been but one of us left,
what could he have done more, then what every one of us does? could he shed
more tears for the loss of us all, could he make himself more sad then we now
are? Either let us say, that one and ten are equal, or let us not shed as many
tears for one as we would for ten; much less ten times as many tears as there
would be for ten. For but one would weep for ten, and here ten that weep for
one. Divide your grief then, and let every one bear a part, but not the whole;
for that is, as if you had none to bear it with you.

V. Ask thy self, Or if we have not, God is still ours, who rules the world,
and not we.
Who is it that governs the world? Is it the will of God, or thy will that thou
prayest may be done? Shall not he that made a thing have leave to dispose of it
as he thinks good? By what law is it that he shall not do what he pleases with
his own? Must we have our wills in all things, and must not he have his will
also? must not he be pleased as well as we? If we think it so reasonable to
have what we will; then it is more reasonable that he should have what he
wills. Now if our will and his will cannot stand together, which shall bend and
submit themselves to the other? Is not his will most wise? If he had considered
better, would he have done otherwise? could we have told him what would be most
fit for us? If we had been of his Counsel, should not this friend have been
taken away? Does he will things because he will? Perhaps there is no reason at
all for our wills, and we are in love with a thing, we know not why; shall we
think that he is so in like manner? Or if we have any reasons, are not his
better? We would have the life of a child that he may be a comfort unto us; God
will have us to part with him, that he may be our only comfort. We should choose
his life, that he might enjoy the things that we have got: But God thinks fit
that he should die, that we may put our estates to better uses, whereby we are
assured he may be more glorified. Or perhaps we desire our children may live
for Gods glory sake, that they may honor and serve him in the world: but
cannot he tell what is best for his own glory? is he so careless of that as to
take away the things without which he cannot be served? Let us then cease our
complaints, unless we would have him to let us govern the World. But he was
taken away, will some say, before his time, else I should be content. I shall
answer this as Photius does, Epist. 234.
(...), Let me hear no such word I beseech you, a word too bold to be spoken,
and more bold to be thought. Before the time do you say? Then why was he not
thought to come before the time, when he came out of his mothers womb? There is
no reason for it but this, that it was the will and pleasure of God that he
should be born at such a time. And must God appoint the time of his birth, and
we set the time of his death? Did the Workman give him a being in good time,
and take him to himself, not knowing the fittest time? From a drop he made him
to become a lump of flesh. He formed the flesh into parts, he brought him into
the light, and he kept him in his infancy and childhood. Was any of these out
of due time? why then only should it be out of season when he translated him to
another life? Let us do therefore as David did, who prayed and wept as long as
he could hope the decree of God was not absolute concerning his child's death;
but when he saw that it was irreversible, he comforted himself. Let us always
say as Job does, The Lord gives and the Lord takes away, and blessed be the
Name of the Lord. And let this be further considered to the enforcing of this
truth, that if the will of the Lord must be born, then it must be done. And his
will is, that we should take all things patiently, yea, cheerfully from his
hands. And therefore if we mourn immoderately, what do we but only add sin unto
our pain? As there is a time to laugh, so there is a time to weep: but there is
no more time to weep superfluously, then there is to laugh idly and profusely.
Both in the one and in the other we must be wholly subject to the will of God.
But that will of God, as I said, is very wise in every thing, and therefore he
intends to make us laugh by this mourning; and by every sad thing that does
befall us, to make our hearts glad. He always gives something better then he
takes away, if we would but seek after it; and ofttimes he takes one thing away
that we may seek after the better. But alas, our blindness is so great, that we
value not that which brings us profit, unless it be sweet to our taste. We let
our passion judge, and not our reason; and therefore we think there is no good
in a bitter cup, and no danger in a pleasant draught. We lament and mourn when
we ought to think our selves great gainers; and we rejoice and leap, when
perhaps a cross of the greatest burden has befaln us. Let us stay a while
therefore, and expect the end of things before we mourn. And let us but desire
to be cured, rather then pleased; to have our souls amended, rather then our
fancy humoured; and we shall have great reason to thank God for every thing
that comes to us.

VI. And this will lead me to another consideration, concerning the Goodness of
God in all that he does. Ask thy self therefore, And he rules it better then we
could do.
Does not God do all things for our Good? Do we wish better to our selves then
God does? Has not He the greatest care of all his creatures, to see that it be
well with them? Did he make them for any other end then that they might be
happy? Is there the least Sparrow that falls to the ground without our Fathers
Providence? Then Mankind must needs be under a greater love, and none of them
can die by chance, but by his direction. And above all other men, He has a
singular care over the persons of good Christians, the very hairs of whose
heads are all numbered. If not so much as an hair can drop off without Him,
much less can any body of them fall into their graves, but He has a hand in
it. But still He has a more special providence over such Christians as are
fatherless and widows, helpless and destitute of all succor. And therefore as
it was his goodness that took their friends away, so much more will his
goodness take care of them whom he has left none else to take care of. He
considers us not only as his children, but as children placed in the midst of
such and such circumstances; as desolate and sad, as left only to his
providence and tuition. And therefore it is that the Psalmist says, Psa. 10.14.
Thou art the helper of the Fatherless. And in another place, Psalm. 68.5.
A Father of the fatherless, and a Judge of the widow, is God in his holy
habitation. Psalm. 69.23.
I am poor and sorrowful, let thy salvation set me up on high. Yea, and all
good men are full of compassion to such persons: Job 29.12, 14.
So that The blessing of those that are ready to perish come upon them; and
they cause the widows heart to sing for Joy.

It is an excellent saying of the Royal Philosopher Antoninus, worthy to be
engraven upon our minds. (...), etc. Lib 2.. 11.
If there be a God, then nothing can be hurtful to us, for he will not involve
us in evil. But if either there be none, or he take no care of men's matters,
what should I live for in a world that is without a God, or without a
Providence? But there is a God, and he cares for men also, and has put it into
their power not to fall into those things which are truly evil. And for the
rest that befall us, if any thing of them had been evil, he would have provided
that we should have been able not to have fallen into that neither. But if this
great person had known also that God leaves us not to our own power, when he
sends any thing upon us, but that he has a peculiar love to his servants when
they are in trouble, and affords them his assistance. He would have said on
this sort, If we be not alone without God, then nothing need discomfort us, for
he is the God of all comfort. If we be alone, then we had need to be most
discomforted for that, and never endure in a condition without God. But we are
not alone, and we are least alone when we are alone; and have him most, when we
have other things least. Therefore he has put it into our power not to be
troubled, but to go to him for comfort in all that befalls us; and if there were
no comfort in him for us in such cases, then they should not have befaln us.
Let us not therefore mourn as long as we have a God, and as long as all things
make us seek for our comfort in him.

VII. Let us ask our selves, Grief will end, let us end it.
How long we intend to mourn? Does any man intend to continue it all his life?
Then he may fall into the follies of Augustus, who made the image of his Nephew
whom he dearly loved, be placed in his Bedchamber, that he might kiss it and
embrace it daily. Or the dotage of Alexander will be a fit punishment for us,
who built temples, and commanded sacred solemnities every year for his beloved
Ephestion. Do you intend every year to have a funeral Sermon? to go and weep
over their graves at that time, as you do when they are first put into them? If
not, set some measures to your mourning, for of it self it knows no measure.
And if you intend not to weep always, why can you not cease now? If it be not
a thing to be lamented for ever, why should it be so sadly lamented at all?
Decency indeed does require some mourning, and natural affection must be
allowed its tears; but we must stay them as soon as may be, and not mourn as if
we thought we could never mourn enough. For if we think so, then we must mourn
always, or else we show that we had no reason to mourn so much. But if any man
be resolved to let the sorrow take its course, and run as far as ever it can,
let me tell him, that either his sorrow will spend him, or else it will spend
it self, and so be cured without any thanks at all to us. It is a trite thing
which I am going to add, but (to speak with Seneca) I will not therefore
forbear to speak it, because it is spoken by all. So it falls out that he who
will not put an end to his own grief, time will end it for him. But this is
most dishonorable to expect, till it put an end to it self, when it can run no
longer, and not to end it our own selves by not permitting it to run at all
with our leave. To be weary of weeping is the basest remedy for grief. It is
far better for us to leave grief, then to let it leave us. It is a shame to let
time conquer that, which has conquered us. Seeing it must cease, let it cease
by our valor and strength, not by its own weakness. Let it die by our hands,
and not merely because it can live no longer.

We are weary of nothing sooner then of grief, and therefore let us cease that,
which if we would, we cannot do long. It is well observed by Pliny the second,
Lib. 5. Epist. 16.
that as a crude wound is very angry under the Chirurgions hand, but in a short
time does both suffer it and require it; so a fresh grief does use to reject
and despise all comfort, but shortly after not only receives it most
courteously, but also desires and expects it. And seeing if it can find no
comfort, it will fairly cease it self, it is more like men, that we should
comfort our selves and put a period to it.

VIII. Ask thy self again, It may do us much harm before it end.
To what purpose is all my mourning? Every wise man intends some good to
himself in what he does; and therefore unless sorrow will do us some good, it
is a foolish thing to indulge unto it. But can any man that has had his fill
of it, tell us what satisfaction it has given him? May we not put all our
gains in our eyes (as the Proverb is) after they have wept so immoderately?
Does any man say he is glad that he mourned so much? Then he had best mourn
again if there be so much gladness and profit in it. Had we not better say with
David concerning his child when it was dead, I shall go to him, but he shall
not return to me? I may bring my self in sorrow to my grave, but I cannot bring
him up from the dead. I cannot water him with my tears, as we do a dry plant,
that he may spring up again; but I may easily drown my self, and learn others
by my example not to weep for me. What I would not have them do for me, why
should I do it for another? Why should I make my self miserable, and make no
body else the better? The truth is, if there were only no good in it, it were
the less matter, but it does us likewise not a little harm. Though it will end
of it self, yet it may breed us no small trouble before it end. This is all the
comfort that such a man has, and it is a very poor one; that if his grief do
not kill him, (...), etc. Phot. Epist. 234.
it will kill it self. But many an one has grief destroyed; many a body has
it distempered; and given most mortal wounds also to the soul it self. Many
affections move the soul most vehemently, but none more then grief, which has
been the cause of madness in some (as Plutarch has observed) and in others
has bred incurable diseases, and made others to destroy themselves. And this
it may do either naturally, for nothing eats the heart so much as grief;
nothing casts such a damp on the vital spirits as immoderate sorrows; or else
providentially by Gods anger, who is displeased to see us so angry and
repining, and often inflicts worse things upon us then those which we causlesly
make the matter of so doleful complaints. Let us therefore cease that which
brings such troubles before it cease it self, and when it is ceased, gives us a
new sorrow, to think that we should be so unreasonably sorrowful.

We must write upon this, as well as upon inordinate joys, Vanity of vanities,
all is vanity and vexation of Spirit. And therefore let us not be troubled now,
lest we be troubled more afterward, to consider how foolishly we were troubled.
The Fable of Niobe which tells how she turned her self with sorrow into a
stone, does but signify the stupidity and dullness that waits upon grief, and
the excessive melancholy into which it sometimes casts us, which renders us as
insensible as a stone. Take heed how you grow in love with sadness, for it has
no profit wherewithal to recompense your affection to it; but pays your folly
only with it self, and such diseases as ordinarily use to accompany it. And we
should be the less in love with it, because there are so many occasions of it
in our lives. We need not weep so much for the loss of one thing, for we must
expect continual losses. The world is not such a place that we should take care
to spend all our tears on one thing; we shall have occasion enough for them, if
we have any mind to weeping. Let us bestow therefore the less upon one, because
there are so many to solicit our sorrows. And if our souls be tender, and apt
to receive the impressions of doleful things, we have the more need to comfort
our selves, for every grief will but make us still more apt to grieve.

And besides, what a folly is it thus to die with continual grief for him, who
if he did grieve to die, his grief continued but a little while: He died but
once; why should we die always with grief? He dyed that he might live; why
should we live only for to die? It is certain we must die, but of all deaths
let us not die with grief; and much less for grief about that which we see we
cannot avoid our selves. But let us be furthest of all from making our life a
perpetual death, and grieving for that, which by grief we may so soon run our
selves into.

IX. Ask thy self again, Weep no more for thy friend, then thou would have
had him weep for thee.
Whether two friends do not think that one of them must die first? Do we not
see that in the common course of things, one man goes before another to his
grave? Who then (if it had been permitted to thy choice) would thou have
appointed to be the leader unto the other? Would thou have given thy self the
pre-eminence, and resolved to have shown him the way? Then Death it seems is a
good thing; for if it were evil, we can scarce believe thy self-love is so
little as to wish it might be thy portion before another. And if it be good,
then thou may soon satisfy the pretense of loving them better then thy
self, by being glad that they enjoy it before thy self. Or would thou have
had both gone together, and been enclosed in the same Coffin, and interred in
the same grave? Then it seems it is no such great mattter to die as thou make
it, seeing thou art so willing to die also. And if it be no great matter for
thee to live, then no more was it unto him. If the sorrow of living without
him, be greater then the sorrow of dying with him, why then was not he desirous
that thou should die? and why did he pray for thy life and health when he
dyed? And if he would not have thee to die also when he dyed, why do thou
then live in a kind of death, and enjoyest not thy self, nor the pleasures of
life? Either resolve to die also, or else to live as a man should do.

X. If his death be so sad, thou will not be able to bear thy own.
Ask thy self, How can I take my own death? Certain it is that thou must die
also, but if thou can not part with a friend, how can thou part with thy
self? How will thou endure that soul and body should be separated, if thou
can not shake hands with another body distinct from thy self? Are not they
the most ancient friends? is not their union most strict and close? Can two men
cleave so together as thy soul embraces its companion? What then will thou do
then when their bonds shall be untied, if thou can not bear the rupture of
lesser cords of love? What will thou think when thy soul sits on thy lips, and
gives thy body a farewell kiss, if thou can not close the eyes of thy friend
without so many tears? Will thy soul mourn after thy body is dead, as thou do
now lament the death of thy friend? Will it groan and sigh, to think of the
hole where its flesh lies? Will it sigh to think that its old companion is then
become the companion of worms? If not, then let it not groan so heavily for a
less matter that is now befaln it. If it will, then why art thou troubled for
thy friend, and not for thy self, to think how sad thou must one day be? The
fear of thy own death, must more then equal thy sorrow for the death of another
man. And how can thou have time to think of any thing else, if thou do fear
it? Or if thou do not fear it, how can thou fall under thy sorrow, who have
overcome so great a fear?

Do thou intend to go crying out of the world? If not, then be not now
dismayed at that which thou must bear so valiantly thy self. Then do not mourn
so much for the loss of another life, which will but put selflove into a most
piteous case, when thou come to yield up thy own. Death is no strange thing
(as I have said) for we must all die. But then why should we mourn so much, if
it be such an usual thing? If we do mourn excessively, it is a sign we think
not of the commonness of it, and then how shall we take our own death, seeing
we think not of it? Let us but comfort our selves upon solid grounds against
our own departure, and I will warrant you that shall cure all our other
lamentations. Let us but dare to die our selves, and we shall not dare to cry
so much for any man's death.

Isidore of Pelusium thinks that our Lib. 2. Epist 173.
Savior did not mourn for his friend Lazarus because he was dead (for he knew
that he was going to raise him from the dead) but because he was to live again,
and to come from the haven where he was arrived, back again into the waves and
storm, from the crown which he enjoyed, to a new encounter with his enemies.

If thou do not believe his interpretation, yet do thou believe the thing?
Do thou seriously consider that the misery of this world is so great, that we
should rather weep that we are in it, then that others are gone out of it? Then
I ask thee again, whether when thou art dead and well, thou would willingly
live again? If not, then thou know what to say to thy self concerning thy
friends death. If thou would, then it seems thou can be contented with this
grief; and I will not go about to comfort thee, seeing thou love life with
all the miseries thou createst to thy self.

But the very truth is, we are so sensible of our bodies, and have so little
feeling of our souls or divine things, that it is ready to make us think we are
not, when our bodies are dead. This makes death such a terrible thing. This
makes both our own and others death so heavy, because it seems as if there were
an extinction of us. That which we feel not, nor have any sense of within us,
it is as if it was not. And therefore if we feel not heavenly things, and
perceive not that we have a soul, we shall receive death as if it was the loss
of our selves, and then who can but be sad? Let us live therefore in a sense of
such things as may make us die willingly, and think that we our selves are not
lost; and then we shall not think that we have lost our good friends, nor lay
their death so much to heart.

XI. Ask thy self likewise, Nor will thou be able to help others to bear their
sorrows.
How will thou be able to comfort others, if thou can not comfort thy self?
It should seem by thy tears that thou art very ambitious of the name of a
friend; but if thou be not able to comfort thy friend, what is he the better
for thee? and how did thou deserve to have the friend which thou have lost?
If thou art able, or have ever given any comfort unto others, administer then
the same cordials to thy self. Why should not that satisfy thee, which thou
expectedest with so much reason should satisfy them? What thou would say to
another if his friend was dead, that say to thy self. And if thou would
wonder that he should reject comfort, then do not make thy self a wonder. Did
thou never tell any man that it is a shame to be impatient, when we can cure
our selves? that they suffer nothing but what God and nature have appointed;
that we must all expect such losses; that no body knows whose turn is next?
Take then thy own counsel, and be not such a Physician as cannot cure himself
at all. Is thy distemper different from theirs? are there not the same griefs
and maladies in their mind? Then the same medicine will cure thee, that thou
gave to them. Or if it would not cure them, then thou wast much too blame
that did not seek a better both for them and thee. Or is thine some strange
loss, the like to which never any suffered? Then this may comfort thee, that
thou shall never suffer the like again. For it would be more strange if a thing
that never com^s shall twice fall upon one man. If it be so strange to thee,
then thy courage will be as strange to others. If thou art drawn into an
example of suff^rings, then thou may render thy self an example to all of
patience and contentedness. And so Seneca says of the Brother of Drusus, that
though Drusus dyed in the midst of his embraces, and with his kisses warm upon
his mouth, thoug he dyed in the very height of his fortune, with the most
warlike Nations dead at his feet; yet he not only put a measure to his own
grief, but taught all the Army how to be moderate also. And indeed he could not
have stopped the tears of others, unless he had been of so brave a spirit as
first to stop his own. If thou art a friend therefore unto any, let them all
learn of thee how to be well satisfied. Comfort thy self as thou have comforted
others, or else as thou do intend to comfort them. And let it be seen by thy
worthy behavior toward thy self, that thou art worthy to be a friend to
another person.

XII. Ask thy self again, Death does sometime befriend us.
Whether friends only be mortal? Do none die but they that love us? must not
all our enemies and they that hate us die also? Death then that makes thee sad,
may give thee comfort. As it puts an end to some comforts, so it is the common
end of all miseries. Though we may not wish for the death of any, yet it is no
harm to think that they must die who hate us, and their rage shall not last for
ever. If nothing can cease their malignity, yet death can. It has done us then
no such wrong, but what it can repay us with the same hand that did it. Though
we have now no friend, yet shortly we may have no enemy neither. This was one
support to the Christians under their persecutions, that though their enemies
(like Saul) did breath out nothing but threatenings and slaughters against them,
yet their breath was but in their nostrils, and might soon evaporate and vanish
away. Julian called the Apostate, had done more hurt to the Christians then the
ten Persecutions, if death had not suddenly wounded him with one of his arrows.

The Marian flames had devoured in all likelihood a great many mo^e bodies, if
death had not shortn^d her reign, and so extinguished the fires. We have no
reason then to look upon it as unkind, which may do us so many courtesies: nor
to accuse that of cruelty to us, which destroys the cruelty of others toward
us.

XIII. And now may you not well make one question more to your selves and say,
Contentment has more to say for it self, then grief has.
Is there not more reason to be comforted, then there is to be sad? If there be
(as certainly there is) what should hinder your comfort, if you live by reason?
If you do not live by it, then nothing that a man can say will comfort you.
Nothing will cheer us unless we think of it, and make it our own by meditation:
neither will any thing sadden us unless we think of it also. Seeing then they
are our own thoughts that make us either sad or merry, and we have more
comfortable thoughts then heavy, we cannot but be of good cheer, if we will not
be enemies to our selves. All that we can say for our sadness is, that we have
lost a friend, a very dear and perhaps only friend. But you have heard that
there are more in the world, and that you have not lost this; and that you have
more comforts remaining then are taken away; and that if you had none but God,
you had enough; and if you will read again what has been said, twenty other
reasons will offer themselves to cheer, for one that arises to make you sad. If
there was no reason at all to be sad, then none need spend any time in giving
of comfort: But if they be very few in compare with others, and we are made to
follow the most and strongest reasons, then he is not to be pitied, who
notwithstanding the small reason of his sorrow, will not be of good comfort.

The greatest cause that I know of this sort of trouble, is, when many that we
love die soon after one another. So it happened to that Prince (which the L. L.
1. Essay cap. 2.
Mountainge speaks of) who received the news of his Elder Brothers death, whom
he highly esteemed, with a great deal of constancy; and shortly after the
tidings of his younger Brothers decease, in whom he placed much hope, did not
alter the smoothness of his countenance. But when one of his servants dyed not
long after that, he suffered himself to be so far transsported, that he quitted
his former resolution, and gave up himself to all grief and sorrow. The reason
of this was not from the love that he bare to this person more then the rest,
but (as he well says) because being top full of sorrow before, the next flood
must needs break the banks, or overflow all the bounds of patience.

And so Hier. Cardan tells us, In Dialog. cui tit. Guilielmus.
that after he had patiently born many reproaches, and the cruel infamous death
of a son of great hopes; and the dangerous sickness of another son, and the
death of his parents, and wife, with many other evils; yea and after he wrote a
book of Consolation against all these evils; yet he was overcome with grief at
the death of an English youth, whom he brought from Dover with him, as he
passed from Scotland, in the time of Edward the sixth. And he gives the same
reason for it that the other does, Fatigatum multis adversis, oppressit me haec
extrema infaelicitas; being wearied before with many griefs, this last
unhappiness made me fall to the ground. It was not its strength, but his own
foregoing weakness that made him fall. It was not heavy, but it came upon the
back of many other loads, and so oppressed him.

But something has been said to this also; For holy Job was in the same
condition and far worse; one messenger did tread upon the heels of another to
bring him tidings of his misery; and yet he was patient, though he himself
likewise was in his own body most sadly afflicted. We have the same grounds of
comfort that he had, and abundance more then was known in those younger times.
And when one cause of trouble falls upon the neck of another, we can add one
reason likewise unto another, and so be comforted. For our troubles can never
be so many, as the causes of our consolation are. Yea, one single reason of
those that I have propounded will answer all. Do we not know very well that all
friends are mortal? Then it can be no new thing (if we well consider it) for
two or three to die after we have lost one: But the loss of one does rather
mind us of the mortality of all. And does not God govern the world in the death
of the last as well as of the first? then there is no less wisdom and goodness
in it when many die, then when one. He that can solidly comfort himself in the
death of one, will not be immoderately troubled for the loss of more. If we let
our grief indeed work underground, while nothing of it appears: if our hearts
be loaded with it, though our eyes look not heavily before others, then it is
no wonder if it do at last break forth, when the heart is overcharged, and can
find no other way to ease it self. But if we take a course to comfort our
hearts at the very first, and make them truly contented, or if we let not the
grief settle it self, but labor to dislodge it, then we shall be the better
disposed to bear such another cross with the like patience. For then a new
trouble does not come upon the other, but only follows after it: It does not
add to the former, but only comes in its stead; it does not augment, but only
renew our grief.

XIV. And now is it not time to conclude these questions, and to say to your
selves, We should not be the more troubled because we understand our trouble.
Why should not reason do that which little or no reason can do? The more we
are men, shall we be the less in peace, and cry like children? Nay, children
weep while they see their parents put into the grave, and within a day or two
they forget their sorrows; why cannot we do so also? Though they know not their
loss, yet they know not the reasons neither why they should not be discontented
for their loss. Though they have little understanding of their sufferings, yet
they have as little knowledge of our comforts and supports. And as for brute
creatures, you see that they make a doleful noise for the loss of their young a
very short while, and then they remember it no more. Some of the people of Cous
(if I forget not) used at the age of seventy years either to kill their
parents, or pine them to death, and to rejoice much at it. They thought that
they had lived long enough, and that it was both a misery to themselves, and a
great burden to their children to have them continue any longer. The Caspians
also and some of the people of old Spain had the like custom, which we well can
inhumane and barbarous. But why cannot understanding teach us that, which want
of understanding taught them? Why should Barbarism make them rejoice at what
they did themselves, and Christianity make us sad at what is done by God and
the order of things? St. Hierome reports that in his time there was at Rome, a
man who had had twenty wives, married to a woman who had had two and twenty
husbands. There was great expectations which of them should die first; and when
the man buried her, his neighbors crowned him with Laurel, and caused him to
bear a bough of Palm in his hand, in token of a victory, at his wives funerals.
It seems that men can sport at death if they list, and laugh at that which
makes so many cry. Why then cannot reason make us moderately sad to bear that,
which humor and fancy can make men not to lament at all? Why cannot our
Religion do more with us, then the people or our friends, who it is like can
laugh us our of our sorrows?

If I have not said too much in this argument, I have some confidence, that I
have not said too little. And indeed I have said more then I first intended,
and so much that if any one have the patience to read it through, me thinks the
very length of the discourse should make them forget their sorrows, and by
thinking so long upon another thing, they should not remember what they thought
upon before. One soul is scarce big enough to hold all these considerations,
and the thoughts of grief also. Here are so many that they are able to thrust
sorrow out of doors by their multitude, if not by their strength and force.

And yet notwithstanding I must detain you a little longer before I give your
thoughts leave to turn themselves to other things. For I am of the mind that
all these considerations will only assuage the grief, and pricking of the
wound; but will not quite heal it, and take away its putrefaction. I shall
therefore commend two or three things, for the pressing out all the filthy
matter, for the closing of the sore, and to make the soul perfectly whole and
sound.

Be dead to all things, and thou will not be offended that they die.. 8. I. It
is not their death, but the life of something else, that troubles us.
Mortify thy spirit to the world and all things that are in it, and when thou
have left them, it will be no wonder that they leave thee. Think with thy self
often that thy friends are dead, that thou see them carried to the grave,
that thou beholdest worms crawling out of their eyes and mouth, and try how
thou art able to bear that thought. Think that he or she that lies in thy bed
by thy side, is as cold as a stone; think that thou embracest the carcass of
thy dear friend, and ask thy soul how it can brook it. Think thus often, and
though thy soul may start at the first, yet at last it will be patient. That
little sadness will banish and chase away all the greater, that else would
seize on thee hereafter. There will be little to do when death comes, if thou
constantly do this. Thy soul will be so loose from them, that thou will not
give a shrike; none will bear the strings crack when you are separated. Death
will not be a breaking of your society, but a fair and easy untying of it.
Nothing will happen to you but what you have looked for long before, and you
will be able to say, This is not the first time that I have seen my dear friend
dead. Yea, think with thy self that thou see thy own body laid in the grave,
and that thou feel thy self as cold as a clod of earth. Think that thou art
turned into rottenness and dirt; and that thou art forgotten by thy neighbors.
If thy soul can endure these thoughts, then why should it be troubled at the
death of another? This is a kind of death to be so separated from thy body in
thy thoughts. It is all one not to be in thy body, and not to feel that thou
art in it. Raise thy mind then up toward heavenly things; fix thy thoughts on
God and the life to come; think that thou see thy self in heaven among the
Saints of God; and while thy soul is there, it is not in thy body here below.
This kind of death differs from that which will be hereafter in this only, that
then thou will be more perfectly out of thy body. But if there be no trouble in
this separation which thou now make even whilst thou art in it: There will
be far less trouble (one would think) quite to part with it, and to get from it.

And the way to be dead to these earthly things, We must not let false opinions
live.
is, to change our opinion of them, and to see them to be what indeed they are,
empty and unsatisfying, changeable and unconstant. Of this I have spoken before
in the former discourse, but seeing it is a thing so great and fundamental to
our contentment, let me again present you with it. We are the cause of our own
grief, by magnifying the things of the world to such a value, that the loss of
them shall be worth so many tears. We think that they are happy who are rich
and honorable, though they be never so wicked and unskilful how to live.
(...), etc. L. 1. cap. 19.
We presently cry up a man for wise, and what not? who (to use Arrianus his
phrase) is preferred by Caesar, though it be but to be Groom of his
close-stool. And on the contrary, we despise virtue if it be in a threadbare
coat, and count him a fool who is unfortunate, No wonder then, that we cry and
whine like children, when we lose any of these worldly things; seeing we think
our selves more happy then men in the enjoyment of them. We think that we are
undone when we part with that which we have such an high opinion of, and there
is no way to make us think that all is safe, but by altering of that forlish
opinion. We expect what cannot be, and will not be content with what may easily
be. We cannot make the things of this world to be still and quiet, but may make
our selves so: and the way to that quietness is well to consider their
inconstancy, and that our happiness is in something better.

It was a good rule which Pythagoras gave to all his Scholars, and is the same
that I would have you learn, (...), Do not walk in the high way. i. e. Do not
follow the common opinions; be not led by vulgar and popular apprehensions.
Rectify the ordinary conceits which you have carelessly entertained of things,
and judge of them as they are in themselves, and not as they are reputed of. If
we would do thus, then that which is the cause of our sorrow, would be the
cause of our tranquillity; because nothing has left us, but that which we knew
would not stay with us. We mourn now because things are so inconstant; but then
we should not mourn, because we knew them to be inconstant. If we could make it
good that any of these things are ours, then I might avouch it, that they would
never have left us: But if they were not ours, why are we offended, that God
does what he will with his own? And besides, shall we who are so inconstant,
oblige all things besides our selves to constancy? shall we whose desires are
so restless and uncertain, expect that all things but only we should be stable
and quiet? No, let us look into our selves, and we shall find so much
difficulty to settle them, that we shall not wonder that other things are
unsettled. And again, if things be so mutable, why should we not think (as I
have already said) that they will one day change to what we would have them?
But suppose they should, what are we the better? If our opinion be not turned
too, we shall be as much afraid to lose them again, seeing they are so
unconstant, as now we are desirous to have them by the benefit of their
inconstancy. We must therefore alter our esteem of things now, else we shall
only change our trouble, but not be rid of it, when things are changed. Adeo
nihil est miserum nisi cum putes, etc. So certain it is, that nothing is
miserable, but when we think it is so; and that nothing will make us happy
unless we think that we are happy. And we had better think so now, then stay to
be taught this lesson by the dear experience of a great many troubles. Let
thine estate be never so prosperous, yet if thine heart be unmortified, thou will never be the nearer, but rather the further off from settlement. For they
that have the greatest abundance, are the soonest disturbed by every trifle,
because they are not used to have any thing go contrary to their humor.

But if thou will take any comfort from the unconstancy of things, let it be
this; That if thou think thy self therefore unfortunate, because those
things are gone that were joyful, then thou may think thy self happy enough,
seeing the things that are unpleasant are going away also. And think I beseech
you once more, and be of this opinion, That there is nothing better in this
world to thee then thy self. As long therefore as thou have thy self, why
should thou be troubled, especially if thou thy self think never the worse
of thy self, because thou art poor and destitute of friends? For these take
away nothing of thy self, nor can any thing in the world deprive thee of thy
self. And as Boethius well says, This is the condition of humane nature, that
it then only excels all things here, when it knows it self: But when it does
not, it is below the very Beasts: For it is natural for them to be ignorant;
but for a man it is the basest vice, especially when he is ignorant of himself.

There was a Fable among the heathens which wise men understood to contain in
it great Philosophy. In the midst of this sad discourse, it will please you
perhaps, if I relate it, and it will please you a great deal more for to learn
and live by it. After Jupiter had made the world, he thought that men would not
be restrained from sin without rewards and punishments; and so he made two
great barrels, the one full of good things, the other full of bad, to be sent
down among men as there was occasion. Pandora being very desirous to know what
was in these barrels did one day broach them, and all the good things flew out
toward heaven, and all the bad toward hell. Hope only and Fear remained in
the bottom of these Casks; the former in that of Evil things, and the latter in
that of Good. When this was done, Jupiter threw down these empty Tubs to the
earth, and all mortals ran at the rareness of the sight to see what they could
find in them. Some looked into the one, and some into the other, and though
both of them were empty, yet they thought verily that the one was full of good,
and the other full of evil. And ever since it came to pass that here below we
have nothing but a fancy or conceit of Good mixed with fear and jealousy, and
a mere conceit of evil, with some hope in the compound of it. The Moral of it
is this, I hat the things of this world are but seeming Goods, and seeming
evils. They are our own opinions that trouble us with the shadow of evil, and
that flatter us on the other side with a fair show of Good. All real Good is in
heaven, and all real misery is in hell. If we go to heaven, we are w^ll enough
whatsoever we loose; if we fall into sin and so into hell, we cannot be well,
though we should enjoy all the world. Let us turn our minds then toward these
heavenly things which they did but dream of in the dark ages of the world. Let
us heartily believe the Gospel which has brought to light eternal life: And
then we shall think our selves happy enough if we lose not those things: and
perhaps the death of our friends and such like cross^s befall us, that we may
not lose them.

When the days of mourning do come, II. Our tears should be kept for that
which is the cause of death and all our tears.
Turn thy sorrow for thy friend into sorrow for thy sins. Remember that thy
tears may be due to some other thing, and the cure of that will cure all thy
other griefs. If thou art not a Christian, then it is thy duty to mourn neither
for one thing nor other, but only to bewail thy self. Let the dead bury their
dead (as our Savior said) do thou presently follow after thy Lord with tears.
Take no care of funerals, think of no earthly thing, but only how thou may^st
be a Christian. And if thou art so, th^n thou ought to rejoice that thy sins
are pardoned, and that thou have not the great^st cause of gri^f; and this joy
sure will swallow up all thy sorrows. There is scarce any thing so considerable
in our bodies that is seen, as our tears; for they are the most notable
expressions of what is in our hearts. The hands (as Ant. Guevara observes) do
work, the seet do walk, the tongue speaks, but it is the heart only that weeps.
The eyes are but the spunges of the heart, through which its affections are
drained and dried up. An afflicted heart has neither hands to labor, nor feet
to walk, nor can it find a tongue to speak, but tears are all that it has to
tell you what it wants. And therefore we ought to reserve these for some
greater thing then our dead friends, which our heart ought much to be affected
withal. As our Savior said to the women of Jerusalem when he was going to the
most cruel sufferings, so might our friends say to us when they are a dying,
Weep not for us, but weep for your selves, if you be dead while you are alive.
Mourn more then you do, if you have not yet mourned for your sins and amended
them: But if you have, then rejoice in the favor of God, and bless him for his
Son Jesus, who is better to thee then ten Sons, or all thy friends which thou
lamentest. Are our sins dead as well as our friends? have we buried them in the
grave of our Lord? are we risen again to an heavenly life? let us go then to
God, and pray to him, and praise him, and this will give us ease. But if we be
troubled for sin, then sure we shall not add another sin by immoderate sorrow,
and forgetfulness of Gods goodness. If it be sin we hate, then mourning
complaints and discontents must all be hated. Would you indispose your self to
pray, to praise God and meditate in his sacred Word? Would you render your self
unfit to receive the Sacrament of his most blessed body and blood? If not, then
mourn but so much as will not hinder any of these, and you have leave to mourn
as much as you please. Stop but here, and there is no man will lay any
restraints upon you. But then how short your mourning must be, you will soon
guess, and the Sun must not go down upon your grief, no more then it must upon
your wrath. But if you take no great care whether you disturb your souls or no,
then you have most reason to mourn for that carelessness and neglect. Go then
and bewail your unkindness to God, your unthankfulness for his mercies, and
unbelief of his Gospel; for you can never take your hearts in a better time,
then when they are so sad, and inclined to be sorrowful. Tell them that now
they are very well disposed for a necessary business; and bid them look if
there be not something else to bewail that is more considerable. Ask thy self,
have thou not deserved this and ten times more? Will thou add another sin, when
thou should cease all sins? Have thou not been careless of seeking God? Have
thou not foolishly wasted thy precious time? and art thou not troubled at all
for that? Yea art thou now impatient, as if God dealt hardly with thee? and
will thou spend more time badly when thou art taught by the death of thy friend
how short it is? It is most incongruous thus to bewail the death of a child or
acquaintance, when thou art like to die thy self both body and soul. And when
thou have mourned for thy sins, thou will be taught thereby how little thou
ought to mourn for thy losses. For even our tears for sin must not be
immoderate, and therefore much less must we dare to let them flow in abundance
for our losses. So you know the great Apostle commands the Corinthians to
comfort him that had been guilty of a great sin, and receive him again into the
Church now that he repented, lest perhaps such an one should be swallowed up
with overmuch sorrow, 2 Corinthians. 2.7. I wish all those who are ready to destroy
themselves with grief, would seriously confider this, that we may not over-load
our hearts with grief for our sins themselves, which are the causes of all
other sorrows.

We cannot please the Devil better then by discontent. He would fain oppress
every good man with some passion or other; let us take heed how we join with
him against our selves. If we have left his service, that is enough to provoke
him. If we have bid defiance to his pleasures, this does incense him, and we
must expect that he will endeavor to overcome us with griefs.

The Devil is mad against all good men; and therefore let all those who have
irritated him against them, beware how they now prove cowards, and execute his
vengeance for him with their own hands. Let us take heed (as Photius
excellently expresses it) lest we be good at stirring up and provoking the
envy and rage of our adversary, but naught at resisting and overcoming him by
patience and perseverance to the end. (...).

But if we must needs weep for the loss of something here, let it be for the
afflictions of the people of God. Let us mourn to see the Church sit like a
widow in her black garments. Let it pity us to see the blood of Gods servants
shed like water upon the ground. If our own sins do not trouble us, let us weep
to see the wickedness of the world, and let our eyes run down with tears, to
think that men do not keep Gods Law. Some such channel we should cut for our
tears, and not let them spend themselves on this fashion about our own personal
troubles. This is a method both to stop our tears, and likewise to make them
useful to us while they run. It is a way to ease us of our present grief, and
of all others also. We shall exchange that sorrow that would have troubled us,
for a great deal of joy and comfort. Whereas our worldly grief would have left
the heart sad, this will leave it light and merry.

Believe thoroughly that the Lord Jesus lives, III. The life of our Lord Jesus
gives us the greatest comfort against death.
and so thou may both expect a resurrection from the dead, and likewise hope
for comfort from him when thou art left sad and desolate. The Body it self does
not die any more then corn does, which dies, that it may live and spring up
again with large gain and advantage. Are we loath to throw the corn into the
ground, and do we not patiently expect till the harvest comes? Why should we
then bury our friends with so many tears, seeing they are but laid in the womb
of their mother again, that by the power of God they may have a better birth.
The Heathen could say much to comfort themselves, but they knew not this
comfort; for indeed they were rather contented then comforted. Those that did
think themselves most wise, and judged that they had the best supports, did
only dream that the soul might take another body, and shift its place at
several times: But we know that there will be a time, when even our scattered
ashes will fly into one another embraces again, and a new life will breath
into our dust, and make it stand upon its feet. And then in the mean time if
our condition be never so sad, and we be left all alone, why do we not solace
our selves in the great compassion of our High Priest, who has a feeling of
all our miseries which we endure? Can we expect that ever he should love us
more then when we are like unto him in sufferings? We should be so far from
being sad at what befalls us, that we should think, if our condition was a
little worse, we should be more dear unto him then now it is when nothing
extraordinary is happened to us. No man can be alone as long as he lives who has
said, I will not leave you comfortless like fatherless children, I will come to
you. Did not he bid his Disciples to be well content, when he himself dyed? Did
he not leave his peace with them, and bid them that their hearts should not be
troubled? And what is the death of one of our friends, to the departure of the
best friend to the world that ever was from his little flock of friends? Did
not Christ know what he said, when he was going to die? Did he advise them not
to be troubled, when it was impossible that they should be otherwise? And if
they were not to be troubled then, I am sure we have less reason to be troubled
now; both because we have a less loss to bewail, and we have a stronger and
more excellent comfort against our loss. Our friends are as much below him, as
his state in the grave was beneath that to which he is now advanced in the
Heavens. Their hearts were not to be troubled when He that is the Lover of the
world was held in the chains of death, because they knew that he would loose
them; Why then should we be disturbed for the death of one that loves us only,
when we know that Christ is risen, and that he is in the Heavens, Angels,
Authorities, and Powers being made subject to him. If an Angel was necessary
for our comfort, we should not want his Ministry. He is so full of love and
compassion toward us, that if he did not think he had left Cordials enough to
support us, he would come himself to cheer us, and raise our friend, as he did
Lazarus, from the dead. But now we may well live in hope, and he has given us
strong consolation and good hope through grace. Let us have patience but a
little, and we shall not be capable of mourning any more; All tears shall be
wiped off from our eyes, sighing and sorrow shall fly away.

Remember then I beseech you,. 9. Let no man therefore be in love with tears.
whosoever you are that cast your eyes on these lines, what I said at the
beginning. Take heed you do not indulge your selves in your tears. Est enim and
dolendi quaedam ambitio, for there is a certain ambition even in mourning, and
men think that they shall be the better thought of for their grief. But assure
your selves, that if we study to exceed one another in grief, it is but just
with God that we should never want misery enough, seeing we are so ambitious of
it. If we will mourn immoderately, when he would have us to be patient; we
shall not keep our selves patient when perhaps there is little or no cause to
mourn. When the air is disposed to rain, it is a long time before we can
recover fair weather; and every little cloud will fall a weeping, which at
another time would have been dry and barren. And just so it is with those that
strive to gather as many clouds as they can to overcast them, and make them
sad. It is so long before they can disperse them all, that every little thing
renews their grief, as if a cheerful day should never shine upon them more.

It was a very handsome device that one of the Ancient Philosophers used to
comfort Arsinoe, when he observed her to weep immoderately for her sons death.
Let me entreat you said he, to lend me your patience till I tell you this
story: On a time Jupiter conferred honor upon all the lesser Gods or divine
Powers, and there was none of them wanting but only Sorrow. When all the rest
were gone away rejoicing, she came and begged some honor also with many tears
and entreaties. Jupiter having conferred all honors that were worth any thing
upon the other Heavenly Powers, He granted to her all that which men bestow
upon their dead friends ( viz. grief and tears) as best befitting her quality.
Now all these little Deities (said this wise man) do love those most that love
and honor them, and so does Sorrow also. They bestow most of their gifts on
their Votaries, and those that pay them constant services, and they care not
for those that observe none of their ceremonies. If you therefore bestow no
honor upon Sorrow, then she will not love you nor come to you. But if you
studiously seek how to please her, and honor her by tears and lamentations, and
all such sad things that are the offices wherein she delights, she will be in
love with you, and you shall never want her company, nor be without occasions
of doing continual honor to her. She will be continually supplying thee with
tears to pour upon her Altar, and filling thee with sighs, which are the
incense which she loves thou should evaporate toward Heaven. By this Art the
wise man staid her tears; for she knew that he meant, that if we give way to
grief, we shall never want it: and much more, if we seek for arguments to
aggravate it, it will stick so fast unto us, that it will never forsake us.
Though love and respect to our friends, and the natural affection which
distinguishes us from beasts, do allow and require a moderate, sorrow and
contristation of our spirit; yet an intemperate grief and afflicting of our
souls is unreasonable; for it does them no good; and it is unnatural; for it
does both our body and mind abundance of harm; and let me add likewise, that it
is unchristian, and argues that we have little hope in God either for our
selves or others. God has done us the honor to make us Priests unto himself;
and you know it was the law for the Priests, L^v. 21.
that none of them should mourn for a dead friend, unless he was of their
nearest kindred, And therefore let us take heed how we make our selves unclean
for the dead, by weeping, so that we should unfit our selves for any Christian
service, which God has appointed us for our constant employment. Can you mourn
and praise God too? Can you pour out your souls to God, while you pour out
these tears of grief? Can you pray in faith for other things, and not be able
to believe that you can live without a friend? Can you read seriously, when
your eyes are sore with the sharpness of your sorrow? Can you meditate of
heavenly things, while your thoughts are filled with the images of such doleful
objects? If not, know that you defile your Priesthood, and that you must
instantly cleanse your selves, that you may be fit continually to offer up
spiritnal sacrifices unto God.

And for a conclusion of this discourse, remember what I said in the former
Treatise, He must write these things in his heart, who would find the comfort
of them.
That you must lay these foundations and grounds of comfort within your selves,
or else you will always be troubled. It is something within us that must
satisfy our minds, and not the enjoyment of any outward good; and therefore we
must work these principles into our hearts; for even they if they be without
us, will not profit. We either think that it is the thing that we want which
will cure us, when as it is without us; or else that we have reasons enough to
comfort us, when as alas! we want them also, because we let them lie without
us, and have them not in our minds. We have more ways then one to abuse and
deceive our selves. At first we think that if we had what our hearts desire at
this present, we should never be disquieted: And when by reason and experience
we find it otherwise, then we make a great many good principles upon which to
rest our souls; but they are at a great distance also from our hearts; and when
we should use them, they are none of our own no more then any thing in this
world.

Let these two things then settle themselves in our minds, which will lead us
into the right way of fortifying our souls both against this and all other
trouble. First, Never think that the things which thou want will cure thee;
for they will rather make the wound wider, and enlarge thy wants. The more we
have, the more we desire still to have; and the way to think we have enough, is
not to desire to have too much. It is very well observed by Plutarch, (...).
that it seems to us as if our clothes did give us heat, when as they are cold
of themselves, and in a great heat we shift our clothes to make us cool. Just
so do men think, that the things without them will afford them content; and
that if they had a sumptuous house, and had riches at command, and were
encompassed with servants, and had their friends to bear them company, they
should live most sweetly and deliciously; when as experience teaches us, that
we are still desirous of some change in one thing or other about us. It is the
heat of our own bodies that keeps us warms, which our clothes do only contain,
and keep in that it may not fly abroad, and disperse in the air; and so is it
the liveliness and strength of our own spirit that must make us live merrily,
and which gives all the pleasure and grace to these outward things which
minister to our comfort. They can only help to maintain and increase our
delights; but our delight must arise from a more certain cause within our
selves. Add one heap of riches to another, build great houses, invite to thy
self friends and lovers; unless thou do free thy self from thy own desires,
unless thou do put an end to thy fears and cares, and such like things, thou
do but like him that adminsters Wine to a man in a Feavour, or Honey to a
Choleric person, or meat to him that is troubled with the Colic, which do
not strengthen, but destroy them. The less we have, the better it is, unless we
desire but a little. And therefore it is of absolute necessity, that we form to
our selves such strong principles as will moderate our desires and make them
reasonable. But then let me tell you in the second place. That a good book, and
a Treatise of the Principles of Contentment may be without us as well as any
thing else. We think that we have good reasons of being quiet which will
comfort us upon all occasions. But where are they? In our Books? That is no
more ours, then our money that bought it, unless the book be in our heart. We
must labor to write these truths on our souls, and turn them into the reason
of our minds. Things of faith we must make as if they were things of reason:
and things of reason we must make as sensible as if they beat continually upon
our eyes and ears. Let us color and die our souls with these notions, or else
they will do us but little good. If this book lie by us, and not in us, it will
be little better then waste paper. Arrian L. 2. cap. 9.
(...), etc. says Epictetus. For it is one thing to have bread and wine in a
cup-board, and another thing to have them in our body. When they are eaten and
drunk, they turn into flesh and blood, into bones and nerves, and make us lusty
and strong: but when they lie by us, we only seem to have them, but they afford
us no nourishment or refreshment at all. Even so it is in these things; If we
inwardly digest them and turn them (as it were) into the substance of our
souls, they will make us of a lively complexion; but else we may be pale with
fear and pine away with grief; and it is not their fault, but our own. And as
he that does not eat when he should, may have no stomach when he is weak, but
presently vomit up his food again: So he that minds not these things till he be
sick of his troubles, and in great need of comfort, will find his soul (it is
most likely) very impatient of the remedy; and it will be a trouble to him but
to read that which will quiet him.

Meditate therefore seriously of what has been said. A recapitulation of the
chief things that have been said.
Think that you are not losers by your friends gains, and that there is no
reason to be sorrowful when they are filled with joy. We love our selves indeed
better then we do them, and are troubled at our own loss, not at theirs; but
then if the loss be our own, we can tell better how to repair it. That is our
comfort, that it is in our own hands to ease our selves, if we be the cause of
our own trouble. Consider often that it is as natural to die as it is to be
born: That God gives us every thing upon this condition, that we should be
content to give it up again when be pleases to call for it. That God is a
loving Father, and does every thing for the best, That he would have us love
him more, when he leaves us nothing else to love. That nothing can be sad,
which by his grace and our care may be turned into joy. That we ought to turn
our sorrow into care, least there be something worse to sorrow for, even the
sin of out immoderate sorrow. That we ought to live so, that we may comfort our
selves with hope we shall see our friends again that die in the Lord. That
seeing we must die too, and others must weep for us, by our life we must leave
them something to comfort them in hope that we are better, then if we were with
them. We must often consider how much of our grief depends on mere fancy, and
not on things. We were perhaps at a great distance from our friends while they
lived, and did but seldom see them. The case is not much altered now that they
are dead. If we have sustained a loss, we do but double it by losing our own
quiet and comfort also. And yet there is more cause of thankfulness then of
repining; both that we had them so long, and also that God has taken away only
them. Our grief at last must cease; and that which will end it then, may end it
now. Or if it must end it self by it its own weariness, it is a shame that
Religions reason cannot do more then mere length of time can do. It is but as
we our selves would have it, who would have been loath to have died first. Or
else it is as they would have it, who would have been loath to have outlived
us, and been so sad as we make it necessary for to be. They are not quite gone
away, but only gone before. And by sorrow we may tread too fast upon their
heels. Let us henceforth place our chiefest comfort in God; for if one be taken
away, then so may another. There will be every day new matter of trouble; and
unless we be better provided against it, we shall be every day miserable. This
world is the place of sorrow; and therefore seeing there are things enough to
trouble us let it not be our work to create trouble to our selves. Trouble is a
thing that will come without our call; but true joy will not spring up without
our selves. If any sorrow should oppress us, it must be for our sins. And when
we mourn for them, let us be sorrowful we were no more thankful for such
enjoyments as we have now lost. And lastly, Let these tears teach us to take
off our affections from worldly things, all the pleasure of whose possession is
scarce big enough to compensate the trouble of parting with them.

FINIS.
These several Books following are Printed, and to be sold by Francis Tyton, at
the Three Daggers in Fleetstreet.
THis same Author has a Sermen preached at the Funeral of Mr. Jacomb. And a
Treatise on the Sacrament of Baptism, and another on the Lords Supper. Mr.
Baxter's Saints Everlasting Rest, quarto. His Apology, containing Exceptions
against Mr. Blake. The Digression of Mr. Kendal. Animadversions on a late
dissertation of Ludiomous Colvinue, alias Ludovinus Molineus. An Admonition to
Mr. Eyrs: with Mr. Crandon's Anatomy, quarto. Confession of Faith, quarto.
Christian Concord, quarto. Defense of the Worcestershire Petition, quarto.
Advice to the Parliament, quarto. Letter to Mr. Durry, for Pacification,
quarto. Concerning the Saints perseverance, quarto. The Quakers Catechism,
quarto. Of Infant Baptism against Mr. Tombs. Thirty two Directions, for getting
and keeping Spiritual Peace, octavo. Against Popery, Octavo. Lawson's
Examination of the Political Part of Hobbs his Leviathan, Octavo. The Libertine
schooled: Or, A Vindication of the Magistrates Power, in Matters of Religion,
quarto. A Sovereign Antidote, against those sinful Errors, that are the
Epidemical Disease of our Times, quarto. A pleasant Walk to Heaven, on Ephesians. 4
1. quarto. The Blessed Peacemaker: Or, A Christian Reconciler, intended for
the healing of our Divisions, quarto. Innocents, no Saints: Or, A pair of
Spectacles, for a dark-sighted Quaker, by E. D^d, quarto. Man's Duty, in
magnifying Gods Work: A Sermon preached before the Parliament, on the occasion
of the Victory obtained against the Spanish Fleet: By John Row, Preacher of the
Word at the Abbey-Church, Westminster quarto. The Perusal of an old Statute of
Death and Judgment: A Funeral Sermon by Mr. Bedford, quarto. Communion with
God, the Saints Privilege and Duty, twelves. The Will of Man, subjected to the
Will of God, octavo. A Commemoration Sermon, preached at Paul's on the 5th of
November. 1646. quarto. A Voice out of the Temple: Being also a Sermon on the 5th
of November. quarto. An Assise Sermon, Preached by Tho. Gilbert, quarto. Barton's
Translation of the singing Psalms, twelves. Sydenham's for Infant Baptism,
octavo. R^nedeus Dispensatory, in folio. Spencer's Similies, in folio. Dr.
Robinson's Endoxa, in octavo. Dr. Marrison's Spiritual Logic, in octave. The
History of Dreams: By Mr. Philip Goodwin, Minister at Watford, octavo. The
Three Theological Graces by Mr. Ward. octavo. Biddle dispossessed, in answer to
his Challenge, twelves. Habbington's Edward the 4th, in folio. His Observations
on History, in octavo. Allen's Henry the 7th, octavo. Buck on the Beatitudes,
in quarto. Eurialus and Lucretia, octavo. English Law: By Charles George-Cock,
folio. Gospel-Ministery, and Gospel Light, and Life, By Dornford, in octavo.
The Rise, Fall, and Ruin of Antichrist, By Haughton, octavo. Orders of
Chancery, octavo. The Bloody Inquisition of Spain, twelves. Hughs Abridgement
of the Common Law, large quarto. His Abridgment of all the Acts and Ordinances,
quarto. Several Works of Mr. Murcot, Minister at Dublin in Ireland; with his
Life, quarto. A Catalogue of the Chancellours of England, quarto. A Scripture
Chronology, By Mr. Allin, Minister, in quarto. A Catalogue of most Books
vendible in England, of Divinity, History, Law, etc. quarto. Annotations upon
Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Song of Solomon, By Arthur Jackson,
Preacher of God's Word at Faiths under Paul's, quarto.

