UNTO HIS GRACE, THE EARL OF MARCHMONT LORD HIGH COMMISSIONER OF SCOTLAND And
the Right Honorable ESTATES OF PARLIAMENT The PETITION of HENRY PAIN,
Humbly Shows,
THAT where your Petitioner a Stranger, being apprehended Eight Years ago and
upwards, has been ever since detained Prisoner, and the greatest part of the
time closs Prisoner; whereby his private Affairs and Fortune are not only
ruined: But likewise his Health is so weakened and impared, That if he continue
in this Miserable Condition, he cannot have a prospect to live long: And your
Petitioner having applied to the last Session of Parliament for a Remedy to his
Sufferings, they were graciously pleased to ordain, That an Address might be
made to His Majesty, that some course might be taken for his Relief; which has
never as yet had any effect, but your Petitioner still continues under great
Hardship and Misery in the Castle of Stirling.

It is therefore humbly craved, That His Grace the Commissioner, and honorable
Estates of Parliament, will so far Compassionat the Miserable Condition of a
poor Gentleman, (who is a Stranger) as either to allow him to depart this
Kingdom upon his enacting himself to Banishment, and that a time may be
prefixed for that effect, or else some other Course taken for his Deliverance
out of this miserable state, under which he has groaned so many Years: And
that a Sum of Money may be ordained to be paid him for relieving him of the
Debts he has contracted; which are very considerable, by reason of his long
Imprisonment, and almost continual Sickness: And that in the mean time, he may
be brought to Edinburgh, in order to prepare for his Transportation out of this
Country.

And Your Petitioner shall ever pray.

