LES PROVINCIALES: OR, THE MYSTERY OF JESVITISME, discovered in certain
LETTERS, Written upon occasion of the present differences at SORBONNE, between
the JANSENISTS and the MOLINISTS, from January 1656. to March 1657. S.N.
Displaying the corrupt MAXIMS and POLITICS of that SOCIETY.

Faithfully rendered into ENGLISH.

Sicut Serpents -- LONDON, Printed by J. G. for R. Royston at the Angel in
Ivie-lane, 1657.

Religion

Les Provinciales Or the Mystery of Iesuitisme

(...).

By Louis de Mortalte:



To. Vaughan. Sculp. 1657

THE PREFACE.
THere are happily those who would expect in this place a certain character of
JESUITISME. That is, they would fain see what the sharpness of Satyr could
truly say of a sort of people pretending to such a transcendency of holiness
above all others, as not to content themselves with any other name then that of
the holy JESUS, degenerated into such Monsters both as to Religion and
Morality, as Barbarism it self cannot p^rallel. But this is the main design of
the whole Treatise, and what it does with such life and conviction, as must
needs work a strange alteration in mankind; that is, a body so powerfu l as as
that of the JESUITS, and so scattered* over the face of the earth, will be
looked on hereafter as the most abominable and most despicable thing in the
world. Leaving therefore the Reader to discover what ever may be of horror,
impiety, and extravagance in their MAXIMS, out of the LETTERS themselves, all
that I conceive necessary in this place, is, to give a short account of the
occasion of writing, and the main heads of these LETTERS, as also of the state
of affairs at that time, and lastly to say something of the AUTHOR. To which
is added, what effect they have had since; and this is thought but requisite,
out of a reflection on those, who, in regard the scene lies in another Count^y,
being unacquainted with some circumstances, would happily be glad of such
satisfact^on.

I shall not need to unravell the whole difference between the Jans^nists and
the Molinists, since that, as well those that know it not, as those that do,
may be sufficiently satisfied out of the LETTERS themselves. All then I shall
note is the state of affairs at the College of SORBONNE when these Letters
came first abroad. That was when the College had so many extraordinary
assemblies about the examination of the second Letter of M. Arnauld, about the
beginning of the year M.DC.LVI. What the College could not do, what all the
writings that came abroad on both sides could not satisfy the world of, these
Letters did, clearing up the difficulties, and telling us, that there were two
Questions examined; one relating only to matter of fact, and consequently
easily resolved, the other of faith, wherein all the difficulty lay. Page 44.
The question of Faith was, whether a Proposition which M. Arnauld had taken
out of two Fathers of the Church, Saint Augustine and Saint Chrysostom, ought
to be approved or condemned. The Doctors of all sides agreed that it was
Catholic in the writings of the Fathers; but the Adversaries of M. Arnauld
pretended he had changed it in the citation, so far as to have made it
heretical. The business then was to discover the difference, which his
adversaries endeavored to make appear; but his defenders so confuted that
pretended diversity, that the Molinists were forced to deny them the liberty of
Answering, by limiting their discourses to half an hour, which was measured out
by a glass. This breach of privilege was it that obliged them to forbear the
Assembly, and to declare what ever were done there to be null.

Monsieur Arnauld's adversaries being by this means left alone in Sorbonne, did
what they pleased without any opposition, and insisted particularly on three
points concerning grace, which are explicated in these Letters.

The first, concerning that which they call next Power, is explicated in the
first Letter.

The second, concerning Sufficient Grace, is treated of in the second Letter.

The last, relating to that which they call actual Grace, is cleared up in the
fourth Letter.

And the third Letter, written immediately upon the Censure, discovers the
perfect conformity there is between the proposition of M. Arnauld and that of
the Fathers, which is such, that the Doctors that censured it could not assign
any difference: So that these four Letters clear up all these points by
certain conferences which the Author pretends to have had with several Doctors.

The six following Letters, viz. the V. VI. VII. VIII. IX. and X. explicate
the Morality of the Jesuits, by certain discourses between the Author and a
Casuist of theirs. The Author acts the part of a man desirous to be instructed;
and, hearing such extravagant maxims, is startled, yet not thinking it
convenient to discover the horror he conceived thereat, entertaines them with
all the moderation he could. That obliges the Jesuit to discover things more
freely; not but that he often finds him at a loss, but attributing it to the
novelty of the maxims, he goes on still, confirming what he said by the best
reasons of the most eminent Authors of the Society.

The Casuist is one that would happily abhor the lewdness of those principles,
were it not for the implicit respect he has for his Authors, whose opinions
he thinks so sacred that he ever quotes their own words, not fearing to publish
any thing for which he has their Security. Upon this confidence does he
discover their Morality as contributing much to the saving of a many souls;
not considering that what they allow as a prudent and Christian expedient, is a
base political compliance with the most irregular passions of men.

These conferences are continued till they come to certain essential points,
whereat the Author is so incensed that he cannot but exclaim against the
insupportable profaneness they must needs introduce. So that the Father,
being come to the highest excesses, as for instance, that of clearing Christian
Morality of the obligation of Loving God, and affirming that it is enough if a
man do not hate him, The Author breaks off, and so puts a period to that kind
of entertainment with the X. Letter.

Hence it appears of what concernment it was that this business should be
treated of by way of Dialogue; since the Author does not only acquaint us with
the maxims of the Jesuits, but also with the subtle insinuating ways whereby
^ey poison the world therewith.

The main design of their Morality we find to be this; viz. to draw all the
world to themselves by accommodation and compliance. To this end are their
maxims levelled to the several humors of men. And because these contrary
inclinations oblige them to have contrary op^n ons, they have been forced to
change the true rule of manners, and foyst in another that should be like a
nose of wax, subject to any sense, and capable of all forms, a Monster, called
THE DOCTRINE OF PROBABILITY.

According to this doctrine, a man may, with safety of conscience, follow an
opin^on maintained by 4. g^ave Doctors, or by 3. or by 2 or by 1. nay this one
Doctor being consulted may give an advice held as probable by others, though he
be really persuaded it is erroneous: quamvis ipse doctor ejusmodi sententiam
sp^culative sals^m esse c^rto sibi persuadeat, as Layman the Jesuit affirms*
So that it being in his power to advise according to whethe^ he please of two
contrary opinions, it will be prudence in him to recommend that which shall be
most acceptable to the Querent: Si haec illi savorabilior seu exoptatior sit.

This corruption, which indeed is the souce of all the rest, is explicated in
the V. VI. and XIII. Letters, whence it may clearly be inferred that all their
present extravagances proceed from it, and that it may be the damme of a many
other strange and monstrous opinions, there being no more needful to make them
safe as to point of Consci^nce, the^ the irregular imaginations of the Authors
that invent them. Hither are to be also referred the incredible liberties they
have given persons of all conditions, as Priests, Religiou^ men, Benefice-M^ng
ers, Gentlemen, Menial Servants, Merchants, Magistrates, rich, poor, Usurers,
Bankrupts, thieves, Naughty women, nay even Sorcerers.

For the sixth Letter contains their degenerate principles concerning Alms,
Simony and domestic frauds: the VII. those of Murder, on all occasions; the
VIII. their dispensations from making any restitution. The IX. finds out easy
ways to be saved, so that it may be done without any abatement of the delights
and accommodations of life. And lastly the X. which, as I have said, ends with
the dispensation from loving God, acquaints us with the mitigations of
Confession, which are such that the sins they could not excuse, are so easily
washed away by their new methods, that, as they say themselves, Crimes are now
expiated with greater cheerfulness then they are committed.

The Jesuits, sensible of the prejudice these Letters did them, and finding
that their silence increased it, thought themselves obliged to make some answer
thereto: but even in that they were infinitely at a loss.

Two questions clear up the business: one, whether the Casuists have taught
these opinions, and that is a truth in matter of fact not to be
disacknowledged. The other, whether the opinions are not impious and
unmaintainable; and that, their extravagances considered, is as much out of all
controversy as the other. So they took pains to no purpose, and so
unsuccessefully, that all their undertakings have proved abortive. For the
first thing they writ they called A first Answer, but there never came forth
any second. They put out in like manner the first and second Letter to
Philarchus, and never came to a third. Then they laid the foundations of a long
work, which they ealled IMPOSTURES, whereof they promised four parts, but
having litter'd the first and some part of the second, the damme miscarried,
and we heard no more of them. At last Father Annat, rallying all he could to
come in to the succor of these Fathers, has sent out his last book called The
Fair Dealing of the Jansenists, a mere repetition, and questionless the
weakest of their productions; so that the Author of the Letters has found it
no hard matter to make his party good.

The XI. Letter is spent to answer the reproach they fasten on him for the
Raillery there may be in his Letters. For besid^s that it is the most natural
way to answer what is ridiculous by derision, it is not disconsonant to the
practice of the Saints, and consequently does Religion no vivlence, nor is
guilty of any breach of charity.

In the XII. XIII. and XIV. he comes to the reproaches they make him of not
faithfully citing the passages of their Authors. And this, as a point of great
concernment, he is the more careful to clear himself of. Nor indeed can any
indifferent man conceive he should hazard his reputation with good men, so much
as to urge a false citation, when it would have been so easy for his
Adversaries to evince the contrary against him. But besides the many
professions he makes of his diligence, to avoid not only the least false
citations, but even the lest distortion of a sentence of theirs, I have an
acknowledgement of his by way of Postscript to the XVI. Letter, which, to the
confusion of the Jesuits, who are so free both to advance and maintain any,
though ever so groundless calumny, I must here insert, as being omitted in its
proper place. He in the XV. Letter, had suspected a certain person to be the
Author of their Apologies; it proving otherwise he thus recants. I understand,
says he, that he whom all the world thought Author of your Apologies,
disclaimes them, and is troubled that they are fathered on him. He does well,
and I was too blame to think him guilty of any such thing. For what assurance
soever might have been given me of it, yet should I have thought him a person
of too much judgment to believe your Impostures, and of too much honor to
publish them if he did not. There are f w in the world that dare once engage
with those excesses that are familiar with you, and which carry but too much of
your character to afford me any excuse, that I knew you not thereby. I was
carried away with the common report. But this excuse which were happily too much
for you is not enough for m^, who have made a profession not to say any thing
without certain proof, and who have not said ought but that* I repent me of it,
I discl^ime it, and I wish you would make your advantage of my example.

Having therefore discovered their foul play even in those particular calumn es
wherew^th they would have blasted him, he come^ to the general principle
thereof in the XV. viz. That according to their Divinity, they may, without
crime, calumniate those by whom they think themselves unjustly meddled with, and
charge them with crimes they know to be false, purposely to discredit them Th^s
is so generally maintained by Doctors nay whole Universities, that as Caramuel,
one of their best friends, says, If this opinion be not probable and secure in
point of conscience, there is hardly any such in all Divinity.

This Maxim being so firm, it were certainly no great wonder they should put
it in practice upon the Author of the Letters, and all their Adversaries. But
since it is so easy for them to load any one with calumnies, according to this
principle, it is as easy for the Author to wash off those vain reproaches of
imposture and heresy, by the assistance of truth. And this latter, though it
fill up all their writings, yet does Father Annat very eagerly aggravate in his
book of the Fair Dealing. This is answered in the XVII. Letter, where the
Author cleares not only himself but the Church from heresy, and makes it
appear that the difference between the Jesuits and their Adversaies about the
five Propositions, condemned by Innocent X. amounts to no more then a question
of fact, concerning the sense of Jansenius. That is also in some part the
subject of the XVIII. Letter, which he concludes with several instances of
Popes eluded and overreached by the false informations of Religious Sycophants.

So much for the Letters, which, because the first ten were written to a
Provincial, are called Les Provinciales. Something would be said of the Author,
but there is no more known of him then what he has been pleased to afford us of
himself. He has lately appeared under the name of Louis de Montalte. He has
often declared that he is neither Priest nor Doctor, which the Jesuits would
interpret, as if he were no Divine; but how well he is acquainted with true
Divinity, there needs no more then his own Letters to prove.

It will not be amiss, in a word, to give some little account of the effects of
these Letters, that is, bring the Reader to the present posture of affairs, in
relation to them. The Letters were no sooner abroad, but the Pastors of Paris
and Rouen would needs examine the citations, and consequently demand that
either the Letters, or the Casuists cited therein, should be censured,
according as they were either contrary or conformable thereto. The manner of
proceeding by those of Rouen, is thus described by one of them in a Letter to a
friend of his. The Pastors of Rouen, says he, because they would not hastily,
but with consideration, engage in this business, had a debate in one of their
assemblies, about consulting the books, whence it was said that the
propositions and pernicious Maxims preached against by the Pastor of Saint
Maclou, had been taken, and that true copies and extracts should be made
thereof. This done, that the condemnation thereof should be required by
canonical ways, if they were found in the Casuists, what quality or condition
soever they were of. And if they should not be found there, that the
prosecution might determine as to them, and be directed to procure a censure of
the LETTERS TO THE PROVINCIAL, wherein those doctrines with the Authors thereof
were cited. Six of the Company were named to manage that business; they spent
therein a whole month, doing all things with all possible fidelity and
exactness: they sought out the places cited; they found them, word for word, as
they were cited, in he Originals. They drew copies thereof, and reported the
whole to their Brethren in a second assembly, wherein for further certainty it
was ordered; That any among them that were desirous of further satisfaction as
to those matters, should be at liberty to come to the persons deputed, into the
places where the books were, to consult them and compare them as they pleased.
This order was observed, and for five or six days after, there were ten or
eleven Pastors at a time searching after the passages, and comparing them with
the Authors, and were all satisfied. Could there be more circumspection used in
any business? etc.

After this search the Pastors unanimously demanded of their Archbishop the
condemnation of these errors, and thereupon writ to those of Paris, who
immediately joined with them and with all those of the Kingdom, to demand of
their Prelates, that a censure might pass as well against the Maxims cited in
those LETTERS, as against a great number of others which they had themselves
discovered and presented to the Clergy of France.

From what has been said, may be, not impertinently, started this question,
viz: What Idea men should conceive of these excellent JESUITS and other
CASUISTS? To which it may be justly answered, That, it being proved against
them, that they not only maintain these extravagant MAXIMS, but daily brood
such as are yet more horrid and monstrous, they ought to be looked on as the
vermin of Religion and humane Society, and consequently, accountable for all
the inconveniences and mischiefs occasioned thereby.

The Letters dis-cypher'd.
OF Absolution. 225. 226. 4. Rules to be observed by Adversaries. 259. etc. Of
voluntary and involuntary action. 72. 73. etc. The story and trial of J. de
Alba. 124. 125. Of Alms. 275. 279. etc. Ambition a venial sin. 197. Of
Attrition and contrition. 231. etc,
B.
Bauny vindicated 2. ways. 374. 378. Bauny's method to avoid illicitous
contracts. 163.
C.
It is lawful to calumniate where there is no crime. 363. etc. The names of
certain famous Casuits. 100* That a man may give or accept a challenge. 138.
139. Complacency, self-liking no sin but a gift of God. 198. The Contract
MOHATRA. 165. 166. 167. Of Confession. 215. etc. Good cheer. 201. How the
contradictions that are between the Jesuits and 104. etc. Popes, Councills and
the Scripture are reconciled. 104. etc. How they convert China and the Indies.
83.
D.
A decree about the body of Saint Denis. 503 A decree against Galilaeo. 504.
Easy devotions. 187. The doctrine of PROBABLE OPINIONS. 92. 93. etc. How a man
may fight a duel. 137. The difference between Saint Basil and Athanasius. 447.
F.
Of Fasting. 88. 89. 90.
G.
When a man is obliged to love God. 237. 238. It Is enough if we do not hate him.
239. Actual grace what. 56. 57. etc. Sufficient and efficacious grace. 20. 21.
etc.
H.
Pope Honorius condemned. 457.
I.
The reason why the Jesuits are so violent against Jansenius. 194. Whether the
Jesuits may kill the Jansenists. 154. Direction of the Intention what, and how
convenient. 133. etc.
K.
Jesuiticall Tenants. A Religious man may kill a detractor. 153. It Is lawful to
kill for a box o'th ear. 143. 145. 302. It Is lawful to kill for the lie given,
opprobrious speeches, and for affrontive 146. 147. 316. signs. When not
allowable. 148. A man may be killed for 6. or 7. ducats, or a crown. 151. That
an informer may be killed. 141. That the false witness: and the corrupt Judge
may. 142. A man may be killed for an Apple. 343. To kill treacherously what.
140.
L.
The law and the Gospel compared. 240. Excellent ways to avoid lying. 202.
203.
M.
Of hearing mass. 209. etc. MAXIMS for all men* 114. For Bankrupts. 168. 295.
etc. For Boutefeus and such as set houses on fire 170. For Beneficed men as to
Simony: 115. 285. etc. For rich men and Usurers. 162. For Gentlemen. 129. etc.
For Priests. 116. For Judges. 159. 160. For Religious men. 120. For Servants.
122. 123. Le Moine's character of a melancholy fool. 195. When the occasions of
sinning are to be avoided. 90. When sought. 91. The original and growth of
opinions. 111.
P.
Next power what. p. 11. 12. 13. etc. The ^ecurity of probable opinions in
respect of the Laws. 126. 127. M. Arnaulds proposition and censure. 44. 45.
etc. Promises oblige not. 204. The story of M. Puys. 368.
Q.
The story of Father Quiroga. 362.
R.
Red things the best. 263. 264. Of restitution. 173. 175. etc. Of Revenge. 134.
S.
The conditions that make a Sin. 58. 59. Transactions passing in the soul
without which sin is not imputable. 6^ Next occasions of sinning what. 227
Sloth defined. 200 Speculation and practice. 311. etc When lawful to steal.
171. When to go to the stews. 229.
V.
The story of Father Valerian. 381: Virgilius excommunicated for holding there
were Antipodes. 405. Of Virginity. 206.
W.
Fine clothes for women. 207. 208.
THE MYSTERY OF JESVITISME discovered in certain LETTERS, Written upon occasion
of the present differences at SORBONNE, between the JANSENISTS and the
MOLINISTS.
To a Provincial. LETTER I.
Sir,
WE have been extremely mistaken. Nor was I undeceived till yesterday, till
which time I simply thought Religion had an extraordinary concernment in the
disputes at Sorbonne. So many assemblies of a company so famous as that of the
Faculty of Paris; and wherein things so strange and so much beyond example have
passed, make the world conceive such a high Idea thereof, that men cannot be
persuaded but the occasion is very extraordinary. In the mean time, you will
not be a little surprised, when you shall find by the present account, what
this so great noise amounts to; and that i^ it I shall in few words acquaint
you with, having my self searched into the bottom of the business.

There are two Questions examined, one of Fact, the other of Right. That of
fact consists in this, viz. whether Monsieur Arnauld be temerarious, for having
affirmed in his second Letter, That he had very carefully read over Jansenius
's book, that nowithstanding, he had not found therein the propositions
condemned by the last Pope; and that nevertheless, as he condemned those
propositions, wheresoever they were found, so should he do it in Jansenius, if
so be they were in him?

The question is this, whether he could without temerity make such an
expression of his being dis-satisfied that the propositions were in Jansenius,
when the Bishops had before declared they were there?

The business is proposed in Sorbonne. Threescore and eleven Doctors undertake
his vindication, and maintain that he could make no other answer to those, who
by so many writings, put him to the question whether he held the propositions
to be in that book, but that he had not seen them there, and nevertheless that
if they be, he condemns them.

There were some went a little further, declaring that notwithstanding the
strict search they had made after them, they could never find them there; nay,
that they had met with such as were quite contrary, and thereupon very
earnestly entreated, That if there were any Doctor present who had found them
there, he would be pleased to show them; a thing so easy, that it could not
well be denied, as being the most certain way to convince them all; ^ay
Monsieur Arnauld himself. But this they could never obtain. And so much as to
what concerns that party.

Of the other, were fourscore secular Doctors, and some half as many begging
Friars, who have condemned the proposition of Monsieur Arnauld, without ever
examining whether what he had affirmed were true or false, and that after it
had been declared, that not the truth but the rashness of his proposition was
under consideration.

Besides all these were fifteen, who would not subscribe the Censure, and are
accordingly termed Indifferents.

Thus was the Question of Fact decided, whereat I am not troubled a jot, for
whether Monsieur Arnauld be rash or no, my conscience is nothing concerned. Or
were I so desirous to know whether these propositions are in Jansenius, his
book is neither so scarce, nor of that bulk, but that for my own satisfaction I
might read him all over, and never consult Sorbonne about it.

But were I not afraid to be thought temerarious my self, I think I should be
carried away with the opinion of the greatest part of those who having hitherto
taken it upon the public faith, that these propositions are in Jansenius,
begin now to mistrust the contrary from that fantastic refusal the others make
to show them, which indeed is such, that I could never yet meet with any one
who told me he had seen them there. Insomuch that it is my fear, this censure
may do more hurt then good, and give those who shall come to the knowledge of
it an impression thereof, quite contrary to the conclusion. The world is grown
extremely mistrustful, and men believe not things till they see them. But as I
have already said, that point is of no great consequence, since Faith is not at
all concerned in it.

For the Question of Right, it seems to be of greater concernment because it
does relate to Faith; for which reason I have the more particularly informed my
self thereof. But I shall give you such an account of it, that you will find it
a thing of as little importance as the former.

In this it is examined what Monsieur Arnauld says in the same Letter, viz.
That the Grace without which a man cannot do any thing, had failed Saint Peter
in his fall. Whence you and I conceived that the business was to examine the
main principles of Grace, as whether it be not conferred on all men, or whether
it be efficacious, but we were much mistaken. I am in a short time grown a
great Divine, and you shall acknowledge as much.

To know the truth of the business, I visited Monsieur N. a Doctor of the
College of Navarre, who lives not far from me, and is, as you know, one of the
most zealous against the Jansenists. But I, being then as violent out of
curiosity as he out of zeal, asked him whether it would not be formally
decided, that Grace is bestowed on all men, that so we may at length hear no
more of that question. He gave me a scornful retort, and told me, that that was
not the point; that there were some of his party who held that grace was not
bestowed on all; That the examiners themselves had openly, before a full
Assembly at Sorbonne, affirmed the opinion to be problematicall; and that he
himself was of that opinion; confirming it by a passage which he said was very
remarkable in Saint Augustine, viz. we know that grace is not bestowed on all
men.

I desired him to excuse my mis-apprehension of his meaning, and entreated him
to tell me, whether they would not at least condemn that other opinion of the
Jansenists which makes so much noise in the world, that grace is efficacious,
and that it determines our will to do that which is good. But I was no less
unfortunate in this second question. You understand nothing at all of the
business, said he to me, there is no heresy in that, it is an Orthodox opinion,
all the Thomists maintain it, and I held it my self in my exercise at Sorbonne.

I durst not presume to trouble him with any further doubts, nay was at a loss
where the difficulty should be; but to be a little better satisfied, I
entreated him to show me wherein consisted the heresy of Monsieur Arnauld's
proposition. In this, said he, that he does not acknowledge that the just have
a power to fulfill the Commandments of God in the manner that we understand it.

Having learnt so much I took my leave of him, and very much elevated that I
knew what was most considerable in the business; I went to Monsieur N. who
grows stronger every day then other, and was then arrived to that degree of
health that he brought me to his brother in law, a Jansenist, if ever there
were any, and yet a very honest man. To be the better entertained, I pretended
to be of his side, and said to him, Could it be possible that the Doctors of
Sorbonne should introduce into the Church such an error, as, That all the just
have at all times a power to fulfill the Commandments? How do you speak, says
the Doctor to me, do you call that an error which is a Catholic Tenent, and
opposed by none but Lutherans and Calvinists? Why, said I, are not you of that
opinion? No, said he, we anathematize it as heretical and impious. Awakened a
little by this answer, I perceived that I had over-acted the Jansenist now, as
I had done the Molinist before. But being not fully satisfied with his answer,
I desired him to tell me sincerely whether he held, that the just had always a
real power to observe the Commandments. This set him a little on fire, but it
was with a devout zeal; whereupon he told me that he would never dissemble his
opinions for any man whatsoever, that it was his belief, and that he and all of
his party would maintain it to the death, as being the uncorrupted doctrine of
Saint Thomas, and of Saint Augustine their Master.

This he spoke with so much earnestness, that I could not doubt his reality.
With this confidence I returned to my former Doctor, and fully satisfied, told
him that no question there would soon be a peace concluded in Sorbonne; that
the Jansenists were agreed as to the power which the just have to fulfill the
Commandments. Soft and fair, said he, a man must be a Divine ere he can see the
end of the business. The difference which is between us is so subtle, that we
can hardly discover it our selves; it is a thing you will not so easily
understand. It Is enough for you to know that the Jansenists will indeed tell
you, that all the just have at all times a power to fulfill the Commandments,
that is not the thing we dispute about. But they will not tell you that this
power is a next power. There Is the point.

This word was both new and harsh to me. Till then I had understood things well
enough, but this term cast me into a cloud, and I think there was no other
reason for the invention of it, then that of making a confusion. I thereupon
desired him to give me the explication of it, but he making me believe there
was something of mystery in it, sent me back again without any other
satisfaction, to ask the Jansenists whether they would admit this next power. I
burdened my memory with this term, for my understanding contributed nothing
thereto; and for fear of forgetting it, I went immediately to my Jansenist, and
as soon as our first complements were over, bluntly asked him; Tell me I pray,
said I, do you admit the next power? He began to laugh, and said to me somewhat
faintly, do you tell pie in what sense you understand it, and I will give you
my thoughts of it. My knowledge in the business was not so great, but that I
saw my self in an incapacity to answer him, and yet to make advantage of my
visit, I told him at random, I understand it, said I, according to the sense of
the Molinists. At which being not at all moved, to whom among the Molinists,
said he, do you refer me? I bid him take them altogether, as making all but one
body, and that informed by one and the same spirit.

You are much to seek in the business, said he, they are so far from
maintaining the same opinions, that they hold such as are mere contraries. But
being all united in the design to destroy Monsieur Arnauld, they have bethought
them to agree in something, viz. the term, next, which both the one and the
other make use of, though they understand it several ways, so to speak the
same language; as also that by this seeming conformity they might form a
considerable body, and make up the greatest number, so to be the more able to
crush him.

This answer I was startled at, but without taking much impression of the
wicked designs of the Molinists, which I shall not credit upon his word, and
wherein I am not at all concerned; I made it my endeavor only to know the
several senses which they gave that mysterious word, next. I should be very
glad to give you satisfaction, said he, but you will find such a manifest
rerepugnance and contradiction in it, that you would hardly believe me, nay you
would distrust me: Your surer way were to learn it from themselves, I will give
you directions how to do it. You are only to visit at several times Monsieur
le Moine, and Father Nicolai. I know neither, said I; then see, said he,
whether you know any of those I shall now name to you; for they follow the
sentiments of Monsieur le Moine. It happened that I knew some of them. Then,
said he, see whether you know any of the Dominicans whom they call new
Thomists, for they are all such as Father Nicolai. I also knew some among those
he named to me; whereupon resolved to make the best advantage I could of this
advice, and to get once out of the business, I took leave of him, and went
first to one of the disciples of Monsieur le Moine.

I entreated him to tell me what was meant by having the next power to do a
thing. That Is no hard matter to resolve, said he, it is to have whatsoever is
necessary to do it, so that there be nothing wanting to act. According to
which, said I, to have the next power to cross a river, is to have a boat,
boat-men, oars, and the rest, so that nothing be wanting. Very right, said he.
And to have the next power to see, said I, is to have a good sight, and light
enough. For he who has ever so good a sight in the dark, would not have the
next power to see, according to your doctrine, since that light would be
wanting, without which nothing can be seen. Very learnedly, said he. And
consequently, added I, when you say that all the just have always a next power
to observe the Commandments, your meaning is that they have at all times all
the graces necessary for the accomplishment of them, so that there wants
nothing on Gods behalf. Hold, said he, they have at all times whatsoever is
necessary for the observation of them, or at least for their praying to God for
it. I apprehend you, said I, they have whatsoever is necessary to pray unto God
to assist them, it being not necessary they should have any new grace from God
so to pray. You are in the right, said he. But is it not necessary, said I,
they should have an efficacious grace to pray unto God? Not at all, said he,
according to Monsieur le Moine.

To lose no time, I went to the Convent of the Dominicans, and asked for those
whom I knew to be of the new Thomists. I entreated them to tell me what next
power signified. Is it not that, said I to them, wherein there is nothing
wanting for to act? No said they: how Father, said I, will you call that power
next, when there is something wanting to it, and will you say, for example,
that a man in the night, and without any light, has the next power to see? we
affirm that according to our doctrine he shall have such a power, if he be not
blind. I am content, said I, but Monsieur le Moine understands it in a contrary
manner. It Is true, said they, but we understand it thus. With all my heart,
said I, for I never quarrel about the term, provided I have some account of
the sense wherein it is taken. But I perceive hence, that when you say the just
have always the next power to pray unto God, your meaning is that they stand
in need of another assistance to engage them to pray, without which they never
will. You apprehend excellently well, replied the Fathers, embracing me,
excellently well. For they must have further an efficacious grace, which is not
given to all, and which determines their will to pray. And it is a heresy to
deny the necessity of this efficacious grace in order to prayer.

Excellently well, said I to them, in my turn; but according to you, the
Jansenists are Catholics, and Monsieur le Moine a Heretic. For the Jansenists
affirm that the just have the power to pray, but that there is nevertheless
requisite an efficacious grace, which tenet you approve. And Monsieur le Moine
says, that the just pray without ^fficacious grace, and that you condemn. Very
right said they, yet Monsieur le Moine calls this power, a next power.

How Fathers, said I, this is no more then to play upon words, to say, that you
are agreed, because of the common terms you make use of, when you are contrary
in the sense. The Fathers made no reply at all, when just upon the word comes
in my disciple of Monsieur le Moine I had been with before, which I thought an
extraordinary good fortune; but I have heard since that their meetings are not
so seldom, and that there is almost a constant conversation between them.

I know a man, said I, to my disciple of Monsieur le Moine, who says that all
the just have always the power to pray unto God; but yet that they will never
pray without an efficacious grace determining them, which God gives not to all
the just at all times; is he an Heretic or no? Stay, says the Doctor, you may
surprise me. Soft and fair, Distinguo, if he call this power a next power, he
shall be a Thomist, and consequently a Catholic; if not, he shall be a
Jansenist, and consequently an Heretic. He, said I, neither calls it next, nor
not next. He is then an Heretic, said he, ask these good Fathers else. They
shall be no Judges in this case, for they were already giving their consent by
a nod with the head. But I told them, this man denies to admit the word next,
because the authors thereof will not explain it. Upon that one of the Fathers
would needs give it a definition, but he was interrupted by the disciple of
Monsieur le Moine, who said to him, Must you needs renew our distractions? Are
we not agreed not to explain that word next, and to make use of it on all
sides, without saying what it signifies? whereupon the Dominican was silent.

By this did I discover their design, and rising up to be gone, told them; In
troth, Fathers, I am very much afraid that there is abundance of foul practice
among you, and be what will the result of your Assemblies, I dare foretell that
though the censure were given, peace would not be established. For take the
word as you please, if there be no explication of it, either side may pretend
to the victory. The Dom^nicans will say that the word is taken in their sense;
Monsieur le Moine will have it in his, and so it will cost much more disputes
to explain it, then it has to introduce it. For, when all is done, there were
no great danger to receive it without any sense, since it can do no hurt but by
the sense. But it is a thing does not become Sorbonne and Theology, to use
equivocal and cavilling terms without any explication. And therefore in a
word, Fathers, tell me once for all, what I ought to believe to be a Catholic;
you must, said they altogether, affirm that the just have the next power,
taking it abstractedly as to all sense; abstrahendo a sensu Thomistarum, and a
sensu aliorum Theologorum.

That is to say, said I, taking my leave, a man must pronounce that word with
his lips, to avoid being an heretic in name. For in fine, have you the word
out of the Scripture? No, said they. Have you it from Fathers, or Councils, or
Popes? No. Is it Saint Thomas's? No. What necessity is there then, said I, to
meddle with it, since it has neither authority nor any sense of it self? You
are very obstinate, said they, you shall either affirm it or be an heretic,
and Monsieur Arnauld also; for we are the stronger party; and if there be
occasion, we can bring in so many Franciscans that we shall clearly carry it.

Upon this solid reason I left them for to write you this relation, whereby you
perceive they meddle not with any of the ensuing points, and that they are not
condemned by either side.

1. That grace is not bestowed on all men.

2. That all the just have the power to fulfill the Commandments of God.

3. That nevertheless, for to fulfill them, and even to pray, they stand in need
of an efficacious grace, which determines their will.

4. That this efficacious grace is not at all times given to all the just, and
that it depends on the pure mercy of God. So that there is only the word next
without any sense which runs all the hazard of it.

Happy are the people that know it not! Happy those who were before its birth!
for I see no remedy for it, if the Gentlemen of the Academy do not by their
Authority expel this barbarous word out of Sorbonne, where it causes so much
distraction. Without this, the censure will certainly pass, but I perceive all
the hurt it will do, is to make Sorbonne contemptible for this procedure, which
will derogate from that authority which it is requisite it should have upon
other occasions.

In the mean time I will leave you at liberty to be for or against the word
next, for I have more affection for my neighbor, then to persecute him under
this pretense. If this relation finds you any entertainment, I shall be
encouraged to continue my intelligence of what shall happen. I am, etc.

Paris. Januar. 23. 1656. S. N.
To the same. LETTER II.
Sir,
AS I was closing up the last I sent you, there came to give me a visit
Monsieur N our ancient friend, the most fortunately in the world for my
curiosity; for he is extreme^y well versed in the Questions of the times, and
is perfectly well read in the secrets of the Jesuits, among whom he not only
continually is, but has the acquaintance of the most eminent. After a little
discourse of the occasion that had brought him to me; I entreated him to tell
me in a word what were the main points in controversy between the two parties.

He presently informed me, and said, there were two principal points; the first
concerning the next power; the second touching sufficient grace. Of the former
you have an account in my last; in this you shall have of the latter.

I understood then briefly that their difference concerning sufficient grace is
this: That the Jesuits pretend there is a grace generally given to all, yet so
far compliant with the Free Will, that this latter makes the other efficacious
or inefficacious at its choice, without any new supply from God, on whose
behalf there is not any thing wanting for to act effectually. For this reason
they call it sufficient, because it alone suffices for to act. On the
contrary, the Jansenists will not admit there should be any grace actually
sufficient which is not also efficacious, that is to say, that all those graces
which do not determine the will to act effectively are insufficient to act,
because, as they say, a man never acts without efficacious grace. This is the
difference between them.

Enquiring afterward of the doctrine of the new Thomists. It Is fantastic,
says he, they agree with the Jesuits in admitting a sufficient grace given to
all men; but withal hold, that men never act with that only grace; and that for
to oblige them to act, it is requisite that God give them an efficacious grace,
really determining their will to the action, which grace God gives not to all.
So that according to this doctrine, said I to him, this grace is sufficient,
and yet is not such. Very right, said he, for if it suffice, there were no need
of any more for to act; and if it suffices not, it is not sufficient.

But, said I, what difference then is there between them and the Jansenists?
This, said he, that the Dominicans are at least so far in the right, that they
confidently affirm all men have sufficient grace. I apprehend you, said I, but
they say it before they are aware, since they add, that for to act, it is
absolutely necessary to have an efficacious grace, such as is not given to all,
and so they comply with the Jesuits by a term which has no sense, and are
contrary to them, and agree with the Jansenists in the substance of the thing.
It Is very true, said he. How then comes there an union, said I, between them
and the Jesuits? and why do not these latter oppose them as well as they do the
Jansenists, since they will meet with among them such powerful adversaries, as
maintaining the necessity of efficacious grace which determines, will hinder
them from establishing that which you say is alone sufficient?

That were too great an undertaking, said he, it is more advantageous for them
to comply with those that are powerful in the Church. The Jesuits are well
satisfied, that they have prevailed with them to admit the very term of
sufficient grace, though they understand it as they please; for they make this
advantage of it, that when they please, they make the contrary opinion
ridiculous and unmaintainable. For it being once supposed that all men have
sufficient grace; the conclusion is obvious, that efficacious grace is not
necessary, since that such a necessity would exclude the sufficiency before
supposed. Nor would it signify any thing to say that it is otherwise
understood; the common acception of this term admits not any such explication:
for he that says, sufficient, says all that is necessary, it is the proper and
natural signification of it. Now were you but acquainted with what has passed
formerly, you would find that the Jesuits have been so far from having their
doctrine established, that you would admire to see it advanced so much. Knew
you but what rubs the Dominicans laid in their way under Clement VIII. and
Paulus V. you would not wonder so much that they are so loath to enter the lists
against them, and that they are content they should continue in their opinion,
conditionally that they may as freely hold theirs, and that especially when the
Dominicans countenance it by those words which they have publicly agreed to
make use of. They sit down very contentedly with their compliance; they do not
press them to deny the necessity of efficacious grace, that were to be
importunate; it is not good tyrannizing over ones friends; the Jesuits are very
well aforehand. The world is satisfied with words, few search into the depth of
things, and so the term of sufficient grace being current on both sides,
though in a different sense, there is not any, except the most acute Divines, but
think that what that word signifies is as well held by the Dominicans as the
Jesuits. And the sequel will discover that the latter are not the more easily
over-reached.

I acknowledged they were indeed very excellent men; and to make the best I
could of his advice, I went straight to the Dominicans, where I found at the
gate a friend, and a great Jansenist, (for I have some in all parties) asking
for another Father then him I came to speak with. But with much entreaty I
prevailed with him to bear me company, and so asked for one of my new Thomists.
Being come, he was extremely glad to see me. Well Father, said I, it is not
then enough that all men have a next power, whereby they never act to any
effect, but they must also have a sufficient grace wherewith they act as
little. Is not this the opinion of your School? It is so, says the Father; I
have maintained it this very morning in Sorbonne. I talked out my half hour
there, and had it not been for the Sand, I would have altered that unhappy
proverb which it already so rife in Paris; He votes as silently as Friar in
Sorbonne. And what do you mean, replied I, by your half hour and your sand? Are
your debates cut out by a certain measure? They are so, said he, within these
few days. And are you obliged to speak for half an hour? No: a man may speak
as little as he pleases; but not as much, said I? O the excellent encouragement
of ignorance! the rare pretense for those who cannot say any thing worth the
hearing! But in a word Father, is this grace which is given to all men
sufficient or no? It is, said he. And yet it has no effect without efficacious
grace? Very right, said he. And all men have this sufficiency, continued I, and
all have not the efficaciousness? Very true, said he. You mean, said I, that
all have graces enough, and that all have not enough; that is to say, that this
grace suffices although it does not suffice; that is to say, is sufficient in
name, and insufficient in effect. In troth, Father, this doctrine is very
subtle. Have you forgot, because you have forsaken the world, what the word
sufficient signifies among those that have not? Do you not remember that it
comprehends whatever is necessary for to act? But it is impossible your memory
should be so weak; for, to take a comparison which you must be the more
sensible of, if you had to dinner but two ounces of bread and a single glass of
water, would you be satisfied with your Prior, who should tell you that were
sufficient to nourish you, under pretense, that with something else which he
should not give you, you would have whatever were necessary for you to dine
well? How then are you so much overseen as to affirm, that all men have
sufficient grace to act, when you acknowledge that there is yet some other
grace absolutely necessary to act, which all have not? Is it that this belief
is of no great consequence, and that you leave men at liberty to believe that
efficacious grace is necessary, or not? Is it a thing indifferent to affirm,
that a man having sufficient grace, does not act to any effect? How, says the
good Friar, indifferent! It Is a heresy, it is a formal heresy; the necessity
of efficacious grace to act effectively is of Faith. It is heresy to deny it.

Where are we then, cried I, what side must I now take? If I deny sufficient
grace, I am a Jansenist; if with the Jesuits I so admit it, that efficacious
grace is not also necessary, I shall be an heretic, as you say. And if I admit
it as you do, yet granting withal a necessity of efficacious grace, I offend
against common sense, and am a madman, as the Jesuits affirm. What then must
I do in this inevitable necessity of being either a madman, an heretic, or a
Jansenist? And into what extremities are we reduced, if of all these, only the
Jansenists offer no violence either to Faith or Reason, and are withal cleared
from error and madness?

My friend the Jansenist derived a good omen from this discourse, and thought
me already convinced. However at that present he said nothing to me, but
addressing himself to the Father, I would feign know, said he, wherein you and
the Jesuits agree. In this, said he, that both the Jesuits and we do
acknowledge sufficient graces given to all. But, said the other, there are two
things in the word sufficient grace; there is the sound, which is only wind;
and the thing it signifies, which is real and effective. So that when you agree
with the Jesuits about the word [sufficient] and are contrary to them as to the
sense, it is evident that you are contrary one to another as to the substance
of that term, and agree only about the sound. Is this a sincere and cordial
proceeding? But what reason have you to be troubled at it, says the good man,
since we betray no man by this manner of speaking? For in our Schools we openly
teach, that we understand it in a sense contrary to that of the Jesuits. I am
troubled, said my friend, that you do not declare it every where, that by
sufficient grace you understand that grace which is not sufficient. You are
obliged in conscience, when you thus change the ordinary terms of Religion, to
acknowledge that when you admit a sufficient grace in all men, your meaning is,
that they have not sufficient graces in effect. All persons whatsoever take the
word sufficient in the same sense, only the new Thomists understand it in
another. All women, who make make up the best half of the world, all relating
to Courts, all belonging to the wars; all Magistrates, all Lawyers, Merchants,
Tradesmen, all people; in a word, all sorts of persons, except the Dominicans,
understand by the word sufficient, that which comprehends whatever is
necessary. No man has yet taken notice of this singularity; it is only said
every where that the Dominicans hold, that all men have graces sufficient. From
whence what may be concluded, but that they hold all men have all the graces
which are necessary to act, and that much more when they see them engaged in
the same interests and designs with the Jesuits who understand it after that
manner. The uniformity of expressions added to that union of parties, must
certainly be an evident demonstration of the uniformity of your sentiments.

All the faithful ask the Divines what is the true state of nature since its
corruption. St Augustine and his Disciples answer, that it has no more
sufficient grace then God is pleased to bestow on it. The Jesuits come
afterward, and say, that all have graces effectually sufficient. The Dominicans
are consulted upon this contrariety; what do they? they close with the Jesuits;
by that union they make up the greatest number. They separate from those who
deny these graces to be sufficient. They declare that all men are furnished
therewith. What can be said of this less then that they countenance the
Jesuits? And yet after all this, they add, that however these sufficient graces
are fruitless without the efficacious, which are not given to all.

Would you have a representation of the Church amidst these different opinions?
I look on her as a man who leaving his Country to go and travel, is set upon
by robbers, from whom he receives several wounds and is left half-dead. He
sends into the next towns for three Physicians: The first having searched his
wounds thinks them mortal, and plainly tells him that none but God can restore
him to his former strength. The second coming after him, flatters the
distressed man, and tells him that he had yet strength sufficient to recover
his own house; and crow'd over the former, as being of an opinion contrary to
him, and laid a plot to destroy him. The poor man in this doubtful condition
spying the third coming afar off, reaches out his hands to him, as such as he
expected should determine the business. This having looked on his wounds, and
considered the judgments of the two former, embraces that of the second, is
united with him, and both together conspire against the first, and shamefully
force him away, for they are too strong by reason of their number. The wounded
man concludes by this proceeding of his, that he is of the same opinion with
the second, and asking him whether it were really so, he declares affirmatively
that his strength is sufficient to go through his journey. But the other
sensible of his own weakness, asked him whence he judged him to be so strong?
From this, said he, that you still have your legs. Now the legs are orga^s
naturally sufficient to go upon. But, says the sick-man, have I all the
strength requisite to make use of them? for in the languishing condition I now
am in, methinks they are useless: No certainly, you have not, says the Doctor,
and you will never go effectively if God send you not his assistance from
heaven to assist and guide you. How, says the sick, it seems I have not in my
self that sufficient strength, such as to which there is nothing wanting, to
walk effectively? Alas you are very far from it, said he. Why then, says the
wounded man, you are of an opinion contrary to that of your companion, as
touching the truth of my condition: I must needs acknowledge it, replied the
other.

What do you imagine this poor man said? He was troubled at the fantastic
carriage of this third Doctor. He blamed him for joining with the second, to
whom he was of a contrary opinion, and with whom he was but seemingly
compliant; and discarding the first to whom he was conformable in effect.
Whereupon trying his strength, and finding by experience the truth of his
weakness, he dismissed them both, and calling for the first, put himself into
his hands, and according to his advice, begged of God that strength which he
confessed he had not himself; he found mercy at his hands, and by his
assistance came safely to his own house.

The good Father a little astonished at such a parable made no answer at all.
Whereupon to revive him a little; But after all, Father, said I, calmly to him,
upon what account did you give the name sufficient to a grace which you say it
is a point of faith to believe insufficient in effect? You speak of it, said
he, as your humor leads you. You are free, and a private person; I am a
religious man, and live in community; know you not what a difference this
makes? we depend on our superiors; they depend on others; those have promised
our suffrages; what can I do? That half word was enough; we needed no more to
put us in mind of his Brother-Frier who upon some such occasion was packed away
like an exile to Abbeville.

But, said I to him, how came your Order to be engaged to admit this grace?
That Is another discourse, said he. All that I can in a word tell you of it, is,
that our Order has to its utmost maintained the doctrine of St Thomas
concerning efficacious grace. How violently did it oppose the first eruption of
the doctrine of Molina? what pains has it taken to establish the necessity of
the efficacious grace of Jesus Christ? know you not what passed under Clement
VIII. and Paul V. and that the one prevented by death, and some affairs in
Italy hindering the other to publish his Bull, our arms remain in the Vatican?
But the Jesuits, who upon the first breaking forth of Luther and Calvin, making
their advantage of the small light which the people have to discern error from
the truth of Saint Thomas's his doctrine, had in a small time so generally
dispersed their doctrine, that they were become absolute Masters of the popular
belief, and we in a condition to be cried down as Calvinists, and treated as
the Jansenists are at the present, if we did not moderate the truth of
efficacious grace, by a seeming acknowledgment of a sufficient. Being in this
extremity, what better course could we take to secure Truth and our own
reputation, then to admit the term of sufficient grace, yet denying it to be
such in effect? This is the true state of affairs.

This he spoke with so much regret that I much pitied him. But my second not
moved at it, Flatter not your self, said he to him, with so much tenderness to
Truth; if she had not met with other preservers, she had perished in such weak
hands. You have received into the Church the name of her enemy; it is no less
then to have received him in himself. Names are inseparable from things; if the
word suffici^nt grace be once established, it will be to little purpose for you
to say, that you there by understand a grace that is insufficient, you will not
be heard. Your explication will be odious over all the world, where men speak
with much more sincerity of things of less consequence; the Jesuits will
triumph; it will be their sufficient grace in effect, and not yours, which is
nothing but a name, that shall be established; and what is contrary to your
belief, will become an article of faith.

We will all suffer martyrdom, says the Father, ere we consent to the
establishment of sufficient grace according to the sense of the Jesuits; Saint
Thomas, whom we are sworn to follow, being directly opposite thereto. To which
my friend being more eager then I, replied; Come, come, Father, your Order has
received an honor which it has not managed well. It deserts that grace which
was committed to its trust, and which was never forsaken since the beginning of
the world. That victorious grace, which had been expected by the Patriarchs,
foretold by the Prophets, brought into the world by Jesus Christ, preached by
St Paul, explained by St Augustine, the most eminent of the Fathers; maintained
by those who have followed him, and confirmed by Saint Bernard, the last of the
Fathers; supported by Saint Thomas* the Angel of the Schools; transmitted by
him to your Order; kept up by so many of your Fathers, and so gloriously
defended by those of your Order under the Popes Clement and Paul: this
efficacious grace, I say, which as a depositum has been put into your hands,
to the end that in an holy Order which was to last for ever, it might have
preachers to publish it to the end of the world, it is now forsaken for such
poor and unworthy concernments. It is now time that other hands be armed in its
quarrel. It is time that God raise up to the Doctor of Grace, such bold
disciples, as unacquainted with the engagements of the world, may serve God for
his own sake. Grace is no longer safe under the banners of the Dominicans, but
it shall never want defenders, for it forms them its self by its own Almighty
power. It requires hearts that are pure and undefiled, and purifies, and
disengages them from the interests of the world, as such as are incompatible
with the truths of the Gospel. Prevent these threats, Father, and take heed
that God remove not this torch out of its place, and leave you in in darkness,
and without a crown.

He had said more, for he grew more and more inflamed, but I interrupted him,
and rising up, In troth Father, said I, were I a person in authority, I would
have it cried with sound of Trumpet, KNOW ALL MEN, that when the Dominicans say
that sufficient Grace is given to all, their meaning is, that all have not the
grace which suffices effectively; which done, you should affirm it as much as
you please; but not otherwise. And this closed our visit.

You see that this is a political sufficiency suitable to the next power. But I
shall presume to tell you, that if a man be not a Dominican, he may without any
danger question not only the next power, but also this sufficient grace.

As I make up this letter, word is brought me that the Censure is past, but not
knowing upon what terms, as also that it will not be published till the
fifteenth of February; I shall refer the account I intend you of it, to the
next Post.

I am, etc.
Paris. Januar. 29. 1656. S. N.
The Provincial's ANSWER to the two precedent LETTERS.
Sir,
YOur two Letters have not found me only entertainment; they are generally
seen, generally heard, generally believed. They are not only esteemed by
Divines; they are well received by those of a lower sphere in the world, nay
they are understood even of Women.

I here send you the thoughts of them, of a Gentleman of the Academy, one of
the most eminent among those most illustrious persons, who had only seen the
first. I wish that Sorbonne, which owes so great an obligation to the memory of
the late Cardinal, would submit to the jurisdiction of his French Academy; The
author of the Letter should not be unsatisfied. For as a member of it, I should
exercise my authority to condemn, to banish, to proscribe, nay I should not
stick to say, to exterminate with all my power this same next power, which
makes so much noise to no purpose, and that without knowing otherwise what he
desires. But the misfortune is, that our Academick power is limited, and cannot
take cognizance of this case. I am sorry for it, and that so much the more,
that all the little power I have is not able to acquit me as to what I ow you,
etc.

I shall add to that, what another person, of whom I shall not give you the
least hint as to know him, has written to a Lady who had sent him your first
Letter. I am obliged to you, much beyond what you can imagine, for the Letter
you sent me; it is infinitely ingenious, and excellently well penned. It
discovers things without being too open; it clears up the cloudiest things in
the world; it satyrises hand^omely; it instructs even those who are not at all
acquainted with the things, but extremely heightens their entertainments who
know them. It is, besides all this, an excellent apology, and if you will, a
subtle and ingenious censure. In a word, it discovers so much art, so much
wit, and so much judgment, that I should very gladly be acquainted with the
Author, etc.

I doubt not but you would be as glad to know the person that gives it this
character; but you must be content to honor him without knowing him, and when
you shall know him, you will honor him much more.

Be pleased therefore to continue your Letters upon my account; and let the
censure come when it will, we are provided to entertain it. Those words of next
power and sufficient grace though threatened with, we are nothing afraid of. We
are better taught by the Jesuits, Dominicans, and Monsieur le Moine, as well
concerning the many postures they are put into, as touching the solidity of
these new words, then to trouble our heads about them.

In the mean time I shall ever rest, etc.

Paris, Febr. 2. 1656.
To the Provincial by way of Answer to the Precedent. LETTER III.
Sir,
I Had no sooner received your Letter, but there was brought me a written copy
of the Censure. I am as nobly treated in the one as Monsi^ur Arnauld is
unworthily in the other. I fear me there may be excess on both sides, and that
we are not well known by our Judges, for if we were, I am confident that
Monsieur Arnauld would deserve the approbation of Sorbonne, and I the censure
of the Academy. There is indeed a contrariety in our interests; he should make
himself known that he might vindicate his innocence, whereas I should continue
in obscurity, that so I might not lose my reputation. So that since I may not
discover my self, I recommend it to your care, to make my acknowledgments to my
noble Approbators, and it shall be mine to give you an account of the Censure.

Sir, I must needs confess, I was extremely surprised at it. I expected to find
the most abominable heresies in the world condemned in it; but you will second
my admiration with your own, to see that so many extraordinary preparations
should come to nothing just at the production of so great an effect.

To understand it with more diversion, I shall desire you to reflect on the
strange impressions have been given us for so many years of the Jansenists.
Then call to mind the Cabals, the factions, the erroneous opinions, the
schisms, the plots which have been for so long time laid to their charge. Add
to that how much they have been traduced and defamed in books and pulpits, and
how that this torrent, which has been so violent and of so long continuance,
has nevertheless increased within these late times, wherein they are openly
and publicly accused, not only as heretics and schismatics, but have been
censured as Apostates and Infidels, denying the mystery of Transubstantiation,
and renouncing Jesus Christ and the Gospel.

From so many such horrid accusations might well be hatched the design of
examining their books, so to conclude them really such. Among the rest they
have fallen particularly on the second Letter of Monsieur Arnauld, which was
given out to be fraught with the most detestable errors could be imagined.
They appoint for his Examiners his most professed enemies. Their main business
is to sift out whatever they should think censurable; and they make report of a
proposition concerning the doctrine thereof, which they expose to Censure.

What could be less expected from all these proceedings, then that that
proposition, culled out from all the rest with such remarkable circumstances,
should comprehend the essence of the blackest heresies imaginable? And yet it
is such, that there cannot be any thing seen therein which is not so clearly
and so formally expressed in those passages of the Fathers, cited by Monsieur
Arnauld in that place, that I never yet meet with any man that could apprehend
any the least difference. All which notwithstanding it was imagined there was
some terrible one, since that, the passages out of the Fathers being absolutely
Catholic, it must needs follow, that the proposition of Monsieur Arnauld, to
be heretical, should imply an inevitable contradiction thereto.

It was from Sorbonne that this discovery was not without reason expected. The
eyes of all Christendom were open to perceive in the censure of these Doctors
that point which was so imperceptible to the community of mankind besides. In
the mean time, Monsieur Arnauld makes his Apologies, wherein, in several
columns he lays down his own proposition, and the passages out of the Fathers,
whence he had taken it, so the better to discover the conformity, even to
ordinary capacities.

There we find Saint Augustine, in one place where he cites him, saying, That
Jesus Christ shows us a just man in the person of Saint Peter, who by his fall
teaches us to shun presumption. He brings another out of the same Father,
saying, That God, to show us that we can do nothing without grace, has left
Saint Peter without grace. He cites another out of Saint Chrysostom, saying,
That the fall of Saint Peter happened not out of any coldness in him toward
Jesus Christ; but because grace failed him, and that it happened ^ot so much
through his negligence, as by Gods forsaking of him, purposely to teach the
whole Church, that without God a man can do nothing. Out of all which he draws
the condemned proposition, which is this; The Fathers show us a just man in the
person of Saint Peter, to whom the grace without which a man cannot do any
thing, was wanting.

Upon this do some endeavor, though ineffectually, to discover how it can come
to pass, that the expression of Monsieur Arnauld is as different from those of
the Fathers, as Truth is from Error, and Faith from Heresy. For wherein
consists the difference? Is it that he says, That the Fathers show us a just
man in the person of Saint Peter? They are the very words of Saint Augustine.
Is it that he says, that grace failed him? The same Saint Augustine who
affirmed Saint Peter to be a just man, says also, that upon that particular
occasion grace failed him. Is it that he says, that without grace a man can do
nothing? But is it any more then what Saint Augustine says in the same place;
nay, even what Saint Chrysostom said before him, with this only difference,
that he expresses it more fully, where he says, That his fall happened not
through his coldness or negligence, but through a defect of grace, and the
dereliction of God.

All these considerations held the world in suspense, as desirous to know
wherein this diversity consisted, when at last this so famous and so long
expected censure appears after so many Assemblies. But alas! how strangely has
it eluded our expectation! For whether these good Molinists thought it below
them to give us any information of it, or for some other reason known only to
themselves, they have done no more then barely pronounced these words; This
proposition is temerarious, impious, blasphemous, worthy to be anathematized,
and heretical.

Sir, could you believe it, that abundance of people seeing themselves eluded
as to their hope, begin to grow quarrelsome, and would be revenged on the
Censors themselves? They draw from their carriage strange consequences for the
innocence of Monsieur Arnauld. What, say they, is this all so many Doctors so
cruelly bent against one, could do in so long time, only to find in all his
works but three lines they can object any thing against, which yet are taken
out of the very words of the most eminent Doctors of the Greek and Latin
Churches? Is there any Author that they had a mind to ruin, whose writings
might not afford a more specious pretense? What greater argument can we expect
of the true Faith of this illustrious though censured person?

Whence comes it, say they, that that they are so liberal of imprecations in
the censure, where they faggot together all the most terrible expressions of
poison, pestilence, horror, temerity, impiety, blasphemy, abomination,
execration, Anathema, heresy, which are the most horrid could be uttered
against Arius, nay Antichrist himself, to confute an imperceptible heresy, and
that without making any discovery thereof? If this proceeding be against the
words of the Fathers, where is Faith and Tradition? If against Monsieur
Arnauld's proposition; let them show us wherein it differs from the other,
since we can perceive nothing but a perfect conformity. When we shall be made
sensible of the evil it may contain, we shall abhor it; but while we see no
such thing, and only find the sentiments of the holy Fathers comprehended and
expressed in their proper terms, how can we avoid having an holy veneration
for it?

Thus you see how some are incensed, but they are such as are too
sharp-sighted. For us who dive not very deeply into things, our best course is
to be quiet and to comply. Would we be more learned then our Masters? Let us
not undertake what they avoid, we should lose our selves in this disquisition.
If we should be too strict, it is to be feared the Censure it self would prove
heretical. Truth is a thing so delicate, that when a man is at ever so little
distance from it; he falls into error, but this latter is also of such a fine
thread, that even before a man gets loose from it, he jumps into the truth.
There is but an imperceptible point between this proposition and Faith. The
distance is so insensible, that not perceiving it, I was afraid I should be
opposite to the Fathers of the Church, by agreeing too well with the Doctors of
Sorbonne.

This fear made me address my self to one of those who were neuter in the first
question, to inform my self truly of the business. I went to one I thought the
ablest, whom I entreated to set down the circumstances of this difference,
ingenuously confessing I could not perceive any. To which he replied laughing;
How simple are you to imagine there is any! where should it be? Do you think if
any such were, that the world should not have hear of it, and that they would
not have be glad to expose it to the sight of all those in whose esteem they
would discredit Monsieur Arnauld? By these few words I was satisfied that all
those who were neuters in the first question would not have been such in the
second. However I gave ear to his reasons, and asked him, Why they had set upon
that proposition? Are you ignorant, replied he, how that Monsieur Arnauld has
ever been cautious of saying any thing which was not strongly gounded on the
Tradition of the Church: That his adversaries are nevertheless resolved to cut
him off from all benefit thereof upon any terms whatsoever; And consequently
the writings of the one giving no advantage to the designs of the others, they
have, to satisfy their passion, been forced to take any proposition, and to
condemn it, without giving any account wherein or wherefore? For do you not
see, how the Jansenists keep them still at check, and prosecute them so
violently, that upon the least word they let fall against the principles of the
Fathers, they are presently overwhelmed with whole volumes, or are forced to
submit? So that after so many discoveries of their weakness, they have thought
it more easy and convenient to censure then to reply, because it is less
trouble to find Friars, then Arguments.

But, said I, if it be so, the censure signifies nothing. For what credit will
be given it, when it has no ground, and is destroyed by the answers may be
made thereto? Did you reflect on the imaginations of the people, says the
Doctor, you would speak after another rate. Their Censure, how censurable
soever it may be in it self, will for a season have its effect; and though it
be certain there will be so much pains taken to show its invalidity, that it
will at last be discovered, yet is it withal true, that at the beginning, it
will have as great an influence over the most, as if it were the justest in the
world. For there needs no more then to cry up and down the streets; Come, buy
the Censure against Arnauld. Here Is the condemnation of the Jansenists; the
Jesuits have their will. How few are there that will read it? How few of those
that do read it will understand it? How very few will perceive that it answers
not the Objections? Who do you think will concern himself so much in the
business as to undertake to examine it to the bottom? whence you may infer how
advantageous it will be to such as are adversaries to the Jansenists. They are
sure by this means to triumph, though as they are commonly wont, vainly, at
least for some months. And that is very much as the case stands with them, by
that time they will have bethought them of some other shift to subsist. They
live but from hand to mouth. By these sleights have they kept above water all
this time; as for instance, one while by a Catechism, wherein a child condemns
their Adversaries: Another by a Procession, wherein sufficient grace leads the
efficacious in triumph; one time by a Comedy, wherein the Devils carry away
Jansenius; another by an Almanac, and now by this Censure.

In troth, said I to him, I had erewhile much to object against this procedure
of the Molinists, but having heard what you say, I admire their prudence and
their policy. I now see they could not have done any thing more judiciously or
more securely. You apprehend it right, said he, their surest way has ever been
to be silent; which happily gave a great Divine occasion to say, That the most
able among them, are those who plot much, speak little, and write nothing.

'I was by the suggestion of this spirit, that in the very beginning of the
Assemblies, they had prudently ordered, that if Monsieur Arnauld came into
Sorbonne, it should be simply to discover what he believed, not to engage in
dispute with any one. The examiners not strictly observing this method were a
little at a loss, whence h^ply it came they were so sharply refuted by the
second Apologetick.

From the same Spirit have they derived that rare and wholly new invention of
the half-hour and the sand. They have by that means prevented the importunity
of those tedious Doctors who thought it a certain pleasure to refute their
reasons; to produce the books so to convince them of falsehood; to press them to
answer, and to reduce them to such a nonplus that they had nothing to answer.

Not but that they well saw that this want of freedom which had obliged so
many Doctors to refrain the Assemblies, must ne^ds derogate from the Censure,
and that the act of Monsieur Arnauld would be an ill prologue to usher in a
favorable reception of it. Nay they are satisfied that those who are not
persons to be begged, will give as great weight to the judgment of 70. Doctors,
who could not expect to get any thing by defending Monsieur Arnauld, then to
that of an hundred others who could lose nothing by condemning him.

But all considered, they thought it no small advantage to have a Censure out,
though it were but of a part of Sorbonne, and not of the whole body; though it
were passed with little or no freedom, and procured by little shifts, and
those not the most regular; though it explain nothing of what might be in
controversy; though it express not wherein this heresy consists; and that
there is little said in it, for fear of mistake. Nay this silence is a mystery
to the simple, and the Censure will have this singular advantage thereby that
the greatest Critics and subtilest Divines cannot find any insufficient reason
in it.

You may therefore clear up your thoughts of all fear of being an Heretic, for
admitting and adhering to the condemned proposition; it is not dangerous any
where but in Monsieur Arnaulds second Letter. If you will not take my word,
take Monsieur le Moines, the most violent of the Examiners, who, to a Doctor of
my acquaintance asking him wherein the difference in question consisted, and
whether it were any longer lawful to say what the Fathers said, made this
reply, This proposition were Catholic in any other mouth. It Is only in that
of Monsieur Arnauld that Sorbonne has condemned it. Whence admire the
stratagems of Molinisme, whereby are wrought such strange hurly-burlies in the
Church; That what was sound and Catholic in the Fathers, becomes heretical in
Monsieur Arnauld that what was heretical in the Semipelagians, proves orthodox
in the writings of the Jesuits; that the so ancient Doctrine of Saint Augustine
is insupportable Novelty; and that the new Inventions which are hatched every
day even before our eyes, pass current for the ancient Faith of the Church.
Upon this he took leave of me.

This instruction has restored me to my sight. I learn by it that this heresy
is of a new kind; they are not the opinions of Monsieur Arnauld that are
heretical, it is only his person. It Is a personal Heresy. He Is not an Heretic
for any thing he has either said or written, but only because he is Monsieur
Arnauld. This is all can be objected against him. Let him do what he will, he
shall never be otherwise, till he cease to be at all. The Grace neld by Saint
Augustine shall never be the true grace, while Monsieur Arnauld maintains it.
It would happily be such, did he but once oppose it. It were the surest way,
happily the only means, to establish that, and destroy Molinisme; so much
misfortune do the opinions he embraces derive from him.

But let us have nothing to do with their differences, they are the disputes of
Divines and not of Divinity. We who are no Doctors need not trouble our
thoughts with their Controversies. Communicate the news of the Censure to all
our friends, and afford me your affection so far as you conceive me, Sir,

Paris, Feb. 9. 1656. Your most humble and most dutiful Servant,
E.A.A.B.P.A.F.D.E.P.

To the same. LETTER IV.
Sir,
INcomparable men these Jesuits! I have seen Dominicans, Doctors, nay persons
of most qualities; I wanted only this visit to make me complete. For I see
other men are but their Copies, and things are ever most noble in their
Originals. I had the happiness to meet with one of the most eminent among them,
having no other company then that of my faithful Jansenist, who was with me at
the Dominicans. Being extremely desirous to be better informed about the
difference there is between them and the Jansenists, concerning what they call
actual grace; I addressed my self to the good Father, desiring him to afford me
some little instruction, and explain that term whereof I told him I knew not
the meaning. With all my heart, replied he; I have a particular affection for
the curious. Take the definition of it. By actual grace, we mean, an
inspiration of God, whereby he discovers his will unto us, and stirs up in us a
desire to accomplish it. And what controversy, said I, does this breed between
you and the Jansenists? This, replied he, that we would have God bestow actual
graces on all men in every particular temptation; for we hold, that if a man
have not in every temptation, that actual grace, to restrain him from sinning,
what sin soever he may commit cannot be imputed to him. On the contrary, the
Jansenists affirm, that sins committed without this presence of actual grace,
are nevertheless imputable. But they are a sort of pitiful souls. I guessed at
what he would say, yet to clear it a little more fully, Father, said I to him,
this term of actual grace I know not how to digest, it is a meat I am not used
to, would you but do me the favor to tell me the same thing without using that
term, I should think it a great obligation. To do that said the Father, I am
only to put the definition instead of the definitum, that alters not the sense
of the discourse; with all my heart. We hold then as an undeniable principle.
That an action cannot be imputed as sin, if God before it be committed, give us
not a knowledge of the evil of it, and an inspiration exciting us to avoid it.
Have I now expressed my self home?

I was not a little astonished at the discourse; which granted, all sins of
surprise, and all committed out of a pure oblivion of God, are not to be
imputed: whereupon turning to my Jansenist, I knew by his countenance what
little credit he gave it. But he continuing silent, Father, said I, I wish what
you say were true, and that you could make it good. How? said he, you would
have it proved? you shall be satisfied; be that upon my account. Upon that he
went for his Books, while I and my friend fell into discourse. Did ever m^n
talk thus, said I? Is this such news to you, replied he? Assure your self, that
neither Fathers, nor Popes, nor Councils, nor the Sc^iptures, nor any books of
Devotion even in these last times ever spoke after this rate; but indeed for
Casuists and new Schoolmen, he can easily furnish you. But such, replied I, if
they clash ever so little with Tradition, I can as easily laugh at. You are in
the right; said he to me; at which word, in comes the Father. laden with
books, and presenting me with the first came to his hand; There* said he, read
Father Bauny's Summary of sins, it is the fifth Edition, whence you may infer
the goodness of the Book. It Is pity, said my Jansenist to me whispering, that
this should be condemned at Rome and by the Bishops of France. Turn, said the
Father; to page 906. I did, and found these words, For a man to sin, and stand
guilty in the sight of God, he must know that the thing he is about to do is
naught, or at least doubt, fear, or imagine that God takes no pleasure in the
action wherein he is employed, that he forbids it, and all this
notwithstanding, to do it, to break through the hedge, and exceed his bounds.

A very good beginning, said I to him. But note by the way what Envy is,
replied he. This very passage gave Monsieur Haillor occasion, before he became
one of us, to abuse Father Bauny, applying to him these words, Ecce qui tollit
peccata mundi: Behold him that takes away the sins of the world. It is, said I,
a new kind of redemption this of Father Bauny's.

But would you have a more authentic proof, continued he? take this book of
Father Annats. This is the last of his writing against Monsieur Arnauld, turn
to page 34. where the leaf is turned down, and read the lines I have marked
with black lead, they are golden ones. There I found these words, He who has
not any thought of God, nor yet of his own sins, nor any apprehension, that is,
as he explained it, any knowledge, of the obligation lies upon him to exercise
acts of the love of God, or of contrition, has no actual grace to exercise
those acts; but it must be also acknowledged, that he is not guilty of any sin
if he omit them, and that if he be damned, it will not be for any thing
relating to that omission. And some few lines lower, And the same thing may be
affirmed of sins of commission.

See now, says the Father, how he speaks of the sins of Omission and
Commission; he forgets nothing; what say you to it? I am extremely well
satisfied, replied I; what excellent consequences may be deduced from it, I am
already over head and ears in them! O what what mysteries am I rapt into! I see
a far greater number justified by this ignorance, and forgetfulness of God,
then by Grace and the Sacraments. But, Father, does this any more then bring me
into a fools paradise? Is not this something like that sufficiency which
suffices not? I am extremely afraid of the Distinguo, I have been trapann'd
there already, do you speak sincerely? How, said the Father, a little enflamed;
this is no jesting matter; here is not any equivocation. I am in earnest, said
I to him; but the excess of my desire it should be so, puts me into some fear
it may not.

Take then for your better information, the writings of Monsieur le Moine, who
has taught it openly in Sorbonne. He indeed learnt it first from us, but he
has unravelled the business excellently well. O what a noble structure has he
made of it! He shows that to make an action to be a sin, there is a necessity
all these things be transacted in the soul. Read and weigh every word. I read
in Latin what you find here in English. 1. On the one side God infuses into the
soul a certain love which inclines her toward the thing command^d, and on the
other the rebellious concupiscence presses her to the contrary. 2. God inspires
her with a knowledge of her weakness. 3. God inspires her with a knowledge of
the physician that must cure her. 4. God inspires her with a desire to be
cured. 5. God instills into her a desire to pray to him, and implore his
assistance. Now if all these things pass not in the soul, says the Jesuit, the
action is not properly sin, and consequently not imputable, as Monsieur le
Moine affirms in the same place, and all throughout the discourse. Are you not
yet satisfied with Authorities?

But all modern, whispered my Jansanist. It Is very well, said I, applying my
self to the Father. What an happiness is this for many of my acquaintance, I
must needs make them yours too. It may be you have not met with any burdened
with fewer sins, for they never think of God; Vices have prevented their
reason. They never had the knowledge of their infirmities, nor yet of the
physician that should cure them. Such a desire as that of their souls welfare,
never so much as came into their thoughts, much less that of begging it of God;
so that according to Monsieur le Moine they are yet in their baptismal
innocence. They never were guilty of a though^ of loving God, or being sorry
for their sins, insomuch, that according to Father Annat, they have not
committed any sin, through want of charity and repentance. Their life is a
continual study of all sorts of pleasures and enjoyments, never interrupted by
the least remorse of Conscience. From these extravagances I inferred their
infallible destruction; but Father, you convince me, that they are so many
demonstrations of their salvation; happiness be your reward for this excellent
way of justification. Others cure souls by painful austerities; but you show
us, that those who were thought the most desperately sick, are the best in
health. O the excellent method of living happily both in this and the other
world! I ever was of opinion that a man sinned the more, the less he thought of
God; but for ought I perceive now, when a man has once learned the kn^ck of
not minding him at all, things are in a secure posture for the time to come.
Away, away, half-sinners, who have some little inclination to virtue,
inevitable damnation is their lot. But for these free sinners, obdurate
sinners, dischequer'd sinners, full and fat sinners, Hell cannot hold them;
they have cheated the Devil by complying with him.

The Father perceiving well the connection of these consequences, made an
handsome evasion, and without show of any disturbance, either through good
nature or prudence; that you may see, said he, how we salve all these
inconveniences, know we affirm, that all these impious persons you speak of,
should be without sin, if they never had had thoughts of conversion, or desires
to apply themselves to God. But we hold that they all have, and that God never
suffered any man to sin, having not before given him a sight of the evil he
intends to commit; and withal a desire either to avoid the sin, or at least to
implore his assistance to enable him to shun it; and there are none but
Jansenists that affirm the contrary.

How, Father, replied I, is that the Heresy of the Jansenists, to deny that at
every time a man commits a sin, a certain remorse troubles his Conscience,
notwithstanding which, a man sticks not, as Father Bauny says, to break
through the hedge, and exceed his bounds? It Is very pleasant a man should be an
Heretic for this. I thought men had been damned for not having good thoughts,
but that they should for not believing that all the world have, is a thing I
must confess never came into my thoughts.

But Father, I think my self obliged in conscience to undeceive you; and tell
you, there are thousands have not these desires, sin without the least regret,
and do both rejoice and glory in it. And for this I appeal to your self, who
must needs know it well. No question but you hear the confessions of some of
those I speak of, for it is among persons of quality that it ordinarily
happens. But Father look you to the dangerous consequences of your doctrine. Do
you not perceive what influence it may have on those Libertines who make it
their business to raise doubts about Religion it self? what advantages do you
give them, when you tell them, as an article of Faith, that at the commission
of every sin, they feel a certain mon^tion and internal desire to eschew it?
For is it not evident, that being, by their own experience, convinced that your
doctrine is erroneous even as to that point which you say is of faith, they
will extend the consequences of it to all the rest? They will say, that if you
are not orthodoxal in one article, you are to be mistrusted in all; and so they
will be forced to conclude, either that Religion is false, or that you are but
slenderly instructed in it.

But my second taking up my discourse, it were, Father, said he, more for the
security of your doctrine, not to make so obvious an interpretation, as you
have done, of what you mean by actual grace. For how can you but expect to meet
with the incredulity of many, if you openly declare, That no man sins but he
has beforehand the knowledge of his infirmity, as also that of his physician,
with the desire of being cured, and that of begging it at Gods hands? Will it
be believed, upon your word, that those who are immersed in Avarice,
unchastity, blasphemy, quarrels, revenge, robberies, Sacriledges, have any
real desires to embrace chastity, humility, and the other Christian virtues?

Can any one imagine that those Philosophers who so highly celebrated the power
of nature knew the infirmities and the cure of it? Will you affirm that those
who maintained it as an undeniable Maxim, that virtue is not the gift of God,
and that there never was any person that craved it of him, ever bethought them
to ask it of him themselves?

Who can believe that the Epicureans, who did not acknowledge Divine
Providence, had any motions to pray unto God? when they affirmed, that our
addresses to him are derogatory to his Majesty, as if it were below him to
trouble himself with any thoughts of us or our necessities.

In a word, how can it be imagined that Idolaters and Atheists can have, in all
their temptations, that is, an infinite number of times in their life, any
inclination to pray to the true God, whom they know not, to bestow on them the
true virtues they are ignorant of.

All this, says the good Father very resolutely, we shall affirm, and rather
then acknowledge that a man can sin and not have the sight of his evil-doing,
and an inclination to the contrary virtue, we shall maintain, that all the
world, even Athiests and Infidels have these inspirations and desires in every
temptation. For you cannot, at least by the Scripture, make it appear otherwise.

Upon this I resumed the discourse. How, said I, Father, must we appeal to
Scripture to evince a thing so evident? This is no point of faith, nor indeed
of ratiocination, but merely matter of fact; we see, know, and feel it.

But my Jansenist closing with the Father upon his own terms, If you will not,
said he to him, be satisfied with any thing but Scripture, be it so: but I pray
oppose it not, and since it is written, That God has not revealed his
judgments to the Gentiles, and has suffered them to err in their own ways,
do not affirm that God has enlightened those, whom the holy Writ assures us,
to have been left in darkness and the shadow of death.

Does it not sufficiently convince you that your principle is erroneous, to see
that Saint Paul calls himself the chiefest of sinners, for a sin which he
professes committed out of ignorance, not without zeal?

Is not the Gospel clear enough, that those who crucified Jesus Christ stood in
need of the pardon he begged for them, though they were not sensible of the
malice of their action, and that, according to Saint Paul, they had never done
it if they had known so much?

Is it not Christ's forewarning us, that there will be those that shall
p^rsecute his Church, yet believe they do God serv^ce in their endeavors to
ruin it, enough to let us understand, that this sin, which, according to the
Apostle, is the greatest, may be committed by such as are so far from knowing
they offend, that they believe they should if they did it not? In a word, is it
not enough that Jesus Christ himself has taught us, that there are two kinds
of sinners, one sinning with knowledge, the other without, yet shall be both
punished, though in a different measure?

The good Father pressed by so many proofs out of Scripture, whereto he had
appealed, began to give ground, and admitting impious persons to sin without
inspiration, you will not certainly deny, said he, that the Righteous never sin
but God gives them -- You retreat, you retreat, Father said I to him, and quit
the general principle; and perceiving that it holds not in respect to sinners,
you would compound the business, and make it competible to the Righteous. But,
that granted, the advantage you will make of it will be very inconsiderable,
for the benefit of it will reach to very few; insomuch that it is not worth the
disputing for.

But my second, who had, as I conceive, by his readiness to take all
advantages, studied the question very much that morning, gave him this answer.
You are now, said he to him, gotten into that redoubt which all of your party
that run the hazard of a dispute are forced to: but you lie as open to all
assault as ever, for your example of the just is soon defeated. Who makes it
any question but that even they very frequently fall into sins of surprise, and
when they are not sensible of it. Do we not learn even from the Saints
themselves what trap-doors concupiscence laie^ for them, and that it often
happens, notwithstanding a vigilant sobriety, they sacrifice that to pleasure
which they thought to have b^stowed only on necessity, as Saint Augustine
acknowledges of himself in his Confessions.

How ordinary is it to see even the most zealous transported with passion and
bitterness in dispute through an over-reflection on their own interests; though
their Consciences give them not at that time any other notice save that they
behave themselves so out of a tenderness to truth, and they themselves are not
sensible of it till a long time after?

But what will be said of those who are violently inclined to things really
bad, as believing them really good, (whereof we have many instances in the
Ecclesiastical History) which yet hinders not, but that as the Fathers hold,
they have sinned in those occasions?

Moreover, this not granted, how could the righteous be guilty of secret sins?
How should it be true that God alone knows their greatness and number? insomuch
that no man knows whether he deserve love or hatred, and that the greatest
Saints should always walk in fear and trembling, even though they find not
themselves guilty of any thing, as Saint Paul affirms of himself.

You are therefore to conceive, Father, that the examples as well of the
righteous as sinners do equally overthrow the necessity you suppose there is in
sin, of knowing the evil, and loving the contrary virtue, since the earnestness
of impious persons in their vices, sufficiently discovers they have not the
least inclination to virtue; and that the affection which the righteous have
for virtue, argues very much that they have not always a knowledge of the sins
they daily commit, as is clear out of Scripture.

And that the righteous do sin after this manner it is so certain, that it
seldom happens great Saints offend otherwise. For how can it be imagined that
those sublimated souls, which with so much ardor and aversion, shun the least
things that may displease God, as soon as they are sensible of it, and who yet
commit many sins daily, should have every time, before they fell, the knowledge
of their infirmity on that occasion, as also that of their Physician, together
with the desires of their health and praying to God for his assistance; and
that, notwithstanding all these inspirations, these zealous souls cannot but
exceed their bounds, and commit the sin?

Conclude then, Father, that neither sinners, nor yet the righteous have
always these knowledges, these desires, and all these inspirations as often as
they sin; that is, to use your term, have not a^w^yes actual grace in all
occasions wherein they sin. And affirm not with your upstart Authors that it is
impossible a man should sin, when he knows not justice; but acknowledge rather
with Saint August^ne and the ancient Fathers, that it is impossible he should
not sin, when he is not acquainted with justice. Necesse est ut peccet a quo
ignoratur justitia.

The good Father perceiving his opinion almost defeated as well in regard of
the righteous as sinners, would not yet quit the field; well, said he, after a
little meditation, I have forces enough to rout you yet. Whereupon taking up
Father Bauny in the same place he had sh^wn us before; See, see but the reason
on which he grounds his position; I knew he was not unfurnished with good
proofs. Read there what he cites out of A^istotle, and you shall acknowledge,
that, after so express an authority, you must either bu^n the book of that
Prince of Philosophers, or be of our opinion. Note then the principles Father
B^u^y grounds thereupon. He says in the first place, that an action cannot be
imputed as blame^ble when it is involuntary. I grant it, said my friend to him.
This is the first time, said I to them, that ever I knew you agree about any
thing; if you value my advice, Father, go no further. That would amount to
nothing, said he; for we are to know what conditions are requisite to make an
action voluntary. I am extremely afraid, answered I, that you will fall out
about it. Fear nothing said he, the case is clear, Aristotle is on my side.
Pray mark what Father Bauny says; That an action be voluntary, it is requisite
it should proceed from a man that sees, that knows, that considers well what
there is of good, what of evil in it. Voluntarium est, say we commonly with
this Philosopher (you know, said he to me, wringing me by the hand, who
Aristotle is) quod fit a principio cognoscente singula in quibus est actio. So
that when the will is at random and without any discussion, inclined to
desire, or abhor, to do, or omit a thing, before the understanding could
possibly come in to see whether the evil of it were in prosecuting or eschewing
it, doing or not doing of it, such an action is neither good nor evil, in as
much as before that disquisition, that sight and reflection of the mind upon
the good and bad qualities of the thing wherein a man is employed, the action
whereby it is done is not voluntary.

Now, said the Father, are you not yet satisfied? I should think, replied I,
that Aristotle is of Father Bauny's opinion, yet can I not but much wonder at
it. How, Father, to act voluntarily, is it not enough that the Agent knows what
he does, and that he does it not but because he will do it? but it seems, it is
further requisite, that he see, that he know, and consider well what there is
of good and evil in the action. This granted, humane life will afford but few
voluntary actions, for a man seldom thinks of all this. How many oaths in
gaming, excesses and extravagances in our debauches and enjoyments, which being
not voluntary, are consequently neither good nor bad, because not attended by
these reflections of the mind upon the good and bad qualities of what a man
does? But is it possible, Father, that this should come from Aristotle? I have
heard say, he was a very excellently learned person. I Will clear up the business
to you, says my Jansenist. Whereupon calling for Aristotle's Ethics, he opened
it at the beginning of the third book, whence Father Bauny had taken the words
he had cited out of him: Father, said he, I excuse you for taking it upon the
credit of Father Bauny, that Aristotle was of this opinion; but you would have
been of another mind, had you read him your self. It Is very true he teaches,
that to make an action voluntary a man should know the particularities of that
action, singula in quibus est actio. But what does he mean by this, but the
particular circumstances of the action? as the instances he gives clearly
demonstrate, he producing none but those of such as are ignorant of some one of
the circumstances; as that of a person, who being to show an engine, lets fly
a dart out of it and casually hurts some body; and that of Meropus, who killed
his own son, when he thought to have killed his enemy; and such like.

Hence you may perceive what kind of Ignorance that is which makes an action
involuntary, and that is no other then that of the particular circumstances,
called by Divines, as you very well know, Father, the ignorance of the fact.
But for that of right, that is the ignorance of the good and evil which are in
an action, whereof the present discourse is, let us see whether Aristotle be of
Father Bauny's opinion. These are the words of the Philosopher. All impious
persons are ignorant of what they should do, and what they should avoid; and
this is the very thing that makes them impious and wicked. It cannot therefore
be affirmed, that, because a man is ignorant of what in prudence he ought to
do, to perform his duty, his action is involuntary: For this ignorance which
consists in the election of good and evil, does not cause an action to be
involuntary, but only makes it vicious. The same thing may by said of him who
is genenerally ignorant of the rules of his duty, since such an ignorance
renders him blameworthy and incapable of excuse. In like manner the ignorance
which makes actions involuntary and excusable, is only that which regards
matter of fact in particular, and in its singular circumstances. For then, a
man is pardoned, and excused, and looked on as a person that has done a thing
against his will.

Now, Father, will you still affirm th^^ Aristotle is of your opinion? And who
but may very well be astonished, to see a heathen Philosopher more illuminated,
then your Doctors, in a business, wherein not only Morality, but even the
conduct of men's souls is so highly concerned, as that of the knowledge of the
conditions which make actions voluntary, or involuntary, and consequently
render them excusable or inexcusable as to matter of sin? Have then, no more to
do, Father, with the Prince of Philosophers, but submit to the Prince of
Divines, who thus decides this controversy, in his Retractations, Lib. 1. c.
15. Those who sin out of ignorance, do not their action but because they will
do it, though they sin, when they would not sin. And so this sin of of
ignorance cannot be committed but through the will of him that does commit it,
but by a will inclining to the action and not to the sin, which yet does not
exempt the action from being a sin, because, for that, there needs no more then
that a man do what he is obliged not to do.

Here the Father was at a loss, but much more for the passage out of
Aristotle, then that out of St Augustine. But while he was pumping for
something to say, word was brought him that the Lady -- and the Lady
Marchioness -- staid to speak with him. Whereupon, leaving us in haste, I shall
acquaint our Fathers with it, said he, no question but they will find something
to reply; we have those here that are very subtle.

We gave him the hearing; upon which being alone with my friend, I discovered
to him my astonishment at the confusion which this doctrine would breed in
Morality. To which he answered, that he wondered at my astonishment; are you
yet ignorant that their extravagances are far greater in Morality then in
doctrine? He gave very strange instances, and adjourned the rest till another
time. I hope it will be the subject of our next conference.

I am, etc.
Paris. Febr. 25. 1656. S. N.
To the same. LETTER V.
Sir,
I Am now to perform the promise I made in my last, that is, to give you an
essay of the Morality of our good Fathers the Jesuits, those eminent men for
learning and prudence; a sort of people that have the pillar of divine wisdom
going before them, a surer guide then any thing of Philosophy. You happily think
I do but jest; no, I speak it seriously, or indeed they speak it themselves. I
do but transcribe their own words, and that, as truly as in the ensuing
panegyric. It is that society of men, Angel^ I should have said, whereof
Isaiah has prophesied in these words, Go you swift and ready Angels. Is not
the Prophecy clear enough? They are Eagle-like spirits, a flight of Phenixes,
there being an Author, who not long since has demonstrated that there are more
then one. They have changed the face of all Christendom. This must be believed
when they affirm it; you shall find it so in the sequel of this discourse,
which will acquaint you with their Maxims.

I have taken a great deal of pains to inform my self, as being not
over-confident of what I had learned of my friend. I would needs be an ocular
witness, but am satisfied he told me nothing but what was true. I think he is
never mistaken, as you shall find by the account you have of these conferences.

In that I had with my friend, he entertained me with things so infinitely
pleasant that my Faith was as the eye of a needle in respect of a Camel; but
showing them to me in the Fathers books, I had nothing to say by way of
alleviation, but that they were the sentiments of some few among them, which it
were not just to charge the whole body with. To give it the more weight, I
assured him of my acquaintance with some of them as remarkable for their
severity as those he quoted were for their circumspection. With that he drew
the curtain and discovered the interior of the Society, known to few in the
world, which happily you will be glad to understand.

You imagine, said he to me, that you have done them abundance of right by
showing that there are some Fathers among them as conformable to evangelical
maxims as others are disconsonant, and thence conclude that these extravagant
opinions ought not to be put upon the score of the whole society. I easily
grant it. For if they were, they would not suffer among them such as should be
so contrary thereunto. But since there are among them such as advance
principles so licentious, there is the same obligation to infer, that the spirit
of the society is not that of Christian austerity. For if it were, they would
not admit members that should so much oppose it. What then, answered I, is the
main design of the whole body? It must certainly be thought they have not any
assured scope, and that every one is at liberty to speak at random what he
thinks. That cannot be, replied he; such a vast body cannot subsist by a
temerarious conduct, and without a soul to dispose and regulate its motions:
Besides that there is a particular order among them that nothing be printed
without consultation with their superiors. But how, said I, can the same
superiors approve Maxims so different? That, replied he, I shall easily clear
up to you.

Know then, that they do not endeavor the corruption of good manners; no,
that is not their design; but note withal, that it is not their main drift to
reform them. That were no good policy. Take then their grounds. They are so
well opinion'd of themselves as to believe, it is for the advantage and benefit
of Religion that their reputation be universal, and that they have the disposal
of all Consciences. And whereas the maxims of Evangelical severity are more
convenient for the government of some, they make use of them upon such
occasions as contribute to their design; but the same maxims being not equally
serviceable as to a many others, when they are to deal with such, they omit
them, that so they may comply with all.

Being therefore engaged to deal with all sorts of persons, and those of
several conditions and nations, it is but requisite they should have Casuists
suitable to this diversity.

From this principle you may easily judge, that if they had not any but these
licentious Casuists, their main design wou^d be soon frustrated, which is, to
grasp all the world, since those who are truly pious put themselves under
another conduct. But as there are not many of this humor, so need they but few
severe directions to guide them. Few sheep require fewer shepherds; whereas the
swarm of remiss Casuits are employed to satisfy those who seek after remisness
and Liberty.

It is by this obliging and complying conduct, as Father Pe^avius calls it,
that they embrace all the world. For if there come to them one resolved to make
restitution of goods unjustly gotten, it is not to be feared they will divert
him. On the contrary, they will encourage and confirm him in so holy a
resolution. But let another come who would be absolved without restitution, it
shall go very hard but they will contrive a way to dismiss him well satisfied.

Thus do they preserve their friends and oppose their enemies. For if they are
charged with any more then ordinary remisness, they immediately bring upon the
stage their austere directors, and certain books they have published concerning
the rigor of the Christian law; and the simple, and those who make no deep
scrutinies into things, patiently swallow it down for good satisfaction.

Thus are they furnished for all customers, and answer so pertinently what they
are asked, that when they are in a Country where the belief of a crucified God
is accounted extravagance, they smother the scandal of the Cross, and preach
up a glorified Jesus Christ, not a suffering Jesus Christ. This course they
took in the Indies and in China, where they have permitted the Christians to
commit Idolatry, by a subtle invention, viz. that of injoyning them to hide
under their cloths an image of Jesus Christ, to which they teach them, by a
mental reservation, to direct those public adorations, which they render the
Idol Oachim-choan, and their Keum-fucum, as Gravina, a Dominican lays it to
their charge, and as may be seen in certain papers in the Span sh tongue,
presented to Philip the Fourth of Spain, by the Franciscans of the Philippine
Islands, cited by Thomas Hurtado in his book of Martyrdom for the Faith, page
427. Insomuch that the Congregation of Cardinals, de propaganda fide, was
forced to give the Jesuits a particular prohibition, that they should not,
under any pretense whatsoever, upon pain of Excommunication, permit those
idolatrous adorations, and so conceal the mystery of the Cross from those
they instructed in Christian Religion; enjoining them expressly not to admit any
to Baptism till after that knowledge, as also to expose in their Churches the
image of the Crucifix, as may be seen in the Decree of that Congregation, dated
the 9. of July 1646. signed by the Cardinal Caponi.

By these means do they, like Locusts, cover the face of the earth, with the
help of a Monster called, The doctrine of probable opinions, the source of this
torrent of irregularities. This you must understand from themselves. For they
are not so shie as to conceal it from any, no more then what you have already
heard, with this difference nevertheless, that they disguise their humane
prudence and policy under the notion of Divine and Christian wisdom, as if
Faith, and the Tradition whereby it is maintained, were not always the same
and unchangeable in all times and all places; as if the rule should apply it
self to the thing that is to be measured by it; and as if souls, to be cleans'd
from their imperfections, were only to corrupt the Law of the Lord, whereas
the Law of the Lord is holy and without blemish, such as does convert souls,
and make them conformable to his saving instructions.

Do but go among those good Fathers, and I am confident, your own observation
will satisfy you, that their doctrine concerning Grace proceeds from looseness
in Morality. You will find Christian virtues such strangers, both to them and
charity, whereby they live and are informed; you will find such palliations of
crimes, and such disorders countenanced, that it will be no longer a miracle to
you, their maintaining that all men have at all times grace enough to live
piously, as they understand it. But their Morality not exceeding that of
Pagans, it is within the reach of Nature to observe it. When we affirm a
necessity of efficacious grace, we assign other virtues for its object. It is
not simply to cure some vices by others; it is not only to engage men in the
exercises of the external duties of Religion; it is to arrive at a higher
virtue then that of the Pharisees, and the wisest Heathens. The law and reason
are graces sufficient to produce these effects. But to disingage the soul from
the love of this world; to deprive her of what she thinks dearest; to work in
her a self-mortification; to elevate and unite her absolutely and unchangeably
to her God; this, this is not the work of any but an Almighty hand. And it were
irrational for a man to pretend, that he has always full power, a^ it were to
deny, that these virtues, destistitute of the love of God, which these good
Fathers confound with Christian virtues, are not in our power.

This was his discourse, burdened with abundance of passion, for he is
extremely troubled at these disorders. For my part, I had a certain esteem for
these good Fathers, for the excellency of their Politics; and so, according to
his advice I went to an honest Casuist of the Society, whom having known a long
time, I thought this a good occasion to renew my acquaintance with him. Being
well enough instructed how they are to be treated; I found it no hard matter to
do it. His entertainment was infinitely kind, for he loves me still; and after
some indifferent discourse, I took occasion, from the season we now are in, to
learn something of him concerning Fasting, so to enter insensibly into the
business. I told him it was very burdensome to me to fast; he exhorted me to do
my self a little violence, but I continuing my complaints, he was moved at it,
and fell to bethink him of some reasons of dispensation. He indeed found a
many, which yet I could not make any advantage of, till at last he bethought
him to ask me, whether, going to bed supperless, I was not much troubled to
sleep. I am indeed, Father, said I, which forces me many times to make a
collation at noone, and sup at night. I am very glad, replied he, that I have
found out this way to ease you, without sin; go, go you are not obliged to fast
at all. But you shall not take it upon my word neither, come into the Library.
I went; and there taking out a book, here is that will prove it, said he, (God
knows how!) This is Escobar. Who is that Escobar, said I? How? do you not know
one Escobar, of our Society, who has compiled this Moral Divinity, out of
twenty four of our Fathers; whereupon he has in the Preface, made an allegory
between this book, and that of the Apocalypse, which was sealed with seven
seals. And he says, that Jesus offers it so sealed to the four living
creatures, Suarez, Vasquez, Molina, Valentia, in the presence of twenty four
J^suites who represent the twenty four Elders. He read the whole Allegory which
he found very pat, and by which he gave a great Idea of the excellency of that
work. Having afterward sought out his passage concerning fasting; here, I have
it, said he; Is he, who having not supped, cannot sleep, obliged to fast, or
no? Not at all. Are you not satisfied? Not absolutely said I, for I can make a
shift to fast if I but take a collation in the morning and sup at night. Why
then take the consequence along with you, said he, they have omitted nothing.
And what will you say, if a man can content himself with a collation in the
morning so he sup at night? That Is my case. He is never the more obliged to
fast. For no man is obl g'd to break the order of his meals. A most pregnant
reason, said I to him; But tell me I pray, continued he, do you drink much
wine? No Father, said I, my constitution will not bear it. This I said, replied
he, purposely to give you notice that you might drink of it in the morning, and
at any other time of the day without breaking your fast; and you know, that
nourishes somewhat. Take the question decided. May a man drink wine at any time
when he pleases, and that in a considerable quantity, without breaking his
fast? He may, nay if he please, Hypocras. I had clearly forgot that same
Hypocras, said he, I must needs put it into my Catalogue. 'Twas an honest
fellow, and a good fellow, this Escobar, said I. All the world's in love with
him, replied the Father, he starts out such pleasant questions. Here Is another
of them in the same place* If a man doubts whether he be 21 years of age, is he
obliged to fast or no? No. But put the case I am 21 years of age just at one of
the clock this night, and that to morrow be a fasting day, shall I be obliged
to fast to morrow? No. for you may eat as much as you please from midnight
till one of the clok, for you are not yet arrived to the 21 year of your age;
and consequently having a right to break the fast, you are not obliged to keep
it. Excellent diversion, said I! The best in the world, replied he, I read him
day and night; nay can hardly do any thing else The good Father was almost out
of himself to see me so pleased with it; and continuing, observe, says he,
this touch of Filiutius, one of those 24 Jesuits. He who has over-wearied
himself about any thing, as for instance, in satisfying a Wench, is he obliged
to fast or no? By no means. But suppose he has so over-wearied himself out of
a set purpose to be dispensed withal from fasting, shall he nevertheless be
excused? Though what he did was merely the effect of such a formal design, yet
shall he not be obliged to fast. Well, could you have believed so much, said
he? In troth, Father, said I, I am not yet fully persuaded of it. What, is it
not a sin, not to fast when a man may do it? Or is it lawful to hunt ou^ the
opportunities of firming? Or is not a man rather obliged to eschew them? This
certainly were a great convenience. Not always, said he, it is according --
According to what, said I? This, replied the Father, if a man should find any
inconvenience in avoiding those opportunities, were a man in your judgment
obliged to avoid them? Father Bauny holds the negative. They, says he, ought
not be denied absolution, who remain in the very next degrees to sinning, if
they are in such a condition that they cannot quit them without giving the
world occasion to talk of them, or running into some inconvenience thereby.
You tell me very good news, Father, said I, there is no more now to be said, but
that a man may make it his business to seek out those opportunities, since it
is lawful for him not to avoid them. Nay it is lawful to do so, added he; the
famous Casuist Bazilius Pontius affirms it; and Father Bauny citing him,
confirms his judgment, which in his Treatise Of Repentance, Qu. 4 page 94. is
this, A man may seek out an opportunity, directly and out of set purpose (primo
and per se) when the spiritual or temporal concernment of our selves or our
neighbor inclines him thereto.

In troth, Father, said I, I think my self not awake when I hear religious men
talk after this rate! speak conscientiously, are you of this opinion? No truly,
said the Father. Then, said I, you speak against your conscience? Not at all,
said he; I did not speak in that according to my conscience, but according to
that of Pontius and Father Bauny. And you may safely follow where they lead,
for they are excellent men. How, Father, because they have put these three
lines into their books, shall it be lawful to seek the opportunities of
sinning? I thought we should have taken no other rule then that of the
Scripture and the Tradition of the Church, not that of your Casuists. Nay then,
cries out the Father, you put me in mind of these Jansenists. Do you think that
Father Bauny and Bazilius Pontius cannot make good their opinions, as probable?
I am not satisfied with probability. I look for security. I see then, says the
good Father, you understand nothing of the Doctrine of Probable Opinions, which
if you did, you would talk after another rate. I must needs take a little pains
with you, as to that point, you will not repent your coming hither, for without
that, you can understand nothing, it being the foundation, and A. B. C. of all
our Morality. I was very glad to see him fallen upon the subject where I would
have had him; whereupon I took occasion to entreat him to explain what a
probable opinion was. Our Authors, said he, will give you a better accout of it
then I can. Thus they generally describe it all, and among others our twenty
four. An Opinion is then called probable, when it is grounded upon reasons of
some consideration. Whence it sometimes comes to pass, that the authority of
one grave Doctor may render an opinion probable. The reason this; That a man
absolutely devoted to study, would not maintain an opinion, if he were not
induced to do it, by a good and sufficient reason. Which granted, said I, one
only Doctor may turn men's consciences topsie turvy, and yet all will be
secure. You must neither laugh at, nor think to oppose this doctrine; the
^^deavours of the Jansenists to do it, proved ineffectual; no, it is too well
grounded to be so shaken. Mark what Sanchez, one of the most eminent of our
Fathers, says; You happily question whether the authority of one good and
learned Doctor renders an opinion probable? To Which I answer, it does. And
this is affirmed by Angelus, Sylv. Navarr. Emanuel Sa. etc. It is thus proved.
A probable opinion is that which is grounded upon something considerable, But
the authority of a knowing and godly man is of no small consideration, but
rather of great consideration. For, take the reason along with you; if the
testimony of such a man be of great weight to assure us that such a thing
happened, for instance, at Rome, why shall it not have the same effect in a
question of Morality?

The comparison, said I, deduced from the things of this world to matters of
conscience, is very pleasant! Have patience, replied he; Sanchez answers that
in the lines next ensuing. And the restriction which some Authors make in this
case, I do not approve, viz. that the Authority of such a Do^tor is sufficient
as to the things of humane right, but not in those of Divine. For it is of
great weight in both.

Father, said I, to deal freely with you* I shall not stand to this rule. What
assurance have I, that your Doctors taking so much freedom to examine things
by reason, what seems certain to one will seem such to all the rest, there
being such a strange diversity of judgments; -- You understand not the case,
says the Father, interrupting my discourse; they are indeed often of several
opinions, but that breaks no squares. Every one makes his own good and
probable. There Is nothing so clear as that they are not all of the same
judgment; nay, on the contrary, they never almost agree, and yet all this makes
for the best. There are few questions, wherein one does not hold the
affirmative, the other the negative, yet in all these cases both the one and
the other of the contradictory opinions, is probable. Whence Diana upon a
certain occasion, said, Pontius and Zanchez are of contrary opinions, but,
being both learned men, either makes his opinion probable.

But, Father, said I, a man must needs be at a great loss which to embrace. Not
at all, says he, he is only to follow the opinion he is most inclined to.
What though the other be the more probable? It matters not, said he. And the
other more certain? It matters not, says the Father again; take it explained
by Emanuel Sa, of our Society. A man may do what he conceives lawful, according
to a probable opinion, though the contrary be the more certain. For this the
opinion of one grave Doctor is sufficient. But if an opinion be both less
probable and less certain, may a man lawfully follow it, discarding what he
believes more probable and more sure? Once more, he may, said he: hear
Filiutius, that great Jesuit of Rome. It is lawful to follow the less probable
opinion, though it be the less certain. It is the common opinion of the more
modern Authors. Are you not satisfied? We are indeed now at random, Father,
said I, gramercy your probable opinions. This is an excelent liberty of
conscience. But for you Casuists, may you take the same freedom in your
Answers? We do, says he, and so answer what we think good, or rather what we
conceive will prove most satisfactory to those that ask us. For these are our
directions, taken out of our Fathers, Layman, Vasquez, Sanchez, and our 24.
These are the words of Layman, whom the book of our 24 has followed. A Doctor
being consulted, may give an advice, not only such as is probable according to
his own opinion, but what is contrary to his opinion, if so it be accounted
probable by others, especially when this advice, though contrary to his
judgment, happens to be more acceptable, and more for the interest of him that
consults him; (Si forte haec illi favorabilior seu exoptatior sit.) But I hold
further, that it will be prudence in him, to give those who come to him, such
advice as is held as probable by some knowing person, though he himself be
convin^'d that it is absolutely false.

In troth, Father, your doctrine will fall on its feet. May a man answer
affirmatively or negatively as he pleases? It Is an advantage cannot well be
valued. You have wrought a miracle on me, I now see what benefit you make of
these contrary doctrines which your Doctors advance upon all occasions. For one
you may make your advantages of, and the other never hurts you. Your bets are
so secure, that if you lose by the one side, you get by the other. It Is very
true, says he, and we may at any time say with Diana, who, having Father Bauny
for him, when Father Lugo was against him, said, Sape premente Deo, fert D^us
alter opem; if one God charges us too h^^d* another relieves us.

I am illuminated, said I; yet still there sticks one thing in my stomach. When
a man has consulted one of your Doctors, and received from him an opinion
somewhat too large, he will be merely trapann'd, if he meet a Confessor, who,
not being of the same, will deny him absolution if he alter not his judgment.
Have you made no provision in that case? Do you question it, replied he? All
Confessors are obliged to absolve their penitents holding probable opinions,
under pain of mortal sin, the more to mind them of their duty, this is clear
out of our Fathers, and among others, Father Bauny. When the patient, says he,
follows a probable opinion, the Confessor is bound to absolve him, though his
judgment be contrary to that of the penitent. But he does not affirm it a
mortal sin not to absolve him. How ready you are to catch? says he, take what
follows; he categorically concludes, That to deny absolution to a penitent who
walks according to a probable opinion, is a sin, in its own nature mortal. And
to confirm this opinion he cites three of our most eminent Fathers, Suarez,
Vasquez, and Sanchez.

O Father, said I, with what prudence do you order all things! We need not fear
any thing now, the Confessor must do his duty. I knew not before that you had
the power to ordain any thing under pain of Damnation. I thought your
Commission reached no further then to take away sins, and never imagined you
could introduce any. But for ought I see you are omnipotent. You do not speak
properly, said he; we do not introduce sins, we only take notice of them. I
have already observed twice or thrice that you are no good School-man. Howere
it be, Father, said I, I am satisfied as to that doubt, but I have another to
propose to you, which is, that I know not what shift to make when the ancient
Fathers are contrary to the opinions of any of your Casuists.

You are extremely to seek in the business, said he. The Fathers were good for
the Morality of their times; but they are far short of that of ours. It is not
therefore to be regulated by them, but by the new Casuists. Hear our Father
Cellot, who, as to this point, seconds our famous Father Reginaldus; In
Questions of Morarality the modern Casuists are to be preferred before the
ancient Fathers, though they were nearer the times of the Apostles. And it is
according to this tenent, that Diana speaks after this manner: Are beneficed
persons obliged to make restitution of their revenue, when they mis-imploy it?
The Ancients affirmed they were, but the Modern hold they are not; let us not
therefore quit this opinion which acquits a man from the obligation of making
restitution. These are excellent good words, said I, and furnished with
consolations for the goods of this world. For the Fathers, said he, we deliver
them up to those that handle positive Divinity, but for us who govern men's
consciences, we seldom read them, and, in our writings quote only the modern
Casuists. What an extravagant writer is our Diana! There is before his books a
lift of all the Authors he cites. There you will find two hundred ninety and
six, whereof the most ancient is within eighty years. This then is an humor
come into the world since your Society, said I: Thereabouts, replied he. My
meaning, Father, is, that at your appearance, Saint Augustine, Saint
Chrysostom, Saint Ambrose, Saint Hierome, and the rest, vanished out of sight,
as to matter of Morality. But I would fain know the names of those that have
succeeded them; who are those modern Authors? They are very excellent men, and
very famous, said he; They are, Villalobos, Conink, Llamas, Achokier,
Dealkozer, Dellacruz, Vera-Cruz, Vgolin, Tambourin, Fernandez, Martinez,
Suarez, Henriquez, Vasquez, Lopez, Gomez, Sanchez, De Vecchis, De Grassis, De
Grassalis, De Pitigianis, De Graphacis, Squilanti, Bizozeri, Barcola, De
Bobadilla, Simancha, Perez, De Lara, Aldretta, Lorca, De Scarcia, Quaranta,
Scophra, Pedrezza, Cabrezza, Bisbe, Dias, De Clavasio, Villagut, Adam a Manden,
Itibarn, Binsfeld, Volfangi a Vorberg, Vosthery, Streuesdorf. O Father, said I,
a little frightened, were all these Christians? How, Christians, replied he? Did
I not tell you that these are the men by whom we govern Christendom at this
day? This somewhat troubled me, but not discovering any thing of disturbance, I
only asked him whether all those Authors were Jesuits. No, said he, but it
matters not, they have left excellent things behind them. Not but that the
greatest part of them have either derived from, or imitated our Fathers; but we
stand not upon terms of honor: Besides, they cite our Fathers ever and anon,
and that very honorably. Thus Diana, who is not of our Society, speaking of
Vasquez, calls him, the Phoenix of Wits; and sometimes he says, that, Vasquez
al ne amounts to as much with him, as all man kind besides, instar omnium. In
like manner our Fathers often quote this gallant Diana; for if you well
understand our doctrine of probability, you will find this will breed no
controversy. On the contrary, we heartily wish others, besides the Jesuits,
were able to render their opinions probable, that all such might not be imputed
to us. And when any Author whatsoever has advanced any one, we have a right to
take it by the doctrine of probable opinions, yet so that we are not
accountable for it, when the Author is not of our body. All this I understand
ve^^ well, said I, and see that any thing will find entertainment among you,
but the ancient Fathers, and that you are the Masters of the field, and need no
more then drive all before you.

But I foresee three or four great inconveniences and strong turn-pikes which
will check your pursuit. What, I pray, says the Father amazed? Scripture, said
I, Popes and Councils, whom you cannot give the lie to, and who are all in the
only way of the Gospel. And is that all, said he? you have put me into a cold
sweat. Do you imagine that a thing so visible has not been foreseen, and that
we have not made provision for it accordingly? I cannot but wonder you should
think that we are opposite to the Scripture, Popes, and Councils. I must
convince you of the contrary. It would trouble me you should think we are
forgetful of the duty we owe them. Certainly you have this imagination from
some opinions of our Fathers, which seem to offer some violence to their
Decisions, when indeed there is no such thing. But to understand the Harmony
there is between them, requires more leisure. I wish you should not entertain
any sinister thoughts of us. If we meet to morrow, I shall clear up the
business to you. Here the conference ended, and so shall this discourse; it is
pretty fair for a Letter. With a confidence you will content your self with
this, till you have what is behind. I rest, etc.

Paris, March 20. 1656.
To the same. LETTER VI.
Sir,
IN the conclusion of my last Letter, I told you how that the good Father, the
Jesuit, promised to acquaint me how the Casuists reconcile the contrarieties
which happen between their opinions and the D^cisions of the Popes, Councils,
and the Scripture. And indeed he has given me good satisfaction as to that
point in my second visit, of which you have this present account; wherein you
will find me more exact then in the other. For I brought a Table Book with me,
to set down the citations of passages, being not a little troubled I had not
done it the first time. But if you make any doubt of those I have cited in the
other Letter, let me know so much, and I shall easily give you satisfaction.

The good Father's discourse was to this effect. One of the ways whereby we
reconcile these apparent contradictions, is, by the interpretation of some
term. For instance. Pope Gregory XIV. has declared that Murderers are
unworthy the benefit of taking sanctuary in Churches, and that they are to be
forced from thence; whereas our 24 Ancients, page 660. affirm, That those who
kill any one treacherously ought not to incur the penalty of that Bull. This,
to you, seems contradictory, but it is reconciled, by interpreting the word
Murderer as is done, by these words: Are Murderers unwo^thy to enjoy the
privilege of taking sanctuary in Churches? According to the Bull of Gregory
XIV. they are. But we understand, by the word Murderers, those, who have
received money to kill any one treacherously. Whence it comes to pass, that
those who kill without receiving any reward, but do it only to oblige their
friends, are not called Murderers. In like manner, it is said in the Gospel,
Give Alms of your superfluities. Luke 11.41. Vulg. Lat.
And yet diverse Casuists have found out a way to exempt even the richest
persons from this obligation of giving alms. This you think another
contradiction, but the reconciliation is easily discovered, by interpreting the
word superfluity, insomuch that it seldom or never happens that any one is
troubled with any such thing. And this is done by the learned Vasquez in this
manner, in his treatise of Alms, cap. 4. Whatever men lay up out of a design
to raise their own fortunes or those of their relations, is not called
superfluous. For which reason it will be hard to find any among those that are
worldly-minded, that have ought superfluous, no, not even among Kings.

With him agrees Diana, citing these very words of Vasquez, for he ordinarily
grounds all he says on our Fathers, and so concludes very handsomely; That, in
this question, Wheteer rich men are obliged to give alms out of their supe
fluity? though the affirmative be true, yet it will seldom or never happen,
that it is obligatory in point of practice.

I am sat^sfied, Father, said I, that this must follow out of the doctrine of
Vasqu^z. But if it be objected, that, for a man to work out his salvation, it
were as sure a way for him, according to Vasquez, to be guilty of ambition
enough that so he may have nothing superfluous, as it is according to the
Gospel, not to be ambitious at all, that so he may give alms out of his
superfluities, how will you answer it? It may be answered, said he, that both
these ways are equally secure according to the same Gospel; one, according to
the Gospel, in the more literal, and more obvious sense; the other according to
the same Gospel interpreted by Vasquez. Whence you see the benefit of these
interpretations.

But when the terms are so clear as not to admit any explanation, then we make
the best advantage we can of the most favorable circumstances, as you shall
see in this example. The Popes have excommunicated those Religious men that
quit their habit, and yet our 24 Ancients stick not to discourse thus, page
704. In what cases may a Religious man quit his habit without running the
hazard of Excommunication? He instances in many, and among others this. If he
quit it upon some infamous occasion, as for to go and steal, or to go,
incognito, to uncivil places, as the Stews, intending to resume it again as
soon as he has done. And indeed it is evident the Bulls mention not any of
these cases.

This I could hardly believe, and therefore entreated the Father to show it me
in the original, and found that the Chapter wherein these words are, is
entitled; The Practice according to the School of the Society of Jesus, Praxis
ex Societatis Jesu schola: and here I found these words, si habitum dimittat,
ut furetur occulte, vel fornicetur. The same thing he also showed me out of
Diana, in these terms, ut eat incognitus ad Lupanar. But how comes it, Father,
said I, that they acquit them of excommunication in this case? Do you not
apprehend the reason, said he? Do you not perceive how scandalous it were to
surprise a religious man in that condition with his religious habit on? And
have you not heard what answer was made to the first Bull, Contra
sollicitantes? And how our twenty four in a particular chapter, Of the Practice
of the School of our Society, explain the Bull of Pius Quintus, Co^tra
Clericos, etc. I know nothing of all this, replied I. Then you are not much
versed in Escobar, said he. I had it not till yesterday, said I, and I had much
ado to find one. I know not what is happened lately, that all the world
enquires after him. No other reason, replied the Father, then what I told you,
in page 117. see it at your leisure. You will there find an excellent example
of the manner of interpreting Bulls favorably. I indeed looked into him that
very night, but I dare not give you any account of it, it is a thing so horrid
and abominable.

The good Father proceeded in his discourse. You now understand what use we
make of favorable circumstances. But there are sometimes such as are so
precise, that they contribute nothing to the reconciliation of the
contradictions, insomuch that in such a case you might well think there really
were some. For example; three Popes have decided, that the Religious, who, by a
particular vow, are obliged to observe a quadragesimal life, are not dispensed
of that vow, though they should be made Bishops. And yet Diana says, that
notwithstanding their decision they are dispensed of it. How, I pray, does he
salve it, said I? By the most subtle of all the new methods, replied the
Father, and the most refined part of Probability. I Will explain it to you: It is
as you observed the other day, that both the affirmative and negative of most
opinions have a certain probability, according to the judgment of our Doctors,
that is, enough to induce a man to follow them with a safe conscience. Not that
the pro and con are equally true in the same sense, that be ng impossible, but
only that they are probable, and secure in their consequences.

According to this principle it is, that our good Friend Diana speaks thus,
part 5. tr. 13. R. 39. As to the decision of these three Popes, since it is
contrary to my opinion; I answer, that they have spoken in that manner out of
their inclination to the affirmative, which indeed is probable, even in my
judgment; but it does not follow thence but that the negative may also have its
probability. And in the same Treatise, R. 65. upon another occasion, wherein,
as before, he is of an opinion contrary to that of a Pope, he speaks thus; That
the Pope has said it, as head of the Church, I acknowledge; but what he has
done, is, as to his judgment, within the sphere of probability. You see then
that this derogates nothing from the judgments of Popes, for if it did, it
would not be suffered at Rome, where Diana is in so great reputation. For he
does not affirm that what the Popes have decided is not probable, but,
comprehending their opinion within the sphere of probability, he sticks not to
hold the contrary to be also probable. This speaks abundance of respect in him,
said I. Nay it is more subtle, replied he, then the answer which Father Bauny
made when they had censured his books at Rome. For he let fall this word
against Monsieur Hallier, who persecuted him tooth and nail; what community is
there between the censure of Rome and that of France? Whence you may easily
perceive, that, either by the interpretation of the terms, or by observation
of the favorable circumstances, or lastly by the cross-probability of the pro
and con, we reconcile all these imaginary contradictions which you were
startled at before, without doing any violence to the decisions of the
Scripture, Councils, and Popes, as you plainly see. Well, reverend Father, said
I, the Church is infinitely happy that you are her defenders. How advantageous
are these probabilities? I knew not upon what ground you had taken so much
pains to establish, that one only Doctor, if grave, may render an opinion
probable, but that the contrary might be so too, and then a man may choose
either pro or con as he thinks best, although he do not believe it certain, and
all with so much safety of conscience, that a Confessor, who should deny
absolution upon the credit of these Casuists, were in the state of damnation.
Whence I apprehend that one particular Casuist, may, at his pleasure, make new
rules in Morality, and dispose, according to his humor, whatever relates to
the conduct of the Church. You must, said the Father, admit some moderation in
what you say. Observe well what I am going to tell you; it is our method,
wherein you will see the progress of an opinion, from its first beginnings to
its maturity.

In the first place, the grave Doctor who has found it out, exposes it to the
world, and casts it abroad as a seed to take root. While it is in this
condition, it is weak, but time must ripen it by degrees. Upon which account,
Diana, who has introduced a many, says in one place, I advance this opinion,
but because it is as yet new, I leave it to be ripened by time; relinquo
tempori maturandam. Accordingly in a few years it insensibly gathers strength,
and after a considerable time, it is authorized by the silent approbation of
the Church, according to that excellent maxim of Father Bauny; That an opinion
being advanced by some Casuists, if the Church oppose it not, it is an evident
argument that she approves it. And indeed by this principle does he confirm an
opinion of his, in his sixth Treatise, page 312. How, said I, Father, by this
account* the Chu ch would be thought to approve all those abuses which she
suffers, and all those erroneous opinions in books which she censures not?
Dispute it, said he, with Father Bauny; I only give you a relation, and you
would debate the business with me. You must never dispute matter of fact. I was
telling you, that when time has thus brought an opinion to maturity, then is
it absolutely porbable and sure. And thence it comes, that the learned
Caramuel, in the Letter wherein he directs his fundamental Theologie^ to Diana,
says, that that great Diana, had rendered diverse opinions probable which were
not such before, quae ante anon erant; and consequently that a man sins no
longer in following them, whereas before he did sin, jam non peccant, l^cet
ante peccaverint.

Truly Father, said I, there is much edification to be got by your Doctors. Of
two persons that do the same things, he who knows not their doctrine, sins; he
who does, sins not. It is therefore at the same time both instructive and
justificative. The law of God made men sinners, according of Saint Paul; but
this makes almost all innocent. I beseech you, Father, instruct me fully as to
this point, I will not leave you till you have acquainted me with the principal
maxims which your Casuists have established.

Alas! said the Father to me, it should have been our principal end, not to
establish any other maxims then those of the Gospel in all their severity. Nor
is it less evident from the regulation of our Manners, that if we suffer any
freedom in others, it is rather out of compliance then design; we are indeed
forced to it. Men are now arrived to such a height of corruption, that we, not
able to prevail with them to come to us, are obliged to go over to them.
Otherwise they would forsake us, they would do worse, they would be absolutely
cast away. It is therefore to restrain them that our Casuists have considered
the vices whereto men, in their several conditions, are most inclined, that
they might establish maxims so gentle, (without injury to truth) as if they
should not be satisfied with, they must needs be very hard to please. For the
main drift of our Society, for the advantage of Religion, is not to turn away
any whatsoever, so to keep the world as much as may be together.

We have therefore Maxims suitable to all sorts of persons, to such as have
Benefices to dispose to Priests, to Religious men, to Gentlemen, to Menial
Servants, to the Rich, to Merchants, to those who are in troubles, to those who
are in necessity, to devout women, to such of that Sex as are not so, to
married people, to such as are disordered. In a word, they have made provision
for all things* That is, said I, you are furnished for the Clergy, the Nobility
and the Commons. I am extremely desirous to know them.

Let us begin, says the Father, with the first. You know what trading there is
at this day, about Benefices; and if we should measure things by the writings
of Saint Thomas and the Ancients, the Church would be found well stored with
Simonists. Which considered, it is necessary our Fathers should, by their
prudence, moderate things, as these words of Valentia, one of Escobars four
living creatures, will show you. It is the conclusion of a long Discourse where
he gives many expedients, among which the best in my judgment is this; in page
2042. of the third Tome. If a man give a temporal good for a spiritual, (that
is to say, money for a Benefice) and that a man give money as the price of the
Benifice, it is apparent Simony. But if he gives it as the motive inclining the
will of the Incumbent to resign his interest, non tanquam pretium beneficii,
sed tanquam motivum ad resignandum, it is not Simony, though he that resigns
consider, and look on the money as his principal end. Tannerus, who is also of
our Society affirms the same thing, Tom. 3. page 1519. confessing withal, that
Saint Thomas is of a contrary opinion, in that he absolutely maintains that it
is undeniable Simony to give a spiritual good for a temporal, if the temporal
be the end thereof: By this means we do salve abundance of Simonies. For who
would be so wicked, as, when he gives money for a benefice, to refuse to do it
out of an inclination to give it as a motive obliging the incumbent to resign,
instead of giving it as the price of the benefice? No man is so far forsaken of
God. I agree with you, said I, that all the world have graces sufficient, to
make such a bargain. It is very certain, replied the Father.

You see then how we have mitigated things in regard of persons that take
benefices. As for the Priests, we have diverse Maxims that are no less
favorable to them. For instance, take this of our twenty four, page 143. A
Priest that has once received money to say Mass, may he take other money upon
the account of the same mass? Filliutius affirms he may, by applying that part
of the sacrifice which b^longs to himself as Priest, to him who paies him last,
provided he receive not as much as a whole mass amounts to, but only for one
part, as happily for a third of the mass.

This, Father, is certainly one of those cases wherein the pro and con are very
probable. For what you affirm must needs be so, after the authority of
Filliutius and Escobar. But leaving it in the sphere of probability, the
contrary, methinks, might very well be maintained, and made good by these
reasons. When the Church allows Priests that are poor to receive money for
their Masses, it being just that those who serve the Altar should live of the
Altar; her meaning is, not that they should make an exchange of the sacrifice
for money, much less, that they should be deprived of all those graces which
they should first derive thence themselves. Nay, I might further urge, that the
Priests, according to Saint Paul, are obliged to offer sacrifice first for
themselves, and then for the people; that is, it is lawful for them to
communicate to others the fruit of the sacrifice, but not voluntarily to exempt
themselves of all advantage thereof, to bestow it on another for the third part
of the Mass, that is, four or five pence. Truly, Father, as little gravity as I
pretend to, I could render this opinion probable. It would cost you no great
pains, said he. That is apparently such already. All the difficulty were to
find out probability in the contrary. And that is the work of the most eminent,
among whom Father Bauny is highly considerable. It Is infinitely pleasant to see
this able Casuist diving into the pro and con of the same Question, wherein the
Priests are still concerned, and fast ning on reason every way, he is so
subtle and ingenious. He says in a certain place, it is in his tenth Treatise,
page 474. There cannot any such Law be made, as shall oblige a beneficed Priest
to say Mass every day, because such a law would infallibly, haud dub e, expose
them to the danger of saying it sometimes in mortal sin. And yet in the same
Treatise 10. page 441. he says, That the Priests who have received money to
say Mass every day, ought to say it every day, and that they cannot be
dispensed with, upon pretense that they are not always sufficiently well
prepared for to say it, because it is in their power, at any time, to make an
act of contrition, which if they neglect to do, it is their own fault, and not
his upon whose account they are to say Mass. And to take away the greatest
difficulties which might divert them from doing it, he thus resolves the
question in the same Treatise, Qu. 32. page 457. May a Priest say Mass the same
day wherein he has committed a mortal sin, happily one of the most enormous, he
making his confession beforehand? Villalobos says, not, because of his
uncleanness. But Sanchez affirms, he may, and that without sin; and I think
his opinion safe, and that it ought to be followed in practice; and tuta, and
sequenda in praxi.

How Father, said I, may this opinion be put into practice? May a Priest guilty
of such a disorder, presume, the same day, to approach the Altar upon Father
Bauny's word? Or should he not rather submit to the ancient laws of the Church,
which absolutely excluded, from the sacrifice, those Priests who had committed
sins of that nature, then the new opinions of Casuists, who readmit them
thereto, on the very day that they are so fallen? You have a very treacherous
memory, says the Father, have I not sometime told you, That in matters of
Morality we are not to be guided by the ancient Fathers, but the modern
Casuists? as our Fathers, Cellot, and Reginaldus affirm. I remember it very
well, answered I, but this is a business of greater consequence, for the Laws
of the Church are therein concerned. You speak reason, said he, but, it seems,
you are not yet acquainted with this excellent maxim of our Fathers, That the
Laws of the Church are of no force when they are no longer observed, cum jam
desuetudine abierunt, as Filliutius affirms, Tom. 2. Tr. 25. N. 33. We see,
better then the Ancients, the present exigences of the Church. If there were so
much rigor observed in excluding Priests from the Altar, you easily apprehend
the consequence, that there would not be so great a number of Masses. Now the
abundance of Masses brings so much glory to God and so much profit to souls,
that I dare affirm, with our Father Cellot, in his book of The Hierarchy, page
611. of the Rouen impression, that there could not be too many Priests, though
not only all men and women, were it possible, but even all inanimate bodies,
and brute beasts, bruta animalia, were turned Priests to celebrate the Mass. I
was so surpised at that fantastic imagination, that I could not say any
thing, so that he kept on his discourse.

But there is enough as to the Priests; I should be too tedious else, we come
now to the Religious. The greatest difficulties they meet with consist in the
obedience they owe their superiors, see what gentle pills our Fathers
prescribe them. Castrus Palaus, of our Society, op. mor. page 1. disp. 2. page
6. says; It is out of all controversy, (non est controversia) that the
Religious man, who of his side has a probable opinion, is not bound to obey
his Superior, though the Superiors opinion be the more probable. For in such
a case, it is lawful for the religious man to embrace that which is most
acceptable to him, quae sibi gratior fuerit, as Sanchez affirms. Nay though
the commandment of the Superior be just, you are not thereby engaged to obey
him, for it is not just as to all points, and in all circumstances; non
undequaque just praecipit, but only probably, and so you are probably engaged
to obey him, and you are probably disengaged from obeying him, probabiliter
obligatus, and probabiliter deobligatus. In troth Father, said I, a man cannot
have too high an esteem for so excellent a fruit as that of the double
probability! It Is of extraordinary use, said he, but to proceed. I shall
trouble you but with this one passage of our famous Molina, in favor of those
religious men, who, for their disorders* are turned out of their Convents. Our
Father Escobar quotes him, page 705. in these terms; Molina affirms, that a
religious man turned out of his Monastery is not obliged to any reformation in
order to his return into it again, and that he is not any longer tied by his
vow of Obedience.

Well, Father, said I, the Ecclesiastics are well provided for; your Casu^sts,
I see, have dealt very favorably with them, nay as well as they would have
done for themselves. I Fear me they have not been so tender of people of other
conditions. It Is but just a man should do well for himself. Nay even those
others could not have done better for themselves, replied the Father; all have
been treated with equal charity, from the greatest even to the least. To make
good which ^ssertion, you engage me to acquaint you with our Maxims concerning
Servants.

We have considered, as to their particular, the trouble they are in, when,
being conscientious people, they serve disordered Masters, For if they do not
all the messages they employ them in, they lose their services and fortunes;
and if they obey them, they are troubled in conscience. To comfort them in this
condition, our twenty four Fathers, in page 77. have exemplified the services
which they may perform with safety of Conscience; whereof these are some. To
deliver Letters and Presents; to open doors and windows; to help their Master
to get in at a window; to hold the ladder while he gets up; all this is
allowable and indifferent. But indeed to hold the ladder, it is requisite they
be threatened more then ordinary, in case they do not. For it is an injury to
the Master of the house, for any man to come into it through the window.

Do you observe how judiciously this provision is made? I expected no less,
said I, from a book extracted out of the works of twenty four Jesuits. But our
Father Bauny, added the Father, has further taught servants to do their
Masters all these services innocently, by obliging them to direct their
intention, not to the sins wherein they are agents, but only to their own
profit thereby. This he has handsomely expressed in his Summary of sins, p.
710. of the first edition. Let the Confessors, says he, take good notice, that
they may not absolve servants who do dishonest M ssages, if they consent to the
sins of their Masters; but we must say the contrary, if they do them for their
own temporal advantages. And this is easy for them to do, for why should they
be so ready to give their consent to sins, which only put them to a great deal
of trouble both of body and conscience?

Besides, the same Father Bauny has established this great Maxim, to oblige
those that are not content with their wages. It Is in his Summary page 213, and
214. of the sixth Edition. May Servants who are not content with their wages
advance them of themselves by filching and purloyning as much from their
Masters as they imagine necessary to make their wages proportionable to their
services? In some occasions they may, as when they are so poor when they come
into service, that they are obliged to accept any proffer that is made to them,
and that other Servants of their quality get more elsewhere.

This Father, said I, is just the case of John d' Alba. What John d' Alba,
says the Father, what do you mean? How, Father, have you forgot what happened
in the year 1647. where were you then? I read, says he, Cases of Conscience at
a College of ours, far from Paris. Then Father, said I, I perceive you know not
this story, and therefore must needs tell it you. I heard it in a place where I
was the other day from a person of good quality. He told us that this John d'
Alba, being a servant to your Fathers of the College of Cle mont in Saint James
street, and thinking his wages too low, stole something from them to make it
up. That upon this, your Fathers put him in prison, charging him with felony,
and that he came to be tried at the Chastelet, if my memory fail me not, the
sixth of April, 1647. For the Gentleman gave all these particulars without
which we should hardly have believed him. This poor rogue, being examined,
confess d, that he had tak ng away certain Pewter-pl^tes from the Fathers, but
pleaded that he was not guilty of any felony for so doing, alleging for his
just fication, this doctrine of Father Bauny, ^ which he presented to the
Judges, with an attestation from one of your Fathers, under whom he had studied
the cases of Conscience, and who had taught him the some thing. Whereupon
Monsieur De Montrouge, one of the sagest of the Judges of that Court, gave his
judgment thus; That he was not of opinion, that, upon the writing of those
Fa^thers, containing a doctrine so unlawful, pernicious, and contrary to all
Laws, natural, divine and humane, such as is able to confound all Famili^s, and
to authorize all domestic frauds and infidelities, the prisoner should be
acquitted. But his judgment was, that that over-faithful disciple should be
whipped before the College-gate of Clermont by the common Hangman, who at the
same time should bu n all the writings of those Fathers treating of theft and
that they should be prohibited to teach any such doctrine again, upon pain of
death.

Men expected the effect of this generally approved judgment, where happens an
accident which caused an arrest of it. But in the mean time, the prisoner
vanishes, (none knows how) and with him all discourse of the business, so that
John d' Alba got out, and made no restitution of the plates. This was his
relation, to which he added that this judgment of Monsieur De Montrouge is upon
record in the Chastelet, where any one may see it. The story we thought very
pleasant.

What do you take all this pains for, says the Father? what does all this
signify? I entertain you with the maxims of our Casuists, and was just
falling upon those that regard Gentlemen, and you interrupt me with impertinent
stories. I only told it you by the way, said I, besides that you may thence
take notice of a thing of great importance as to what we discourse of, which I
perceive you had forgotten, when you established your doctrine of Prob^bility.
And what, I pray, says the Father, can there be wanting, when the business
has passed through the hands of so many excellent men? This replied I, that
you have secured all those who follow your opinions in respect of God and their
own Consciences; for, as you affirm, a man is safe enough so far, by adhering
to one grave Doctor. You have also given them good security, as to what
concerns their Confessors; for you have obliged the Priests to absolve them,
upon a probable opinion, upon pain of mortal sin. But you have not put them
into a safe posture in relation to the Judges, insomuch, that while they follow
your probabilities, they are exposed to the whip and the halter. This was an
extraordinary oversight. You are in the right, says the Father, you oblige me
very much. But the reason of it is, that we have not so much power over the
Magistrates as over the Confessors, who are obliged to submit to us in all
cases of Conscience; for we are the sovereign Judges there. That I understand
very well, said I, but if, on the one side, you are Judges of the Confessors,
are you not, on the other, Confessors to the Judges? your power is of a large
extent: oblige them to acquit Criminals who go upon a probable opinion, upon
pain of exclusion from the Sacraments; lest it happen, to the great contempt
and scandal of probability, that those, whom you make innocent in the Theory,
be whipped and hanged in the practick. If you do not this, how can you expect
Disciples? Some course must be taken, said he, it is no slight matter. I will
propose it to our Father Provincial. But you may keep this advice till another
time, and not interrupt what I have to say to you of the maxims we have
established to oblige Gentlemen, which therefore I shall not acquaint you with,
but upon condition that you tell me no more stories. This is all you are like
to have for the present, for it requires more then one Letter to give you a
full account of one Conference. In the mean, I am, etc.

Paris, April 10. 1656.
To the same. LETTER VII.
Sir,
I Had no sooner appeased the good Father, whose discourse I had a little
disordered by the story of John d' Alba, but he resumed it upon my promise to
him not to start any such again, and so entertained me with the maxims of his
Casuist^ concerning Gentlemen, much to this effect.

You know, said he, that the passion which is most predominant in persons of
this rank, is, that punctilio of Honor, which ever and anon engages them to do
those violences that seem to be contrary to Christian piety, which indeed are
such, that there were no way* but to exclude them from Confession, i^ our
Fathers had not remitted somewhat of the severity of Religion, the better to
comply with humane frailty. But, their duty toward God obliging them to a
submission to the Gospel, and their charity toward their neighbor to an
indulgence to the world, they had need of all their abilities to find out
expedients, such as should moderate things with so much equality, that men
might maintain and repair their honor, by the ways ordinarily used in the
world, yet without burthening the Conscience, so to make a certain provision
for two things which seem to be so much opposite, as piety and honor.

But if the design be advantageous, the execution of it is proportionably
troublesome; nor do I doubt but you are sensible of the greatness and
difficulty of the enterprise. It startles me, said I. It startles you, replied
he? I believe it. It would startle othergates people then you are. Do you not
know, that on the one side it is provided by the Evangelical Law, not to return
evil for evil, but to leave vengeance to God? And on the other, the Laws of the
world forbid a man to suffer injuries, but admit him to endeavor his own
satisfaction, and that many times by the death of his enemies? Have you ever
seen any thing that seems to be more contrary? And yet when I tell you that our
Fathers have reconciled these things, you can make no other answer, then that
it startles you. My expression, said I, was a little too scanty; For indeed I
should think it absolutely impossible, if having seen so much of your Fathers
as I have, I were not satisfied they could easily do what is impossible to
other men. Upon this ground it is that I conceive they may happily have found out
some expedient, which I admire before I know it, and which I would entreat you
to d scover to me.

If that be your meaning, said he, I am ready to serve you. Know then that this
miraculous principle, is nothing else but our grand method of directing the
intention, a thing of so great consequence in our Morality, that I durst almost
compare it with the Doctrine of Probability. You have seen several slight
touches of it in those Maxims I have already entertained you with. For when I
explicated to you the manner how servants may conscienciously do certain
unhandsome mess^ges, did you not observe that all the difficulty was in the
diversion of the intention from the evil, whereof they are the abetters, to
direct it to the advantage accrewing to themselves thereby? This is the meaning
of directing the intention. And you have, in like manner, seen that those who
give money for Benefices were inexcusably Simonists, were it not for a like
diversion. But now I will display this grand method in its full luster, upon
the subject Murder, which it justifies upon a thousand occasions, that by such
an effect you may judge what it is able to produce. I already perceive, said I,
a general permission to do any thing, nothing shall escape it. You always jump
out of one extremity into another, replied the Father, amend that fault. For,
to satisfy you, that we do not permit all things, know, for instance, that we
never suffer a man should have no other design in sinning, then a formal
intention to sin; and that, if any one be so obdurate, as in an evil action to
limit his desire by the evil it self, we have no more to do with him; this is
diabolical, and admits not any exception of age, sex, or quality. But if a man
be not sunk into that wretched condition, we endeavor to put in practice our
method of directing the intention, which consists in a man's proposing to
himself, as the end of his actions; an allowable object. Not but that we, as
far as lies in our power, divert men from doing things fordidden; but when we
cannot hinder the action, we at least purify the intention, and so correct the
viciousness of the means, by the purity of the end.

Thus, you see, have our Fathers found out a means to permit the violences men
ordinarily commit in maintaining their honor. For there is no more to be done,
then to divert the intention from the desire of revenge, which is sinful, to
incline it to a desire of maintaining ones honor, which, according to our
Fathers, is allowable. And thus they acquit themselves of a l obligations both
toward God and toward men. For they satisfy the world by permitting the
actions, and satisfy the Gospel by purifying the intentions. This is a thing
the Ancients never knew; the world is engaged for it only to our Fathers. Do
you now understand the business? Very well, said I. You allow men the gross
substance of things, and give God that spiritual motion of the intention, and
by this equal division, make an alliance between divine and humane Laws. But
Father, to deal freely with you, I am a little distrustful of your promises,
and question whether your Authors affirm as much as you do. You do me wrong,
said the Father, I advance nothing but what I prove, and that by so many
passages, that their number, their authority, and their reasons will fill you
with admiration.

For to let you see the Harmony our Fathers have made between the maxims of
the Gospel and those of the world, by the means of this direction of the
intention; hear what our Father Reginaldus says, in praxi, l. 21. n. 62. p.
260 It is forbidden, that private men should revenge themselves. For Saint Paul
says Romans 12. Render not unto any man evil for evil. And Eccles. 28. He who
will revenge himself will bring upon himself the vengeance of God, and his sin
shall not be forgotten Besides what is said in the Gospel concerning the
forgiving of offenses, as in the 6. and 18. Chapter of Saint Matthew.
Certainly, Father, said I, if, this premised, he say any thing but what is in
the Scripture, it cannot be for want of knowing it. What Is his conclusion, I
pray? This, said he, From all these things it is evident, that a man of courage
may immediately pursue another that has hurt him, not indeed out of any
intention to render evil for evil, but out of that of preserving his honor,
Non ut malum pro malo reddat, sed ut conservet honorem.

See you then how careful they are to forbid a man to have an intention to
render evil for evil, because the Scripture condemns it. No, they never permit
that. See Lessius de Just. l. 2. c. 9. d. 12. n. 79. He who has had a box
of the ear given him may not have the intention to revenge himself; but he may
be permitted that of avoiding infamy, and to that end, may immediately put back
the injury, and that with his sword, etiam cum gladio. We are so far from
admitting that men should entertain any design to be revenged of their enemies,
that our Fathers will not so much as allow them to wish their death, out of any
motive of hatred. See our Father Escobar, tr. 5. Ex. 5. n. 145. If your enemy
have some intention to do you a mischief, you ought not to wish his death out
of any intention of hatred, but you may justly do it to avoid your own
disadvantage. For that is so far lawful, with this intention, that our great
Hurtado de Mend za says, That a man may pray unto God to send sudden
destruction on those who endeavor to persecute us, if he cannot avoid it
otherwise. It Is in his book de spe, vol. 2. di 15. 3 Sect. 4.55.48.

Reverend Father, said I, the Church has forgotten to put a prayer to this
purpose among those she makes use of. There is not indeed, said he, laid down
there all that a man may ask of God. Besides that in this case it could not be,
for this opinion is later then the B^evia^y; you are no good Chronologer. But
to keep to the business in hand, take this other passage of our Father Gasper
Hurtad^, de sub pecc. diff. 9. cited by Diana, p. 5. tr. 14. R. 99. He is one
of the 24* Fathers; of Escobar. An incumbent may without any mortal sin w^sh
the death of him that has a pension out of his li ing; and^^ son that of his
father, and may rejoice when it happens, p ovided it proceed only from a
consideration of the advantage accrews to him thereby, and not out of any
personal hatred.

O Father, said I, what excellent advantages may there be made of the direction
of the intention! I see it must needs be of a large ex^ent. And yet there are
certain cases which were not easi^y resolved, though such as persons of quality
are extremely concerned in. Propose them, says the Father, that we may see
what may be said thereto. Show me, said I, with all your direction of
intention, how a man may be permitted to fight a duel. Our great Father Hurtado
de Mendoza, will give you satisfaction immediately, says the Father, in the
passage cited by Diana, p 5 tr. 14. R. 99. If a Gentleman that is challenged be
known not to be much precise, and that it may be judged from the sins he
ordinarily commits wi hout any scruple of conscience, that if he accept not the
challenge, it is not out of any fear of God, but merely out of cowardiz^, and
consequently that people would thence take occasion to say of him, that he was
a hen hearted fellow, and no man, gallina and non vir; this man, may, for the
maintenance of his honor, come to the place appointed, not indeed with an
express intention to fight the duel, but only with that of defending himself,
if he by whom he was challenged, come thither, unjustly to set upon him. And
his action shall be in it self indifferent. For what hurt can there be for a
man to go into a field, to walk there in expectation of another, and to defend
himself if any one set upon him? So that he commits not any sin at all, for
when the intention is directed to other circumstances, the chall nge is not at
all accepted, for the acceptance of a challenge consists in the express
intention of fighting, which such a man has not.

You are not as good as your word Father, said I, this is not properly to
permit duels; on the contrary, he by a shift does not acknowledge it to be any,
so to make the thing the more lawful; so far does he think it forbidden. Ho,
ho, said the Father, you begin to grow a sophister, I am extremely glad of it.
To answer you, I might affirm that in that he allows all that they desire who
fight duels. But since you expect such punctual satisfaction, our Father Layman
shall give it you for me, who permits duels in express terms, provided that a
man direct his intention to accept the challenge for to preserve his honor, or
his fortune. It is, l. 3. p. 3. c. 3. n. 2, and 3. If a Soldier of the Army,
or a Courtier, must in likelihood lose his reputation or his fortune if he
accept not a challenge, I see no reason why he should be condemne^ who does
accept it to defend himself. Petrus Hurtado affirms the same thing, as he is
cited by our famous Escobar, tr. 1. ex. 7. n. 96. and n. 98. where he adds
these words of Hurtado, That a man may fight a duel even to defend his estate,
if there be no other means to preserve it, because every man has a right to
secure what is his own, and that even by the death of his enemies.

These passages gave me occasion to admire the difference there is between the
piety of the King and that of the Jesuits; the former using all his power to
prohibit and abolish Duelling in his Dominions, the latter employing all their
subtilty to make it allowable, and to countenance it in the Church. But the
Father was in such an excellent good humor, that it would have been unhandsome
to interrupt him, so that he proceeded thus. In a word, says he, Sanchez,
(pray consider what persons I cite) goes further; for he allows a man not only
to accept, but also to give a challenge, if so be the direction of the
intention be right. And our Escobar seconds him in the place beforementioned,
n. 97. Father, said I, if it be so, I am convinced, but I shall not believe he
writ any such thing till I see it. Then read it your self, said he; whereupon I
read words to this effect in Sanchez's Moral Theology, l. 2. c. 39. n. 7. It
is but rational to affirm, that a man may fight a duel to save his life, his
reputation, nay his estate, if it be any thing considerable, when it is clear
that others endeavor to take them away from him unjustly by foul practice and
vexatious suits at Law, and that there is no other way to preserve them. And
Nava rus says very well, that in such an occasion it is lawful either to
accept or give the challenge, licet accep tare est offe^re duellum. Nay
further, that a man may dispatch his enemy at unawares; nay yet more, that in
such occurrences a man need not confine himself to the ordinary way of Duels,
if he can secretly murder his adversary, and thereby put an end to the
business. For by that means he shall not only avoid the hazard he may be in,
by exposing his life in fighting, but also not participate of the sin which his
enemy would commit by the duel.

This Father, said I, is a pious Treachery; but, how pious soever, it is still
a Treachery, since a man is permitted to kill his enemy treacherousty. Did I
say, replied the Father, that one man might kill another treacherously? God
forbid: I told you, he might do it secretly, and thence you conclude that it
may be done treacherously, as if it were but one and the same thing. Learn of
Escobar, tr. 6. exa. 4. n. 26. what it is to kill treacherously, and then you
will say something. A man is said to kill treacherously, when he kills him who
has not the least suspicion that such a thing will happen to kim. He therefore
that kills his enemy is not said to kill treacherously, though he do it behind
his back or by way of ambush, licet per insidias, aut a tergo percutiat. And in
the same treatise, n. 56. He who kills his enemy with whom he had been
reconciled, though under promise never to attempt his life again, is not
absolutely said to k ll him treacherously, unless there had been a very
intimate friendship between them before; arctior amicitia.

You are now sensible that you do not so much as understand the terms, and yet
will needs speak as confidently as a Doctor. I must indeed confess, said I,
that this is new to me, and I learn from this definition, that, happily, there
never was any man killed treacherously; for a man seldom assassinates any but
his enemies. But, however it be, a man according to Sanchez, (I do not say,
treacherously, but behind the back or in an ambush) may confidently kill an
Informer that prosecutes us in any Court, may he not? No doubt but he may,
says the Father, provided there be a right direction of the intention; you
ever forget what is most considerable. It is also the opinion of Molina, to. 4.
tr. 3. disp. 12. nay, according to our learned Reginaldus, l. 21. c. 5. n. 57.
a man may kill the false witnesses which such a prosecutor produces against
him. In a word, if we credit our eminent and celebrious Fathers, Tamerus and
Emanuel Sa; a man may kill both the false witnesses and the Judge too, if there
be any correspondence between them. Take his own words, tr. 3. disp. 4. q. 8.
n. 83. Sotus, says he, and Lessius affirm that it is not lawful for a man to
kill the false witnesses, and the Judge which conspire the death of an innocent
person; but Emanuel Sa and other authors do, with reason, impugn that opinion,
so far at least, as it relates to matter of Conscience. And he further
maintains, in the same place, that a man may kill both witnesses and Judge.

I am now Father, said I, sufficiently instructed in your principle of the
direction of the intention, but I would fain understand also the consequences
of it, and be acquainted with all those cases wherein this method arms a man
with a power to kill. Let us therefore run over those you have put already, for
fear of mistake; for equivocation were here very dangerous. I take it then upon
your security, that there being a right direction of the intention, a man, to
preserve his reputation, or his estate, may, according to your Fathers, accept
a challenge, sometimes give one, he may secretly kill an unjust prosecutor, and
with him the witnesses he should make use of, nay the corrupt Judge that
favors them; you have further told me, that he who has received a box of the
ear, may, abstracting all thoughts of revenge, right himself with his sword.
But, Father, you have not assigned a proportion how far this may be done. A man
cannot be mistaken in that, replied the Father, for a man may proceed so far as
to kill him. It Is excellently well proved by our learned Henriquez, l. 14. c.
10. n. 3. and by diverse others of our Fathers, cited by Escobar, tr. 1. ex. 7.
n. 48. in these words. One man may kill another who has given him a box of the
ear, though he run away for it, provided he do it not out of hatred or revenge,
and that by that means there be a gap opened for excessive murders, such as
are destructive to the state. And the reason of it is, that a man may as well
do that in pursuance of his reputation, as of his goods, taken away from him.
For though your reputation be not so in the possession of your enemy as would
be the goods he had taken away from you, yet may it be recovered in the same
manner, besides that it is a certain expression of height of spirit, and
authority, and that a man gains esteem among men for doing it. And indeed is
it not confessed that he who has so received a box of the ear, is accounted
dishonorable, till such time as he has killed his enemy?

This I thought a tenent so horrid, that I had much ado to keep my self in;
but, out of a desire to know that followed, I let him go on. Nay, said he, a
man may, to prevent a box of the ear, kill him that is going to give it, if
there be no other way to avoid it. This is obvious in our Fathers. For
instance, Azor. inst. mor. part. 3. page 105. (he is one of the 24. Ancients)
puts this case. Is it lawful for a person of quality to kill one that would
give him a box of the ear, or a bang with a stick? Some say, not, and their
reason is, that the life of our neighbor is more precious then our honor,
besides the barbarism it were to kill a man out of no other motive then that
of avoiding a blow. But others affirm it lawful; and for my part, I think it
probable, when it cannot be avoided otherwise. For if it were not, the
reputation of innocent persons were perpetually exposed to the insolences of
the malicious. This is further maintained by our great Filiutius, to. 2. tr.
29. c. 3. n. 50. by Father Hereau in his writings concerning murder; Hurtado
de Mendoza, to. 2. disp. 170. Sect. 16. 137. and Becanus, Somm. t. 1. q 64. de
homicid. Add to these our Fath^rs Flahaut and Le Court, in those writings of
theirs, which the University [of Paris] quoted at length in their third
Petition, purposely to have them publicly censured, though ineffectually; and
Escobar, in the same place, n. 48. affirming the same things. In a word, it is
so generally maintained, that Lessius, l. 2. c. 9. d. 12. n. 77. speaks of it
as a tenent made absolutely sterling, by the unanimous consent of all Casuists.
It is lawful, says he, according to the consent of all Casu sts, ex sententia
omnium, to kill him who would give a box of the ear, or a blow with a stick when
a man cannot other ways avoid it. What would you have more?

I gave him thanks, for indeed I had heard but too much. Yet to see how far he
would stretch this pernicious doctrine. But Father, said I to him, may it not
be lawful for one man to kill another for something less then a box? May he not
so direct his intention, that he may kill him for the Li^? No question but he
may, says the Father, witness our Father Baldellus, l. 3. disp. 24. n. 24.
cited by Escobar in the same place, n. 49. it is lawful to kill him who says
to you, you Lie, if a man cannot right himself otherwise. And that a man may in
like manner kill for opprobrious speeches, we have the authority of the same
Fathers. For Lessius whom Father Hereau among others follows word for word,
says in the place before cited. If you endeavor to ruin my reputation by
opprobrious speeches spoken before persons of honor, and that I cannot avoid
them otherwise then by killing you, may I do it? According to modern Authors I
may, nay though the crime you lay to my charge, be such as I am really guilty
of, it being supposed to have been so secretly committed that you cannot
discover it according to the ways of justice. It Is thus proved. If when you
would take away my reputation by giving me a box of the ear, it is in my power
to prevent it by force of arms, the same defense is certainly lawful when you
would do me the same injury with your tongue. Besides, a man may avoid the
affronts of those whose ill language he cannot hinder. In a word, Honor is
more precious then Life; but a man may kill in defense of his life, ergo, he
may also kill in defense of his honor. There Is Arguments in form for you;
this is not discourse, but demonstration. To conclude, this great Lessius in
the same place, n. 78. shows that one man may kill another for a simple
gesture, or expression of contempt. There are, says he, several ways to
derogate from, and to take away a man's reputation, wherein yet it is but just a
man should right himself; as by giving a man a bang with a stick, or a box
of the ear, or if a man should affront us by words or by signs; sive per signa.

O Father, said I, you have said as much as need be wished for the security of
a man's honor, but certainly their lives must run many a hazard, if for ill
language and disobliging gestures, a man may kill at random, and that with a
safe conscience. All this is true, said he, but our Fathers out of their
extraordinary circumspection, have thought it convenient this doctrine should
not be put in practice in certa^n emergencies, as, for defamatory speeches. For
they hold at least, That it should ha^dly be practiced; practice vix probari
potest. And this not without some reason, which is this. I know it, said I,
it is because murder is forbidden by the Law of God. No, said the Father, they
go not upon that ground; they find it lawful in point of Conscience,
considering only the truth in it self. Why then do they forbid it, sa^d I?
Mark, says he, it is because a Country would in a small time be utterly
depopulated, if all Detractors were put to death. Take it from our Father
R^ginaldus, l. 21. n. 63. page 260. Though this opinion, that one man may kill
another for ill language want not its probability in the Th^ory* yet is the
contrary to be followed in the practick. For a man ought, in the manner of his
defense, consider the prejudice may h^ppen the State. Now it is evident that by
k ^l^ing people after this rate there would be too many murders committed.
Lessius says as much in the place before cited; Heed must be taken that the
pract ce of this maxim prove not prejudicial to the State; for then it is not
to be permitted; tunc enim non est permittendus.

How Father, said I, this prohibition is merely political, and proceeds not at
all from Religion? Few people will stick at it, especially being in heat of
blood, for a man might probably imagine that it were no injury to the State to
rid it of a wicked man. Upon which consideration, said he, it is, that our
Father Filiutius adds to the former reason another of no small weight, tr. 29.
c. 3. n 51. That a man would be punished by the hand of justice for killing
people upon that account. I told you Father, said I, that all you can do will
amount to nothing if you have not the Judges of your side. The Judges, says
the Father, who dive not into men's Consciences, proceed only according to the
external circumstances of an action, whereas we principally consider the
extention. Thence comes it to pass, that our maxims are sometimes different
from theirs. However it be, Father, said I, it is easily concluded from you,
that a man may, with safety of Conscience, kill such as are evil speakers,
provided he mind the safety of his person.

But Father, since you have made such excellent provision for a man's honor,
have you made none for his estate? I know it is of less importance, but it
matters not. Methinks a man may very well direct his intention so as to kill
another, to preserve that. He may, says the Father, and I have given you some
hints whence you might infer as much. All our Casuists affirm it; nay it is
lawful, th^ugh we are so far from fearing any violence from those that have
taken away our goods, that they end^avour to avoid us. Azor, one of our Society
proves it, p 3. l. 2. c. 1 q. 20.

But I would know, Father, what value the thing should be of that may engage us
to that extremity? It is requisite according to Reginaldus, l. 21. c. 5. n. 66.
and Tannerus in 2. 2. disp. 4. q. 8. d. 4. n. 69. that the thing be of great
p^ice, in the judgment of a prudent man: which is confirmed by Layman and
Filiutius. That signifies nothing, said I, where shall we go to find a prudent
man, a thing so seldom met with, to make this estimation? Why do they not fix
on a certain sum? How, says the Father, do you think it so easy a matter to
assign a sum of money proportionable to the life of a man, and a Christian?
Here it is that I have a fair occasion to show you the necessity there is of
our Casuists. Do you find out in the ancient Fathers, for how much money it may
be lawful to kill a man? What will they tell you, but, non occides, thou shall
not k ll? Who then, said I, has been so presumptuous as to determine the
sum? Our great and incomparable Molina, says he, the glory of our Society,
who by his inimitable prudence has valued it at six or seven Ducats, for whi
h he assures us that it is lawful to kill a man, though he who has taken them
fly for it. It Is in his to. 4. tr. 3. disp 16. d. 6. adding further in the
same place, that he durst not charge that man with any sin who kills another
who had taken from him a thing of the value of a Crown or less, unius aurei,
vel minoris adhuc valoris. Which gave Escobar occasion to lay down this general
Rule, n. 44. That regularly it is lawful to kill a man for the value of a
Crown, according to Molina.

O Father, said I, how came Molina to be so illuminated as to determine a thing
of this importance without any assistance of either Scripture, Councils, or
Fathers? I must needs conceive that he was led by a particular light, much
different from that of Saint Augustine, as well upon the subject of Homicide,
as that of grace. I am perfectly illuminated thus far, and withal fully
satisfied, that there are none but those of the Clergy which a man may injure
both as to point of honor and estate, without any fear that they will kill him
for such injury. What Is that you would say, replied the Father? Were it, in
your opinion, rational that those whom of all the world we ought to respect the
most, should be the only men exposed to the insolences of the wicked? No, our
Fathers have provided against that disorder. For Tannerus, to 2. d. 4. q. 8 d.
4. n. 76. says, That it is lawful for Clergie-m^n nay for even Religious men
to kill, in defense, not o^^ly of their lives, but also of their own goods or
that of their community. Molina, cited by Escobar, n. 43. Becanus, in 2 2. t.
2. q. 7. de Hom. concl. 2. n. 5. Regin^ldus* l. 21. c. 5. n. 68. Layman, l. 3.
tr 3. c. 3. n. 4. L ssius, l. 2. c. 9. d. 11. n. 72. and others, affirm it in
the same words.

It is also maintained by our eminent Father Amicus, that it is lawful for
Priests and Religious men to prevent those that would disgrace them by
opprobrious speeches, by killing them beforehand. But there must ever be a
right direction of the intention. Take his own expressions, t. 5. disp. 36. n.
118. It is lawful for an Ecclesiastic or a Religious man to kill a Detractor
that threatens to divulge the scandalous crimes of his Community or himself,
when there is no other means left to hinder him from doing it, as if he be
ready to scatter his calumnies, if not suddenly dispatched out of the way. For
the case being such, as it were lawful for that Religious man to kill him who
would take away his life, it is equally lawful for him to kill him who would
take away his own honor, or that of the Community, whereof he is a member,
with as much reason as there is for those that are of the world to do the like.
This indeed I was ignorant of, said I, and was simply persuaded to the contrary
without making any reflection thereon, minding only what I heard said that the
Church is so far from having ought to do with blood, that she permits not
Ecclesiastical Judges to be present at criminal Judgments. Let not that breed
any worms in your Conscience, says he, our Father Amicus proves this doctrine
fully, though out of an excess of humility well becoming so great a person, he
submits it to the prudent Reader. Add to this, that Caramouel, our illustrious
defender, citing it in his Fundamental Theology, page 543. believes it to be
so certain that he maintains the contrary not to be so much as probable; and he
draws from it most admirable conclusions, as among others this which he calls
the Conclusion of Conclusions, conclusionum conclusio; That a Priest not only
may upon certain occasions kill a Detractor, but that there are some wherein he
is OBLIGED to do it, etiam aliquando d^bet occidere. He examines diverse new
questions according to this principle, for instance, this, WHETHER THE JESUITS
MAY KILL THE JANSENISTS? This Father, cried I, is a strange point of Divinity!
I hold the Jansenists already dead according to the doctrine of Father Amicus.
See, said the Father, how y^u are mistaken; he concludes the contrary out of
the same principles. And how can that be Father, said I? Because, says he,
they derogate nothing from our reputation; take his own words, n. 1146. and
1147. p. 547, 548. The Jansenists call the Jesuits Pelagians; may they be
killed for so doing? Not: because the Jansenists do no more darken the Luster
of the Society then an Owl does that of the Sun: on the contrary, they have
added thereto, though contrary to their intention. Occidi non possunt, quia
nocere non potuerunt.

Alas, Father said I, do the lives of the Jansenists depend merely upon the
question, whether they prejudice your reputation? I think them very insecure,
if it be so. For if it prove ever so weakly probable that they do injure you,
they are in a condition to be dispatched without any difficulty. You will
reduce it into an argument in form; and there needs no more then that, with a
little direction of the intention, to send a man out of this world, with safety
of Cons^ience. O how happy were they, whose natures cannot brook injuries, to
be instructed in this Doctrine! But what a sad condition are they in that
offend them! Certainly Father, a man might as safely deal with people that have
no Religion as those who are trained up according to this Dire^^ion. For to
conclude, the intention of him who hurts lessens not the pain of him that is
hurt. He perceives not that secret direction, and is only sensible of the blow
he receives. Nay I see not but that a man may with less indignation see himself
barbarously murdered by persons purposely set to do it, then feel the
conscientious stilletto's of people pretending to devotion.

To be free with you, Father, I am a little startled at this, and these
questions of Father Amicus and Caramuel I cannot digest. Why says the Father,
are you a Jansenist? I have another reason for it, said I, which is this, that
I ever and anon write to a friend I have in the Country whatever I learn of
the maxims of your Fathers. And though all my business be simply to relate and
faithfully to cite their words, yet am I doubtful they should come to the sight
of some unsettled mind, who must either imagjne you very much injured, or draw
from your principles some abominable conclusion. Go, go, says the Father, they
are such as will never cause you any hurt, I warrant you. Know, that whatsoever
our Fathers have printed themselves and that with the approbation of our
Superiors, is neither evil in it self, nor dangerous in the publishing.

What I write therefore is upon the reputation of the good Father, but my paper
fails me, and not passages; for there are so many others, and those so
pregnant, that it would require whole volumes to say all that might be said. I
am, etc.

Paris, April 25. 1656.
To the same. LETTER VIII.
Sir,
YOu little imagined that any one had the curiosity to know who we are, and yet
there are those who would feign guess at it; but they are much mistaken. Some
take me for a Doctor of Sorbonne; others father my Letters on four or five
persons, who, as my self, are neither Priests nor Ecclesiastics. From all
these mis-conjectures I learn, that all goes well as to the design I had to be
known only to you, and the good Father, who still admits my visits, and whose
discourse I still endure, though not without some trouble. But I am forced to a
compliance, for he would soon break them off, if he thought me so glutted
therewith as I am; and consequently I should not perform the promise I made to
acquaint you with their Morality. I assure you, the violence I do my self is
such as you should not think inconsiderable; It is no small torment to see
Christian Morality turned topsie-turvy by such strange extravagances, and not
dare openly to contradict it. But since I have endured so much for your
satisfaction, I think it but just I should at length discover my own, when he
shall have no more to say to me. In the interim, I shall humor him as much as
lies in my power; for the more silent I am, the more liberal is he of his
discourse, nay so prodigal was he of his instructions the last time, that I
shall find it no easy task to tell you all. You will find, that as to matter
of Money they are the same stewards as they were before in matter of Life. For
how^ver he may palliate his Max^mes, those I have now to acquaint you with are,
in effect, laid down for the encouragement of corrupt Judges, Usurers,
Bankrupts, Thieves, common prostitutes, and Sorcerers, who are all very
indulgently dispensed with as to any restitution they should make of what they
get by their employments. Which the good Father taught me by this d scourse.

It was my engagement, said he, in the beginning of our meetings, to explicate
to you the Maxims of our Authors, for persons of all qualities. You have
already seen those that concerned persons that have to do with Benefices,
Pri^sts, Religious men, Servants, and Gentlemen; let us now proceed to the
rest, and begin with the Judges.

To enter into the business, I will give you one of the most considerable and
most advantageous Maxims which our Fathers ever taught in their favor. We
have it from our learned Castro Palao, one of our twenty four Ancients. Take
his own words; May a Judge in a question of right, give sen ence according to a
probable opinion, quitting that opinion which is more probable? He may, and
that contrary to his own judgment; imo contra propriam opinionem. And it is no
more then our Father Escobar cites, tr. 6. ex 6. n. 45. A very excellent
beginning Father, said I! The Judges are much your servants for it, which makes
me think it very strange that they should oppose your probabilities, as we have
heretofore observed, when they may make such advantages thereof. For by this
account you furnish them with a power over men's fortunes; proportionable to
that you pretend to your selves over their Consciences. You see then, said he,
that we act not with any reflection on our own interest herein; we only
endeavor the quiet of their Consciences; upon which account it was that our
great Molina took so much pains, upon occasion of the Presents that are made
them. For, to take away all scruples they might make to receive any in some
cases, he has been so liberal of his endeavors, as to give a catalogue of all
those cases wherein they conscientiously may receive them, unless th^re be a
particular provision made to the contrary. It Is in his to. 1. tr. 2. disp. 88.
n. 6. They are these, Judges may receive presents from the parties, when they
make them either out of friendship, or out of gratitude for the justi^^ they
have done them, or for to oblige them to do it for the future, or for to engage
them to take a particular care of their business, or to give them a sudden
dispatch. Our learned Escobar speaks to the same purpose, tr. 6. ex. 6. n. 43.
If there are several persons whereof one has no more right to be dispatched
then another, is the Judge who shall receive any thing from one of them, upon
condition, ex pacto, to dispatch him first, guilty of any sin thereby? Not,
certainly, according to Layman; for he does the others no injury according to
natural right, when he grants that to one by way of acknowledgment for his
present, which it was in hi^ power to grant any of th m he should think fit. So
that being before equally obliged to all by the equality of their right, h^
becomes so much the more to him who makes him the present, so far that he is
engaged to prefer him before the rest; and this preferring seems to be such as
might be valued worth money; quae obligatio videtur pretio aestimabilis.

Under your Reverence's favor, said I, I am a little su^priz'd at this
permission, which the chief Magistrates of the Kingdom are yet ignorant of.
For Monsieur the first President brought a Bill into the Parliament to hinder
certain Registers from taking money for this kind of prefer^ing men; which
certainly is enough to persuade us that he was very far from thinking it
allowable in Judg^s; and indeed it was generally commended as a piece of
reformation very advantageous to all parties. The good Father surpised at this
discourse replied; Is it true what you say? For my part, I knew nothing of it.
Our opinion is only probable: the contrary is also probable. Truly Father,
said I, men find that the first President has done more then probably well in
this case, and that he has stopped the course of a public corrupt on grown
ordinary by length of time. I am of your mind, says the Father, but let that
pass, we have no more to say to the J dges. You do very well, said I, since
they have so little consideration for what you have done for them, That Is not
it, s^yes the Father; but there are so many things, to be said on each subject,
that we must be brief on every one in particular.

We come now to Rich men and Money-mongers. You know the greatest trouble there
is with them is to dissuade them from Usury, wherein indeed our Fathers have
been extremely careful; for they have such an extraordinary aversion for their
vice, that Escobar, tr. 3. ex. 5. n. 1, says, That to affirm Usury to be no
sin is Heresy. And Father Bauny in his Summary of sins, c. 14. fills-up
several pages with the punishments due to usurers. He declares them to be
infamous while they live, and unworthy of burial when they are dead. O Father,
said I, I did not imagine he could have been so rigorous! He is so, when there
is a necessity for it, says he; but withal, this learned Casuist having
observed that men are not inclined to usury but out of a desire of gain, says
in the same place. It were therefore no small obl gation put upon the world,
if, rescuing mankind from the ill ^ffects of Usury, and withal from the sin
which is the cause thereof, some way were found out for men to make as great,
if not greater, advantages of their money by some good and lawful employment
thereof, then may be done by usury. No question, Father, said I, we should have
no more usurers. To do which, said he, he has furnished us with a General
method for all sorts of persons, Gentlemen, Presidents, Counselors, etc. and
that so easy withal, that it consists only in the use of certain words which
a man must pronounce as he lends his money, which done, he may take what profit
thereof he pleases without any fear of being an Usurer, as he must needs have
been otherwise. And I pray what are these mysterious terms, said I? Take his
own words, says he; as near as they can be rendered out of the French, in which
language he writ his book of the Summary of sins, that he might be understood
by all the world, as he confesses in his Preface. He who is desired to lend
money, may answer in this manner; I have no money to lend, but, to make an
honest and lawful profit of, I have. If you would have the sum you desire to
improve it by your industry at half gain, half loss, I may happily furnish you.
But since it would prove a hard matter to ascertain the profit you may make of
it, if you will allow me a certain advantage, and withal give me good secu^ity
for the principal, that it be in no danger, we should sooner come to an
agreement; and you shall have the money paid down immed ately. Is not this an
easy way to get money without sinning? And had not Father Bauny reason to say
those words whereby he concludes this method? This, in my opinion, is a means
whereby abundanc^ of people in the world wh^ by their usu ies, extortions, and
illicitous contracts draw on themselves the ^ust indignation of God, may be
sa^ed by making considerable, honest and lawful advantages.

Ah Father, said I, how powerful are these words! I profess to you, that had I
them not from a good hand, I should take them for some of those enchanted words
that are able to dissolve charms. They must certainly have some secret virtue
to chase away usury, which I understand not, for I ever thought that sin
consisted in a man's receiving of more money then he had lent. You understand it
but little then, replies the Father. Usury, according to our Fathers, consists
not in any thing almost, but the intention to take that profit as usuri^us.
Whence, our Father Escobar makes a man avoid usury by a simple shifting of the
Intention. It Is in tr. 3. ex. 5. n. 4 33.44. It were usury, says he, for a man
to receive any profit from those to whom he lends his money, if it be exacted
as due by law; but if it be exacted as due only out of gratitude, it is not
usury. And n. 3. I^ is not lawful for a man to have the intention to make
advantage of the money l^nt immediately; but to receive it upon the account of
affection and good will, media benevolentia, is not usury.

These indeed are subtle methods; but, in my judgment, one of the b^st (for we
have choice enough) is that of the Contract Mohatra. The contract Mohatra,
Father, said I! I perceive, says he, you know not what it is. There Is nothing
strange in it but the name. Esc^b^r shall explain it to you, tr. 3. ex. 3. n.
36. The Contract Mohatra is that whereby a man buys some commodity, as stuffs
or the like, at a very dear rate and upon trust, for to sell it again
immediat^ly to the same person for ready money, and at a very easy rate. This
is the Contract Mohatra; whereby you see, a man receives a sum of money in
hand, yet is obliged for a far greater. But Father, said I, I think never any
but Escobar made use of that word; is it to be found in any other books? How
are you to seek in these things, says the Father? The book last mentioned of
Moral Divinity, Printed this very year at Paris, speaks of the Mohatra, and
that very learnedly. The ttile of it is Epilogus Summarum. It is an Epitome of
all the Sums of Divinity taken out of our Fathers, Suarez, Sanchez, Lessius,
Fagundez, Hurtado, and other famous Casuists, as the title shows. You will find
in the 54 page these words, The Mohatra is, when a man having occasion for 20.
l. buys of a Mercer as many Stuffs as amount to 30. l. to be paid within a
year, and sells them to him again immediately for 20. l. ready money. Hence you
may perceive that the Mohatra is not so strange a word. Very well Father, said
I; but is this a lawful contract? Escobar, replies the Father, says in the
same place, that there are some Laws that forbid it under very great penalties.
Then it signifies nothing, Father, said I: you are mistaken, says he; for
Escobar in the same passage assigns certain expedients to render it lawful,
even though, says he, that he who sels and buys again looks on his profit as
his main intention, provided only that when he sells he exceed not the highest
prices of Stuffs of that kind, and that when he buys again, he fall not below
the lowest, and that there be no agreement beforehand either in express terms
or otherwise. But L^ssius, de Just. l. 2. c. 21. d. 16. says, that though
there were such an agreement, a man is never obliged to make restitution of the
profit, unless it be by way of charity, in case he of whom it is exacted, be in
want, yet with this proviso, that a man can restore it without inconvenience to
himself; si commode potest. What could any man say more? In troth Father, said
I, were the indulgence but a little larger, I should think it naught and not to
be tolerated. Our Fathers, says he, are not to learn where they should make a
halt. You see then the advantages of the Mohatra.

I have diverse other methods to acquaint you with; but these are sufficient;
and therefore I now come to those who are behind hand in point of estate, or in
trouble. Our Fathers have, their condition considered, made the best provision
they could for them. For if they have not wherewithal to live handsomely, and
to pay their debts too, it is lawful for them to secure one half of what they
have, and then turn Bankrupts and so elude their Creditors. The controversy is
decided by our L^ssius, confirmed by Escobar, tr. 3. ex. 2. n. 163. May he, who
turns Bankrupt, with a safe conscience, retain as much of his own goods as is
requisite to maintain himself handsomely, ne indecore vivat? I, with Lessius,
affirm he may; and that even though they were gotten by violences and crimes
known to all the world, ex injustitia, and notorio delicto: although that i^
such a case he should not retain as much as otherwise he might. How Father,
said I, by what strange kind of charity would you have those goods remain in
the possession of him who had got them together by rapine and extortion, in
order to his honorable subsistence, rather they should be scattered among his
Creditors to whom they of right belong, and whom you have by that means reduced
to poverty? It Is impossible, replied he, to satisfy all, and our Fathers have
particularly made it their business to comfort this miserable sort of people.
It is further out of tenderness to the indigent, that our famous Vasquez, cited
by Castro Palao, t. 1. tr. 6. d. 6. p. 6. n. 12. says, that when a man sees a
thief resolved and ready to rob a poor body, he may, to divert him from so
doing, assign him some rich person in particular, whom he may rob instead of
the other. If you have neither Va^qu^z nor Castro Palao at hand, you may find
the ^ame thing in your Escobar. For, as you know, he affirms nothing but what
is taken out of twenty four of the most eminent of our Fathers. It Is in tr. 5.
ex. 5. n. 120. in the practice of our Society, concerning charity toward our
neighbor.

This charity, Father, is certainly very great, said I, to rescue one from
robbing, by exposing another to the mercy of the Thief. But I should think that
to make this piece of charity perfect, he, who had assigned the rich man to be
robbed should be accordingly obliged in conscience to restore to him that which
he had caused to be taken away from him. No such matter, replies he, for he did
not rob him himself, he only directed another to do it. Now mark this
excellent resolution of Father Bauny upon a case at which you will be much more
astonished, and wherein you would think there were a greater obligation to make
restitution. It Is in his Summary, chapter 13. A certain man entreats a Soldier to
beat his neighbor, or to fire the barn of one that has offended him; the
question (...); whether, the Soldier doing as he was bidden, the other, who
had entreated him to do all those outrages, ought, out of his own, to make good
the damage happening thereby. My opinion is, he ought not: for no man is
obliged to make restitution, if he has not done that which is unjust. Does a
man do that which is unjust when he only entreats another to do him a
courtesy? Whatever may be desired of him, he is still at liberty either to
grant or deny it. Which way soever he may incline, whether to restore, or not,
he is guided merely by his own will. There Is no obligation lies upon him but
that of goodness, sympathy, and the easiness of his own nature. If therefore
the Soldier make not satisfaction for the mischief he has done, there is no
reason the other should be forced to do it, at whose entreaty he had so injured
the innocent. This passage was like to break off our discourse, for I could
hardly refrain laugh^ng at the good nature of a fellow that can so easily set a
barn on fire, and those extravagant ratiocinations, which exempt from making
restitution the first and true Author of such a mischief as that of fire, whom
the civil Magistrate would not exempt from the halter; but if I had not
withheld my self, the good Father would happily have taken snuff; for he spoke
very earnestly, and so went on after the same rate, to this effect.

You may, says he, by so many proofs, easily perceive how frivolous your
objections are, and that they amount to nothing but to make us digress from the
business we have in hand. Proceed we then to persons that are in necessity, for
whose comfort and encouragement our Fathers, and among others Lessius, l. 2. c.
12. n. 29. affirm, that it is lawful to steal, not only in an extreme
necessity, but also in such a necessity as is hard to be endured, though it be
not extreme. Escobar cites him, tr. 1. ex. 9. n. 29. This is very strange,
Father, said I; there are few in the world who think not their necessity hard
to be endured, whom yet you would not allow the liberty to steal with a safe
Conscience. Nay though you should limit this permission to those only who
really are in that condition, yet must you needs open a gap for abundance of
thefts, which the Magistrate would punish notwithstanding that, so hard to be
endured, necessity; whereas you should rather endeavor to suppress them, since
it is your duty to promote not only justice among men, but also charity, which
by this principle is clearly destroyed. For is it not an open violation of
charity, and an injury to ones neighbor, for a man to deprive him of what is
his, and convert it to his own use and advantage? This is the doctrine I have
been hitherto brought up in. It does not hold always true, replies the Father,
for our great Molina has taught us, t. 2. tr. 2. disp. 328. n. 8. That the
order of charity does not require that a man should deprive himself of an
advantage to save his neighbor from a prejudice proportionable thereto. This
he says to make good what he had undertaken to prove in that place, viz. that
a man is not obliged in conscience to restore the goods which another had
deposited in his hands purposely to defraud his Creditors. And Lessius
maintaining the same opinion, confirms it by the same principles, l. 2. c 20.
d, 19. n. 168.

You happily have little compassion for such as are put to their sh fts, but our
Fathers have been more tender then so. They do justice as well to the poor as
the rich; nay they do it ever to sinners. For though they are infinitely at a
distance with those that commit crimes, yet are they so charitable toward
them, as to teach, that goods purchased by crimes may lawfully be retained.
Lessius affirms it, l. 2. c. 10. d. 6 n. 46. certain it is that goods gotten
by Adultery are purchased by an unlawful way; yet is the p^ssession thereof
lawful; quamvis mulier illicite acquirat, licite retinet acquisita. Whence it
comes that the most eminent of our Fathers do formally decide, that what a
Judge receives from one of the parties that has no justice of his side to
favor him with an unjust sentence; and the reward a soldier receives for
killing a man and whatsoever is gotten by infamous crimes, may lawfully be
detained. This Escobar gathers out of our Authors whom he summons together, in
tr. 3. ex. 1. n. 23. where he lays down this general rule: Goods gotten by d
shonourable ways, as murder, an un^ust sentence, a dishonest action, etc. are
lawfully possessed by him that has so gotten them, and he is not obliged to make
any restitution. And further in tr. 5. ex. 5. n. 53. A man may dispose of what
he has received for murders, unjust sentences, infamous sins, etc. because
the possession thereof is just, and that the possessor has a title and
propriety to the things he has gotten thereby. Father said I, I never before
heard of this way of purchasing, and question whether the Law will allow any
such, and look on assassination, injustice and Adultery as sufficient titles. I
know not, says the Father, what law books may say as to this point, but am
certain, that ours, which are the infallible rules of Consciences, speak as I
do. It Is true they except one case, wherein they oblige to make restitution;
viz. when a man has received money of those who are not in a capacity to
dispose of what they have, such as are persons under age, and Religious men.
For these are by our great Molina, excepted in t. 1. de Just. tr. 2. disp. 94.
nisi mulier accepisset ab eo qui alienare non potest; ut a religioso, and filio
familias. In this case their money is to be restored. Escobar cites this
passage in tr. 1. ex. 8. n. 59. and confirms the same thing tr. 3. ex. 1. n.
23.

But under your fatherly correction, said I, methinks you are more tender of
Religious men in this case then others. Not at all, says the Father, is there
not the same care had for all generally under-age, of which number Religious
men are while they live? There Is much reason they should be excepted. But for
what concerns all others, there is no obligation to return them what they have
given for the doing of an evil action. Lessius proves it at large, l. 2. de
just. c. 14. d. 8. n. 52. What a man receives, says he, for any criminal
action, is not subject to restitution by any natural justice, because a wicked
action may be set at a certain value, out of a consideration of the advantage
which he receives thereby who was the occasion of the doing of it; as also of
the pains which he takes who puts it in execution. For this reason a man does
not lie under any obligation to return what he has received for performing it,
be the action of what nature it will, as murder, an unjust sentences,
incontinence, unless it be received of such as are incapable of disposing of
what they have. You will happily say, that he who receives money for doing a
mischief or an ill-turn, commits a sin, and consequently that he can neither
receive nor retain it: but I answer, that when the blow is once given and the
business done, there is then no sin at all either to pay or receive the
payment. Our great Filiutius minces this business yet a little smaller; for he
further presses, that a man is obliged in conscience to make different
satisfactions for good turns on actions of this kind, according to the
different qualities of those that commit them, and that some are to be better
considered then others. And that it is he establishes upon solid reasons, in
tr. 31. c. 9. n. 231. Occultae fornicariae debetur pretium in conscientia, and
multo majore ratione quam publicae. Copia enim quam occulta facit mulier sui
corporis, multo plus valet quam ea quam publica facit meretrix: nec ulla est
lex positiva quae reddat eam incapacem pretii. Idem dicendum de pretio promisso
Virgini, conjugatae, Moniali, and cuicunque alii. Est enim omnium eadem ratio.

To second which passage he turned over his Authors, and showed me some things
of this nature so horrid and infamous that I durst not repeat them, and such as
he would have been startled at himself (for he is a good honest man) were it
not for the implicit respect he has to his Fathers, which makes him look on
whatever comes from them with a certain veneration. I in the mean time was
silent, not so much out of any design to engage him in the pursuance of that
subject, as out of amazement to see the books of Religious men fraught with
decisions so horrid, so unjust, and withal so extravagant. He therefore went
freely on with his discourse, whereof the conclusion was this. For this reason
is it, says he, that our illustrious Molina, (I suppose after him you will
look for no further satisfaction) decides this question thus. When a man has
received mon^y to do a wicked action, is he obliged to return it? We must
distinguish, says this excellent man; if he have not done the action for the
doing of which he had before hand been paid, he ought to return the money; but
if he has done it, he is not obliged to any restitut^on: si non fecit hoc
malum tenetur restituere, secus, si fecit. This passage is cited by Escobar,
tr. 3 ex. 2. n. 138.

Thus have you heard some of our Principles concerning Restitution. I have kept
you very hard at it to day; I would now see how you profit under these
instructions. Answer me then. Is a Judge who has received a bribe from one of
the parties* to give sentence on his side, obliged to return it? You just now
told me, said I, that he was not. I thought as much; did I affirm it
generally? I only told you that he was not obliged to restore, if by his means
the cause went of his side who had no right. But when a man has right on his
side, would you have him further purchase the carrying on of his cause, which
is but his due in justice? There Is no reason for that. Do you not apprehend
that justice is a debt due from the Judge, and that consequently he cannot sell
it; but that unjustice is not any way due from him, and that consequently he
may receive money for it. This doctrine is generally and unanimously taught by
all our principal Authors, as, Molina disp. 94. and 99. Reginaldus, l. 10. n.
184, 185. and 178. Filiutius, tr. 31. n. 220. and 228. Escobar, tr. 3. ex. 1.
n. 21. and 23. Lessius, l. 2. c. 14. d. 8. n 52. That a Judge may well be
obliged to return what he has received by way of bribe for to do justice,
unless it be bestowed on him out of Liberality; but that he is never obliged to
return what he has received of a man, in whose favor he has given an unjust
sentence.

This fantastical decision put me a little out of my bias; but while I
reflected on the pernicious consequences of it, the Father had provided another
question for me. Answer now, said he, with more circumspection then before. I
ask you, whether a man who pretends to Fortune-telling, be obliged to make
restitution of the money he has gotten by that employment? What your Reverence
pleases, Father, said I. How, what I please, replied he? You are certainly an
admirable Scholar! According to your expression, it should seem that the truth
depended on our will. But I see you could never have found out this of your
self. See then how Sanchez resolves the difficulty; but note it is no meaner
man then Sanchez. In the first place he distinguishes, in his Summary, l. 2. c.
38. n. 9^, 95, and 96. Either this Fortune Tellers makes use of Astrology and
other natu^al means, or he does his work by the Black-art. For he says, he is
obliged to restitution in one case, and not in the other. But in which do you
think he is obliged? There Is no great difficulty in that, said I. I perceive,
said he, what you would say; you think he is obliged to restitution, in the
case wherein he has made use of some diabolical assistance: But you are far
from the business; it is but quite the contrary. See Sanchez's resolution in
the same place. If this Fortune teller has not been at the pains and trouble
to find out by the help of the Devil, what he could not otherwise have attained
the knowledge of; si nullam operam apposuit, ut art diaboli id sciret, he ought
to make restitution; but if he have taken that pains, he is not obliged to any
at all. And how comes that Father, said I? Do you not apprehend it, says he?
It Is because a man may well foretell by some Diabolical art, whereas Astrology
is nothing but imposture and deceit. But Father, said I, put the case the Devil
do not answer truly, for he is not much more to be credited then Astrology,
shall not the Fortune teller upon the same ground, be obliged to make
restitution? Not always, replied he. Distinguo, says Sanchez to that point.
For if the Fortune teller be ignorant of Diabolical Arts, si sit artis
diabolicae ignarus, he is obliged to make restitution, bt if he be an
experienced Conjurer, and has done all that lay in his power to find out the
truth, he is not obliged to any at all. For then the diligence of such a
Conjurer may well be thought worth a reweard, dilig^ntia a mago apposita est
pretio aestimabilis. This is but reason Father, said I, for it is the only way
to engage Wizards and Conjurers to endeavor ability and perfection in their
art, out of hopes of enriching themselves lawfully, according to your maxims,
by proving faithful servants to the public. You speak methinks a little
satyrically, says the Father; it is not handsome. For if you speak so freely,
in some places where you are not known, there might happily be such as would take
your discourses very much amiss, and would charge you with making your self a
sport of Religion. I should easily avoid that reproach, said I, for I am of
opinion, that if men would take the pains to examine the true meaning of my
words, there will not be found any, whence the contrary may not clearly be
deduced, and a day may happily come that our discourse may minister some occasion
to make it appear. Ho, ho, says the Father, you are it seems in very good
earnest? I must tell you, said I, that to imagine I make sport with holy
things, is a jealousy I should as easily resent, as it is in it self unjust. I
only said it in jest, replied the Father, but let us be more serious. I stand
ready to do what you please Father, said I, it depends altogether on you. But I
must confess I was a little surpised to see that your Fathers have been so
universally careful of persons of all ranks and qualities, that they would
needs regulate the lawful advantages of Magicians. The world is wide, says the
Father, a man cannot write too much for it, nor be over-particular in putting
cases, nor repeat too often the same thing in several books. How true this is
you will find by this passage out of one of the greatest of our Fathers. You
may well allow him to be such, when he is at this present, our Father
Provincial. It Is R. F. Cellot in his eighth book of the Hierarch. c. 16. 2. We
know, says he, a certain person, who carried a considerable sum of mon^y to
make restitution thereof in obedience to the command of his Confessor. Calling
in, by the way, at a Book-seller's, and asking what news ab oad, numquid novi?
the Bookseller showed him a book newly come forth of Moral Divinity. The other
turning it over carel^sly and not minding any thing what he did, falls
accidentally upon his own Case, and there learned that he was not obliged to
make restitution; so that shaking off the burden of a scrupulous Conscience,
and still reteining that of his money, he returned with a light heart home
again, abjecta scrupuli sarcina, retento auri pondere, levior domum repetiit.

Now tell me whether it contributes not much to ones advantage to be acquainted
with our maxims? will you now laugh at them? And will you not rather, with
Father Cellot make this pious reflection upon so fortunate an adventure?
Occurrences of this nature are, in God, the d spensations of his providence, in
the Angel-Guardian, the influ^nce of his conduct, and in th^se to whom they
happen, the effect of their predestination. God had from all eternity ordained
that the golden chain of their salvation should depend on such a particular
Author, and not on an hundred others who yet deliver the same things, because
it happens not that they meet with them. If such a man had not written, such
another man had not been saved. Let us therefore by the bowels of Jesus Christ,
prevail with those who quarrel at the multitude of our Authors, not to envy
others the books which the eternal election of God and blood of Jesus Christ
h^th purchased for them. What excellent expressions are these, whereby this
learned man proves so solidly the proposition he had advanced, viz. How
beneficial it is that a many several Authors write upon the subject of Moral
Divinity. Quam utile sit de Theologia Morali multos scribere.

Father, said I, for my own sentiment upon this passage, I shall refer it to
another time, and shall say no more at present, then that, since your maxims
are so advantageous, and that it is so much requisite they should be published,
you ought to continue your Lectures therein. For I assure you, the person I
send them to communicates them to a many others. Not that we have any design to
make advantage thereof, but that we are really satisfied the world will think
it self much obliged by a faithful account of them. That it may, says he, you
see I conceal them not; and therefore in pursuance of your design, I shall at
our next meeting entertain you with those conveniences and accommodations of
life which our Fathers allow, to make salvation more feasible, and the business
of the devotion more easy: so that having already gone through what relates to
several particular conditions, you may learn what provision is made in general
for all, and consequently that there may nothing be wanting to your perfect
instruction.

Paris, May 28. 1656. I ever forget to acquaint you that there are Escobars of
several Editions. If you buy any, take those of Lions, which in the
frontispiece have the figure of a Lamb laid over a book sealed with seven
seals; or, if you will, those of Brussels, printed in the year 1651. These
being the last that are come abroad, are better and larger then those of the
former Editions of Lions in the years 1644. 1646.

I am, etc.



To the same. LETTER IX.
Sir,
I Shall be as frugal of my Complements to you now, as the good Father was to
me the last time I saw him. He had no sooner eyed me, but he comes toward me,
and looking into a book he had in his hand, broke forth with these words. Would
not he put an extraordinary obligation on you that should open Paradise to you?
Would you not give millions of gold to have a key to it, and so get in when you
pleased your self? There Is no necessity of being at so great charge; h^re's
one, nay an hundred, at a far easier rate. I was in some doubt whether the good
Father read, or spoke of himself; but he soon put me out of it, saying, These
are the first words of an excellent book of Father Barry's, of our Society; for
I never say any thing of my self. What book is it Father, said I? See the title
of it, said he; Paradise opened to the lovers of Holiness, by an hundred
devotions to the Mother of God, easy to be practiced. How Father, said I, any
one of th^se easy Devotions is enough to open Heaven? It is so, said he; take
it further affirmed in the sequel of the words you have heard. As many
Devotions to the Mother of God as you find in this book, so many celestial
keys are there to set open the gates of Paradise to you, if so be you practice
them; and therefore he says at last, that he is satisfied if a man practice
but one of them.

I would gladly know some of the easiest, Father, said I. They are all such,
replied he; for instance. To salute the blessed Virgin when ever you meet with
any Image of hers; to say over ten Ave-Maries for the ten pleasures of the
Virgin; often to pronounce the name of Mary; to give Commission to the Angels
to do her reverence as from us; to wish ones self able to build her more
churches, then all Kings and Princes have, put together; to bid her good morrow
every morning, and good night every evening; to say every day on Ave-Mary in
honor of the heart of Mary. Nay he affirms this last Devotion to be so
effectual, that the practiser thereof may assure himself of the Virgin's heart.
It may be Father, said I, but certainly with this proviso, that he present her
with his? There Is no necessity of that, said he, specially when a man is too
much taken up with the things of this world; take his own words. Heart for
heart, were indeed but what ought to be; but yours happily is too much taken up
with the world, and is ever filled with the creature. For which reason I dare
not invite you immediately to offer up that little slave which you call your
heart. And so he is satisfied with the Ave-Mary he at first desired. These are
the Devotions of page 33. 59. 145. 156. 172. 258. and 420. of the first
Edition. This is an extraordinary convenience, said I, such, as I conceive,
there will not any be damned hereafter. Alas, alas! says the Father, I
perceive you know not how far the hardness of heart of some people may extend!
There are those in the world, who would never be obliged to say every day these
two words, good morrow, good night, as being a thing cannot be done without
some application of the memory. So that Father Barry has been forced to
furnish them with exercises of much more ease, as, to have always a pair of
Beads about the arms after the manner of a Bracelet, or to have a Rosary about
them, or some picture of the Virgin. These are the Devotions of page 14. 326.
and 447. And then tell me whether I have not furnished you with Devotions easy
enough to obtain the favor of Mary, as Father Ba^ry says, page 106. This,
Father, said I, is certainly easiness in extr^mity. It Is indeed* said he, as
much as possibly could be done, and I think will serve the turn. For that were
a wretched Christian indeed, who would not set aside one moment in all his life
to put a pair of Beads about his arm, or a Rosary in his pocket, and by that
means secure his salvation. And that it so infallibly does, that those who have
made trial thereof, have never been disappointed, after what manner soever they
have lived, though we still exhort people to good life. Of this I shall give
you no other instance then what is in page, 34. of a woman who practicing daily
the devotions of saluting the images of the Blessed Virgin, lived nevertheless
all her life in mortal sin; at last dies in that condition, and yet was saved
by the merit of that devotion. How could that possibly be, cried I? thus, said
he, our Savior raised her again for that very purpose. So certain is it that a
man cannot miscarry if he practice any of these devotions.

I must confess Father, said I, that the Devotions done to the Virgin are a
powerful means, conducing much to salvation, and that the least among them are
of great merit when they are the effects of Faith and charity, such as they
were in the Saints that practiced them; but to think to persuade those who use
them without any change of their ill lives, that they shall be converted at the
hour of death, or that God shall raise them again, is a proceeding, in my
judgment, fitter to encourage sinners in their evil courses, by the treacherous
peace which this rash confidence brings with it, then to recall them by a true
real conversion, which is the work of Grace only. What matters it, says the
Father, how we get into Paradise, so we can but once get in, as upon some such
occasion, says the famous Father Binet, sometime our Provincial, in his
excellent book, Of the mark of Predestination, n. 31. p. 130. of the fifteenth
Edition. By hook or by crook it matters it not whether, so we can but gain the
city of glory; as the same Father says in the same place. It matters not
indeed I must confess, said I, but the question is, whether a man shall get in.
The Virgin, said he, is your security for that. You have it in the close of
Father Barry's book. If it happen that at the hour of death, the enemy of
mankind should pretend some interest in you, and that it might occasion some
disturbance in the little Republic of your resolution, you have no more to
say, then that Mary is responsible for you, and that it is to her that he must
apply himself.

But Father, said I, if a man would press this further, you would be at a
little loss. For, in one word, who has assured us that the Virgin will be
responsible? Father Barry, says he, is engaged for her, page 465. As for the
happiness and advantage you shall receive thereby, I will be responsible to
you, and pass my word for that good Mother. But Father, said I, who shall be
engaged for Father Barry? How, says the Father? he is one of us, and are you
yet to learn that our Society is responsible for all the books of our Fathers?
This is a thing worthy your knowledge. There is then a certain order in our
Society, containing a prohibition to all Booksellers to print any work of our
Fathers, without the approbation of the Divines of our Society, and the
permission of our Superiors. It is an Order made by Henry III. dated May 10.
1583. and confirmed by Henry IV. December 20. 1603. and by Lewis XIII. February
^4. 1612. So that our whole body is responsible for the books of any one of our
Fathers. This is a particular privilege of our Society. And thence it comes to
pass, that there comes not any work of ours a^road which proceeds not from the
spirit of the Society. Thus much it was very fit you knew. I look on it Father,
said I, as a great obligation, and all I am troubled at, is, that I knew it not
sooner. For this knowledge engages a man to be much more attentive to your
Authors. I should have done it before, said he, had but the least occasion
offered it self, but make the best advantage you can of it for the future, and
let us go on with our discourse.

I conceive, said he, I have furnished you with ways how a man may secure his
salvation sufficient, as to easiness, certainty and number; yet our Fathers
wish men would not satisfy themselves with this first degree, wherein a man
does no more then what is precisely necessary in order to future happiness. For
as it is their main design to promote as much as may be the glory of God, so do
they think nothing contributes so much thereto as to encourage mankind to
greater piety. And whereas the children of this world are the more diverted from
Devotion by the strange representation is made of it, our Fathers have thought
it a thing of extraordinary consequence, absolutely to take away that
fundamental obstacle. This is it that Father le Moine has got abundance of
reputation for in his book of EASY DEVOTION, which he writ merely to that
purpose. There he gives us a most excellent representation of Devotion, for
indeed no man ever understood it so well as he did. You have it in the first
words of that Treatise. Virtue never yet appeared to any* never was there any
portraiture made thereof that was like her. It is not at all to be admired that
so few have endeavored to climb up her rock. They have made her so ill company
as to affect nothing so much as solitude. They have appointed for her
attendants, grief and labor; in a word, they have made her the greatest enemy
of divertisement and recreation, wherein consist the only comfort and
enjoyment of humane life. This he says, page 92.

But Father, said I, this I am certain of, that there are very eminent Saints
whose lives have been extremely austere. It Is very true, said he, but there
have been withal some Polite Saints, and Courtier-like Puritans, according to
the same Father, page 191. And you will find page 86. that the difference of
their manners proceeds from that of their humors. Hear what he says. I deny
not but there are some devout persons who are pale and melancholy by
complexion, such as affect nothing so much as silence and solitude, and have
nothing but phlegm in their veins, and earth in their faces. But there are
also a many others of a more happy constitution, such as have abundance of that
gentle and warm moisture, and of that temperate and rect^fied blood which
causes joy.

You see then that the love of silence and retirement is not common to all the
devout, and that, as I told you, it is rather the effect of their complexion,
then of piety; whereas indeed those austere kinds of lives you speak of are the
proper characters of savage and unciviliz'd persons. Accordingly you have them
disposed among the r^diculous and brutish deportments of a melancholy fool, in
the description which Father le Moine has made of such an one in the seventh
book of his Moral Representations; whereof take these touches. He wants eyes to
contemplate the beauties either of art or nature. He would think himself
over-pressed with a heavy burden, should he but take the least enjoyment or
recreation. Upon Festival days, his conversation is among the dead. He is more
in love with himself, when lodged within a tree, or in a grot, then if he were
in a palace or upon a throne. For injuries and affronts, he is as insensible of
them, as if his eyes and ears were no other then those of a Statue. Honor and
reputation are Idols he has no acquaintance with, and which he has nothing to
sacrifice to. A beautiful woman is a ghost to him; nay those imperious and
sovereign looks, those inviting Tyrants, who, wherever they come, m^ke
voluntary and chainless slaves, have no more influence over his eyes, then the
Sun has over those of Owls. etc.

With your Reverences favor, said I, I must needs say, that had you not told
me that Father le Moine was the Author of that Representation, I should have
thought it had been some Reprobate that had done it, purposely to make the
Saints ridiculous. For if this be not the character of a man absolutely
disengaged from the sentiments which the Gospel obliges him to renounce; I must
confess, I know not what it means. See then, says he, how strangely you are to
seek in it. For these are the Symptoms of a weak and unrefined disposition,
such as has not those generous and natural affections it ought to have, as
Father le Moine affirms in the conclusion of that description. By this means
it is that he teaches Christian virtue and Philosophy, according to the design
he had in that work, as he declares in his preface. Nor indeed can it be
denied, but that this method of treating of Devotion is much better received in
the world, then what was practiced before us. There Is no comparison between
them, said I, and I now begin to hope that you will make good your word to me.
You will find it much more clear, says he, by what follows; I have as yet
spoken only of piety in general. But that you may understand by particulars
what difficulties our Fathers have weeded out of it, is it not a business of
extraordinary comfort for the ambitious to be persuaded that true devotion is
not inconsistent with an inordinate love for honor and greatness? How Father,
said I, though they endeavor it with ever so much excess? Though they did,
says he; for it were still but a venial sin, unless a man should desire that
greatness purposely to offend God, or prejudice his Country with greater
convenience. Now venial sins do not hinder a man from being devout, since the
greatest Saints have not been free from them. Hear what Escobar says tr. 2 ex.
2. number. 17. Ambition, which is an inordinate desire of dignity and greatness,
is of it self a venial sin; but when a man covets that greatness to prejudice
the State, or to have greater convenience to offend God, these external
circumstances make it mortal.

This begins excellently well, said I. But is it not also, continued he, a very
gentle doctrine for the covetous, to affirm, as Escobar does, tr. 5. ex. 5.
number. 154. I know that rich men do not sin mortally, when they do not give alms
of their abundance, in the great necessities of the poor: Scio in gravi
pauperum necessitate divites, non dando superflua, non peccare mortaliter*
Certainly if this be true, said I, I am extremely to seek what sin is. To make
it more clear to you, says he, do you not think that the good opinion a man
has of himself, and the complacency he takes in his own works, is a sin, and
that one of the most dangerous? And will you not be astonished if I make it
appear, that though this good opinion or self love be absolutely groundless,
yet is it so far from being a sin, that, on the contrary, it is a gift of God?
Is it possible, said I? We have it, says he, in our great Father Garassus, in
his book entitled, The Summary of the principal Truths of Religion, part 2.
page 419. It is, says he, an effect of commutative justice, that all hon^st
labor should be rewarded either with praise, or satisfaction --. When great
wits are delivered of some excellent work, they are justly recompensed with
public acclamations. But when an ordinary ingenuity takes a great deal of
pains to do somewhat that amounts to very little or nothing, and so
consequently cannot pretend to any public applause, that his labor may not go
without reward, God gives him a certain personal complacency, which, without an
injustice more then barbarous, cannot be envied him. Thus does God, who is
just, give the very frogs a certain satisfaction in their croaking.

These are, said I, excellent decisions for the encouragement of vanity,
ambition, and avarice; but for Envy, Father, is there any more difficulty to
excuse that? That is a very nice point, says the Father. We must use that
distinction of Father Bauny in his Summary of Sins. For his opinion, c. 7. p.
123. of the fifth and sixth Edition, is, That envy at the spiritual good of
ones neighbor is mortal, but envy at the temporal is but ve^ial. And upon what
ground Father, said I? You shall hear, says he. For the good that is in
temporal things is so slight and of so little consequence in relation to
heaven, that i^ is of no consideration a^ all in the sight of God and his
Saints. But Father, said I, if this good be so slight and inconsiderable, how
comes it that you permit men to kill one another to preserve it? You
misunderstand things, says the Father, you are told, that that good is of no
consideration only in the sight of God, not in the account of men There indeed
I was mistaken, said I, and it is to be hoped that these distinctions will in
time rid the world of all mortal sins. Entertain no such imagination, says the
Father, for there are nevertheless some in their own nature mortal, as for
example, Sloth.

Nay then Father, said I, all the accommodations of life are lost. Have a
little patience, says the Father, when you have seen the definition which
Escobar gives this vice tr. 2. ex. 2. Numb. 81. you will happily be of another
opinion: hear it. Sloth is a certain grief that spiritual things are spiritual
things, as if a man should be grieved that the Sacraments are the sources of
grace. And that is a mortal sin: I cannot imagine Father, said I, that there
ever has been any one so fantastic as to bethink himself of a sloth of that
nature. Escobar indeed, replies he, does soon after say, n. 105. I must
confess, it seldom happens that any one ever falls into the sin of sloth. Do
you not perceive hereby of what consequence it is to define things well? I do
indeed, said I, and it puts me in mind of your other definitions of
assassination, treacherous lying in wait, and superfluity. But how comes it
Father, that you do not extend this method to all manner of cases, and assign
all sins definitions of your own coining? that so men may not offend any more,
while they only pursue their pleasures.

It is not always necessary, replied he, upon this ground to change the
definitions of things. You will find it so upon the subject of good cheer,
which undoubtedly is one of the greatest enjoyments of life, is in this manner
allowed by Escobar, n. 102. in his Practice according to our Society. Is it
lawful for a man to eat and drink as much as he can, without any necessity, but
merely for his pleasure? Certainly it is, according to our Father Sanchez,
provided he do not thereby prejudice his health; Because it is allowable in the
natural appetite to be taken up with those actions that are proper thereto. An
comedere and bibere usque ad sati^tatem, absque necessitate, ab solam
voluptatem, si^ peccatum? Cum Sanctio, negative respondeo, modo non obsit
valetudini; quia licite potest appetitus naturalis suis actibus frui. This
Father, said I, is certainly the most absolute passage, the most fundamental
principle of all your Morality; and whence may be drawn very advantageous
conclusions. Is Gluttony then not so much as a venial sin? It is not, says he,
in the manner I have expressed it to you; but it were, according to Escobar, n.
56. a venial sin, if a man without any necessity should so overload himself
with eating and drinking as to cast up all again; Si quis se usque ad vomitum
ingurgitet.

So much for that point, I come now to the easy contrivances we have found out
to avoid sins in conversation and the affairs of the world. That which of all
is the most d ffi ult, is, to avoid lyi^g, and that especially when a man would
have a thing that is false to be believed for a truth. To this purpose is our
doctrine of EQUIVOCATION admirably serviceable, whereby it is lawful to use
ambiguous terms, which the hearer shall understand in another sense then he
does from whom they proceed, as Sanchez says, Op. mor. p. 2. l. 3. e. 6. n.
13. That, Father, said I, you shall not need tell me any thing of, I know it
already. We have indeed made it so public, continued he, that at length all
the world is sufficiently instructed therein. But do you know what course is to
be taken in a case when no equivocal words are to be had? No, said I. I thought
no less, replied he; this indeed is new; it is the doctrine of MENTAL
RESERVATION. Sanchez has it in the same place. A man may swear, says he, that
he has not done a thing, though he really h^ve by understanding within himself
that he did it not on such ^r such a day, or before he was born, or by
reflecting on some other circumstance of the like nature, and yet the words he
makes use of shall not have a sense implying any such thing. And this is a
thing of great convenience on many occasions, and is always justifiable, when
it is necessary or advantageous in any thing that concerns a man's health,
honor or estate.

How Father, said I, is not that a lie, nay indeed perjury? No, replied he;
Sanchez proves it in the same place, and our Father Filiutius also, tr. 25. c.
11. n. 331. because, says he, it is the intention that regulates the quality
of the action. Nay n. 328. he assigns a way to avoid Lying, much more secure
then the former. And that is when a man having said aloud, I swear that I have
not done such a thing, he adds, whispering to himself, this day. Or that after
he has said aloud, I swear, he whispers, that I say and then going on aloud,
that I have not done such a thing. You see that the man says nothing but what
is true, You are in the right, said I* but we should happily find out the cheat,
that it is to speak truth to ones self, and to (...) a^^ud; besides that it is
to be feared there are a many people who have not so much wit at will as to
make use of these Methods. For that, says he, our Fathers^ have taught in the
same place, for their encouragement who cannot bethink them of these
reservations, that there is no more required of them, to avoid lying, then
simply to say, they have not done that which indeed they have, provided they
have in general an intention to give their discourse that sense which a prudent
man would.

Speak ingenuously, have not you been often at a loss for want of this
knowledge? Now and then, said I, And will you not acknowledge, that it were
many times no small advantage to be dispensed in conscience, and that by the
mere observation of certain words? It were indeed, Father, said I, the greatest
convenience in the world. Hear Escobar then, tr. 3. ex. 3. n. 48. where he
gives this general rule. Promises oblige not, when a man has no intention to
engage himself when he makes them. Now it seldom happens that a man has that
intention, unless he be bound by oath or Contract. So that when one says
simply, I will do such a thing, it is conceived he will do it if his mind alter
not. For no man will upon that account deprive himself of his liberty. He
furnishes you with other ways which you may consult your self, and so
concludes, saying, that all is taken out of Molina and other Authors of ours;
omnia ex Molina and aliis, and consequently it is a thing not to be called into
question.

Well Father, said I, I knew not that the direction of the intention had the
faculty to null promises. And yet you see, says the Father, what an ease this
is in the affairs of the world. But that wherein we met with most trouble was
to regulate the conversation between men and women; for our Fathers have been
very strict as to what relates to chastity. Not but that they treat of
questions of much curiosity and niceness as to that point, and particularly
when they have to do with persons that are either married or contracted. This
brought into play the most extravagant, and the most obscene questions that can
fall into man's imagination. He cited as many as might very well furnish me with
matter for diverse Letters, but I shall not so much as give you the citations,
because you show my Letters to all persons indifferently, and I should be loath
to find entertainment for such as make no other advantage of their reading then
their diversion.

The only thing I dare quote to you of all he showed me in their books, is,
what you have in Father Bauny's Summary of Sins, page 165 concerning certain
little privacies which be there explaines, provided a man direct his intention
aright, as to pass for a Gallant; and you will wonder to find in page 148 a
principle of Morality concerning the power which he says that Virgins have to
dispose of their virginity without the consent of Parents; to this effect. When
that is done with the consent of the Maid, though the Father have just cause to
be troubled at t^ yet neither she nor the person to whom she has prostituted
herself has done him any injury, nor, as to what concerns him, violated any
law. For the Maid is in possession of her virginity as well as of her body* she
may dispose of it as she pleases, to whom she pleases, death or mutilation of
members only excepted. But this pattern judge of the whole piece. This put me
in mind of a passage in a Heathen Poet, who was certainly a better Casuist then
these Fathers, since he affirms, that a Maid's Virginity does not absolutely
belong to her self; that one part bel^ngs to the Father, and another to the
Mother, wi h^ut whom she cannot dispose of it, no, not in order to marriage.
And I much question whether there be any Judge, that being to make a Law in
this case would not take the clear contrary to this Maxim of Father Bauny.

This is all I can afford you of the whole discourse that passed between us;
and which lasted so long that I was forced to entreat the Father to pitch upon
another subject. He did so, and entertained me with certain regulations about
Women's cloths, to this effect. We shall say nothing of those who are guilty of
any dishonest inclinations, but the rest; Escobar says, tr 1. ex. 8. n. 5. If
a woman dress her self gorgeously without any evil intention, but only to
comply with the natural inclination she has to be vain, ob naturalem fastus
inclinationem, either it is but a venial sin, or it is no sin at all. And
Father Bauny in his Summary of Sins, c. 46. page 1094. says, that, though a
woman be sensible of the ill effect her curiosity in dressing her self would
work both in the bodies and souls of those who should see her in rich and
gorgeous apparel yet were it no sin at all in her to make use thereof* And he
cites, among others, our Father Sanchez, as being of the same opinion.

But Father, said I, what answer can your Authors make to those passages of
Scripture which speak so expressly against the least things of that kind?
Lessius, replied he, has fully salv'd all, in his book de Just. l. 4. c. 4. d.
14. n. 11. saying, that those places of Scripture were precepts directed only
to the women of that time, that by their modesty they might give such example
as should be for the edification of the heathen. And whence took he that note,
said I? It matters not whence he had it, replied he; it is sufficient that the
sentiments of these great men do always imply a probability in themselves. But
Father le Moine does somewhat moderate that general permission; for he will not
allow it in ancient women: it is in his Easy Devotion; and among other places,
in page 127. 157. 163. Youth, says he, may, by a certain natural right, dress
it self more then ordinary. Gorgeous attire is allowable in an age* which is,
as it were, the flower and prime of life. But a man must accordingly confine
himself thereto; it were as extravagant to do it in a season contrary to that,
as to think to gather roses in the snow. It is a prerogative of the stars only
to be always as it were in the Ball, as flourishing in perpetual youth. The
safest course then were, for a man to take the advice of his reason and a good
looking-glass, and comply as well with decency as necessity; and then withdraw
when night approches. This indeed argues abundance of judgment, said I. But
that you may see, continued he, how generally provident our Fathers have been,
I am to tell you, that in regard it would be many times to no purpose to allow
young women to trim up themselves, if they have not money at their own
disposal, there is another maxim established for their encouragement. You
have it in Escobar, in the Chapter of Theft. tr. 1. ex: 9. n. 13. A woman,
says he, may take money from her h^sband upon diverse occasions, and among
others, she may take it to game withal, to buy her clothes, and to get other
things that she stands in need of.

In troth Father, this comes off excellently well. There are a many other
things, replied he, might be insisted on, but we must omit them, to speak of
those important Maxims which facilitate the exercise of holy things, as for
instance, the manner of hearing Mass. Our greatest Divines, Gasper Hurtado, de
Sacr. to. 2. d. 5. did. 2. and Conink q. 83. a. 6. n. 197* have taught as to
this business; That it is enough to be bodily present at Mass, though a man be
absent as to the mind; provided he behave himself with a certain external
respectfulness. Nay Vasquez is a little more indulgent; for he says, that a
man fulfills the precept of hearing Mass, even though he have not the least
in^ention to hear it. All this you may find also in Escobar, tr. 1. ex. 11.
number. 74. and 107. and further in tr. 1. ex. 1. n. 116. where, to make the
business more evident, he exemplifies in those that are brought by force to
Mass, and are fully resolv^d not to hear it. I should never have believed it,
said I, if another had told me so much. To be short, says he, this is a thing
which stands in some need of the authority of these great men; as also what
Escobar says in tr. 1. ex. 11. number. 31. That a wicked intention, as happily that
of looking on women with an impure desire, joined with that of hearing Mass as
a man ought, hinders not a man from fully performing the duty; nec obest alia
prava intentio, ut aspiciendi libidinose faeminas.

But there is yet a thing of extraordinary convenience in our learned
Turrianus, Select. p. 2. d. 16. dub 7. That a man may hear one half of a Mass
from one Priest, and afterward: the other half from another; nay that he may
first hear the latter part of one, and afterward the beginning of another. Nay
to be free with you, it is further allowable to hear two halves of a Mass at
the same time, from two several Priests, as if one begins Mass, when the other
is at the elevation, because a man may direct his attention both those ways at
the same time; and two halves of a Mass make a whole one. Duae medietates unam
missam constituunt. And this has been decided by our Fathers, Bauny, tr. 6. q.
9. p. 312. Hurt^do, de Sacr. To 2. de Missa, d. 5. diff. 4. Azorius, p. 1. l.
7. cap. 3. q. 3. Escobar, tr. 1. ex. 11. number. 73. in the Chapter, Of the
exercise of hearing Mass according to our Society. And you shall see what
consequences he draws thence, in the same book of the Edition of Lions, in the
year 1644. and 1646. to this effect. Whence I conclud^ that you may hear Mass
in a very short time, if, for example, you meet with four Masses celebrated at
the same time, which issued out one after another, in such manner, as that when
one began, another was at the Gospel, a third at the consecration, and the last
at the Communion. I must confess Father, said I, that by this method, a man
might hear Mass in an instant at Nostre-Dame. You see then, replied he, that we
could do no more, as to what concerns the quick and easy hearing of Mass.

But I come now to acquaint you how we have mitigated the rigor of the
Sacraments and particularly that of Penance. There you will find the
extraordinary indulgence of our Fathers, and must admire to see, how Devotion,
whereat all the world was startled, has been treated of by our Fathers with
such prudence, that having over-thrown that scar-crow which the Devils had set
up at her gate, they have rendered it less troublesome then vice, and more easy
then pleasure, insomuch, that simply to live is incomparably much more
difficult then to live well, to use the expression of Father le Moine, p. 244.
and 291. of his Easy Devotion Is not this a miraculous chnge? In troth Father,
said I, I rannot forbear giving you my thoughts of it, I fear me you over-shoot
your selves, and that this indulgence is much more likely to frighten the world
from you then to draw them to you. For the Mass, for instance, is a thing so
high and so holy, that it were enough to discredit your Authors with most
people, but to show them after what manner they speak of it. This is very true,
says the Father, in relation to some people; but do you not know that we
accommodate our selves to all? You seem to have forgotten what I have so often
told you to this purpose. That therefore shall be your entertainment at our
next conference, putting off for that reason our discourse of the mitigations
of Confession. I shall make you so perfect in it that it shall never out of
your memory. Thereupon we parted; and so I conceive our next Dialogue will be
concerning their POLITICS. I am, etc.

Paris, June 3. 1656. Since the writing of this Letter I have seen the book of
PARADISE opened, by an hundred Devotions easy to be practiced, by Father
Barry, as also that of the Mark of Predestination, by Father Binet. They are
pieces worthy the perusal.



To the same. LETTER X.
Sir,
I Am not yet come to the Politics of the Society, but have to do with one of
their greatest principles. Here you shall find the Mitigations of Confession,
which certainly must needs have been the most fortunate course that th^se
Fathers could have taken to insinuate into all the world, never refusing any.
This is a thing must needs be known before we proceed any further; for which
reason the Father thought fit to afford the ensuing instruction.

You may have gathered, said he, from my former discourses, with what success
our Fathers have taken the pains, by a certain gift of illumination proper
only to them, to discover abundance of things as allowable which were
heretofore forbidden. But in regard there yet remain certain sins which cannot
be excu^^d. and whereof the only remedy is Confession, it was but requisite to
soften the difficulties of it, by the ways I am now to acquai^t you withal.
So that having, through all our precedent Conferences shown how they have taken
away the scruples which troubled men's consciences, by making them perce^ve that
what they thought ill was not such, all my business in this is, to discover to
you the manner how easily to expiate what is really sin* by rendering Confession
as easy as it has formerly been d^fficult. And how is this done, Father, sa^d
I? By a sort of admirable subtilti^s, replies he, proper only to our Society,
such a^ our Fathers of Flanders, in the ^mage of our first age, l. 3. or. 1. p.
401. and l. 1. c. 2. call pious and holy sl^ights; and a kind of sanctified
artifice of Devotion; p^am and religiosam calliditatem. Et pietatis solet^iam,
l. 3. c. 8. It Is by the assistance of these inventions that crimes are new
adays expiated alacrius, with greater cheerfulness and fervency th^n they were
hereto^^re c^^mitted: insomuch that many sh^k^^ff their poll^i n wi^h much more
exp^dition than they contract them; plurimi v^ (...) macula^ contra^^unt quam
eluunt, as it is said in the same place. Father, said I, would you do me the
favor to teach me these so beneficial sleights? There are a great number of
them, replied he, for as there are a many things in Confession, not easy to be
endured, so are there easy provisions made against them. And whereas the main
trouble of it consists in these heads, the shame it is to confess some certain
sins, the exac^ness requisite in particularising the circumstances, the penance
a man must undergo for the same, the resolution to be made not to fall into the
like again, the care to avoid the next occasions whereby a man comes to be
ensnared, and the remorse which he should be guilty of for the committing of
them, I doubt not but I shall this day so far satisfy you, that there shall be
nothing irksome in all this, so extremely careful have they been to leave out
of a remedy so necessary and sovereign, whatever were harsh and indigestible.

For, to begin with the trouble or confusion that attends the confession of
certain sins; it being, as you are not to learn, a thing of no small
consequence for a man to keep himself as right as he can in the esteem of his
Confessor, is it not an extraordinary convenience for him to be permitted
(according to our Fathers, and among the rest Escobar, who cites for it Suarez,
tr. 7. a. 4. n. 135) to have two Confessors, one for mortal, and another for
venial sins, so to be in good reputation with his ordinary Confessor: uti
bonam famam apud ordinarium tucatur, provided he do not thence take any
encouragement to go still on in mortal sin. And this he seconds with another
ingenious contrivance to show a man how he may confess a sin even to his
ordinary Confessor, who yet shall not perceive that it was committed since his
last confession. That is, says he, to make a general Confession and to
shuffle in that last sin among all the rest which he charges himself withal
in gross. He affirms the same thing princip. ex. 2. n. 73. And I fear not
but you will acknowledge that this decision of Father Bauny Th^ol. Mor. tr. 4.
q. 15 p. 137. takes away much of the shame it is to a man to confess his
frequent relapses; That unless it be upon some certain occasions, which happen
very seldom, there is no reason the Confessor should ask whether the sin a
man charges himself with be an habitual sin, and that he is not obliged to
answer to that point, because he has no such privilege as to put his penitent
to the shame of declaring his frequent relapses.

How Father, said I, this amounts to as much as if one should say, that a
Physician has not the privilege to ask his Patient, whether it be long since
his fever took him. Does not the difference of sins consist in their
different circumstances, and is it not the maine design of a true Penitent to
lay open the state of his Conscience before his Confessor, with a sincerity and
clearness, such as if he were speaking to ^. Christ himself, whose person the
Priest at that time represents? And is not a man extremely a stranger to this
disposition when he conceales his frequent relapses, so to smother the
greatness of his sin? This put the good Father to a little loss, who yet
endeavored rather to shift off the difficulty then resolve it, by bringing
upon the stage another rule of theirs, which introduces a fresh confusion, and
does not in the least confirm this decision of Father Bauny, which, in my
judgment is one of their most pernicious maxims, and such as is only fit to
encourage wicked men in their evil courses. I grant you, said he, that the
habit of sinning adds to the malice of sin, but it changes not its nature;
and that is the reason why a man is not obliged to make confession thereof,
according to the direction of those Fathers of ours, whom Escobar cites princ.
ex. 2. n. 39. That a man is obliged to confess only the circumstances that
alter the species of the sin, and not those that aggravate it.

This rule does our Father Granados walk by, when he says in part. 5. cont. 7.
tr. 9. d. 9. number. 22. that if a man has eaten flesh in Lent, it is sufficient
if he accuse himself only of having broken the fast, without particularising
whether it was in eating flesh, or in making two fasting day meals. And
according to our Father Reginaldus, tr. l. 6. c. 4. n. 114. A Fortune Tellers,
make ng use of the black Art, is not obliged to discover that circumstance, but
it is sufficient if he say, he has practiced Divination, without expressing
whether it were by chiromancy, or by contract with the Devil. And Fagundez,
another of our Society, affirms, part. 2. l. 4. c. 3. n. 17. To carry away a
maid is a circumstance t^t a man is not obliged to declare when the maid had
consented thereto. Our Father Escobar cites all this in the same place; num^
41, 61, 62. with a many other very curious decisions, concerning the
circumstances which a man is not obliged to confess. There you may find them
your self. These indeed, said I, are artifices of Devotion of very great
convenience.

And yet all this, replied he, would come to nothing if there were not also a
mitigation of Penance, which is that that most of all deterres men from
Confession. But now it is so qualified, that even the most delicate need not be
frightened at it, after what we have maintained in our Theses of the College of
Clermont; That if the Corfessor impose a penance proportionable to the offense,
convenientem, and that a man will not submit thereto, he may be quit by
renouncing both the absolution and the Penance imposed. So Escobar in the
practice of Penance according to our Society tr. 7. ex. 4. Number. 188. affirms,
that if the Penitent declare himself willing to have his penance adj u^n'd to
the next wo^ld, and to suff r in Purgatory the whole punishment due to him,
then is the Confessor obliged to impose a very light penance upon him for
satisfaction of the Sacrament, but more especially if he discover any aversion
to undergo a greater. That granted, said I, there is no reason Confession should
be called the Sacrament of Penance. You are mistaken, replied he for there is
still something imposed by way of penance for form sake. But Father, said I, Do
you think that man fit to receive absolution, that is unwilling to suffer any
thing that is painful or afflict ve to expiate his offenses? And when men are
in such a condition, should you not rather bind their sins then loose them?
Have you the true Idea of your Ministry, and know not that you are therein to
exercise the power of binding and loosing? Do you think it lawful to give
absolution indifferently to all that desire it, without ever examining before
hand whether I. Christ looses those in Heaven whom you absolve on earth? How
replied the Father, do you imagine us ignorant, That the Confessor ought to
judge of the disposition of his Penitent, as well because he is obliged not to
dispense the Sacraments to those that are unworthy thereof, I. Christ having
enjoined him to be a faithful Steward, and not to cast that which is holy unto
Dogs; as also because he is a Judge, and that it is the duty of a Judge to do
justice in loosing those that deserve it, and binding those that do not: and
lastly because he ought not to acquit those whom I. Christ condemns. Whose
words are these Father, said I? Our Father Filiutiu's; replied he, to 1. tr. 7.
Number. 354. You make me admire, said I, I should rather have taken them to be one
of the Fathers of the Church. But Father, this passage might well startle all
Confessors and make them very circumspect in the dispensation of this
Sacrament, so as to examine well, whether their Penitents be sufficiently
contrite, and see that the promises they make not to sin for the future be
admittable. There Is no difficulty at all in it, replies the Father, Filiutius
has been more careful then to leave Confessors in any trouble, and therefore
gives them immediately after those words this easy method to avoid it. The
Confessor shall not need be in any trouble as concerning the disposition of his
Penitent. For if he discover not sufficient expressions of his remorse, the
Confessor has no more to do then to ask him whether he does not in his soul
detest his sin: to which if he answer that he does, he is obliged to believe
him. The same thing is to be said of Resolutions made for the future, unless
there happen to be some obligation to make restitution, or to avoid some next
occasion. For this passage Father, said I, it is easily seen it comes from
Filiutius. You are mistaken, says the Father, he has taken it verbatim out of
Suazez in 3. part. to. 4. disp. 32. sect. 2. number. 2. But Father, said I, this
latter passage of Filiutius destroys what he had asserted in the former. For
he utterly devests the Confessors of all power of being Judges of the
disposition of their penitents, when he obliges them to take their own words,
even when they do not discover a sufficient remorse of conscience. Or is there
such an infallibility in their bare assertions that that simple expression is
conclusive? I much fear me, your Fathers have but too much experience that all
those who make such promises keep them not so exactly, nay, I am mistaken if
they do not often find the contrary. It matters not, says the Father, the
Confessors are nevertheless obliged to believe them. For Father Bauny who has
sifted this question very narrowly in his Summary of sins, chap. 46. p. 1090.
1091. and 1092. concludes, that whenever those, who are so far guilty of
frequent relapses, that no amendment can be perceived, cast themselves at the
feet of the Confessor, and tell him that they are sorry for what is past, and
will be reformed for the future, he ought to believe them though upon no other
ground then that of their bare assertions, though it may well be presumed that
such resolutions proceed not but from the teeth outward. Nay though they are
afterward more violently carried away with the same sins, yet ought they
not, in my opinion, to be denied absolution. Now am I confident that all your
doubts are dispersed.

But Father, said I, me thinks you put the Confessors to a great inconvenience
when you oblige them to believe the contrary to what they see. You apprehend
not, said he, the business right, that signifies no more then that they are to
act and absolve as if they did believe that resolution to be good and firm,
though in effect they believe the contrary. And so are the fore-recited
passages explained by our Fathers Suarez and Filiutius. For having affirmed,
that the Priest is obliged to believe his penitent upon his own word, they
add, that there is no necessity the Confessor should be persuaded that the
resolution of his Penitent will be executed, nor indeed that he think it
probably may: but it is sufficient, that he imagine that at that instant he
has some such intention in general, though he expect he should fall again in
a short time. And this is unanimously the doctrine of all our Authors. Ita
docent omnes authors. Will you doubt of a thing taught by all our Authors?
What then Father, said I, will become of that acknowledgment which Father
Petavius was forced to make in the preface before his book of Public Penance
p. 4. That the holy Fathers, Doctors, and Councels unanimously agree and hold
as an infallible truth, that the Penance which is preparatory to the Eucharist,
ought to be full of reality, constancy and courage, not lazy and lukewarm, or
subject to backslidings and relapses? Do you not perceive, replied he, that
Father Petavius speaks of the ancient Church? but this now is so far
unseasonable, to use the expressions of our Fathers, that, according to Father
Bauny, the contrary only is true, it is in tr. 4. q. 15. p. 95. Some Authors
affirm that Absolution ought to be denied those who fall often into the same
sins, and that especially when, after they had been diverse times absolved,
there is not the least appearance of any amendment; and there are others that
hold the contrary. But the only true opinion, is* that they ought not to be
denied absolution. And though they make no^ any advantage of the good
instructions that are many times given them; though they have not performed the
promises they had made to reform their lives; th^ugh they have not endeavored
to become more sanctified, it matters not, and, let others say what they will,
the opinion that is most true, and consequently most to be embraced, is that
even in all these cases, they ought to be absolved. And tr. 4. q. 22. p. 100.
That they ought not to be denied or delayed absolution who continue in
habitual sins against the Laws of God, Nature, and the Church, though they
discover not the least hope of amendment. Etsi ^mendationis futurae nulla spes
appareat. But Father, said I, this confidence of never missing absolution might
very well induce and encourage sinners -- I know what you would say, replied
the Father, interrupting me, but hear Father Bauny, q. 15. Absolution is not
to be denied him who acknowledges that the very presumption of being absolved
had encouraged him to sin with much more freedom then he might have done had
it not been for that presumption. And Father Caussin, maintaining this
proposition, says page 211. of his Answer to Theol. Mor. That if it were not
true, there were no use of Confession as to the greatest part of the world, and
there were no other rem^dy for sinners then the bough of a tree and a ^alt^r. O
Father, said I, what shoales of people must these maxims needs draw to your
Confession-Seats! Nor indeed, replied he, can you easily believe what
multi^^^es do come; we are ^ortwhelm'd, and ^r-run, as it were with the throngs
of our Penitents; Poenitentium numero obruimur, as it is said in The Image of
our first age, l. 3. c. 8. I know, said I, an easy way to ease you of that
importunate trouble. You need do no more then oblige sinners, to avoid the next
occasions of sinning. This only invention would put you into perfect ease. We
do not desire that ease, replied he, for as it is said in the same book l. 3.
c. 7. p. 374. The maine design of our Society is to endeavor the
establishment of virtue, to carry on the war against vice, and to cultivate
an infinite number of souls. And whereas they are very few who are willing to
avoid the next occasions, it was but requisite to define what we meant by a
next occasion, as may be seen in Escobar, in the practice of our Society, tr.
7. ex. 4. n. 226. That is not called a next occasion wherein a man sins but
seldom, as, for instance, to make use of a woman that lives in the same house
with one, three or four times in a year, when it proceeds from a sudden
temptation coming upon him; or according to Father Bauny, once or twice a
month, page 1082. and further page 1089. where he starts a question, viz, what
course is to be taken between Masters and their Maids, and Cousins of both
sexes living together, and by that means mutually induced to sin? It is fit
they should be separated, said I. He indeed affirms they should, replied he,
in case their relapses be frequent and in a manner quotidian; but if their
enjoyments are but seldom, as happily once or twice a month, and that they
cannot be separated without incurring some great prejudice and inconvenience,
they ought to be absolved according to his Authors, and among others Suarez,
provided they make good promises not to sin any more, and be tiuely sorry for
what is past. I understood him so, for he had taught me before what the
Confessor must be satisfied with to judge of that sorrow. And Father Bauny,
continued he, page 1083. and 1084. permits those that are engaged in the next
occasions, to continue therein, when they cannot avoid them without finding the
world matter of discourse, or running into some inconvenience thereby. In like
manner, in his Moral Theology, tr. 4. de poenit. q. 14. page 94. and q. 13.
page 93. he says that a Confessor may and ought to absolve a woman, who
entertaines in her house, a man with whom she sins often, if she cannot
disengage him without loss of reputation, or that there (...) some reason he
should be still retained; si non potest honest ejicere, aut habeat al^qam
causam retinendi, provided she make a resolution not to commit evil with him
any more.

Well Father, said I, the obligation to quit occasions of sinning is certainly
attended with very easy conditions, if the least ensuing inconvenience makes
it void; but if I mistake not, a man is obliged thereto, even according to your
Fathers, when there is no trouble at all. It Is very true, replied he, though
this, as a general rule, is not without some exception. For Father Bauny says
in the same place: It is lawful for persons of all qualities, conditions and
sexes to go into the places of common prostitution, there to convert sinful
women, though it be very probable that they will commit sin there themselves,
nay happily though they have found by frequent experience that they are drawn
into sin by the very sight and insinuations of such women. And though there
are some Doctors who approve not of this opinion, and do absolutely believe,
that it is not lawful for a man to hazard his own salvation, to relieve his
neighbor, yet shall I not stick to embrace the opinion they oppose. These,
Father, said I, are a new sort of Evangelists; but upon what ground is it that
Father Bauny gives them this Mission? upon a certain principle of his own,
cited by him out of Basilius Pontius. I have given you an account of it
formerly, and I think you cannot but remember it. It Is this, that a man may
directly, and for it self, primo and per se, seek after such an occasion, for
either the temporal or spiritual good of himself or his neighbor.

These passages I thought so horrid, that I was almost in a mind to break off
the discourse; but I smothered that sentiment to give him way to proceed, and,
accordingly, only asked him, what consonancy is there Father, between this
doctrine and that of the Gospel, which obliges a man to pluck out his eyes, and
to cut off that which is most necessary, when it is obstructive as to
salvation? And how can you imagine that a man voluntarily continuing in the
occasions of sinning can sincerely detest sin? Is not the contrary apparent,
that is, that he has not the sense thereof which he ought to have, and that he
has not yet attained that true conversion of the heart, which begets in a man
as great a love for God as he had had for the Creatures? How, said he, that
were little less then true contrition. It seems you are yet to learn, that,
as Father Pintere^u says in part. 2. page 50. of his Abbot of Boisi^, All our
Fathers unanimously teach, that it is an error, nay almost a heresy, to
affirm, that contrition is necessary, and that attrition alone, and that
grounded upon no other motive then the torments of Hell which excludes the
desire of offending, is not sufficient with the Sacrament. How Father, said I,
is it almost an article of faith, that attrition proceeding from the fear of
torment suffices with the Sacrament? I presume this tenet is particularly held
only by your Fathers. For others who believe attrition with the Sacrament to
be sufficient, do yet require there should be something in it of the love of
God. Further, some of your own Authors held not this doctrine so certain
heretofore. For your F. Suarez has this expression, De poenit. q. 90. ar. 4.
disp. 15. sect. 4. number. 17. Though it be a probable opinion, says he, that
Attrition is sufficient with the Sacrament, yet is it not certaine^, nay it may
be erron^ous, non est certa, and potest esse falsa. If it be erroneous*
Attrition is not sufficient to effect a man's Salvation; He therefore that dies
wittingly in that condition, voluntarily runs the moral hazard of eternal
damnation. For this opinion is neither very ancient, nor very common. Nec valde
antiqua, nec multum communis Neither was Sanchez* over-confident of the
certainty of it; since he says in his Summary, l. 1. c. 9. nu. 34. That the
sick person and the Confessor, who at the point of death should be satisfied
with Attrition with the Sacrament, were guilty of mortal sin, by reason of
the great hazard of damnation wherein the Penitent should be, if the opinion,
affirming that Attrition is sufficient with the Sacrament, be not certainly
true. Of the same was Comitolus, when he says, Resp. mor. l. 1. q. 32. n. 7.8.
that it is not over-certain, that attrition is sufficient with the Sacrament.

How is that, says the good Father, interrupting me at those words, it seems
then you read our Authors? It Is very well done; but it were better that when you
do read them, it were with some of us. Do you not perceive, that, because you
have read them alone you conclude that those passages do somewbat prejudice
those who now maintain our doctrine of attrition, whereas we should have shown
you that nothing adds more to their reputation. For what glory is it to our
present Fathers, that they have of a sudden so generally spread their opinion,
that, Divines excepted there is hardly any one but imagines, that what we now
hold concerning attrition, was, from the beginning, the absolute Creed of the
faithful. So that when you demonstrate by our very Fathers, that not many
years since, this opinion was not certain, what do you but attribute the
honor of this establishment to our latest Authors?

Thus our intimate Friend Diana thought he put an obligation upon us, by laying
down the several degrees whereby it is come to this height. This he does p. 5.
tr. 13. where he says, That heretofore the ancient Schoolmen held that a man
had no sooner committed a mortal sin, but he stood in need of contrition.
But since it has been believed that a man is not obliged thereto but only on
festival days. Afterward it was thought necessary only when the people
stood in fear of some great calamity. That according to others, a man was
obliged not to delay it long when near death. But that our Fathers Hurtado and
Vasques have very excellently confuted all these opinions, and demonstrate that
a man is not obliged thereto save when he cannot be absolved any other way, or
at the point of death. But to proceed to the miraculous progress of this
doctrine, I shall add, that our Fathers, Fagundez, praec. 2 c. 4. n. 13.
Granados, in 3. p. contr. 7. tr. 3. d. 3. sect. 4. number. 17. and Escobar, tr. 7.
ex. 4. n. 88. in the Practice of our Society, have decided, That contrition is
not necessary even at the point of death, because, say they, if attrition with
the Sacrament be not sufficient at the point of death, it would follow that
attrition were not sufficient with the Sacrament. And our learned Hurtado, de
sacr. d. 6. cited by Diana. part 4. tr. 4. Miscell. R. 193. and by Escobar. tr.
7. ex. 4. n. 91. goes yet further, for he says. Is that remorse which proceeds
purely from a man's reflection on the temporal inconvenience following upon the
sin he has committed (as the loss of health, or money) sufficient or no? We
must distinguish. If he look not on that evil or inconvenience as coming from
the hand of God, the remorse is not sufficient; but if he believe that it does
come from God, as in effect* all evil, as Diana says, except that of sin,
comes from him, such a remorse is sufficient. Escobar says the same thing in
The Practice of our Society. Our Father Franciscus Amicus affirms also the
same thing, T. 8. disp. 3. number. 13. This startles me Father, said I. For I see
not any thing in this kind of attrition but what is natural; and so a sinner
may become worthy absolution^, without any supernatural grace; now there is not
any one but knows this to be a heresy condemned by the Council. I should
indeed have thought so, as well as you, replied he, and yet there is a
necessity it should be otherwise. For our Fathers of the College of Clermont,
have maintained in their Theses of May 23. and Jun. 6. 1644. Col. 4. n. 1. That
attrition may be holy and sufficient for the Sacrament though it be not
supernatural. And in those of August, 1643. that a purely-natural attrition is
sufficient for the Sacrament, provided it be honest. Ad Sacramentum sufficit
attritio naturalis, modo honesta. There can no more be said to this point,
unless I should add a consequence easily drawn from these principles, which is,
that contrition is of so little concernment as to the Sacrament, that, on the
contrary it would prove prejudicial thereto, in that, taking away sins of it
self, it would leave nothing for the Sacrament to do. This is affirmed by our
Father Valentia, that eminent Jesuit, Tom. 4. disp. 7. qu. 8. p. 4. Contrition
is not requisite at all in order to obtain the prin ipal effect of the
Sacrament* nay on the contrary, it is rather obstructive: imo obstat potius quo
minu^ effectus sequatur. There cannot any thing be said more to the advantage
of Attrition.

I am of your mind, Father, said I, but give me leave to give you my thoughts
of it, and discover to you what excesses this doctrine runs into, when you
affirm that Attrition wrought in a man by the mere fear of torment, is, with
the Sacrament, sufficient to justify sinners, does it not clearly follow, that
people may expiate their sins all their life in that manner, and consequently
be saved without ever having loved God in their lives? Durst your Fathers
maintain this? I see well enough by what you say, replied the Father, that you
are not much skilled in the doctrine of our Fathers concerning the love of God.
It is the last draught of their Moral^ty, and that of the greatest consequence
of any. You might have apprehended something of it by the passages I have cited
touching contri ion. But I shall furnish you with others, and therefore
interupt me not, for they are very considerable in the sequel.

Hear then Escobar, who cites the different opinions of our Authors upon this
subject in the exercise of the love of God, according to our Society, tr. 1.
ex. 2. n. 21. and tr. 5. ex. 4. n. 8. upon this question; When is a man obliged
to have actually an affection for God? Suarez says, it is sufficient a man
love him before he dies, not assigning any particular time. Vasqu^z, that it is
sufficient even at the point of death. Others, when a man receives his
baptism. Others, when he is obliged to be contrite. Others, upon holy days.
But our Father Castro Palao disputes against all those opinions, and that
justly, merito. Hurtado de Mendoza pretends that a man is obliged to do it once
every year, and that we are very gently dealt withal to be dispensed with from
doing it oftener. Our Father Coninch believes a man to be obliged once in three
or four years. Henriquez, once in five years. But Filiutius affirms, it is
probable, that in rigor, a man not obliged every five years. When then? He
refers it to the judgment of the wise. I took no notice of this Drollery, where
the spirit of man does so insolently sport it with the love of God. But
continued he, our Father Anthony Sirmond, who triumphs upon this subject in his
admirable book of the de^nce of virtue, in tr. 2. sect. 1. page 12, 13, 14,
etc. discourses thus; Saint Thomas says, that a man is obliged to love God as
soon as he is grown up to be master of his reason and discretion. But that is a
little too soon. Scotus, every sunday, upon what ground? Others, when a man is
in some grievous temptation. True, in case there be no other way to avoid the
temptation. Sotus, when a man receives some benefit from God. It Is good to be
thankful. Others, at the point of death. That Is somewhat of the latest I cannot
be persuaded it ought to be done at every reception of some sacrament. For in
that case, Attrition with Confession is sufficient, if it stand with a man's
convenience. Suarez says, that a man is obliged thereto at some certain time.
But what? Of that he leaves you to be judge your self, as not knowing what to
say to it. Now what that Doctor knew not, I know not who does know. And in
fine, he concludes, that a man is not, in rigor, obliged to any thing but the
observation of the other commandments without any affection toward God, or
resignation of our hearts to him, provided that we do not hate him. This is
that he would prove throughout all his second Treatise. You cannot but see it
in every page, and among the rest in the 16.19.24.28. where he has these
words. God, when he commands us to love him, is satisfied if we do but obey him
in his other Commandments. If God had said, I will destroy you, how obedient
soever you may be to me, if you do not withal give me your hearts, were this a
motive proportionable to the end which God might and ought to propose to
himself? It is therefore said, that we shall love God by doing his will, as if
we had for him all the affection that could be, that is, as if the motive of
charity inclined us thereto. If this really happen, it is so much the better; if
not, we shall nevertheless, in rigor, still obey the commandment of Love* by
doing the works thereof. So that, (do but observe the goodness of God) we are
not so much commanded to love him, as not to hate him.

And thus have our Fathers disengaged men from that irksome obligation of
loving God actually. And this doctrine is of so great importance, that our
Fathers Annat, Pintereau, le Moine, and A. Sirmond himself, have very
vigorously maintained it, when some made it very much their business to oppose
it. I refer you to their Answers to the Moral Theology: and particularly to
that of Father Pintereau in the 2. p. of the Abbot of Boisie page 53. you may
judge of the consequence of this Dispensation, according to the price which he
says it cost, which is the blood of JESUS CHRIST. This is the consummation of
this Doctrine. There you will find that to be dispensed from the troublesome
obligation of loving God, is the privilege of the Evangelical Law above the
Judaical. It was but reasonable, says he, that God in the Law of Grace of the
New Testament, should take away that troublesome and difficult obligation,
(which was in sore^ under the Law of tig^r) of ^xe cising acts of perfect
contrition in order to Justification; and ^t h sh uld institute Sacraments,
such as, in its stead, might carry on a more eas^ dispensation. Otherwise,
Christians, who are the children, could not be reconciled unto, and received
into the embraces of their Fathe, upon so easy te mes, as the Jews, who were
slaves, could obtain mercy from their Lord.

O Father, said I, there is no patience in the world but you are able to
overcome, nor can a man possibly without horror hear the things you have
entertained me with. They come not from me, replied the Father. I know it very
well, said I. But I see not any aversion you have for them, nay you are so far
from detesting the Authors of these Maxims, that you highly esteem them. Do
you not fear, left your compliance with them may make you a partaker of their
guilt? Or can you be ignorant, that Saint Paul thinks worthy of death* not
only those who are the Authors of evils, but also those that consent thereto?

Was it not sufficient, that by your palliations you have permitted men to do
many things which were forbidden, but you must further give them occasion to
commit even those crimes, which, by the easiness and assurance of Absolution
so freely by you proffered to them for the same, you cannot ex use, by
devesting, to that purpose, the Priests of all Power, and obliging them, rather
like sl ves then Judges, to absolve the most inveterate sinners, without
requiring the l ast love toward God, amendment of life, or expression of
remorse, other then Promises, thousands of times broken, without doing any
penance, but what they themselves shall think fit to submit to, and without
enjoining them to avoid the occasions of sinning, if they receive the least
inconvenience thereby? But you are yet more extravagant and the liberty you
have taken to u^settle the most sacred rules of Christian conduct extends to an
absolute over-turning of the law of God. You violate the great Commandment on
which hang all the Law and the Prophets. You give Piety an assault in the very
heart; you deprive it of that spirit whence it derives all vigor and life. You
affirm the love of God not to be necessary to salvation; nay your excess is
such as to pretend that this dispensation from the love of God is the advantage
that the world derives from JESUS CHRIST. This certainly is the very height of
impiety. The price of the blood of Jesus Christ shall be to procure us a
dispensation from loving him. Before the Incarnation men were obliged to love
God, but since that God has so loved the World as to bestow on it his only
Son, the world redeemed by him, shall be discharged from loving him. Strange
Divinity of our days! That men should presume to take away that Anathema which
Saint Paul pronounces against those who love not the Lord JESUS. That which
Saint John says is clearly blown away, that he who loves not remains in
death; nay what is said by Jesus Christ himself, that, he who loves him not
keeps not his commandemenss. Thus do they make those worthy the enjoyments of
God in Eternity who never loved God in their lives. Behold the Mystery of
iniquity accomplished! Open your eyes at length, Father, and if you have not
been moved by the other extravagances of your Casuists, let the
extraordinarinesse of those last draw you out of them. It Is my hearty prayer for
you, and all your Fathers, and withal, that God would be pleased, so to
enlighten them that they may see how uncertain that light is whereby they have
been led into such precipices, and fill those with his love who give men a
dispensation from it.

After some other discourse of this kind, I took leave of the Father. And I see
no great likelihood of ever visiting him again, but be not at all troubled at
it; for if there be any necessity I should entertain you further with their
Maxims, I am so well read in their books, that I am able to acquaint you with
as much of their Morality, and happily more of their Politics, then he would
have done himself. I am, etc.

Paris, Aug. 2. 1656.
To the Reverend Fathers of the Society of JESUS. From the Author of the
Letters to the PROVINCIAL. LETTER XI.
REVEREND FATHERS,
I have met with the letters which you scatter abroad in answer to those I have
written to one of my friends, a PROVINCIAL, upon occasion of your Morality,
wherein one of the principal points of your vindication, is, that I have not
been serious enough when I have treated of your maxims. And this you repeat
over and over in all your writings, and press so much as to affirm I make
sport with holy things.

This reproach, Fathers, as it is very much unexpected, so is it no less unjust.
For where do you find me sporting with holy things? you particularly instance
in in the Contract MOHATRA, and the story of JOHN D'ALBA. But are those the
things which you call holy?

Do you look on the Mohatra as a thing that requires so much veneration that it
is blasphemy not to speak of it with respect? and for Father' Bauny's Lectures,
concerning Theft, whereby John 'd Alba was induced to commit it against your
selves, are they so sacred, that you have a privilege to treat those as
Reprobates that laugh at them?

What, Fathers, must the imaginations of your Authors be received for such
truths as wherein our Faith is concerned; and people cannot make sport with the
passages of Escobar, and the fantastic and dis-christian-like decisions of
your other Authors, but they must be charged with scoffing at Religion? Is it
possible you should presume to repeat so often a thing so irrational? Or are
you not afraid, when you blame me for censuring your extravagancies, to give me
fresh occasion to laugh at the reproach, and to return it upon your own heads,
by showing, that I have not taken occasion to laugh at any thing but what is
ridiculous in your books; and consequently that when I make sport with your
Morality, I am so far from jesting with holy things, as the doctrine of your
Casuists is different from the holy precepts of the Gospel.

There is certainly, Fathers, a vast difference between laughing at Religion
and laughing at those that profane it by their extravagant opinions. It were
impiety to want a respect for the truths which the spirit of God has
revealed; but it were no less impiety to want a contempt for the falsities
which the spirit of man opposes thereto.

For, Fathers, since you force me to engage in this discourse, I beseech you
consider, that a^ Christian verities require love and respect, so the errors
contrary thereto deserve only scorn and detestation. The reason whereof, is,
that as there are two things in the Truths of Religion, a divine beauty, that
renders them amiable and inviting, and a sacred Majesty, which makes them
dreadful and venerable; so are there likewise two things in Errors; impiety
rendering them horrid; and impertinence, making them ridiculous. And therefore
as the Saints have ever, for truth, these two sentiments of love and fear, and
that their wisdom is comprehended between Fear, the beginning, and Love the
end of it; so have they for error these two sentiments, of detestation and
contempt, and their zeal is equally taken up to oppose, by force, the malice of
the impious, and, with scoffing, to confute their folly and extravagance.

Flatter not your selves therefore Fathers, with any hope to make the world
believe, that it is a thing unbeseeming a Christian to treat errors with
scorn, since it is an easy matter to satisfy those that know not so much,
that this kind of proceeding is very justifiable, that it is frequent among the
Fathers of the Church, and is authorized by the Scripture, and the examples of
the greatest Saints, nay by God himself.

For do we not find, that God at the same time both hates and scorns sinners,
nay so far, that even at the hour of their death, a time when their condition
is most sad and deplorable, the divine wisdom joins laughter and scorn to
that vengeance and indignation which shall turn them over into eternal
punishment? I will also laugh at your destruction, and mock when your fear
comes. And the Saints actuated by the same spirit shall do the like, since
that, according to David, when they see the destruction of the wicked, they
shall fear and laugh at it the same time; Videbunt justi, and timebunt, and
super ^um ridebunt. And Job has the li^e expression; the righteous man shall
laugh them to scorn.

But it is a thing very remarkable upon this occasion, that in the first words
which God said to man after his fall, we find a scoffing discourse, and,
according to the Fathers, a bitter Irony. For when Adam had broken the
commandment out of the hope which the Devil had put him into of being made
like unto God, it is apparent out of the Scripture, that God, for his
punishment made him subject to death, and yet after he had brought him into
that condition, as the reward of his sin, he yet laughed at him in that
posture with these scoffing expressions. Behold man is become like one of us.
Which is a sharp and biting Irony, wherewith God reproved him most bitterly,
according to Saint Chrysostom and his interpreters. Adam, says Rupertus,
deserved to be scoffed at by that Irony, and this ironicall expression made him
more fully sensible of his indiscretion then a serious one could have done. And
Hugo de Saint Victor, having affirmed the same thing, adds, that this irony
was a just reward for his sottish credulity, and that this kind of raillery is
an act of justice when he on whom it is bestowed has deserved it.

You see then, Fathers, that derision is sometimes the fittest way to reduce
men out of their extravagances, and that it is at that time an action of
justice, because as Jeremy says, the actions of those who go astray, are
worthy to be laughed at by reason of th ir vanity: Vana sunt and risu digna.
And it is so far from impiety to deride them, that it is an argument of divine
wisdom, according to Saint Augustine. The wise laugh at the indiscreet,
because they are wise, not according to their own wisdom, but that divine
wisdom which shall laugh at the death of the wicked.

In like manner the Prophets, filled with the spirit of God, have made use of
these derisions, as we see in the examples of Daniel and Eliah. In a word, the
very discourses of JESUS CHRIST himself are not without example thereof. And it
is the observation of Saint Augustine, that when he would humble Nicodemus, who
thought himself very well skilled in the law, seeing him much lifted up with
pride by his quality of Doctor among the Jews, he exercises and brings down
his presumption by the depth of his demands, and reduced him to an incapacity
of answering. What* said he to him, are you a Master in Israel, and ignorant of
these things? Which is as much as if ^e had said, Arrogant Prince, acknowledge
that you know nothing. And Saint Chrysostom and Saint Cyril affirm upon that
passage, that he deserved to be so derided.

You see then, Fathers, that if it should happen at this day that such as
pretend to be masters among the Christians, as Nicodemus and the Pharisees were
among the Jews, be ignorant of the principles of Religion, and maintain, for
instance, that a man may be saved without ever loving God in all his life, he
did but follow the example of Jesus Christ, that should laugh at their
ignorance and their vanity.

I doubt not, Fathers, but these sacred examples are sufficient to convince you
that it is not a proceeding contrary to that of the Saints to laugh at the
errors and extravagances of men; otherwise you must quarrel with that of the
greatest Doctors of the Church, who have practiced it. And among these may be
numbered S. Hierom, in his letters, and in his writings against Jovinian,
Vigilantius and the Pelagians; Tertullian, in his Apologetick against the
simplicity of Idolaters: Saint Augustine, against the Religious men of Africa,
whom he calls the Hairy men: Saint Irenaeus against the Gnostics; Saint
Bernard, and other Fathers of the Church, who having been imitators of the
Apostles, are to be imitated by the faithful in all times, since that they are
proposed, let men say what they will, as a true model for the Christians even
of these days.

And this made me the more confident I could not do amiss while I followed
them. Which since I have sufficiently shown that I have done, I have no more to
say to this point, but only those excellent words of Tertullian, which give an
account of all my procedure. What I have done is but as it were a trial of
skill before a set combat. I have rather shown you the wounds might be given
you, then give you any. If there are some passages at which a man cannot well
forbear laughing, it must be attributed to the subject treated of, inclining
thereto. There are a many things which deserve to be thus laughed at, and made
sport with, lest we might be thought to attribute any weight thereto by
opposing them seriously* There Is nothing more suitable to Vanity then Derision,
and it is a privilege proper to Truth to laugh, because she is cheerful, and
to scorn her enemies, because she is confident of Victory. It Is true, great
care must be taken that the raillery be not flat and unworthy of Truth. But
keeping close to that, when a man can with prudence make use thereof, it is but
his duty to do it.

What think you, Fathers, is not this passage very pertinent to our subject?
What I have done is only a trial of skill before a combat. I have been all
this while only in jest, and have rather shown you the wounds you might
receive, then given you any. I have simply laid down your passages, without
making any reflection thereupon, if there has happened any occasion of
laughing, it is because the subject was inclinable theret^. For what is more
likely to occasion laughter, then to see a thing so grave as CHRISTIAN MORALITY
fraught with such fantastic imaginations as yours are? For if, when men's
expectations were so high concerning these maxims, that it was said that JESUS
CHRIST himself had revealed them to the Fathers of the Society, one finds
there, that a Priest who had received money to say a mass, may take more from
others by transferring to them all the part and interest he had in the
Sacrific^; That a Religious man is not excommunicable for quitting his habit to
go and dance, steal, or repair, incognito, to debauched places; and that a
man satisfies the precept of hearing mass, by hearing four parts of a Mass at
the same time from several priests; when, I say, a man meets with these
decisions, and others of the same metal, it is impossible but that such an
elusion of the expectation must needs cause laughter, for nothing more inclines
thereto, then an incredible disproportion between what a man looks for and
what he finds. And indeed how could a man otherwise treat of the greatest part
of these matters, since that* according to Tertullian, to speak seriously of
them were to countenance them. What, must we bring in Scripture and Tradition
to show that for a man to run his enemy through behind his back, or to do it in
an ambush* is to kill him treacherously; and that to buy a Benefice is to give
money as the motive of the resignation thereof? There are therefore some things
fit to be contemned, and deserve only to be laughed at and made sport with. In
a word, what this ancient Author says, that nothing is more suitable to Vanity
then Derision, and indeed the whole passage comes so suitably and with so much
conviction to our purpose, that it is no longer to be questioned, whether
errors may be laughed at without running into any indecorum. Nay, Fathers I
shall affirm they may be laughed at without any breach of charity, though that
be one of the things you most reproach me with in your writings. For charity
does sometimes oblige us to laugh at the errors of men, the rather to incline
them to laugh thereat themselves, and to shun them, according to the words of
Saint Augustine: Haec tu misericorditer irride, ut eis ridenda and fugienda
commendes. The same charity does also many times oblige us to give them a
repulse with indignation, according to this saying of Gregory Nazianzen; The
spirit of mildness and charity has its angry sallios and emotions. In a word,
as Saint Augustine says, Who dares affirms that truth ought to remain
weaponless to deal with falsehood, and that it is lawful for the enemies of
Religion to frighten the faithful with high words, and to divert them by
pleasant passages; but that the Catholics should not write but with a certain
coldness of style such as might lay the Readers asleep?

Is it not sufficiently apparent hence, that according to this procedure we
should suffer the most extravagant and most pernicious errors to be brought
into the Church, when it shall not be lawful to slight and abuse them, for fear
of being charged with running into an indecorum; nor yet to confute them with
violence, for fear of being taxed with want of charity?

What, Fathers, you shall be allowed to affirm that one may kill another to
avoid an affront, or a box of the ear, and it shall not be lawful publicly to
refute a common error of such consequence? You are at liberty to hold, that a
Judge may, with a safe conscience, detaire what he had received for giving an
unjust sentence, and others shall not have the same, to contradict you? You
shall print with the privilege and approbation of your Doctors, that a man may
be saved without ever loving God, and would muzzle their mouths who would
defend that verity of our Faith, by telling them that they are guilty of a
breach of fraternal charity, for opposing you, and Christian moderation, for
laughing at your Maxims. I fear me, Fathers, there are those in the world,
whom you could happily induce to believe such a thing. If there be any so
persuaded, and that think I might commit a breach of the charity I owe you, by
discrediting your Morality. I wish they had* with attention, examined whence
that sentiment took its first rise in them. For though they imagine it proceeds
from their zeal, which could not, without scandal, see their neighbor accused,
yet I would entreat them to consider, that it is not impossible it might come
otherwise; nay that it is probable it proceeds from that secret, and, many
times, even to our selves, unknown disgust, which the unhappy leaven within us
never fails to stir up against those that endeavor the reformation of
manners. And to give them a rule whereby they may discover the true principle
thereof, I would ask them, whether at the same time that it pitties them to see
Religious men treated after this rate, they are not more troubled that
Religious men should treat Truth as they have done. And if they are incensed
not only against the LETTERS, but also against the MAXIMS cited therein, I
shall acknowledge that their resentment may happily proceed from some zeal, but
not well illuminated; and then the passage here produced will sufficiently
enlighten them. But if their violence be against the reprehensions and not
against the things reprehended, your Reverences must pardon me if I cannot
avoid telling them, that they are most grossly abused, and that their zeal is
very blind.

It Is certainly a strange zeal that is incensed against those that discover
public enormities, and not against those that commit them! What new kind of
charity is this that is offended to see manifest errors baffled merely by
bringing them on the stage, and is not moved to see Morality turned upside down
by those errors? If these persons were in danger to be assassinated, would
they be offended with any one that should acquaint them with the ambush laid
for them, and instead of turning out of their way to avoid it, would sit down
and bemone the want of charity in those that discovered the wicked design of
those assassins? Are they angry when they are forbidden to eat such a meat,
because it is poisoned, or to go into a City when the plague is in it?

Whence comes it then that they find this want of charity when a man discovers
Maxims prejudicial to Religion; and on the contrary, think it a great defect
of charity not to discover things prejudicial to their health and lives; but
that the tenderness they have for their lives, makes them take kindly whatever
contributes to the preservation thereof, and the indifference they have for
Truth, makes them not only avoid having any part in her vindication, but also
not a little troubled when they see others endeavoring the destruction of
Falsehood?

Let them then as in the sight of God, consider, how shameful and pernicious
the Morality, which your Casuists scatter through all parts, is to the Church;
how scandalous and illimitable the liberty you introduce into Manners, is; with
what a violent and obstinate confidence you maintain them. And if they think it
not time to arm against such disorders, their blindness is as much to be
deplored as yours, since that both you and they have equal cause to fear this
saying of Saint Augustine upon that of JESUS CHRIST in the Gospel; Woe unto the
blind that lead; woe unto the blind that are led: vae caecis ducentibus, vae
caecis sequentibus.

But to the end you may have no occasion to put these impressions into others,
nor to take them your selves. I will acquaint you Fathers, (and I blush that
you engage me to acquaint you with what I should have learned from you) with
the marks which the Fathers of the Church have left us, whereby to discern
whether reprehensions proceed from a spirit of piety and charity, or from a
spirit of impiety and exasperation.

The first of these rules, i^, that the spirit of piety enclines a man to speak
always with truth and sincerity, whereas envy and exasperation spare neither
lies nor calumnies: splendentia and vehementia, sed rebus veris, says Saint
Augustine. Whoever makes use of lying, acts by the spirit of Satan. There Is no
direction of the intention can rectify calumny; and were it to convert the
whole earth, it were not lawful to traduce the innocent, because we must not
commit the least evil to promote the greatest good, and that the truth of God
does not stand in need of our lying, as the Scripture says* It is the duty of
the champions of Truth, says Saint Hilary, not to advance any thing but what
is true. Accordingly, Fathers, I may say, as in the presence of God, that there
is nothing I detest more then to do Truth the least violence imaginable, and
that I have ever been extremely careful, not only not to falsify (that were
horrid) but even not to alter or distract, in the least, the sense of any
passage. So that if I durst presume upon this occasion to make use of the words
of the same Saint Hilary, I might safely say with him: If we advance things
that are untrue, let our discourses be reputed infamous; but if we plainly show
that what we do produce is public and manifest, it is no breach of moderation,
and Apostolical Liberty to reprove them.

But, Fathers, it is not enough not to produce any but true things, but we must
also not produce all that are such, because there ought to be alleged only
those things that are requisite to discover, and not those which can only hurt
without any advantage. And so, as the first rule is to speak with truth; the
second is to speak with discretion. Wicked men, says Saint Augustine,
persecuting the good, are hurried away with the blind passion that animates
them; whereas the good prosecute the wicked with a prudent discretion, as
Chirurgions consider where they cut, whereas murderers care not where they
strike. You know, Fathers, that of the Maxims of your Authors I have not cited
those that might have troubled you most, though I might have done it without
any breach of discretion, as well as a many learned Catholics, that have done
it heretofore. All those who have read your Authors know as well as your selves
how sparing I have been to you as to that; besides that I have not said ought
relating to any one in particular; and indeed should be much troubled had I
discovered any secret and personal miscarriage, what pregnant proof soever I
might have of it. For I know it to be the character of envy and animosity, and
that a man should never do it, unless there be some extraordinary necessity for
it, as to the benefit of the Church. It is therefore evident that I have have
not any ways been wanting as to modesty, in what I have been forced to say
concerning the Maxims of your Morality; and that there is much more reason you
should acknowledge my reservedness, then complain of my indiscretion.

The third rule, Fathers, is, that when a man is obliged to fall into something
of satyr, the spirit of piety inclines him to direct his wit against errors,
not against holy things; whereas the spirit of Sycophancy, impiety and heresy
makes sport with what is most sacred. I have already vindicated my self as to
this point. And certainly a man, speaking only of the opinions I have cited
out of your Authors, is far enough from being subject to that vice.

In a word to shorten these rules, I shall only trouble you with this one
more, which is t principle and end of all the rest. And that is, that the
spirit of Charity inclines a man to make hearty wishes for their salvation,
against whom he speaks; and, when he directs his reproaches to men, at the same
time to address his prayers to God. A man should always, with Saint
Augustine, preserve charity in his heart, even when he is obliged to do
outwardly things that, to men, seem very harsh, and to smite them with a
rough, but obliging severity, their advantage being to be preferred before
their satisfaction. I am persuaded, Fathers, that my LETTERS contain not any
thing whence it might be inferred that I have not had that desire for you, and
consequently that Charity obliges you to believe that I really had it, when you
can find nothing in them to the contrary. It is therefore evident that you
cannot make it appear I have offended either against this rule, or indeed
against any one of those that charity obliges us to observe; and therefore you
had no reason to aver that I had made a breach thereof in what I have done.

But Fathers, since you will needs, be pleased, in few words to observe a
carriage offending against all these rules, and that has the right mark of
Sycophancy, envy, and uncharitableness I will; give you instances thereof. And
that they may be such as are well known to you, I shall take them out of your
own writings.

To begin then with the unworthy manner wherein your Authors speak of things
sacred whether it be in their ralleries, their Gallanteries, or their serious
and grave discourses, do you think that so many ridiculous stories of your
Father Bin^t in his Consolation of the sick are any way pertinent to the design
he had taken, Christianly to comfort those whom God afflicts? Will you affirm,
that that profane and superficial way wherein your Father le Moine has
treated of piety in his easy Devotion, is more likely to beget respect then
contempt for the Idea he would form of Christian virtue? His whole book of
Moral Representation, does it breath any thing else, as well in the prose as
verse, but a spirit full of vanity and the fooleries of the world? Is that a
piece beseeming a Priest, that ode, of the seventh book, entitled The elogie
of chastity, where it is shown, that all handsome things are red, or subject to
be red. This he writ to comfort a certain Lady whom he calls Delphina, upon her
frequent blushing. In every stanza, he takes occasion to say that some of those
things that are most esteemed, are red, as Roses, Pomgranat^s, the mouth, the
tongue; and among these Galanteries infamous in a religious man does he
insolently presume to bring in those blessed spirits which are always in the
presence of God, and whereof Christians ought not to speak but with veneration.

The Cherubims above the skies,
Of head and feathers only framed,
Who by Gods spirit are inflamed,
Enlightened by his radiant eyes,
These glorious flying faces spread
A beauty ever glowing-red,
Or with their own or with Gods fire;
And midst these mutual fervours they
Move their wings gently to allay
And fan the ardor they acquire:
But redness is in thee displayed,
Delphina, with far greater grace,
For honor dwells upon thy face
In purple like a King arrayed, etc.
What think you of it, Fathers? This preference of the redness of Delphina
before the ardor of those spirits, who have no other then that of charity, and
the comparison of a fan to those mysterious wings, do you think them very
Christian-like in a mouth that consecrates the adorable body of JESUS CHRIST? I
know he said it only to seem a Gallant, and in a merry humor, but this is
that which is called jesting with holy things. And is it not true, that if he
had justice done him, he should not escape a censure, though, to clear himself,
he alleged that reason, which is not it self less censurable, produced by him
in the first book; That the College of Sorbonne has no jurisdiction over
Parnassus, and that the errors of that Country are not subject to censures or
the Inquisition; as if a man were forbidden to be a Blasphemer and an Athiest
only in Prose. Nor would this other passage of the Preface before the same
book stand him in much more stead; That the water of the river on whose banks
he had written his verses had such a faculty to make Poets, that though it were
consecrated and made holy water, yet were it not able to chase away the Demon
of Poesy. Nor yet that of your Father Garassus in his Summary of the principal
verities of Religion, page 649. where he joins blasphemy and heresy together;
speaking of the sacred mystery of the Incarnation in this manner; The humane
Personality has been as it were graffed or set on horseback upon the
personality of the Word. Nor this other passage, to omit a many others, of the
same Author, page 510. where he says upon occasion of the name of Jesus
commonly figured thus, IHS
That some have taken away the Cross, and take the characters alone in this
manner IHS, which is a JESUS dismounted and despoiled.

Thus do you unworthily treat of the verities of Religion, contrary to the
inviolable rule whereby we are obliged not to speak of them but with reverence.
But you no less break that which obliges us not to speak but with truth and
discretion. What is more obvious in your writings then Calumny? Does your
Father Brisacier speak truly and sincerely, when he says, 4. part. p. 24. and
15. that the Nuns of Port Royal pray not to the Saints, and that they have no
images in their Church, when all Paris can witness the contrary? And how
implacable is he to the innocence of those Religious Women who live so
virtuously and austerely, when he calls them, Impenitent Virgins,
asacramentaries, in-communicants, foolish virgins, fantastic, Calaganes,
desperate, and what you please; and traduces them with so many other calumnies,
which could do no less then deserve the censure of the late Archbishop of
Paris. Does he discreetly, when he calumniates Priests of unblameable lives, so
far as to affirm 1. p. page 22. That they practice Novelties in Confession, to
ensnare the handsome and the innocent, and that it were an horror to him to
relate the abominable crimes they commit? Is it not an unsupportable temerity
to advance such horrid impostures, not only without proof, but without the
least pretense or probability? I shall dilate no further as to this point, and
refer the larger discourse I intend you of it to another time: for I have
somewhat to say to this subject, and what I have said is enough to let you see
how far you offend against Truth and Discretion together.

But it will happily be said that you break not the last rule which obliges a man
to wish their salvation whom he speaks against, and that none can accuse you as
to that, without searching into the secret of your hearts, which are known
only to God himself. And yet, how strange soever it might seem, there is
something to prove you guilty, even of that. For though your uncharitableness
toward your Adversaries has been so great as to wish their eternal
destruction; yet such has been withal your blindness that you have discovered
so abominable a wish. Nay so far have you been from having any secret desires
of their salvation, that you have publikly prayed for their damnation; and
after you had betrayed that impious wish in the City of Caen, to the scandal of
the whole Church, you have not blushed afterward to maintain at Paris, even in
your printed books, so diabolical an action. To rail and speak unworthily of
what is most sacred; to traduce Virgins and Priests falsely and scandalously;
and after all, to wish and pray for their damnation, are certainly such
excesses against Piety, as cannot admit any thing beyond them. I know not,
Fathers, how you can avoid confusion, and how it should come into your thoughts
to charge me with want of charity, who, in all I have said, have been strictly
guided by Truth and Modesty, without making reflections on the horrid breaches
of charity, which you your selves are guilty of, by such deplorable extremities.

To conclude then, Fathers, with another reproach you fasten on me, viz. that of
the great number I produce of your Maxims, there are some that you had been
charged with before, whence you take occasion to be troubled that I repeat some
things that had been already said. I make this answer to it, that, in regard
you had made no advantage of what had been said to you before, I have purposely
minded you of it again. For what benefit has ensued after that so many learned
Doctors, nay the whole Universitie, have by so many books reproved you for
these things? What have your Fathers, Annat, Causin, Pintereau, and le Moine
done in the Answers they have made thereto, but load those with calumnies who
had given you such good counsel? Have you suppressed the books wherein those
wicked Maxims were taug^t? Have you silenced the Authors? Are you ever the
more circumspect? And is it not since that time that Escobar has been so often
printed in France and the Low Countries, and that your Fathers, Cellot, Bagot,
Bauny, Amicus, le Moine and others, make it their business, more then ever, to
publish daily the same things; nay others, tending more to Libertinisme then
any before? Be not therefore so much troubled, Fathers, either that I have
reproched you with the Maxims you have not quitted, or that I charge you with
new ones; or lastly, that I have laughed at all. You need do no more then
consider them well to find therein your own confusion and my vindication. Who
can without laughter reflect on Father Bauny's decision, for him that sets a
man's barn on fire; that of Father Cellot concerning restitution; Sanchez's his
regulation in favor of Fortune Tellers: the manner how Hurtado makes a man
avoid the sin of Duelling, by walking in a field, and there expecting another;
Father Bauney's Complements, to avoid Usury; the way to avoid Simony by a shift
of the intention, and that of avoiding lying by speaking one while aloud,
another, low, and such like opinions of the gravest among your Doctors. Needs
there any thing further for my justification, and is there ought more suitable
to vanity then Derision, as Tertullian says? But, Fathers, the corruption of
manners introduced by your Maxims deserves another manner of consideration,
and we may well make this question with the same Tertullian: Ought we to laugh
at their folly or bemoane their blindness? Rideam Vanitatem, an exprobrem
caecitatem? I conceive, Fathers, a man is at liberty either to laugh at or
lament it: Haec tolerabilius vel ridentur vel flentur, says Saint Augustine.
Acknowledge then that there is a time to laugh and a time to weep, as the
Scripture says. For my part, Fathers, it is my wish, that I find not these
words of the Proverbs verified in you; viz. That if a wise man contend with a
foolish man, whether he be angry or laugh, there is no rest.

Reverend Fathers,
At the closure of this Letter came to my hands a piece published by you,
wherein you charge me with imposture in relation to six of your Maxims cited
by me, as also with a correspondence with Heretics. I hope you will find a
satisfactory answer thereto, and that within a short time, after which I
presume you will not be over-earnest in continuing this kind of accusation.

To the same. LETTER XII.
REVEREND FATHERS,
I Was ready to write something by way of answer to the reproaches you have
darted at me for this good space in your writings, wherein you call me
Reprobate, Sycophant, Ignorant, the Fool in the Play, Impostor, Calumniator,
Cheat, Heretic, Calvin st disguised, Disciple of Du-Mouli^, a man possessed
with a Legion of Devils, and what you please your selves. I was also desirous
the world should understand why you treat me after this rate; for I sh uld be
much troubled it believed any such thing of me, and so was resolved to call you
to account for your Calumnies and impostures when there come to my hands your
answers, wherein you charge me with the same. This has obliged m^ to change my
resolution, yet not so but that I shall still continue it in some sort, since
that my hope is, in vindicating my self, to convince you of more t u
impostures then you have imputed false to me. Certainly, Fathers, you are more
to be suspected then I am. For it is not likely that being alone, as I am,
without force or any humane assistance, against so great a body, and being not
backed by any thing but truth and sincerity, I should put all at stake, by
exposing my self to be charged with impostures. It is too too easy to
discover falsities in questions of fact, such as these are. I should not, were
I faulty, want accusers, nor they, justice. Wi h you, Fathers, the case is much
otherwise, for you may say against me, what you please, and yet I have not any
to make my complaint to. This difference of our conditions must needs oblige me
to a great caution, though other considerations should not induce me thereto.
However, you treat me as an eminent impostor, and so you force me to reply; and
yet you know that cannot be done, without exposing afresh, and discovering more
fully the several heads of your Morality, wh ch puts me into some doubt
whether you are so great Politicians as you would seem. The war is removed
into your Quarters, and carried on at your charge: and though you have
endeavored so to pester the questions with School terms, that the answers
thereto being long, obscure and intricate, might prove tedious and distastefu
l, yet will you not happily have your desires; for I shall make it my maine
business to avoid importunity as much as may be in this kind of writing. Your
Maxims must still have something of diversion in them, wherewith the world i^
extremely taken. All I desire is that you would remember that you your selves
engage me into this discovery, and let the world see who shall get the better.

The first of your impostures is upon Vasquez's opinion concerning Alms. Give
me leave to clear it up, so to rid our disputes of all obscurity. It Is a thing
generally known, that according to the spirit of the Church, there are two
precepts concerning alms* one, for a man to give of his superfluity in the
ordinary necessities of the poor; the other* to give something even out of
what is necessary according to his condition, in th i^ extraordinary
necessities. This is affirmed by Cajetan after Saint Thomas; so that to
discover the spirit of Vasquez concerning alms, we are to consider how he has
regulated as well what a man ought to give out of his superfluity, as what he
should give out of that which is necessary.

That out of superfluity which is the ordinary relief of the poor, is
absolutely taken away by this one max me, de Eleemos. c. 4. n. 14. cited by me
in my LETTERS, What ever men lay up out of a design to raise their own
Fortunes, and that of their Relations, is not called superfluous. For which
reason it will be hard to find any among those that are worldly minded, that
have ought superfluous, no not even among Kings. You see, Fathers, that, by
this definition, those who are any way ambitious, will never have any thing
superfluous, and consequently that in regard of the greatest part of men, alms
is clearly taken away. But though it should happen that a man had any thing
supeflruous, yet were be exempted from all charity in the extraordinary
necessities of the poor, according to Vasquez, who is of a contrary opinion to
those who would oblige the rich thereto. Take his own words, c. 1. n. 32.
Corduba, says he, holds that when a man has any thing superfluous, he is
obliged to part with somewhat out of it to those who are only in ordina^y
necessity, at least some part of it, so to fulfill the precept in some thing;
BUT I AM NOT OF THAT OPINION: SED HOC NON PLACET. FOR WE HAVE DEMONSTRATED THE
CONTRARY against Cajetan and Nav^rre. Thus, Fathers, is the obligation
concerning Alms absolutely taken away, according to the pleasure of Vasqu^z.

For that out of the necessary; which a man is obliged to do in urgent and
extraordinary necessities, you shall see by the conditions he assigns to
ground this obligation upon, that the richest in Paris cannot be thereby
engaged not so often as once in their lives I shall produce but two. One is,
THAT A MAN BE PERSUADED that the poor man will not be relieved by any other:
Haec intelligo and caetera omnia quando scio nusum alium opem laturum. c. 1. n
28. What say you, Fathers, can it often happen, that in Paris, where there are
so many charitable people, a man should be persuaded that the poor man that
addresses himself to us will find no other that shall relieve him? And yet, if
a man have not this persuasion he may send him away without relief, according
to Vasquez. The other is that the necessity of the poor be such, that he stand
in fear of some mortal accid^n^, or loss of his reputation, n. 24. and 26.
which happens very seldom. But that which much more argues the rarity of it,
is, that he says, number. 45. That the poor man, who is in such a condition as
wherein there is an obligation to relieve him, may with a safe conscience
steal from the rich man. This certainly must needs be extraordinary, unless
he will have it to be ordinarily lawful to steal. So that after he had
absolutely made the obligation of giving alms out of what is superfluous, the
greatest spring of charity of no effect; he obliges not the rich to relieve the
poor out of that which is necessary, but when he allows the poor to steal
from the rich. This is the doctrine of Vasqu^z, to which, for edification sake,
you refer the readers.

I now come to your own impostures. You in the beginning speak much of the
obligation which Vasquez imposes on Clergymen to be charitable. I said nothing
as to that point, but shall when you please. That therefore relates not to the
present controversy. For the Laios with whom only we have to do here, you
would feign make men believe, that Vasqu^z speaks in the passage by me cited,
according to the opinion of Cajetan, not his own. But as there is nothing more
false, and that you have not affirmed it clearly* I shall think, for your
reputation, that it was not your intention to affirm it.

Then you openly quarrel, that, after I had cited this maxim of Vasquez, It
will be hard to find among those that are worldly minded, no not among Kings
any that have ought superfluous, I thence conclude that rich men are hardly to
give alms out of their superfluity. But what do you mean, Fathers? If it be
true that the rich never have any thing almost superfluous, does it not follow
that they shall never almost stand obliged to give alms out of their
superfluity? I should put it into an argument in form, if Diana, who has such
an esteem for Vasquez that he calls him the Phoenix of wits, had not from the
same principle drawn the same consequence. For having cited this maxim of
Vasquez he concludes from it; That in the question whether rich men are obliged
to give alms out of their superfluity, though the opinion that obliges them
thereto be true, yet it would seldom or never happen that it should be
obligatory in point of practice. I have only pursued that discourse word for
word. What then is your meaning, Fathers? Diana citing the opinions of Vasquez
with a certain applause, finding them probable, and extremely convenient for
the rich, as he says in the some place, is neither detractor, nor falsifyer,
and you do not complain that he imposes any thing upon him; whereas I
representing the same sentiments of Vasqu z, but without treating him with the
elogly of Phoenix, am an impostor, a counterfe t, and a corrupter of his
maxims. Certainly, Fathers, you should be in a little fear, le^t the
difference of your carriage toward those who differ not in the citat^on but
only in the esteem they have for your doctrine, discover the bottom of your
hearts, and give men occasion to judge that your main design is to keep up the
credit and reput^tion of your Society; since that while your accommodating
Theology passes for a wise compliance, you do not disclaim those that publish
it, nay on the contrary you celebrate them as contributing to the design. But
when it is represented as a pernicious degeneration of principles, then does
the same interest of your Society engage you to disclaim those maxims which
do you prejudice in the world; and so you either acknowledge or renounce them,
not according to the truth, which is ever the same and unchangeable, but
according to the alterations of times, according to the saying of that ancient,
Omnia pro tempore, nihil pro ve^itate. Take heed, Fathers, what you do; and
that you may not charge me with having drawn from the principle of Vasqu^z any
consequence he should have disclaimed, know that he has drawn it himself, c.
1. n* 27. A man is hardly obliged to give alms, when he is obliged to give it
only out of his superfluity, according to the opinion of Cajetan, AND
ACCORDING TO MY OWN, and secundum nostr^m. Confess now, Fathers, even from
the testimony of Vasquez himself, that I have exactly followed his sentiment,
and then consider with what conscience you durst affirm, that if a man would
sift the business well, he should not without amazement, find that Vasquez in
that place teaches absolutely the contrary.

But above all, you make a great account of what you say, that Vasquez has, in
requital, obliged the rich to give alms out of their necessary. But you have
forgotten to allege the many conditions requisite to form this obligation, and
you say, in general, that he obliges the rich to give away even what is
necessary for their condition. This is to be too charitable, Fathers, the rule
of the Gospel is not so strict, that were another error, which Vasquez is very
far from. To disguise his remissness you attribute to him an excess of
Severity, which would make him the more blameable, and consequently you lose
the credit of citing him faithfully. But he is not worthy that reproach, after
he had maintained, as he has done, that the rich are not obliged either out of
justice or charity to give of their superfluity, much less out of their
necessary, in all the ordinary exigences of the poor, and that they are not
obliged to give out of the necessary, but upon occasions such as seldom or
never happen.

This is all you lay to my charge, so that I have now no more to do but to make
appear how false that pretense of yours is, that Vasquez is more severe then
Cajetan. And this is not hard to do, since that that Cardinal teaches, That a
man is in point of justice, obliged to give alms out of his superfluity even
in the ordinary necessities of the poor; because, according to the holy
Fathers, the rich are only stewards as to what they have superfluous, having
only the liberty to bestow it on whom they please of those that are in want.
So that whereas Diana says of the maxims of Vasquez, that they are extremely
convenient, and very acceptable to the rich, and their Confessors, this
Cardinal, who has no such comfort to give them, declares, de Eleem. c. 6.
That there needs no more be said to the rich then these words of JESUS CHRIST,
that it is easier for a Camel to pass through the eye of a needle, then for a
rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; and to their Confessors, then
this saying of the same Savior, if the blind lead the blind, both fall into
the ditch. So indispensable did he think this obligation! And indeed it is no
more then what the Fathers and all the Saints have established as an
unquestionable Truth. There are two cases, says Saint Thomas 2.2. q 118. a. 4.
wherein a man is obliged to give alms, in point of justice, ex debito legali;
one when the poor are in danger, the other when we have what is superfluous.
And q. 87. a. 1. The third tenths which the Jews were obliged to eat with the
poor have been augmen ed under the new Law, because it is the pleasure of JESUS
CHRIST that we should bestow on the poor, not only a tenth part, but whatever
we have that is supe^fluous. And yet Vasquez is not pleased they should have so
much as one part, so great compliance has he for the rich, so much cruelty for
the poor, and so opposite is he to those sentiments of charity, which makes the
truth of those words of Saint Gregory, very harsh indeed to the rich of this
world, to be submitted unto and embraced; When we give the poor what is
necessary for them, we do not so much give them what is ours, as restore them
what is theirs; and it is a duty in point of justice, rather then a work of
mercy.

Thus do the Saints persuade the rich to divide with the poor the goods of the
earth, if they would enjoy with them those of heaven. And where you make it
your business to encourage men into ambition, whereby they have not any thing
superfluous, and covetousness, which denies to give though they had; the
Saints, on the contrary, have made it theirs to engage men to give away that
which is superfluous, and to persuade them that they shall have much if they
measure it not by avarice that knows no limits, but by Piety which is
ingenious in finding out ways to deprive it self, that so it may have the more
to dispose of in the works of charity. We have much of that which is
supe^fluous* says S. Augustine, if we reserve only that which is necessary.
But if he seek after vain things, nothing will be enough for us. Seek Brethren,
after that which is sufficient for the work of God, that is, for nature, and
not to satisfy your own covetousness, which is the work of the Devil. And
remember, that the superfluity of the rich is that which is necessary to the
poor.

I should be glad, Fathers, that what I now say, might serve, not only to
justify me, that were no great matter but also to make you sensible of, and
abhor what is corrupt in the maxims of your Casuists, that so we may be
sincerely united in the holy precepts of the Gospel, according to which we all
ought to be judged.

For the second point, concerning Simony, before I come to answer the reproaches
you cast at me, I shall clear up your doctrine upon this subject. Being
somewhat at a loss what to do between the Canons of the Church, which impose
extraordinary punishments on Simonists, and the avarice of so many persons as
drive that infamous trade, you have been guided by your ordinary method, which
is, to allow men what they desire, and to give God words and apparences. For
what can Simonists desire more then to have money for the Benefices they have
to dispose? And this is that which you have exempted from Simony. But because
the name of Simony must not be lost, and that there must be some subject to
which it should stick, you have chosen for that an imaginary Idea, which never
comes into the heads of the Simonists, and which should be of no advantage to
them, which is, to esteem the money considered in it self as much as the
spiritual good considered in it self. For who would ever make it his business
to compare things so disproportionate and heterogeneal? And yet, provided a man
do not make this metaphysical comparison, he may bestow his benefice on
another, and receive money for it, without Simony, according to your Authors.

Thus do you make sport with Religion, to comply with men's passions; and yet do
but see with what gravity your Father Valentia is delivered of his dreaming
imaginations, in the place cited in my Letters, Tom. 3. disp. 16. p. 3. p.
2044. A temporal good may be given for a spiritual two manner of ways, one,
when the temporal is valued at a higher rate then the spiritual, and that were
Simony: the other, when he temporal is taken for the motive and the end
inclining a man to bestow the spiritual, yet not so as to value the temporal
above the spiritual; and in that case it is no Simony. The reason of it is,
that Simony consists in the receiving of the temporal as the just price of the
spiritual. If therefore the temporal good be demanded, si petatur temporale,
not as the price, but as the motive determining a man to confer, there is no
Simony at all, though he look on the possession of the temporal good as his end
and principal expectation. Minime erit Simonia etiamsi temporale principaliter
intendatur and expectetur. And your great Sanchez, has he not met with such
another revelation, as we have it from Escobar, tr. 6. ex. 2. n. 40. Take his
own words. If a man gives a temporal good for a spiritual, not as the PRICE but
the MOTIVE inclining the other to confer it, or by way of gratitude if a man
had received it before, is it Simony or not? Sanchez affirms it is not. Your
Theses of Caen, of the year 1644. say, That it is a probable opinion taught by
many Catholic Authors, that it is not Simony to give a temporal good for a
spiritual, when it is not given as the price. And for Tannerus; his doctrine is
not unlike that of Valentia* whence it may be perceived what great reason you
had to quarrel at my ^aying that it is not conformable to that of Saint Thomas,
when he himself confesses it in the place cited in my Letter, t. 3. d 5. p.
1519. There is, says he, properly and t^uly, no Simony, but when the temporal
good is received as the price of the spiritual: but when it is taken as a
motive inclining a man to bestow the spiritual, or by way of ack^owledgment
that it is alre^dy b stowed, it is no Simony, at least as to point of
Conscience. And a little after. We must affirm the same thing, even though a
man regard the temporal as his principal end, nay prefer it before the
spiritual, although Saint Thomas and others seem to affirm the contrary, when
they hold that it is absolute Simony to give a spiritual good for a temporal
when the latter is the end of the former.

This, Fathers, is your doctrine concerning Simony taught by your best Authors,
who second one another in it very exactly. All I have now to do is to answer
your impostures. You have not said any thing upon the opinion of Valentia; and
so his doctrine stands good notwithstanding your answer. But you fasten on that
of Tannerus, and say, that he has only decided it not to be Simony, as to
divine right: And you would make people believe, that I have left out of that
passage the words, as to divine right. What unreasonable men are these! the
words, as to divine right, never were in that passage. To this you add, that
Tannerus declares it to be Simony as to positive right. You are mistaken
Fathers; he has not said it generally, but in some particular cases, in
casibus a jure expressis, as he affirms in that very place. Wherein he makes
an exception as to what he had established in general in that passage, that it
is not Simony in point of conscience; which certainly must needs imply, that it
is not any as to positive right, unless you would make Tannerus impious to that
degree as to maintain that Simony as to positive right, is not Simony in point
of conscience. But it is your design to muster together these terms of divine
right, positive right, natural right, the interior and exterior tribunal,
particular cases in the civil Law, external presumption, and the like, such as
are not very much known, so basely to shift away and to set people at a loss of
your extravagances. But, Fathers, you shall not escape through these trivial
subtilties, for I shall put such plain questions to you that there shall be no
need of a disting^o. I ask you, without meddling with divine right, or the
presumption of the exterior Tribunal, whether a Patron shall be a Simonist
according to your Authors, if he dispose of a Living of four hundred pound a
year, and receive therefore a thousand pound paid in hand, not as the price of
the Living, but as a motive inclining him to dispose of it. Answer clearly*
Fathers, what must be concluded in this case according to your Authors? Will
not Tannerus formally affirm, That it is no Simony in point of conscience;
since the temporal good is not the price of the Benefice, but only the motive
which obliges the other to bestow it? Valentia, your Theses of Caen, Sanchez,
and Escobar, will not they decide in like manner, that it is not S^mony for the
same reason? Need there any more to clear this Patron from Simony, or will you
dare treat him otherwise in your Confession-seats, what opinion soever you may
have of him your selves, since he has a right to oblige you thereto, as having
acted suitably to the advice of so many grave Doctors? Be then ingenuous and
confess, that such a Patron is free from Simony according to you: and when you
have done, defend that doctrine if you can.

This, Fathers, is the only way to unravel questions, and to avoid the
confusion of School-termes, or altering the state of the question as you do in
your last reproach, in this manner. Tannerus, say you, declares at least, that
such an exchange is a great sin; and you charge me to have maliciously
smothered that circumstance, which absolutely justifies him, as you pretend.
But you are much mistaken, and that many ways. For though what you say were
true, it were nothing, since that in the place where I spoke of it, the
question was not whether there were any sin in it, but only whether it were
Simony. Now these are two different questions; Sins, according to your Maxims,
oblige only to Conf^ssion, Simony obliges to restitution: and there are those
in the world who would think there were a great distance between these two. For
you have found out expedients to make Confession very easy, whereas you have
not found out any to make Restitution pleasant. I may add to this, that the
case which Tannerus charges with sin, is not simply that wherein a spiritual
good is given for a temporal, which is the motive of it, and that the principal
one, but he adds further, that the temporal be valued above the spiritual,
which is that imaginary case we have spoken of already. Nor indeed is it ill
done of him to charge that man with sin, since* he must needs be transcendently
wicked or very stupid, not to be willing to take such an easy course to avoid
a sin as that of forbearing comparisons between the prices of those two things,
when it is lawful to give the one for the other. Besides, Valentia, examining,
in the p^ce before cited, whether it be any sin to give a spiritual good for a
temporal, the latter being the motive of doing the former, produces their
reasons who hold the affirmatives, adding, Sed hoc non videtur mihi satis
certum. But this I am not sufficiently satisfied of.

But since, your Father Eradus Billus, Professor of the cases of Conscience at
Caen, has decided that there is not any sin at all in it: for probable
opinions are ever ripening. This is it he declares in his writings of the year
1644. against which Monsieur Du Pre, Doctor and Professor at Caen made that
excellent printed Oration, which is so generally known. For though this Father
Eradus Billus acknowledges that the doctrine of Valentia asserted by Father
Milha^d and condemned in Sorbonne, is contrary to the common tenent, subject to
Simony in many things, and punishable by Justice when the practice of it is
discovered, yet does he not stick to affirm it to be a probable opinion, and
consequently secure in point of conscience* and that it is not chargeable with
either Simony or sin. It is, says he, a probable opinion, and taught by a many
Catholic Doctors, that it is no Simony, NOR ANY SIN to give money or any other
temporal thing for a Benefice, either by way of acknowledgment, or as a motive
without which it would not be bestowed, provided it be not given as a price
proportionable to the Benefice. This is as much as can be desired. You see then
Fathers, that, according to all these Maxims, Simony would be so rare a thing,
that Simon Magus himself would not be guilty of it, who desirous to buy the
holy Ghost, became thereby the image of the Simonists that buy; nor Gehazi, who
receiving money for a miracle, is the figure of the Simonists that sell. For it
is certain, that Simon Magus, when be offered the Apostles money to get the
power to do as they did, used no terms of buying or selling, or price, and
that he did only offer his money as a motive to obtain that spiritual good.
Which action being not subject to Simony according to your Authors, he might
very well have escaped the Anathema of Saint Peter, had he but known their
Maxims. Nor was this ignorance less prejudicial to Gehazi, when he was smitten
with the Leprosy by Elizeus; for, having received the money of that
miraculously healed Prince, only by way of acknowledgment, and not as a price
equal to the divine virtue whereby that miracle was wrought, he might have
obliged the Prophet to restore him to his health also upon pain of mortal sin;
since such proceeding would have been suitable to the tenants of so many grave
Doctors, and that your Confessors are obliged to absolve their penitents in the
like case, and to cleanse them from their spiritual Leprosy, whereof the
corporal is but the Figure.

To be serious, Fathers, here is matter enough to make you ridiculous; I know
not whence it comes that you hazard your reputation thus. For I need only
produce your other Maxims; as this of Escobar, in the practice of Simony
according to the Society of Jesus. When tw^ Religious men become mutually
engaged one to another in this manner, Give me your voice, that I may be
elected Provincial, and I will give you mine for your election to be Prior; is
it Simony or no? Not at all. And this other, It is no Simony to get a Benefice
upon promise of a sum of money, when the benefie'd person is not resolved to
pay it; because it is but a feigned Simony, which is so far from being real as
cou^terfeit gold is from true. By this subtilty of conscience has he found out
a way, with an addition of cheating to Simony; for men to get Benefices both
without money and without Simony. But I have no time to dilate, for I am to
vindicate my self as to your third ca^umny upon the subject of Bankrupts.

Then that, Fathers, there cannot be any thing more absurd. You treat me as an
Impostor upon occasion of an opinion of Lessius, which I have not cited my
self, but is alleged by Escobar in a passage I cite out of him; and so, were
it true that Lessius is not of the opinion attributed to him by Escobar, what
greater injustice can there be then to quarrel at me for it? When I cite
Lessius and your other Authors my self, I am content to be accomptable. But
since Escobar has shuffled together the opinions of twenty four of your
Fathers, I would fain know whether I ought to be responsible any further then
for what I cite out of him, or that I am moreover to give an account of the
citations which he himself makes in the passages I take out of him? 'Twere
irrational to expect it. Now this is it that at present is in debate. I have
cited in my Letter this passage of Escobar, faithfully rendered, so as you
object nothing against it. May he who turns Bankrupt, with a safe conscience,
retain as much of his own goods as is requisite to maintain himself handsomely,
ne indecore vivat? I, WITH LESSIUS, AFFIRM, HE MAY: CUM LESSIO ASSERO POSSE,
etc. Hereupon you tell me that Lessius is not of that opinion. But consider a
little how you are ensnared. For if it be true that he is, you will be called
Impostors, for affirming the contrary; if it be not, Escobar is the Impostor;
so that it must needs follow that some one of the Society is guilty of
imposture. Look you to the scandal of it. You cannot it seems foresee the
consequences of things. You think there is no more to be done then to fill the
world with reproaches, without any care where they fall. Why did you not propose
the difficulty to Escobar, before you published it? he might have given you
satisfaction. But it is not so easy a matter to hear out of Vailladolid, where
he is, in very good health, and upon finishing his grand work of MORAL DIVINITY
in six volumes, on the former whereof I shall have one day something to say to
you. The first ten LETTERS have been sent him; you may also send him your
Objection, and I am confident he would have given a good account of it, for, no
question he has seen that passage in Lessius whence he has taken the ne
indicore vivat. You would do well, Fathers, to read him carefully, and you will
find it in him as well as I, l. 2. c. 16. n. 45. Idem colligitur aperte ex
juribus citatis, maxim quoad ea bona quae post cessionem acquirit, de quibus
is qui debtor est, etiam ex delicto, potest retinere quan^um necessarium est,
ut pro sua condition NE INDECORE VIVAT. Petes, an leges id permittant de
bonis, quae tempore instantis cessionis habebat? Ita videtur colligi ex DD. etc.

I shall not trouble my self to show you that Lessius, to authorize this Maxim
injures the Law, which allows Bankrupts only a simple livelihood and not an
honorable subsistence; Its enough that I have cleared Escobar from so unjust
an accusation; It Is more then I was obliged to do. But you, Fathers, for your
parts, have not done what you should: for the business is to answer the passage
of Escobar, whose decisions are very convenient and of great advantage, in that
not depending on either what went before, or relating to what comes after, but
being confined by little articles, they are not subject to your distinctions. I
have cited that whole passage out of him, wherein he allows those that turn
Bankrupts, to retain so much of their estates, though unjustly gotten, as
whereby they may maintain their families handsomely. Which gave me occasion to
cry out in my Letters; How, Fathers, by what strange kind of charity would you
have those goods remain in their hands who came unjustly thereby, rather then
return to the lawful Owners and Creditors? This is it you are to answer to; but
it is a thing puts you to such a loss, that you vainly endeavor to elude it by
shifting off the question, and citing other passages of Lessius, not at all
relating to the present controversy. I therefore ask you whether this maxim
of Escobar may, in point of conscience, be followed by those who turn
bankrupts; and take good heed what you say. For if you answer, they may nor,
what will become of your Doctor, and the doctrine of Probability? if you say
they may, I refer you to the Parliament.

So I leave you with the Wolf by the ears; for I cannot for want of place,
engage with the ensuing imposture upon the passage of Lessius concerning
Homicide; I leave it to the next opportunity, and so of the rest.

In the interim, I shall say nothing to you concerning the ADVERTISEMENTS full
of scandalous forgeries, wherewith you conclude every imposture: I shall answer
all together in the Letter wherein I hope to discover the first elements of all
your calumnies. I am sorry, Fathers, you should be forced to such remedies. The
reproaches you cast upon me will not clear up the differences between us, and
the threats you are so liberal of shall not hinder me from vindicating my self.
You think you have might and impunity of your side, and I think I have truth
and innocence on mine. It Is a strange and long war wherein violence endeavors
to oppose Truth. All the attempts of violence cannot so much as weaken truth,
nay they as much as may be strengthen her. All the luster of truth is so far
from appeasing violence, that it does but more and more exasperate it. When
might is engaged with might, the stronger power swallows up the weaker; but
when discourses are opposed one to another, those that are true and convictive
confound and defeat those which have nothing in them but vanity and falsehood:
but violence and truth can prevail nothing one upon another. Yet let it not be
thence presumed that things are equal: for there is this main difference, that
violence is limited by the order of God, who disposes the effects of it to the
glory of that Truth which it opposes: whereas Truth subsists eternally, and at
last triumphs over her enemies, because she is eternal and powerful as God
himself.

Paris, Sept. 9. 1656.
To the same. LETTER XIII.
REVEREND FATHERS,
I Have just now perused your last writing wherein you continue your impostures
even to the twentieth, declaring that you will there put a Period to that kind
of accusation, whereof consisted your first plea, to come to the second, where
you are to take a new course to vindicate your selves, which is to show that
there are a many other Casuists degenerated into Libertinisme as well as you. I
see then Fathers how many impostures I have to answer: and since that we are
now upon, which is the fourth, is upon the subject of Homicide, it will not be
unseasonable, while I answer that, at the same time to give satisfaction to the
11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. as relating to the same head.

I shall therefore, in this letter, make good the truth of my citations,
against the falsities you unjustly lay to my charge. But since you have so
confidently affirmed in your writings, That the opinions of your Authors
concerning Murder are conformable to the Decisions of Popes and the Canons of
the Church, you must needs engage me, in the ensuing Letter, to confute a
proposition so rash and withal so injurious to the Church. It is a matter of
importance to make it appear that she is not in the least tainted with your
corruptions, that so Heretics may not take advantage from your extravagances
to draw thence any thing prejudicial to her honor. But rather, perceiving on
the one side your pernicious maxims, and on the other the Canons of the
Church, whereby they have always been condemned, men will at the same time
find both what they should avoid and what they should follow.

Your fourth imposture is upon the maxyme concerning Murder which you pretend
I have wrongfully attributed to Lessius. It Is this. He who has a box on the
ear given him way immediately pursue his en^my, nay return it him with his
sword, not indeed to be revenged of him, but to recover his reputation.
Whereupon you say that this opinion belongs to the Casuist Victoria. But that
is not the business in question. For there is no repugnance in affirming it to
belong at the same time, both to Victoria and Lessius, since Lessius says
himself that it is also Navarrus's and your Father Henriquez's who teach; That
he who has received a box o'th ear may immediately pursue him that g^ve it;
and load him with as many blows as he shall think requisite for the reparation
of his honor. The question then is, to know, whether Lessius also be of the
opinions of these Authors, as well as his brother-Casuists. And therefore you
add, That Lessius cites not this opinion but to refute it, and consequently
that I attribute an opinion to him, which he alleges only to oppose it, which
is the bas^st and most dishonorable action that a writer can be guilty of. And
I maintain, Fathers, that he d es not cite it but to follow it. This is a
question of fact, such as whereof the decision is easy enough. See we then how
you prove what you assert, and you shall see afterward how I prove what I
affirm:

To show that Lessius is not of that opinion, you say he condemns the practice
of it. And to prove that you cite a passage of his, lib. 2. c. 9. n. 82. where
he has these words, I cond^mne the practice of it. I grant you, that if any
one look for rhese words in Lessius, number. 82. as they are by you cited, he will
find them. But what will he say Fathers, when he finds at the same time, that
in the place beforementioned he treats of a question very different from that
we now speak of, and that the opinion, whereof he, in that place condemns the
practice, cannot any way be that now in hand, but another of a quite different
nature? And yet to clear up the business, we need but open the book at the
very place to which you refer us. For there you will find the sequel of his
discourse in this manner.

He treats of the question, whether a man may kill for a box o'th ear, in number.
79. and concludes it in number. 80. without any the lest word of condemnation.
That question being decided, he opens another in article 81. viz. whether one
man may kill another for opprobrious speeches. And it is upon that that he has
n. 82. the words by you cited, I condemn the practice of it.

Is it not a shameful thing, Fathers, that you durst produce these words, to
persuade men that Lessius condemns the opinion, that a man may be killed for a
box o'th ear? And that, having in all but his only proof, you should triumph
upon it as you do when you say, That many persons of quality in Paris, having
already discovered that palpable falsity by the very reading of Lessius, and
are thereby sati^fied what credit ought to be given that Libeller. How Fathers,
is it thus that you abuse the confidence which these persons of quality have in
you? To make them believe that Lessius is not of such on opinion, you open his
book at a place where he condemns another. And so these persons not
distrusting you, and not making it their business to examine whether the
question controverted be treated of in that place, you basely abuse their
credulity. I am confident, Fathers, that to avoid so shameful a falsehood you
were forced to fly to your doctrine of Equivocation, and that reading the whole
passage aloud, you said to your selves, that something else was handled in that
place. But I question whether this reason, which is enough to satisfy your
consciences, will be sufficient to satisfy the just quarrel these persons of
quality will have against you, when they shall find themselves cajoled by you.

Hinder them, Fathers, from seeing my LETTERS, since it is the only course you
can take to keep up your credit for a while. Yet I do not deal so with yours;
I send them to all my friends, I wish all the world might see them; and I think
there is some reason on both sides. For having published this fourth imposture,
with so much noise, you must needs be discredited when it comes to be known
that you have supposed one passage for another. It will then be easily imagined
that if you could have found what you looked for in that place where Lessius
treated of that matter, you would not have sought it elsewhere; and that you
would not have made use of this shift but because you could not fasten on any
thing else that favored your design. You would have men to find in Lessius
what you say in your Imposture page 10. l. 12 that he does not grant this
opinion to be profitable even in speculation: and Lessius peremptorily affirms
in his conclusion, n. 80. This opinion, that a man may kill for a box o'th ear
given him, is probable in sp^calation. Is not this, word for word, the contrary
of your discourse? Who therefore can sufficiently admire, to see with that
confidence you produce, in terminis, the contrary to a truth in matter of fact?
So that in stead of what you conclude from your supposed passage, that Lessius
was not of this opinion, it may very well be concluded from his true passage
that he is of this very opinion.

You would further make Lessius say, that he condemns the practice of it. And
yet, as I have already said, there is not the least syllable of condemnation in
that place; but he says thus; It seems that the practice thereof should not
EASILY be permitted; in praxi non videtur FACILE PERMITTENDA. Is this the
language of a man that condemns a Maxim? Will you affirm, Fathers, that
Adulteries and Incests are not easily to be permitted, in the practice? should
we not on the contrary, rather infer, that, since Lessius says only that
the practice of it is not easily to be allowed, it may be sometimes allowable
though but seldom: And as if it had been his design to acquaint all the world
when it were allowable, and secure the persons offended as to all scruples of
conscience they might be troubled with in case they knew not on what occasions
it were not lawful for them to kill, in the practice, he has taken the pains
to give them notice of what they should avoid, to practice this doctrine
conscienciously. Mind him, Fathers, It seems, says he, that it ought not
easily to be permitted, BECAUSE of the danger there is men may be carried on
thereto, out of hatred, or revenge, or with excess, or that it may prove the
occasion of too many murders. So that it is clear that this murder will be
allowable in the practice, according to Lessius, if these inconveniences be
avoided, that is to say, if a man can act without hatred, without revenge, and
limit himself to such circumstances as may not occasion too many murders.
Would you have an instance Fathers? I have a fresh o^e for you; that of the box
o'th ear at Compiegne. For you must needs acknowledge that he who received it,
showed by his after-cariage, that he sufficiently mastered the motions of
hatred and revenge. All he had then to do, was to avoid too great a number of
murders: and you know, Fathers, that it happens so seldom that Jesuits give
boxes o'th ear to the officers of the Kings household that it was not not much
to be feared, that one murder committed on such an occasion might have caused
a many others in consequence. And so you cannot deny but that Jesuit might have
been killed with safety of conscience, and that the person affronted might not
upon that occasion have put the doctrine of Lessius in practice. And, Fathers,
he might happily have done it, had he been brought up in your School, and learned
of Escobar, that the man who has received a box o'th ear is accounted
dishonorable, till such time as he has killed the person that that gave it
him. But you may with some reason, imagine, that the contrary instructions he
received from a certain Vicar, whom you affect not too much, have not a little
contributed, as to that accident, to the saving of a Jesuits life.

Let us then hear no more of these inconveniences avoidable in so many
occurrences, and which taken away, murder is according to Lessius, allowable
even in practick. For your other Authors, cited by Escobar, acknowledge no
less. Is it lawful, says he, in the practice of Homicide according to your
Society, to kill him that has given a box o'th ear? Lessius says, it is
lawful in the speculative, but that it ought not to be advised in the
practi^k; non consulendum in praxi, because of the danger of hatred, or
murders prejudicial to the state, likely to ensue thereupon. BUT OTHERS ARE
OF OPINION, THAT, AVOIDING THOSE INCONVENIENCES, IT IS ALLOWABLE AND SECURE IN
THE PRACTICK: in praxi probabilem and tutam judicarunt Henriquez, etc. Thus are
opinions scru'd up by degrees to the height of Probability: For you have
brought this to that pitch by permitting it at length without any distinction
of speculation or practice, in these terms; It is lawful for a man that has
received a box o'th ear, to return it immediately with his sword, not to
revenge himself, but to preserve his reputation. This was taught by your
Fathers at Caen, in the year 1644 in their public writings, which the
University [of Paris] put up to the Parliament in their 3. Petition against
your doctrine concerning Homicide, p. 339.

Whence you may observe, Fathers, that your own Authors do of themselves
destroy that frivolous distinction of speculation and practice, which the
University had discovered to be ridiculous, and the invention of it a secret of
your Politics, which it were not amiss to examine. For besides that it is
necessary it should be understood, for the better clearing up of the 15. 16,
17. and 18. Impostures, it were not amiss to discover by degrees the
principles of this mysterious kind of Policy.

When you undertook to decide cases of Conscience in a gentle and complying
way, you met with some wherein Religion only was concerned, as the questions
concerning contrition, penance, the Love of God, and al those that relate to
the interior of men's consciences. But you have found others, wherein the State
is concerned as well as Religion, such as are those of Usury, Bankrupt,
Homicide, and the like. And it is a thing lies very heavy on the spirits of
those who have a real love for the Church, to see, that in abundance of
occasions wherein you had only Religion to deal withal (this world being not
the place where God visibly exercises his justice) you have subverted the Laws
thereof without the least fear, caution or distinction, as may be seen in your
so confident opinions against penance and the Love of God.

But in those wherein both Religion and the state are concerned, you have
cloven your decisions, and, in such cas^s, formed two questions. One you call
that of speculation, wherein, considering those crimes in themselves, without
regarding the interest of the State, but only the law of God prohibiting them,
you have, without any trouble, allowed them, and consequently overturned the
law of God that condemned them. The other you call that of practice, wherein
reflecting on the prejudice of the State thereby, and the presence of the
Magistrates who maintain the public safety, you do not always allow in the
practice those murders and crimes which you found lawful in the speculation,
so to secure your selves as to the Judges. Thus, for instance, to the question,
whether it be lawful to kill for opprobrious speeches, your Authors Fil^utius,
tr. 29. cap. 3. number. 52 Reginaldus, l. 21. cap. 5. number. 63. and others answer;
It is lawful in the speculation; ex probabili opinione licet. But I do not
approve the practice of it by reason of the great number of murders which
would happen, and the prejudice it would be to the state, if all evil speakers
were killed, besides that a man might be punished by the hand of justice for
killing upon that occasion. Thus do yo^ opinions at first shoot forth under
this distinction, by means whereof you ruin only Religion, without doing any
visible injury to the State. Thus do you think your selves in a secure posture:
For you imagine that the esteem you have in the Church will keep men from
punishing your attempts against truth, and that the caution you use in not
allowing what you think lawful to be put in practice, will secure you as to
the Magistrates, who not being judges of cases of Conscience, are not properly
to meddle with any thing but the external practice. Thus an opinion which were
condemnable under the name of practice, is securely advanced under that of
speculation. Now this foundation being well laid, it is no hard matter to build
up your other maxims upon it. There was an infinite distance between the
prohibition which God made to kill, and the speculative permission which your
Authors have given to do it. But the distance between this permission and the
practice is not very great. All then you have to do is to show, that what is
allowable in the speculative is also in the practice. To do this, you cannot
want reasons; you have been furnished in cases of much more difficulty. Would
you see Fathers how it may be attained? Follow this ratiocination of Escobar,
who has clearly decided it, in the first of the six Tomes of his grand Moral
Divinity, which I mentioned before, where he is otherwise illuminated then he
was in the collection he made of your 24. Ancients. For whereas he thought at
that time there might be opinions probable in the speculative, which yet were
not secure in the practice, he has since found out the contrary, and has
established it in this last work of his; so strangely is the doctrine of
Probability cultivated by time, as well as every probable opinion in
particular. Hear himself, in praeloq. n. 15. I see not, says he, how it
should be, that what seems allowable in the speculative, should not be such in
the practick, since that what may be done in the practick, depends on what is
found allowable in the speculative, and that these things differ not one from
another, but as the effect and the Cause. For speculation is that which
determines the action. WHENCE IT FOLLOVVETH, THAT A MAN MAY WITH A SAFE
CONSCIENCE FOLLOVV IN THE PRACTICK THE OPINIONS THAT ARE-PROBABLE IN THE
SPECULATIVE; nay, and that with more safety then those which a man has not
speculatively, well examined.

Certainly, Fathers, your Escobar reasons very well sometimes. And indeed,
there is such an alliance between specution and practice, that when one has
taken cus, and has taught, That it is lawful ken root, you make no difficulty
to permit the other, without shadowing the business at all. This is apparent
in the permission to kill for a box o'th ear, which from simple speculation,
has, by Lessius, been confidently stretched to a practice which ought not
easily to be permitted; and thence, by Escobar to an easy practice; whence your
Fathers of Caen have cran'd it up to an absolute permission, without any
distinction of Theory or practice, as you have already seen.

Thus do you give your opinions an insensible growth. Should they of a sudden
shoot out into their extremities, they would cause horror. But this slow and
insensible progress gently reconciles them to men's humors, and takes away the
scandal of them. And by this means, the permission of killing, so odious to
Church and State, is first introduced into the Church, and out of the Church
into the State.

The same success has the opinion of killing for ill language met with, for
it is now arrived to an equal permission without any distinction. I should not
spend time to cite the passages of your Fathers concerning it, were it not
necessary, to confound that height of confidence you (...) posture p. 26. and
30. That there is not any Jesuit that permits killing for opprobrious language.
When you affirm such things, Fathers, you should take some course that I might
not see them, since I can with so much ease answer them. For besides, that your
Fathers Reginaldus, Filiutius, etc. have permitted it in the speculative, as
has been already said, and that thence the principle of Escobar does safely
guide us to the practice, I have this to add, that diverse Authors of yours
have, in terminis, permitted it: and among others Father Hereau in his public
Lectures, upon which he was by the Kings order secured in your house, for
having taught, besides diverse other errors, That when he who disgraces us
before persons of quality continues to do so after he had had notice given him
to forbear, it is lawful for into kill him; not publicly indeed, for fear of
scandal, but secretly, SED CLAM.

I have told you already of your Father Amicus, and you are not to learn, that
his doctrine on this subject was censured by the University of Lovain in the
year 1649. And yet it is not two months since that your F. des Bois has
maintained at Roven that very censured doctrine of Amicus, and has taught,
That it is lawful for a Religious man to maintain the honor which he has by
his virtue acquired, even by killing him who would blast his reputation, etiam
cum morie invasoris. Which gave such a scandal to that City, that all the
Pastors joined together to cause him to be silenced, and to oblige him to
retract his doctrine by Canonical ways. The business is in the Bishops Court.

What have you now to say, Fathers? How will you presume to maintain
hereafter, that no Jesuit was ever of opinion that it was lawful to kill for
ill language? Or need we any thing else to convince you then the opinions which
I have cited of your Fathers, since they forbid not to kill speculatively, but
only in the practick because of the inconvenience that would thereby happen to
the State? For I ask you hereupon, Fathers, whether the maine business of our
dispute be not to examine whether you have not subverted the law of God which
forbids homicide? The question is not to know whether you have injured the
State, but Religion. What advantage is it to you, in this kind of dispute to
show that you have had a tenderness for the State, when at the same time you
make it appear that you have destroyed Religion, by affirming, as you do p.
28. l. 3. That the meaning of Reginaldus, upon the question of killing for
opprobrious speeches, is, that a private man has a right to use that kind of
defense, considering it simply in it self. I desire no more then this
acknowledgement to confound you. A private man, say you, has a right to make
use of this defense, that is to say, to kill or opprobrious language,
considering the thing in it self. And consequently, Fathers, the law of God
which forbids killing, is destroyed by this decision.

Nor does what you say afterward make any thing, for you that it is unlawful
and condemned, even by the Law of God, because of the murders and disorders
which might thereupon happen in the State, and that men are obliged, in
relation to God, to be tender of the welfare of the State, This is to fly out
of the question. For, Fathers, there are two Laws to be observed, one,
forbidding to kill, the other, forbidding to endamage the State. Reginaldus
has not happily broken that Law which forbids to prejudice the State, but has
infallibly violated that which forbids killing. Now all the matter in question
is of this latter. Besides that your other Fathers who have permitted these
murders in the practice have destroyed both. To go yet a little higher. We are
satisfied that you do sometimes forbid men to prejudice the State, and you
affirm your design therein is to observe the law of God, obliging them to
defend it. This may be true, though it be not certain; since you might do the
same thing merely out of a fear of the Magistrates. Let us then examine from
what principle this motion proceeds.

Were it not true, Fathers, did you really look upon God, and that the
observation of his law, were the first and principal object of your
resolutions, that this respect and reverence would unanimously guide all your
more important decisions, and would engage you upon all occasions to be tender
of the concernments of Religion. But if, on the contrary, it be apparent that
you violate, in so many occurrences, the most sacred provisions God had made
for men, when you have nothing to oppose but his Law; and that even in those
emergencies wherein it is most concerned, you destroy that law of God which
forbids these actions as criminal in themselves, and are not by any thing
deterred from approving them in the practick but a fear of the Judges, do you
not give us just cause to imagine, that it is not God you reflect on in that
fear; and that, if, in appearance you maintain his Law, in what relates to the
obligation of not prejudicing the State, it is not out of any tenderness you
have for his law, but to compass your own ends; a method has ever been
observed by the most atheistical Politicians?

How, Fathers, you will tell us, that there is a certain right to kill for
opprobrious language, when a man reflects only on the Law of God which forbids
murder? And having thus violated the eternal law of God, you think to take
away the scandal you had raised, and persuade us you are very respectfull
toward him, by adding that you forbid the practice of it upon certain
considerations of State, and for fear of the Judges? Is not this rather to
add a new scandal to the other, not out of the respect you seem to have
therein for the Judges; for that is not it I lay to your charge, and you are
very pleasant upon that string, p. 29. I do not, I say, charge you with a fear
of the Judges, but that you fear nothing but the Judges, and not the Judge of
Judges? That is it I quarrel at, because it is to make God a milder enemy to
crimes then men. Had you affirmed it lawful to kill an evil speaker according
to men but not according to God, it were more supportable; but that that which
is too offensive to be suffered by men should be innocent and just in the sight
of God who is justice it self, what does it but discover to all the world,
that, by this horrid confusion of things, so contrary to the spirit of the
Saints, you are grown impudent toward God, and are afraid of men? Had you been
sincerely minded to condemn these homicides, you would not have taken away the
commandment of God which forbids them: and if you durst have permitted them at
first sight, you would have permitted them openly notwithstanding the Laws
both of God and men. But as you would have them insensibly creep into
permission, and surprise the magistrates, the Sentinells of pub ick safety, so
have you gone subtly to work by cleaving your maxims, and proposing on the
one side, that it is lawful in the speculative to kill men for opprobrious
speeches (for you are at liberty to examine things in speculation) and
producing, on the other, this maxim independently from the other, That what is
lawful in the speculative is also such in the practick. For what concernment
does the State seem to have in this general and metaphysical proposition? And
so these two principles being, as not dangerous, separately received, the
vigilance of the Magistrate is eluded, since there needs no more then to fasten
these Maxims together to draw from them this conclusion, which is that you
would aim at, That it is allowable, in the practick, to kill only for
opprobrious speeches.

This indeed, Fathers, is one of the most subtle contrivances of your
Politics, to separate in your writings, the Maxims which you join together in
your judgments. 'Twas so by pieces that you established your doctrine of
Probability, which I have often insisted on. And this general principle being
laid as a cornerstone, you separately advance such things, as being innocent
in themselves, yet become horrid joined to that pernicious principle. I shall
only instance in what you say, page 11. in your impostures, and which I am
obliged to make some answer to, viz. That many famous Divines are of opinion,
that one may kill another for a box of the ear given. Certain it is, Fathers,
that if a person that did not maintain Probability had said it, there were
nothing to be quarrelled at, since it were only to make a simple recital that
should have no consequence. But for you, Fathers, and all those that maintain
that dangerous doctrine, that whatsoever is approved by eminent Authors, is
probable and sure in point of conscience, when you add thereto that many famous
Authors are of opinion that it is lawful to kill for a box of the ear, what do
you but put stilletto's into the hands of all Christians to kill those shall
offend them, assuring them that they may do it with safty of conscience;
because they shall therein follow the opinions of so many grave Authors?

What horrid language is this, which, while it affirms that some Authors hold a
damnable opinion, is at the same time a decision in favor of that damnable
opinion, and authorizes in conscience whatever it does but cite! It is
understood, Fathers, to be the language of your School. And it is a thing to be
startled at, that you have the face and confidence to speak so loud, since it
visibly discovers your judgment, and is a plain demonstration that you hold
this opinion, that it is lawful to kill for a box of the ear, to be sure in
point of conscience, as soon as you had told us, that many famous Authors
maintained it.

You cannot shift it off, Fathers, no more then you can make your advantage of
the passages of Vasquez and Suarez which you object to me, wherein they condemn
these murders which their Brethren approve. These testimonies severed from the
rest of your doctrine might dazzle their apprehensions who are not sufficiently
skilled therein. But we might join your principles and Maxims together. You
say here that Vasquez does not permit these murders; but what will you say on
the other side, Fathers? That the probability of one opinion hinders not the
probability of another opinion contrary thereto. And in another place, That it
is lawful to follow the less probable and less secure op^n^on, discarding the
more probable and more secure opinion. What may be inferred from all this
summed up together, but that we have an absolute liberty of conscience to
follow which we shall think good of all these opposite opinions? What Is become,
Fathers, of the fruit you were in hope to reap from these citations? It Is
blasted to n^t^i g since there needs no more for your condemnation, then to
draw up these Maxims into one body which you for your justification, suffer to
straggle up and down. To what end therefore do you produce these passages of
your Fathers, which I have not cited, to mitigate those which I have, since
there is nothing common between them? What privilege does this give you to
call me an impostor? Have I affirmed that all your Fathers are in the same
degree of degeneration? Nay have I not, on the contrary, made it appear, that
your main design requires you should have some of all opinions, to be made use
of on all occasions? To those who are inclinable to murder, you will recommend
Lessius; to those that are not, you will produce Vasquez; that so none be
dismissed, dis-satisfied, and without having of his side a grave Author. Lessius
shall speak of Homicide like a Pagan, and happily, of alms somewhat like a
Christian; Vasquez shall speak of alms like a Pagan, and of murder like a
Christian. But by the assistance of the Probability which Vasquez and Lessius
jointly maintain, and which renders all opinions common and indifferent, they
will reciprocally lend one the other their sentiments, and will be engaged to
absolve those who shall have acted according to the opinions which either of
them condemns. It is therefore this variety that augments your disorder.
Uniformitie were much more tolerable, and there is nothing so contrary to the
express rules of Saint Ignatius and your first Generals as this endless
confusion of all sorts of opinions. I shall one day have some discourse for you
about it; and it will be matter of astonishment to see how you are fallen from
the first spirit of your institution; and that your own Generals have foreseen,
that the extravagance of your doctrine in point of Morality, might prove fatal,
not only to your Society, but to the whole Church.

In the mean time, take it from me, you shall not make any advantage of the
opinion of Vasquez. It were a miraculous thing, if among so many Jesuits as
have written, there were not one or two that should affirm what all Christians
acknowledge. There Is no great reputation in maintaining that it is not lawful
to kill for a box of the ear, according to the Gospel; but it is an horrid shame
to deny it. So that this contributes so little to your justification, that
there is nothing makes more against you, since that having had amongst you such
Doctors as have told you the truth, you have not remained in the truth, and
have loved the darkness better then the light. For you have learned of Vasquez,
That it is a Pagan, and not a Christian opinion, to affirm that a man may give
a blow with a stick to him who had given him a box of the ear. That it is to
destroy the Decalogue and the Gospel, to affirm that one man may kill another
upon that account, and that the lewdest villains that have any thing of
mankind in them acknowledge as much. And yet, contrary to these truths, you
have suffered Lessius, Escobar, and the rest, to decide, That all the
prohibitions which God has made against Homicide, hinder not but that a man
may be killed for a box of the ear. To what end was it that that passage of
Vasquez was brought in to confront the opinion of Lessius, unless it be to show
that Lessius is a Pagan and a Villain according to Vasquez? and that is more
then I durst have said. What conclusion then can we make hence, but that
Lessius destroys the Decalogue and the Gospel? That at the last day Vasquez
shall condemn Lessius upon that point, as Lessius shall condemn Vasquez upon
another; and that all your Authors will rise up in judgment one against
another, reciprocally to condemn one another, in their deplorable excesses
against the Law of JESUS CHRIST.

Conclude we then, Fathers, that, since your probability makes the good
opinions of some of your Authors unserviceable to the Church, and advantageous
only to your selves in point of Policy, all they do, is, by their
contradictions, to discover the doubleness of your hearts, which you have
clearly demonstrated by assuring us, of the one side, that Vasquez and Suarez
are of contrary opinions upon the point of Homicide; and of the other, that
many eminent Authors are for Homicide, so to put men into two several ways; by
destroying the simplicity of the spirit of God, who has a curse reserved for
the double-hearted, and those that halt between two ways. Vae duplici cords,
and ingredienti duabus viis.

September 30. 1656.
To the same. LETTER XIV.
REVEREND FATHERS,
HAd I no more to do but to answer the three impostures which are yet behind
upon the point of Homicide, I should have no long discourse to make, for you
should find them refuted in few words: but thinking it a business of greater
consequence to awaken the world with the horror of your opinions upon this
subject, then to justify the exactness of my citations; I shall be forced to
bestow the greatest part of this Letter to refute your maxims, so to convince
you how far you have degenerated from the sentiments of the Church, nay indeed
from those of Nature. The permissions of killing which you grant on so many
occasions sufficiently discover, that as to that point you have so far
forgotten the Law of God, and put out the light of Nature, that it were but
necessary you were reduced into the most simple principles of Religion and
common-sence. For what can be more natural then this sentiment, That one
private person has no right over the life of another? We are so far instructed
of our selves, says Saint Chrysostom, as that when God laid down the precept
of not killing, he has not added, that it is because Homicide is an evil; but
because, says this Father, that the Law supposes that men had already learned
that truth of Nature.

So that men have at all times been subject to this commandment: the Gospel
has confirmed that of the Law, and the Decalogue did only renew what men had
received from God before the Law, in the person of Noah, of whom all men were
to spring. For upon that restoration of the World, God said to this Patriarch;
And at the hand of man, even at the hands of a man's brother will I require the
life of man. Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, for in
the image of God has he made man.

By this general prohibition are men divested of all power over the lives of
men. And God has so far reserved it to himself, that, according to Christian
Truth, opposite in this to the false Maxims of Paganism, a man has not
indeed any power over his own life. But in regard that his providence thought
fit to take some course to preserve the Societies of men, and to punish the
wicked that should disturb them, he has himself established certain Laws, to
deprive guilty persons of their lives: and so those murders, which, without
his order, were attempts liable to punishment, become, by his order commendable
chastisements, which taken away there is nothing but what is unjust therein.
Thus much has been excellently well represented by Saint Augustine, in his
first book of the City of God, chapter 21. God himself, says he, has made certain
exceptions in this general prohibition of killing, either by the Laws, which he
has established for the putting to death of guilty persons, or by the
particular orders he has sometimes given to put to death some certain persons.
So that when men kill in that case, it is not man that kills, but God, of whom
man is only the instrument, as a sword in the hand of him that makes use of
it. But these cases excepted, who ever kills is guilty of Homicide.

It is then out of all question, Fathers, that God only has the power to take
away life, and that nevertheless having established Laws to put the guilty to
death, he has made Kings and Republics the Guardians of this power. And this
is taught us by Saint Paul, when speaking of the right which Supreme
Authorities have to put men to death, he derives it from heaven, saying, That
they carry not the sword in vain, as being the Ministers of God to execute
vengeance upon the evildoers.

But as they derive this power from God, so does he oblige them to exercise it
as God himself would, that is to say, with justice, according to this saying of
Saint Paul in the same place, For Magistrates are not to be feared for good
works but for evil. Will thou then be without fear of the power? do well; so
shall thou have the praise of the same. For they are the Ministers of God for
good. And this restriction is so far from abating any thing of this power,
that, on the contrary, it extremely heightens it, because it is to make it like
that of God, who is impotent as to the doing of evil, and omnipotent as to the
doing of good, as also to distinguish it from that of Devils, who are impotent
as to the doing of good, and whose power is only employed in evil. There is
only this difference between God and Sovereigns, that God being Justice and
Wisdom it self, he may without any ceremonies put to death whom he pleases,
and that when he pleases, and after what manner he pleases. For besides that he
is the sovereign disposer of men's lives, he cannot take them away either
without cause or cognizance, since he is as incapable of injustice as of
error. But Princes are not to proceed so, because they are not so the
Ministers of God, but that they are still men and not Gods. They may be
surpised by evil impressions; they may be exasperated by false suggestio^s;
they may be transported by passion; and this is it has engaged them to lay
down certain humane provisions, and in their Dominions to establish Judges, to
whom they have communicated that power, that so the authority which God has
invested them with, might not be employed but to the end for which they had
received it.

You are then to conceive, Fathers, that to be exempted from Homicide, a man
must act both by the authority of God and according to the justice of God; and
if these two conditions meet not together, a man offends either by killing with
his Authority but without his justice, or by killing with his justice but
without his Authority. From the necessity of this union, it happens, according
to Saint Augustine, that he who without authority kills a guilty person becomes
guilty himself, for this reason principally that he usurpes an Authority which
God had not given him; and, on the contrary, the Judges, who have this
Authority, are nevertheless homicides, if they put to death an innocent
person, contrary to the laws they ought to have observed.

These, Fathers, are the principles of public safety and tranquillity, which
have been received through all times and in all places, and upon which all
Lawgivers, as well-sacred, as profane, have established their Laws; insomuch
that even Pagans have made no exception to this rule, unless it so happened
that there were no other way to avoid the loss of chastity or life, as
conceiving that as Cicero says, the Laws themselves seemed to offer their
assistance to those that are in such an extremity.

But, this case excepted, which yet I have nothing to say to in this place,
that there ever was any Law that permitted private persons to kill, or has
suffered it, as you do, to put off an affront and to avoid the loss of honor
or estate, when a man is not at the same time in any danger of his life, is a
thing, Fathers, which I maintain was never done even by Infidels. Nay on the
contrary, they have expressly forbidden it. It was one of the Laws of the 12.
Tables at Rome, That it was not lawful to kill a Th^efe in the day time, who
did not defend himself by force of arms. Which was no more then what had been
before forbidden in Exodus c. 22. And the Law Furem, ad Legem Corneliam, taken
out of Vlpian, forbids the killing of Thieves even in the night time, if they
put us not in danger of our lives. See it in Cujacius, in tit. dig. de. Justit.
and jure ad l. 3.

Tell us now, Fathers, by what authority you permit what both divine and humane
Laws prohibit, and by what privilege Lessius could say, l. 2 c. 9. number. 66.
and 72. it is, in Exodus prohibited to kill Thieves in the day time, who defend
not themselves by force of arms, and they are punishable by the hand of
justice that should kill in that manner. And yet all this would not make a man
guilty in point of conscience, when a man is not certain that he shall be able
to recover what is taken from him, or that he doubt it, as Sotus says, because
a man is not obliged to put himself to the hazard of losing any thing to save a
Th^efe. And all this is allowable even in Ecclesiast ckes. What strange
confidence is this! The Law of Moses punishes those that kill Thieves when they
do not attempt our lives, and the Law of the Gospel, according to you, shall
absolve them? How, Fathers, is JESUS CHRIST come to destroy the Law, and not to
fulfill it? the Judges, says Lessius, would punish those that should kill upon
such an occasion, and yet a man were not guilty in point of conscience. Is it
that the Morality of JESUS CHRIST is more cruel and less an enemy to murder
then that of Pagans, out of which the Judges have taken those civil Laws that
condemn it? Do Christians make a greater account of the things of this world,
or less of men lives, then Idolaters and Infidels have done? What ground do
you take for this Fathers? Not any express Law either of God or men; but only
this extravagant way of discourse. The Laws, you say, permit a man to defend
himself against thieves, and to oppose force with force. Now this defense once
permitted, murder must also be thought permitted, since that without it it
were many times impossible for a man to defend himself.

It is false, Fathers, this defense being permitted, that Murder is also
permitted. It Is this cruel way of defending ones self is the spring of all
your Errors, and which is called by the facu^ty of Lovain, A MURDERING
DEFENSE, Defensio Occisiva, in the censure of the Doctrine of your F. Amicus,
upon Homicide. I therefore maintain against you, that there is so great a
difference, according to the Laws, between killing and defending ones self,
that even in the same occasions, wherein Defense is allowed, Murder is
forbidden, when a man is in no danger of life. Take it, Fathers, out of
Cujacius in the same place: It is lawful to thrust him back who comes to
poss^ss^ h mselfe of what is ours; BUT IT IS NOT LAWFUL TO KILL HIM. And
further, If any one come to strike us, and not to kill us, it is indeed lawful
to put h m back, BUT IT IS NOT LAWFUL TO KILL HIM.

Whence then do you derive the privilege to affirm, as Molina, Reginaldus,
Filiutius, Escobar, Lessius, and others do, That it is lawful to kill him
that comes to strike us; and elsewhere. It is lawful to kill him that comes to
affront us, according to the judgment of all Casuists, ex sententia omnium, as
Lessius says, number. 74? By what authority do you who are but private men,
communicate this power to other private men, nay to Religious men? And how dare
you presume to usurp this right of life and death, which belongs essentially
only to God, and is the most glorious character of a supreme power? This you
should have answered; and you think you have done us abundance of right, by
saying simply in your 13. Imposture, That the valuable consideration for which
Molina permits a man to kill a thief who runs away without doing us any
violence, is not so small as I said it was, and that it is requisite it should
be greater then of six Ducats. What pitiful stuff is this, Fathers, where
would you determine it? At 15. or 16 Ducats? I shall have the same reproach for
you. At least you cannot assert it should exceed the value of a horse; for
Lessius, l. 2. c. 9. n. 74. clearly decides; That it is lawful to kill a Thief
that is run away with a horse of ours. But I tell you once more, that,
according to Molina, this value is determined at 6. ducats, as I have cited
him: and if you will not agree to it, put it to such Umpirage as you cannot but
stand to: I chose to that end your Father Reginaldus, who explaining that very
place of Molina, l. 21. number. 68. declares, that Molina there DETERMINES the
value for which it is not lawful to kill, at 3. or 4. or 5. ducats. And so
Fathers, I shall not have only Molina but also Reginaldus on my side.

I shall find no harder task to refute your 14. imposture touching the
permission to kill a Thief who would rob us of a Crown according to Molina.
This is so clear, that Escobar shall be my witness for it, tr. 1. ex. 7. number.
44. where he says that Molina does regularly determine the value for which a
man may be killed, at a Crown. And all you have to lay to my charge, in the 14.
imposture is that I have suppressed the last words of that passage, viz: that
men ought to observe herein the moderation of a just defense. Why do you not
also quarrel at Escobar for not having expressed them? But how pitifully
subtle you are? you think men understand not what it is, according to you, for
a man to defend himself. Do we not know that it is to make use of a murdering
defense? You would persuade us that Molina's meaning in it is, that when a man
is in danger of his life by keeping his crown, then he may kill, since it is in
his own defense. Were this true, Fathers, why should Molina say in the same
place, That, in that he is contrary to Carrerus and Pald who permit killing in
ones own defense? Take it therefore from me, that he simply means, that, if a
man can keep his crown without killing the thief, he ought not to kill him; but
that if he cannot secure it but by killing him, though he run no hazard in
point of life, as in case the Thief have no arms, it is lawful to arm
against him and to kill him, to secure the crown; and that so doing, a man does
not, according to him, exceed the moderation of a just defense. And that it is
clearly so, let him explain himself, tom. 4. tr. 3. d 11. n. 5^ A man may be
said not to exceed the moderation of a just defense, though he take arms
against those that have not any, or have the advantage of them in the goodness
of the arms. I know there want not those who are of a contrary opinion: but I
approve not their opinion, not even in the exterior tribunal.

Thus, Fathers, have I made it apparent, that your Authors permit killing for
the defense of a man's estate and his honor, though he be not in the least
danger of life. From this principle do they authorize Duells, as I have
discovered by so many passages, to which you have made no answer at all. You
meddle not in your writings, but with one single passage of your F. Layman who
permits it, in case a man were otherwise in danger to lose his fortune or his
reputation: and say, that I have suppressed what he adds, that that happens
very seldom. O how I admire you Fathers; these indeed are excellent impostures
that you charge me with! It is indeed a question, to know whether this case
happen so seldom? But what we have under consideration is whether it be
lawful to fight a duel in such a case. These are two different questions.
Layman, in the quality of a Casu^st is to judge whether duelling be lawful,
and he declares for the affirmative. We can without him, be our own judges
whether that case happen seldom, and shall tell him, that it is very ordinary.
And if you will take your good friend Diana's word for it, he will tell you it
is very frequent, part. 5. tr. 14. Misc. 2, Resol. 99. But whether it happen
seldom or not, and that Layman follow therein Navarrus, as you will needs
have us believe, is it not an abominable thing that he should consent to that
opinion; that to preserve an uncertain reputation, it is lawful in point of
Conscience to accept a challenge, contrary to the Acts and Edicts of all
Christian States, and against all the Canons of the Church, though you have
not, to authorize all these diabolical Maxims, either Laws, or Canons, or
authorities of Scripture or Fathers, or the example of any one Saint, but only
this impious ratiocination; Honor is more precious then life; But it is
lawful for one man to kill another in defense of his life; it is therefore
lawful to kill in defense of a man's honor. How, Fathers, because mankind is
so degenerated, as to love his counterfeit honor more then the lives which God
has given them to serve him in, it shall be lawful for them to murder one
another to preserve it? That is it which is the most horrid of all, that men do
love that honor beyond their lives. And yet this contagious itch of honor,
which were enough to soil the best and holiest actions, if they were referred
to that end, shall have the faculty to justify the most criminal, because they
are referred to that end? What confusion is this, Fathers, and who sees not
what excesses may be the issue of it?

For it is apparent, that it will be stretched to killing for the most
inconsiderable things, when it stands upon a man's honor to preserve them; nay
I tell you so far as to kill for an apple. You would raise against me, fathers,
and would say that I draw malicious consequences from your doctrine, were I not
stilted up by the authority of grave Lessius, who, number. 68. speaks thus. It is
not lawful for one man to kill another to preserve a thing of little value, as
for a business of a crown, OR FOR AN APPLE, AUT PRO POMO, unless it should be
a great dishonor to him to lose it: For in such a case a man may recover it,
nay if need be, to that end kill the person that has it; et si opus, occidere:
because this is not so much to defend one's goods as ones honor. This is
clear enough, Fathers; And to conclude your doctrine with a maxim that
comprehends all the rest, take this of your Father Hereau, who had it out of
Lessius; The right of defending ones self extends to what ever is necessary to
secure us from whatsoever may be of injury.

What strange consequences are there lodged in this in humane principle! How is
all the world obliged to oppose it, and above all, those that have any relation
to the public. It is not only the general interest that engages them thereto,
but also their own private interest, since your Casuists, cited in my Letters,
extend their permissions to kill, even to them. Thus the factious who fear
punishment for their attempts, which yet never seem unjust to them, easily
persuaded that they are oppressed by violence, will presently believe that the
right of defending ones self extends to, whatsoever is necessary to secure a
man from a^l injury. They will never be troubled with that remorse of
Conscience, which smothers so many crimes as soon as they are brought forth,
and will make it their only business to overcome the external obstacles that
lie in their way.

I shall say nothing of them here, Fathers, no more then of the murders you
have permitted, which are yet more abominable and of greater concernment to the
State then all these whereof Lessius treats so openly in the 4. and 10. doubts,
and not only he but a many more of your Authors. It were to be wished that
these horrid maxims had never come out of hell, and that the Devil, who is the
first Author of them, had never met with men so far devoted to his orders as to
publish them among Christians.

From all I have said hitherto, it may be easily judged what a vast contrariety
there is between your degenerate opinions and the rigor of civil and Pagan
Laws. What will they be when compared to the Ecclesiastical Laws which must be
incomparably much more holy: since it is the Church that only knows and
possesses true holiness? With much more reason, has this chaste spouse of the
Son of God, who in imitation of her Beloved can well shed her own blood for
others, and not that of others for her self, a particular horror for Murder,
such as is proportionable to the particular illumination God has honored her
with. She considers men, not only as men, but as the images of that God whom
she adores. She has for every one of them an holy respect which makes them all
venerable, as redeemed by an infinite price, to be made the Temples of the
living God. Accordingly she looks on the death of a man killed without the
order of God, not only as Homicide, but as Sacrilege also, depriving her of
one of her members, since that whether he be one of the faithful or not, she
ever considers him as either actually being one of her members, or in a
capacity to be such.

For, Fathers, since God became Man for the salvation of men, their condition
is so considerable to the Church, that she has ever punished Homicide, whereby
they are destroyed, as one of the greatest crimes can be committed against God.
I will give you some instances of it, not with any thoughts that all those
severities ought to be continued; I know the Church is at liberty to dispose
several ways of that exterior discipline, but only to show you, what her
unchangeable spirit is as to this particular. For the penances she enjoins for
murder may be different according to the diversity of times; but the horror
she has for it no vicissitude of time can ever change.

The Church, for a long time would not be reconciled, til the approches of
death, to those who were guilty of voluntary murder, such as are those which
you permit. The famous Council of Ancyra condemns them to penance during life;
and the Church has since thought her self very indulgent toward them by
reducing that time to a great number of years. But the more to deter Christians
from voluntary murders, she has most severely punished even those that
happened by chance and imprudence, as may be seen in Saint Basil, Saint Gregory
Nyssenus, in the Decretals of Pope Zachary and Alexander II. The Canons cited
by Isaac Bishop of Langres, t. 2. c. 13. ordain seven years penance for one
that kills another in his own def^nce. And we find Saint Hildebert Bishop of
Man's answering Yves de Chartres, That he had reason to suspend a Priest for his
life, who, with a stone, had killed a Thief in his own defense.

Be not then so confident as to affirm your decisions to be conformable to the
spirit and Canons of the Church. We defy you to produce any one among those
that gives permission to kill for the preservation of ones goods only: for I
speak not of those occasions wherein a man is also to endeavor the safety of
his life. SE SUAQ^E LIBERANDO. Your own Authors acknowledge that there are not
any such; as among others, your Father Amicus, Tom. 5. disput. 36. number. 136.
There is not, says he, any divine or humane Law which expressly permits the
killing of a Thief who stands not upon his own defense. And yet that is it
which you expressly do permit. We defy you to show any Canon that permits
killing for honor, a box of the ear, for an affront, for opprobrious language.
We defy you to allege any that permits the killing of Witnesses, Judges and
Magistrates, what unjustice soever we may expect from them. The spirit of the
Church is absolutely contrary to these seditious Maxims, which open so wide a
gap to all insurrections, whereto the populace is so naturally inclined. She
has ever taught her Children, that they ought not to return evil for evil;
that a man should smother his indignation; not resist violence; render to every
one what is due to him, honor, tribute, submission: to obey Magistrates and
Superiors though unjust, because we ought always to regard in them the power
of God which has set them over us. She forbids men, more expressly then the
Civil Laws do, to be their own carvers in point of justice; and it is by her
spirit that Christian Kings do it not themselves, even in crimes of Treason of
the highest nature, but put the criminals into the hands of the Judges, that so
they might be punished according to the Laws, and proceedings of justice; which
are so far contrary to your carriage, that the opposition there is between them
cannot but make you blush. For since this discourse engages me so far, I shall
entreat you to consider well this comparison between the ways whereby a man
may kill his enemies, according to you, and those observed by the Judges in
putting condemned persons to death.

It is granted by all the world, Fathers, that private men are never permitted
to demand the death of any one: and that though a man should ruin us, lame us,
set our houses on fire, kill our parents, and besides all this, were resolved
to assassinate us, and to ruin our reputation, the Magistrate would not in
justice hearken to the demand we should make for his death. So that there was a
necessity of appointing public persons who should demand it on the behalf of
the King, or indeed rather of God. What think you, Fathers, was it for terror
and formality that Christian Judges took this course? Or did they not do so, to
make the Civil Laws consonant to those of the Gospel, that so the external
execution of Justice should not be contrary to the internal sentiments which
Christians ought to have? It is easily seen how far these first proceedings of
Justice confound you; but what is yet to come will certainly crush you to the
ground.

Suppose then, Fathers, that those public persons demand the death of him who
has committed all these crimes, what will be done? Will they presently stick a
dagger in his breast? No, Fathers, a man's life is of greater consequence; men
proceed with more tenderness; it is a thing lies not at the devotion of all
sorts of persons, but is to be disposed of only by Judges, of whose integrity
and abilities there is sufficient experience. And do you think that one is
enough to condemn a man to death? No, Fathers, there must be at least seven. Of
these seven there must not be any one that has been injured by the person
indicted, left his judgment should by passion be changed or corrupted. And you
know, Fathers, that to the end, their spirits may be the more purified, it is
observed to this day that the morning is appointed for these employments. So
great caution is there used to prepare them for so great an action, as wherein
they are the Lieutenants and Ministers of God, not to condemn any but such as
he condemns himself.

And that they may act as faithful dispensers of that divine power of taking
away men's lives, they are strictly to judge according to the depositions of
Witnesses, and according to all the other formalities they are to observe; All
which done, they cannot in conscience pronounce sentence but according to the
Laws, nor judge any worthy of death, but such as the Law condemns. And then,
Fathers, if the order of God obliged them to proceed to execution upon the
bodies of these wretches, the same order of God does also oblige them to be
careful of their sinful souls; and it is because they are sinful, that they are
obliged to be the more careful of them: so that they are not turned over to
execution, till such time as they have had the means to provide for their
Consciences. All this seems to speak abundance of purity and innocence, and yet
the Church has such an aversion to blood, that she holds those incapable to
serve at her altars who had been employed about any execution of the sentence
of death, though attended with all these so religious circumstances: whence it
is not hard to conceive what Idea the Church has of Homicide.

Thus you see, Fathers, how men's lives are disposed of according to justice,
let us now see how you dispose of them. In your new laws, there is but one
Judge; and that Judge is himself the party injured. He is at the same time
Judge, party, and executioner. He demands, of himself, the death of his enemy;
he condemns him, he immediately executes him, and without any regard either of
the body or soul of his Brother, he kills and damns him for whom JESUS CHRIST
dyed, all this to avoid a box of the ear, or an opprobrious or affrontive
speech, or some offense of the like nature, for which a Judge, who is invested
with lawful authority, should be guilty himself should he condemn those that
had committed them; because the Laws are far from condemning them. And in a
word, to make your excesses full weight, a man contracts neither sin nor
irregularity when he kills in that manner without authority and contrary to the
Laws, though he be a religious man, nay a Priest. Wh^re are we, Fathers, Are
they religious men and Priests that speak after this rate? Are they Christians?
Are they Turks? Are they men? Are they Devils? And are these the Mysteries
revealed by the Lamb to those of his Society; or abominations suggested by the
Dragon into those that follow his party?

For in a word, Fathers, what would you have men take you to be, children of
the Gospel, or enemies to the Gospel? you must needs be of the one or the
other, there is no mean; He that is not with Jesus Christ is against him. This
dichotomy of mankind comprehends all: There are two peoples, and two worlds
scattered over the face of the earth, according to Saint Augustine; the world
of the children of God, which makes up a body whereof Jesus Christ is head and
King; and the world that is at enmity with God, whereof the Devil is head and
King. For this reason is Jesus Christ called the King and God of the world,
because he has every where subjects and adorers; and the Devil is also called
in scripture the Prince of this world, and the God of this age, because he has
every where creatures and Captives. Jesus Christ has given the Church, which
is his Empire, such Laws as he according to his eternal wisdom thought fit;
and the Devil has given the world, which is his kingdom, the Laws he would
have observed therein. Jesus Christ has placed honor in suffering, the Devil
in not suffering. Jesus Christ has bidden those who receive a blow on one
cheek to turn the other also; and the Devil bids those to whom a blow is to be
given, kill such as would do them that injury. Jesus Christ declares those
blessed who partake with him in his ignominy; and the devil declares those
cursed that are in ignominy. Jesus Christ says, woe unto you, when men speak
good things of you; and the devil says, woe unto those of whom the world
speaks not with esteem.

Consider now, Fathers, whether of the two Kingdoms you are of. You have heard
the language of the City of Peace which is called the mystical Jerusalem; and
you have also heard the language of the City of Disquiet called by the
Scripture Spiritual Sodom: which of these two languages do you understand?
which do you speak? Those that belong to Jesus Christ have the same sentiments
with Jesus Christ, as Saint Paul says; and those who are the children of the
Devil, ex patre Diabolo, who was a murderer from the beginning, practice the
maxims of the Devil, according to the words of Jesus Christ. Let us then hear
the language of your School, and ask your Authors; when a man smites us on the
cheek, should we endure it or kill him that would give it; or is it lawful to
kill him to avoid the affront? it is lawful, as Lessius, Molina, Escobar,
Reginaldus, Filiutius, Bald llus, and other Jesuits affirm, to kill him who
would give us a box of the ear. Is this the language of Jesus Christ? your
answer again to this; were a man dishonorable for suffering a box o'th ear
till such time as he had killed him that had given it? Is it not certain, says
Escobar, that while a man suffers him to live of whom he has received a box
o'th ear, he remains without honor. Very right, Fathers, without that honor
which the Devil has derived out of his own proud spirit, into that of his
proud children. It Is this honor which has ever been the Idol of men possessed
by the spirit of the world. It Is to preserve this glory, whereof the evil spirit
is the true disposer, that they sacrifice their lives, by Duells, which they
are so ready to accept; their honor by the infamy of the punishments they ly
subject to; and their eternal happiness, by the hazard of damnation which
they run, and which by the Ecclesiastical Canons deprives them of Christian
burial. We are therefore to give God the praise, that he has illuminated the
Kings mind with purer lights then those of your Theology. His so severe Edicts
upon this occasion have not made the fighting of Duels a crime, they only
punish the crime which is inseparable from it. The fear of the rigor of his
justice has deterred those whom the fear of Gods justice has not; and his
piety persuades him, that the Honor of Christians consists in the observation
of the commandments of God, and the rules of Christianity, and not in that
chimaera of honor, which you pretend, as frivolous as it is, to be a
justifiable excuse for Murders. Thus are your murdering decisions detestable
to all the world, and it were your better course to change your judgment, if
not out of considerations of Religion, out of those of policy. Prevent,
Fathers, by a voluntary recantation of these inhumane opinions, the lewd
consequences which may follow them, and for which you only must be
accountable. And to be the more struck with the horror of homicide, remember
that the first crime of corrupted mankind was murder committed on the person
of the first just man; that the greatest crime of men was a murder committed
on the person of him that is head of all the just; and that Homicide is the
only crime that at the same time destroys the State, the Church, Nature, and
Piety.

October. 23, 1656. Reverend Fathers,
I have seen the Answer of your Apologist to the thirteenth LETTER. It is such
that if he make no better to this, which solves the greatest part of his
difficulties, it will require no rejoinder. I pity his weakness to see him
digress ever and anon from the business in hand, to wantonise in calumnies
and reproaches against both living and dead. But to gain credit to the Minutes
you furnish him withal, you should not have been so dis^ingenuous as to have
denied publicly a thing so notorious as the box o'th ear at Compiegne. It is
most certain, Fathers, from the acknowledgement of the party injured, that he
received upon his cheek a blow from the hand of a Jesuit; and all that your
Friends could do, was to bring it into question, whether it were given with the
palm, or the back of the hand, and then to sift the question, whether a blow
with the back of the hand upon the cheek ought to be called a box o'th ear or
not; I know not to whom it belongs to decide it, but am in the interim
persuaded that it is at least a probable box o'th ear. So far I am satisfied
in Conscience.



To the same. LETTER XV.
REVEREND FATHERS,
SInce your impostures like Hydras increase daily, and that they are your
offensive arms to persecute with so much cruelty all godly persons that any
way oppose your Errors, I conceive my self obliged as well for their interest,
as that of the Church, to unvail a certain mystery in your proceedings, which
I have long since promised, that it may be discovered, even out of your own
Maxims, what credit men should give your accusations and your reproaches.

I know, that those who are not sufficiently acquainted with you are in a great
irresolution what to think of these things, as finding themselves in an
inevitable necessity of either believing the incredible crimes wherewith you
charge your Enemies, or taking you for Impostors, which also seems a thing
incredible to them on the other side. How, say they, if these things were not
so, would Religious men publish them, and would they so far belly their
consciences as to damn themselves by these calumnies? Thus do they discourse
with themselves; and so the evident proofs, whereby your falsifications are
destroyed, crossing the opinion they have of your sincerity, they are in
suspense between the clearness of the Truth, which they cannot deny, and the
observation of charity which they are afraid to make a breach of. So that as
the only thing that hinders them from shaking off your opprobrious language is
the esteem they have for you; so when they shall be once satisfied that you
have not that Idea of Calumny which they imagine you have, and that you think
to work out your salvation by reviling your enemies, it is out of all question,
the weight of truth will so fix their faith, as that they shall no longer
credit your impostures. This, Fathers, shall be the design and subject of this
Letter. I shall not only think it sufficient to discover that your writings
are fraught with nothing but calumnies, but go a little further with you. It is
possible a man may tell things that are false believing them to be true; but
the character of a Liar implies the intention of lying. I shall therefore make
it appear, Fathers, that it is your intention to lie and calumniate, and that
it is done wittingly and with design that you charge your enemies with those
crimes whereof you know them to be innocent, because you think it may be done
without falling from the state of Grace. And though you are as well acquainted
as I am with this point of your Morality, yet shall I still insist upon it,
that none may doubt of it, when they see me address my self to you so to
maintain it to your faces that you shall not have the confidence to deny it,
but you must, by such disacknowledgment, confirm my objections against you for
it. It is so notorious a doctrine in your Schools, that you have maintained it,
not only in your books, but also in your public Theses, which certainly is
the height of confidence; as among others in your Theses of Lovain, of the year
1645. in these terms, It is only a venial sin to calumniate, and impose false
crimes, to ruin their credit who speak ill of us: Quidni non nisi veniale sit,
detrahentis authoritatem, tibi noxiam, falso crimine elidere? And this doctrine
is so much in vogue among you, that you treat him as an ignorant and
temerarious person, who presumes any way to oppose it.

This has been, not long since, the sad fate of Father Quiroga a German
Capuchin, when he endeavored to oppose it. For your Father Dicastillus
presently takes him up, and in that dispute speaks of him in these terms, de
Just. l. 2. tr. 2. disp. 12. number. 404. A certain grave Religious man,
bare-hoof'd and deep-cowl'd, cucullatus, gymnipoda, whom I name not, was so
rash as to cry down this opinion among a sort of women and ignorant people, and
to affirm that it was pernicious and scandalous, prejudicial to good manners,
contrary to the quiet and tranquillity of States and Societies, and in a word,
contrary, not only to all Catholic Doctors, but also to all those that might
be Catholic. But I have maintained against him, and do still maintain, that
Calumny when it is used against a Calumniator, though grounded on absolute
falsities, is not for that any mortal sin either against Justice or Charity.
And to prove it, I have brought a cloud of our Fathers to witness it, and whole
Universities consisting of them, all whom I have consulted, and among others,
the Reverend Father John Ga^s, Confessor to the Emperor, the Reverend Father
Daniel Bastele, Confessor to the Archduke Leopold, Father Henry sometime
Preceptor to those two Princes, all the public and ordinary Professors of the
University of Vienna, (consisting wholly of Jesuits) all the Professors of the
University of Grats, (a place absolutely Jesuitical) all the Professors of the
University of Prague, (whereof the Jesuits are Masters) of all whom I have at
hand the approbations of my opinion, written and signed with their own hands;
besides that I have on my side Father Pennalossa, a Jesuit, Preacher to the
Emperor and the King of Spain, Father Pilliceroli, a Jesuit, and a many
others, who had accounted this opinion probable before any dispute between us.
You see hence, Fathers, there are few opinions you have made it so much your
business to establish as this, as there were not many whereof you stood so much
in need. Insomuch that you have accordingly authorized it so far, that the
Casuists quote it as an infallible principle. It is most certain, says
Caramouel, number. 1151. that it is a probable opinion, that it is not any mortal
sin to calumniate falsely to preserve ones honor. For it is maintained by above
twenty grave Doctors, by Gasper Hurtado, and D^castillus, Jesuits, etc. so that
if this doctrine were not probable, there were hardly any such in all the body
of Divinity.

What abominable Divinity is this, which is so corrupt in all its main heads,
that, if it be not profitable, and secure in point of Conscience, that a man
may calumniate where there is no crime; to preserve his honor, there is hardly
any of all its decisions that is such! How probable is it, Fathers, that those
who maintain this principle, should not sometimes put it in practice? The
degenerate inclination of men is apt enough of it self to bend them that way,
and that so violently, that it must needs break out with all its natural
impetuosity, when the obstacle of Conscience is once taken away. Would you have
an instance of it? Caramouel furnishes you in the same place. This Maxim,
says he, of Father Dicastillus the Jesuit, concerning Calumny having been, by
a Countess of Germany, taught the Empress's Daughters, the confidence they
thence took that it was no sin, at most but venial, to scatter calumnies up and
down, bred in a few days so many, together with so much opprobrious language,
and such a number of false reports, that it put the whole Court into alarm and
combustion. For it is not hard to imagine what use they might make of it; so
that to appease this tumult, they were forced to send for a Religious Capuchin,
a man of an exemplary life, named Father Quiroga, ('it was this that Dicastillus
quarreled with him so much for) who came and made it apper to them that that
Maxim was a most pernicious one, especially among women, and he took a
particular care to oblige the Empress absolutely to abolish the use of it.
There is no reason to be surprised at the lewd consequences of this Doctrine.
It were, on the contrary, a miracle it should not produce this looseness.
Self-love is ever prone enough to persuade us, that whenever any thing is laid
to our charge, it is unjustly; much more may it you, Fathers, whom Vanity has
so strangely blinded, as that you would make the world believe in all your
writings, that to blast the honor of your Society is to derogate from that of
the Church. And thus, Fathers, were there some reason to think it strange you
should not put this Maxim in practice. For we must no longer affirm that of
you, which some have done that know you not: How! would they calumniate their
Enemies, when they cannot do it without endangering their Salvation? But we
must on the contrary say thus; How, would they let slip the advantage of
discrediting their enemies when they may do it without hazarding their
Salvation? Be it therefore no longer a miracle to find the Jesuits Detractors;
they are such in safety of conscience, and nothing can hinder them from being
so, since that by the credit they have in the world they may calumniate without
any fear of being accountable to the justice of men, and that by the
prerogatives they assume to themselves in cases of conscience, they have
established such Maxims as that they may do it without any fear of the justice
of God.

This, this, Fathers, is the source whence spring so many horrid impostures.
This is the treasury whence your Father Brisacier was so well furnished as to
scatter so many, that they drew upon him the censure of the late Archbishop of
Paris. This it was that engaged your Father d'Anjou to discredit, even in the
Pulpit, in the Church of Benedict, on the 8. of March 1655. those persons of
quality who received the charity for the poor of Picardy and Champagn,
whereto they contributed so much themselves; and with an horrid falsitie to
affirm, and such as might well damme up those charities, were there any credit
to be given to your impostures; That he knew of a certainty that those persons
had converted the money to other uses, to be employed against the Church and
against the State. Which gave the Pastor of the Parish, who is a Doctor of
Sorbonne, occasion to preach the next day, merely to refute those calumnies.
It Is by the same principle, that your Father Crasset has preached so many
impostures in Orleans, that the Lord Bishop of that place thought himself
obliged to suspend him as a public ^mpostor by his Mandate of September 9.
wherein he declares, That he forbids Brother John Crasset of the Society of
Jesus to preach in his Diocese, and all his people to hear him, under pain of
being guilty of a mortal disobedience, for that he has been informed that the
said Crasset had made a discourse in the pulpit full of falsehood and calumnies
against the Ecclesiastics of that City, falsely and maliciously charging them,
that they maintained heretical and impious propositions; as, That it is
impossible to keep the commandments of God; That a man can never resist
interior grace; and that JESUS CHRIST died not for all men, and other the like
condemned by Innocent X. For this, Fathers, is your ordinary imposture, and the
first which you lay to their charge, whom it concerns you should be disgraced.
And though it be as impossible for you to prove it against any, as for your
Father Crasset against those Ecclesiastics of Orleans; yet are not your
Consciences in the least disturbance, because you believe this manner of
reviling those who meddle with you, to be so certainly allowable, that you make
not the least difficulty to declare it publicly and in sight of a whole City.

Of this there is a remarkable instance in the difference happened between you
and Monsieur Puys Pastor of S. Nicier at Lions; and since this story perfectly
discovers your spirit, I shall the rather insist upon the principal
circumstances of it. You know, Fathers, that in the year 1649. M. Puys
translated into French an excellent book written by another Capuchin,
Concerning the duty of Christians toward their Parishes, against those by whom
they are diverted from them, without using the least invective, or reflecting
on any particular Religious man or Order. Your Fathers nevertheless took this
as directed to them, and forgetting the respect they might have had for an
ancient pastor, a Judge in the Primacy of France, and highly esteemed by the
whole City, your Father Alby writ a bloody book against him, which you sold
your selves in your own Church upon Assumption day, wherein he charged him with
diverse things, and among others, that he was become scandalous by his
galanteries, that he lay under the suspicion of impiety, of being a Heretic,
an excommunicated person; and in a word, deserved to be cast into the fire. To
this M. Puys answers; and father Alby, by a second book, maintained his former
accusations. Is it not clear then, Fathers, that either you are Calumniators,
or that you really believed all that to be true of that venerable Priest, and
consequently that it was but requisite you saw him cleansed of his errors ere
you thought him worthy to be received into your Friendship? Take then what p
ssed at the composure made of this business before Monsieur de Ville, Vicar
general to the Card* of Lion. M. Scarron, Canon and Pastor of Saint Paul's:
Monsieur Margat. M.M. Bouand, Seve, Aubert, and Durvie, Canons of Saint Nicier.
M. du Gue President of the Treasurers of France; M. Groslier, provost of
Merchants; M. de Flechere, President and Lieutenant General. M.M. de Boisat,
de Saint Romain, and de Bartoly, Gent. M. Bourgeois the Kings chief Advocate in
the Treasurers Court of France. M. de Cotton, Father and Son; M. Boniel: who
all signed the Original Declaration with Mounsieur Puys and Father Alby.
a great number of the most considerable persons of the City, whose names we
have put at the bottom of the page, as they were set to the instrument made
hereupon Sept. 25. 1650. In the presence of so many people M. Puys did only
declare, That what he had written was not any way directed to the Jesuits; that
he had spoken in general against those who cause the faithful to straggle
from their own parishes, without any the least thought of meddling therein with
the Society, and that on the contrary, he had a very aff ctionate est^eme for
it. These words recovered him out of his Apostasy, his scandal and his
excommunication, without any retraction or absolution. Whereupon Father Alby
directed these words to him, Sir, the belief I was in that your quarrel was
against the Society whereof I have the honor to be a member, obliged me to
take pen in hand to answer it; and I thought the manner of my proceeding
lawful and justifiable. But coming to a better understanding of your
Intention, I am now to declare to you, THAT THERE IS NOT ANY THING that might
hinder me from esteeming you a man of a very illuminated judgment, of sound
Learning and ORTHODOX, as to Manners, UNBLAMEABLE, and in a word a worthy
Pastor of your Church. This is a Declartion I make with joy, and which I
entreat these Gentlemen to remember.

No question but they do remember it, Fathers, with this into the bargain,
that people were more scandalized at the reconciliation then they were at the
Difference. For who cannot but admire this discourse of Father Alby? He does
not tell you he has made any recantation, as the effect of any change in the
manners and doctrine of M Puys, but only that understand^ng his intention not
to have been to meddle with your Society, there is not any thing hinders but
that he may account him a good Catholic. He did not therefore really believe
him a Heretic: And yet, after he had, contrary to his knowledge, charged him
with it, he does not acknowledge his default, nay, on the contrary, affirms,
that he believes the manner of his proceeding lawful and allowable.

What is your design, Fathers, thus publicly to discover, that you measure not
men's faith and virtues but according to their intentions toward your Society?
How could you avoid a fear of being accounted, and that by your own
acknowledgement, Impostors and sycophants? How, Fathers, shall the same man,
not discovering the least change in point of life, but merely as you believe
him satisfied or dissatisfyed with your Society, be pious or impious,
unblameable, or excommunicable, a worthy Pastor of the Church, or a person fit
to be cast into the fire, and, in a word, a Catholic or a Heretic? It
signifies therefore the same thing in your language to quarrel with your
Society and to be a Heretic. A very pleasant kind of Heresy, Fathers! Which
granted; when we find in your writings so many good Catholics infamously
termed Heretics, it amounts to no more then that you think them too peremptory
with you. It Is well, Fathers, that we can make a shift to understand this
exotic language, according to which it is that I am a grand Heretic. And it
must needs be in this sense that you so often give me the title. You have no
other reason to cut me off from being a member of the Church, then that you
think my Letter^o prejudice you: and so all I have to do to become a Catholic
again, is, either to approve the excesses of your Morality, which I cannot do
but I must renounce all sentiments of piety, or that I persuade you that I have
no other design in it then to further your true happiness, which if you should
acknowledge, it must needs be imagined you were strangely reformed of your
extravagances. So that I must needs be strangely ensnared in heresy, since that
the purity of my faith being absolutely unserviceable to help me out of this
kind of error, I cannot possibly get out, but either I must betray and wound
my own Conscience, or reform yours. Till then must I be a reprobate and an
Imposter, and how faithful soever I may have been in the citations of your
passages, you will go and cry it up and down, that he must be the instrument of
the Devil that should charge you with things, whereof there are not the least
track or hint in your Books; and yet there will be nothing in all this but what
is conformable to your maxims and ordinary practice, of such a vast latitude
is the privilege you take to lie. I shall take leave to produce an instance of
it, that I have purposely culled out, because I shall with the same labor
answer the ninth of your impostures; nor indeed do they deserve any other then
a cu^sory refutation.

It Is ten or twelve years since that you have had this maxim of Father Bauny's
cast in your dish; That it is lawful directly, PRIMO ET PER SE, to seek out
the next occasion of sinning for the spiritual or temporal good of our selves
or our N^ighbour, tr. 49.14. Whereof he lays down this instance, That it is
lawful for any one to go into places of public prostitution, there to convert
sinful women, though it be probable they will rather commit sin there, as
having before found by experience that th y are wont to be ensnared by the
insinuations of those women. What answer did your Father Caussin make to this
in the year 1644. in his Apology for the Society of Jesus, page 128. See,
says he, but the place in Father Bauny, read the page, the marginall notes,
what goes before, what comes after, nay read the whole book, you will not find
the least track of this Sentence, which is such as could not fall but into the
Soul of a man that is far from having friendship with his Conscience, and seems
such as could not be sugg^sted into him but by some instrument of the devil.
And your Father Pintereau, in the same manner of expression, 1 part. p. 24.
says, He must needs be at a loss of all Conscience that should teach so
det^stable a doctrine, but he must withal be worse then a Devil that should
attribute it to Father Bauny. Reader there is not the least mark or track of
any such thing in his book. Who would not believe that people speaking after
this rate, had reason to complain, and that some body had, in effect, imposed
upon Father Bauny? Have you affirmed any thing against me in more expressed
terms? And how durst a man imagine that a passage is, in terminis, in the very
place where it is cited, when there is not the least mark or track of it in all
the book?

This, Fathers, is certainly a course to gain credit till you are answered, but
it is also the only way never to be credited after you are once answered. For
it is so apparent that you lied at that time, that at this day you make no
difficulty to acknowledge in your Answers, that this maxim is in Father Bauny,
in the very place where it is cited; and the miracle is, that where it was
detestable twelve years since, it is now grown so innocent, that in your ninth
Imposture, p. 10. you charge me with ignorance and malice for quarrelling with
Father Bauny upon an opinion which has not been refuted in the Schools. What
an advantage is it, Fathers, to have to do with people who can indifferently
say pro and con? I shall need only your selves to confound you; for I have but
two things to make appear. One is, that this maxim is a pernicious one; the
other, that it is Father Bauny's; and I will prove both by your own confession.
In the year 1644. You acknowledged it to be detestable; and in 1656. you
confess it to be Father Bauny's. Though this double acknowledgement be enough
for my justification, yet does it do something beyond it; it discovers the
spirit of your Politics. For, tell me, I beseech you, what end you propose to
your selves in your Writings: Is it to deliver your selves with sincerity? No,
Fathers, it cannot, since your Answers destroy one another. Is it to comply
with the truth in point of faith? No more; since you authorize a maxim that by
your own acknowledgement is detestable. But we are to consider, that when you
affirmed this maxim to be destestable, you with the same breath denied it to
be Father Baunys, and so he was innocent: and when you acknowledged it to be
his, you withal maintain it to be good, and consequently he is innocent still.
So that the innocence of that Father being the only thing that is common to
both your Answers, it is also clear, that it is the only thing you drive at
therein, and that all your business is to vindicate your own Father^, by
affirmng, of the same maxim, that it is in your Books and that it is not;
that it is good, and that it is bad; not according to truth, which never
changes, but according to your interest, which changes every minute. What could
I not say to you upon this advantage, for you see it is very demonstrative? And
yet this is but your ordinary course. But to avoid abundance of examples, I
think you will give me an acquittance that you are satisfied if I add but one
more to the former sum.

You have, at several times, been reproched with that other proposition of the
same Father Bauny, tr. 4. q. 22. p. 100. A Priest ought not to deny those
absolution who remains in habitual crimes contrary to the Laws of God, Nature
and the Church, though they discover not the least hope of amendment; etsi
emendationis futurae spes nulla appareat. Now I would I have you tell me,
Fathers, whether in your opinion has best answered it, your Father Printereau,
or your Father Brisacier, who vindicate Father Bauny after those two different
manners; one, by condemning the proposition, but withal not acknowledging it
to be his; the other by granting it to be Father Bauny's, but at the same time
justifying it? Hear them discourse. Father Pintereau, page 18. says thus.
What may be called breaking the reins of all modesty, and to exceed all
impudence, if not, to charge Father Bauny with so damnable a doctrine, as a
thing of all sides acknowledged? Judge hence, Reader, of the unworthiness of
this Calumny, and see what kind of people the Jesuits have to deal with, and
if the author of so black a suggestion ought not to be henceforth accounted the
Interpreter of the Father of Lies. Now see what your Father Brisacier says to
it, 4. p. page 21. But (adds he, to justify Father Bauny) you that quarrel at
this, do h^ply, expect, when a Penitent cast^ himself at your feet, till his
Angel-Guardian should engage all the title he has to heaven for his security.
St^y till God swear by his head that David lied himself, when, by the
inspiration of the holy Ghost, he said that All men are liars, deceitful and
frail; and that the present Penitent is not a greater liar, more frail, more
fickle, and more a sinner then all others, and to you will not apply the blood
of Jesus Christ to any at all.

What think you, Fathers, of their impious and Atheistical expressions? That if
it be but requisite to stay till there were some hopes of amendment in sinners
ere they should be absolved, it is as much as if there were a necessity of
staying till God the Father should swear by his head, that they should fall
into the same sins no more? How, Fathers, is there no difference between Hope
and Certainty? How injurious is it to the grace of Jesus Christ, to affirm,
that there is so little possibility that Christians should ever get out of
crimes that are contrary to the Laws of God, nature, and the Church, that it is
not so much as to be hoped, unless the holy Ghost be mistaken? So that, in your
judgment, if those be not absolved of whom there is no hope of amendment, the
blood of Jesus Christ will be useless, and will never be applied to any. To
what precipices, fathers, does this inordinate desire of keeping up the
reputation of your Authors reduce you, since you find but two ways to justify
them, Imposture and Impiety, and consequently, that the more innocent way of
vindicating them is confidently to disacknowledge things that are most evident.

And indeed thence it proceeds that you make use of it so often. But this is
not yet all that you are able to do. You forge writings to cast an odium on
your enemies, as for instance, The Letter from a Minister to Monsieur Arnauld,
which by your Mercuries you scattered up and down all Paris, to make people
believe, that the book of Frequent Communion, approved by so many Doctors and
Bishops, but indeed as was a little different from your sentiments, had been
written by some secret Intelligence with the Ministers of Charenton. You
sometimes father on your Adversaries writings full of impiety, as the
Circulatory Letter of the JANSENISTS, the impertinence of whose style too
plainly discovers the cheat, and but too palpably betrays the ridiculous
malice of your Father Meynier, who dares quote it as he does, page 28. to
confirm his most unmerciful impostures. You sometimes cite books that never
were in the world, as The Constitutions of the Blessed Sacrament, out of which
you allege such passages as are the ideal issues of your own brains, and
which startle the simple sort of people, who are unacquainted with your
confidence as well in the inventing as publishing of Lies. For there is not any
kind of Calumny which you have not put in practice. Never could the Maxim that
justifies it come into better hands.

But these happily are too easily refuted; and therefore it is but fit you had
some yet more subtle, wherein you do not particularize any thing, so to cut
off all advantage of answering them; as when Father Brisacier said, that his
Enemies commit abominable crimes, but that he will not discover them; Does it
seem something hard to lay open the imposture of so indeterminate a reproach?
And yet there is one excellent man has found out the secret of it; and it is a
Capuchin too; The Capuchins, Fathers, are very fatal to you at the present, and
I see a day coming, that the Benedictines may be no less. This Capuchin is
called Father Valerian, one of the house of the Counts de Magnis. You shall
know by this short story how he answered your Calumnies. God had blessed his
endeavors in the conversion of the Landgrave of Darmstadt. Your Fathers as if
they were troubled to see a Sovereign Prince converted to the faith without
their assistance, presently write a book against him (for you make it your
business to persecute the godly every where) wherein falsifying one of his
passages, they impute unto him an heretical doctrine: and certainly you were
very much to blame, for he meddled not with your Society. They also scattered
abroad a Letter against him, wherein they said, O what things is it in our
power to discover, not mentioning what, which would trouble you to the heart!
For if you take not some course therein* we shall be forced to acquaint the
Pope and Cardinals therewith. This indeed speaks subtlety enough; and I doubt
not, Fathers, but you will speak thus of me; but observe well how he answers it
in his book printed at Prague this last year, in the 112. and following pages.
What shall I do, says he, against these uncertain and indeterminate injuries?
How shall I discover the falsehood of reproaches not particularized? Thus I Will do
it. I openly and publicly declare to those that threaten me, that they are
infamous Impostors, and most accomplished and most impudent Liars, if they
discover not those crimes to all the world. Appear then, Accusers, and publish
those things on the housetop, which you have yet only whispered in the ear,
and whence you have derived the greater confidence to lie. There are some who
think these disputes scandalous. It Is true, it must needs raise an horrid
scandal to charge me with a crime n^ less then heresy, and to b ing me under
suspicion of being guilty of a many others. But, for my part, I do but ^edress
this scandal by clearing my innocence.

In troth, Fathers, you are but in a sad condition; nor was ever man better
vindicated. For it must needs be that you had not the least shadow or pretense
of any crime against him, since you have not accepted of such a challenge. You
are sometimes extremely put to your shifts; and yet you are never the more
circumspect. For not long after you set upon him afresh, upon another occasion,
and he took the same course to vindicate himself, page 151. in these terms.
This kind of men, which grows daily more and more insupportable to all
Christendom, would fain, under pretense of good works aspire to greatness and
dominion, by making contributarie to their ends all Laws, divine, humane,
positive, and natural. They either out of a consideration of their Learning,
out of fear, or out of hope, draw all the great ones of the earth after them,
abusing their authority to bring about their detestable intrigues. And yet
their attempts, though criminal in so high a nature, neither punished nor
opposed: nay, on the contrary, they are recompensed, and they commit them with
as much confidence as if they did God great service. All the world is sensible
of it, all speak it with execration; but there are few that are able to stand
in the gap against so powerful a tyranny. That is it I have endeavored to do.
I have put a rub before their impudence, and will keep it back in the same
manner as I did before. I declare therefore, that they lie most impudently,
MENTIRI IMPUDENTISSIME. If the things they lay to my charge be true, let them
be proved, or let my adversaries stand convicted of a lie, full of impudence.
The proceeding hereupon will discover which side Reason sticks to. I desire all
the world to observe it, and withal to take notice that this kind of men who
suffer not the most inconsiderable injury which they can avoid, pretend very
patiently to suffer those which they cannot, and so, with a counterfeit Virtue,
clothe their real weakness. For this reason have I the more earnestly provoked
their modesty, to the end the more unlettered may be satisfied; that if they
hold their peace, their patience shall not be thought an effect of the quiet,
but the disturbance of their Consciences.

Thus far he, Fathers. And he concludes thus. These men, whose Histories are
known to all the world, are so evidently unjust, and withal so insolent in
their impunity, that I must needs have renounced Jesus Christ and his Church,
should I not detest their proceedings, and that publicly, as well to vindicate
my self, as to hinder the simple from being seduced by them.

Reverend Fathers, you are now in such a Post that it is impossible to retreat.
You must now be accounted Calumniators convicted, and have recourse to your
Maxim, viz. that this kind of calumny is no crime. This honest Capuchin has
light on the secret of putting a padlock on your mouths; and this must be the
course when ever you accuse people without proof. There Is no more to be done
then to answer any one of you as the Capucher did, mentinis impudentissime. For
what other answer could be made your Father Brisacier, when he says, for
instance, that those against whom he writes, are the gates of Hell, the chief
Priests of the Devil, people fallen from faith, hope, and charity, who build up
the Treasuries of Antichrist? which I speak not by way of injury, but as forced
to it by the Truth. Would any one trouble himself to prove that he is not the
gates of hell, and that he does not build up the treasuries of Antichrist?

In like manner, what answer can be made those indeterminate discourses of that
nature which are in your books, and Advertisements upon my Letters. For
instance, That some detain the restitution put into their hands, and by that
means bring the Creditors to Beggary: That bags of money have been offered some
Religious men who have refused them. That Benefices are conferred purposely to
breed heresies contrary to Faith. That some have pensioners among the most
eminent of the Clergy, nay even in sovereign Courts. That I am also a
Pensioner of Port Royal, and that before I writ my Letters, I made Romances,
though I never read any one, and am yet to learn the names of those which your
Apologist has made. What can be said to all this, Fathers, but only, mentiris
impudentissime if you do not particularize all these persons, their words, the
time, and the place? For 'twere fit you should either be silent, or prove all
these circumstances, as I do, when I tell you the stories of John d' Alba, and
Father Alby. Otherwise you will prejudice none but your selves. All these
fab^es might have stood you in some stead before men knew your principles, but
now that the curtain is drawn and all discovered, when you would whisper a man
in the ear, That a certain person of quality, who would not have his name come
upon the stage, told you most abominable things of such and such, you will be
presently put in mind of the mentiris impudentissime, of the honest Capuckin.
It is indeed but too long that you have cheated the world, and abused the
credit men gave your impostures. It is time to restore their reputation to so
many calumniated persons. For what innocence can be so generally acknowledged
but that it may suffer some violence by the so confident impostures of a
Society scattered over the face of the Earth, which under Religious habits
covers souls so irreligious as can commit such crimes as Calumny, and that not
contrary, but according to their own Maxims. So that I may defy all censure
that may fall upon me, for discrediting the confidence men reposed in you;
since it is much more just to preserve to so many persons as you have disgraced
that reputation of Piety which they ought not to lose, then to leave you that
reputation of Sincerity which you do not any way deserve. And as the one could
not be done without the other, of what consequence is it to the world to
understand truly what you are? That is it I am now entered upon, but to go
through with it requires abundance of time. But it shall come abroad, Fathers,
and all your Politics shall not deliver you from it; since that the endeavors
you should make use of to avoid it, would only satisfy the most unconcerned
in the business that you were afraid, and that your Consciences charging you
with what I had to say to you, you have used all the means you could to prevent
it.

November 25. 1656.
To the same. LETTER XVI.
REVEREND FATHERS,
I Now come to the remainder of your Calumnies, wherein I shall answer, in the
first place, those that are yet behind of your Advertisements. But as all your
other books are equally full of them, so must they needs afford me matter
enough to entertain you on this subject as long as I shall think it convenient.
I shall therefore, as to the fable you have scattered up and down in all your
writings against Jansenius, in a word affi^me, that you maliciously mistake
certain words in one of his Letters, which being such as may be taken in a good
sense ought to be taken in good part, according to the charitable spirit of the
Church, and indeed cannot be taken otherwise but according to the Malignant
spirit of your Society. For when he only says to his friend; Trou^le not your
self so much as to what concerns your Nephew, I shall supply him with what is
necessary out of the money I have in my hands, why would you have it to be
understood, as if he should say, that he took that money so as not to restore
it again, and not that he laid so much out of it, to make it good afterward?
But what a strange discovery do you make of your imprudence, since you are
convicted of Lying by your own testimony, out of the other Letters of Jansenius
printed by your means, which make it clearly appear that what money he laid
out was only by way of ADVANCE, and such as he was afterward to reimburse.
This is evident out of that you put out as of the thirtieth of July. 1619. in
these very terms, to your confusion: Trouble not your self concerning any
ADVANCE-MONEY, he shall not want any thing while I shall stay here. As also out
of that of Jan. 6, 1620. where he says; You are very trusty; And though the
business came to such a pass as that an account were demanded, I question not
but I have so much credit in this place as that I should make a shift to find
money if need were.

You must then be Impostors, Fathers, as well in relation to this business, as
the ridiculous story of the Poores-Box of Saint Merry. For what advantage can
you make of the accusation which one of your Creatures put in against that
Clergyman, whom you would gladly tear in pieces? Must it be concluded that a
man is guilty because he is accused? No certainly, Fathers. Godly men, such as
he, will never want accusers, while the world is furnished with such Detractors
as you are. We must not therefore judge of him according to the accusation, but
according to the sentence. Now the sentence given upon the business Febr. 23.
1656. absolutely cleares him; besides that he, who was unadvisedly engaged in
that unjust prosecution, was disclaimed by his Colleagues, and forced to disavow
it. And as to what you say in the same place of that famous director who
enriched himself, in a moment, of nine hundred thousand Livers, there is no
more to be done, then to refer you to the Pastors of Saint Roch* and Saint
Paul, who are able to satisfy all Paris of his absolute disengament as to that
business, and of your inexcusable malice in this imposture. We need say no
more in answer to such frivolous falsities. These are but the trialls of skill
of your novices, and not the mortal blows of your grand Professors.

That Is it I now come to Fathers, I come, I say, to a Calumny the blackest that
ever you were guilty of. I mean that insupportable piece of impudence, whereby
you durst lay it to the charge of devout Religious women and their directors,
That they believe not the mystery of Transubstantiation, nor the real presence
of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist. This, Fathers, is an imposture worthy of you.
This is a crime which God only is able to punish, and you only to commit.
There is requisite as great an humility as that of these humble injured souls
to suffer it with patience, and to believe it, requires a man should be as
wicked as such wicked Detractors as you are. I shall not for my part undertake
to justify them, they are not so much, as suspected guilty of any such thing.
Stood they in need of Defenders, they might soon find better then I am. What I
shall here say, is not to clear their innocence but to discover your malice.
My design is to make you stand amazed at your selves, and satisfy the world,
that, this proved against you, there is not any thing which you may not venture
upon.

And yet you will not stick to say that I have some relation to Port Royal; for
it is the maine thing you have to cast in all their teeth who any way oppose
your extravagances, as if there were only at Port Royal such as had zeal
enough to rescue, aga nst you, the purity of Christian Morality. I am not,
Fathers, to be acquainted with the great deserts of those solitary persons that
are retired thither, nor how much the Church is obliged to their works, as such
as are solid and full of edification. I know by what a pious light they are
illum^nated. For though I never was settled among them, as you would make the
world believe when you know not who I am, yet have I acquaintance with some of
them, and an honor for the virtue of all. But God has not limited to that
number all those he would have to oppose your disorders. I hope, with his
assistance, to make you sensible of it; and if he give me the grace to go on
with the design he has put me upon of employing for him whatever I have
received from him, I shall treat you in such manner, that it shall happily be
your greatest regret that you have not to do with a man of Port Royal. For
whereas those whom you so much insult upon by that famous calumny are content
only to offer up to God their sighs and groans to procure your pardon for the
same, I think my self obliged as one that is not at all concerned in that
reproach, to make you ashamed of it before the whole Church, so to work in you
that saving confusion, whereof the Scripture speaks, which is in a manner the
only remedy against such a hardness of heart as yours is. Fill their faces
with confusion, and they shall seeek thy name, O Lord.

We must needs put a stop to that insolence which has not the least
tenderness even for the holiest places. For who can be secure after a calumny
of this nature? How, Fathers, dare you your selves stick up and down Paris a
book so scandalous, with the name of your Father Meynier in the frontispiece,
and this infamous title, Port Royal combining with Geneva against the most
blessed Sacrament of the Altar, wherein you charge with this. Apostasy not
only M. de Saint Cyran, and M. Arnauld, but also Mother Agnes, his Sister, and
all the Religious women of that Monastery, of whom you say, page 96. That their
faith to as much to be suspected, as to what concerns the Eucharist, as that
of Monsieur Arnauld* whom you hold page 4 to be an absolute Cavinist. Now I
appeal to all the world, whether there be in the Church any upon whom you
might have scattered so abominable a reproach with less probability. For, I
would fain know, Fathers, if these Religious women and their directors combined
with Geneva against the blessed Sacrament of the Altar (a thing cannot be
thought without horror) why should they take for the principal object of
their piety a Sacrament which they thought an abomination? why should they add
to their Rule, the institution of the B. Sacrament? why have they taken the
habit of the B. Sacrament? why taken the name of the Nuns of the B.
Sacrament? why called their Church, the Church of the B. Sacrament? why should
they petition for and obtain from Rome the confirmation of that institution,
and the privilege to say every Thursday the office of the B. Sacrament,
wherein the faith of the Church is so particularly expressed, if they had
conspired with Geneva to abolish that faith of the Church? why should they
oblige themselves, by a particular devotion, and that approved by the Pope, to
have constantly night and day some religious women, in the presence of that
Sacred Host, as it were to repair by their perpetual adorations of that
perpetual sacrifice, the impiety of that heresy that endeavored to annihilate
it? Speak Fathers, if you can; give some reason, why, of all the mysteries of
our Religion, they should pass by those they do believe, and fasten on that
they could not believe? And why they should devote themselves in so full and
absolute a manner to that mystery of our Faith, if they took it as Heretics do
for the mystery of iniqu ty? What answer, Fathers, do you make to testimonies
so pregnant as these, not only as to words but actions, and that not as to
some particular actions but the consequences of a life absolutely consecrated
to the adoration of JESUS CHRIST residing upon our Altars? What reply do you
make to the books of Port Royal, which are full of the most precise terms
whereby Fathers and Councels have thought fit to express the essence of that
mysteri^? It Is a ridiculous thing, but horrid withal to see what answers you
make thereto in your Libell, in this manner. Monsieur Arnauld, you say, speak^s
very well of Transubstantiation* but he happily means a significative
Trans-substantiation. He professes indeed that he believes the real presence,
but who ever told us that he understands it under a true and real figure?
Where are we Fathers, and whom will not you represent as a Calvinist when you
please, if you but take the Liberty to corrupt the most canonical and sacred
expressions that may be, by the malicious subtilties of your new sangled
equivocations? For who ever has made use of other terms then those, and that
particularly in simple discourses of Piety, where there is nothing of
controversy meddled with? And yet the love and respect they have for that holy
mystery, has given them occasion to speak so much of it in their writings,
that I defy you, Fathers, as crafty as you are, to find therein the least
shadow of ambiguity or compliance with the tenants of Geneva.

All the world knows, Fathers, that the heresy of Geneva, essentially
consists, as you express it your selves, in believing that Jesus Christ is not
enclosed within that Sacrament: That it is impossible he should be in several
places; That he is truly no where but in heaven, and that there only he is to
be adored, and not upon the Altar. That the substance of the bread remains;
That the body of I. Christ enters not into the mouth, nor the breast: That he
is not eaten but by Faith; and consequently that the unfaithful eat him not:
And that the mass is so far from being a Sacrifice, that it is an abomination.
Now see, Fathers, after what manner Port Royal conspires with Geneva in their
books. There you may read, to your confusion, that the flesh and blood of
Jesus Christ are contained under the species of bread and wine. M. Arnaulds
second Letter, page 259. That the holy of holyes is present in the Sanctuary,
and that he ought to be adored there. Ibid. p. 243. That Jesus Christ dwells in
the Sinners that communicate by the true and real presence of his body in
their breast though not by the presence of his spirit in their hearts. Freq.
Com. 3. part. chapter 16. That the dead ashes of the Saints bodies derive their
principal dignity from that seed of life remaining in them after the touching
of the immotall and enlivening flesh of Jesus Christ. 1 Part. ch 40. That it is
not through any natural power, but through Gods omnipotence, to which nothing
is impossible, that the body of Jesus Christ in enclosed under the heast and
under the least part of every host; Fam. Divin. Lect. 15. That the divine
virtue is present to preduce the effect which the words of consecration
signify. Ibid. That Jesus Christ who lies dejected upon the Altar is at the
same time elevated in his glory: that he by himself and through his own power
is in several places at the same time, as well in the midst of the Church
triumphant as Church militant. Of suspension, Reason 21. That the Sacramental
species remain suspended and subsist after an extraordinary manner without
being upheld by any subject, and that the body of Jesus Christ is also
suspended under the species, that it depends not on them as substances depend
on accidents. Ibid. 23. That the substance of the Bread is changed, the
accidents remaining unchangeable. In the prose of the blessed Sacrament. That
Jesus Christ rests in the Eucharist with the same glory as he has in heaven.
Letters of M. Saint Cyran. Tom. 1. Let. 93. That his glorious humanity resides
in the tabernacles of the Church under the species of bread, which visibly
cover it, and that knowing us to be dull, he takes that course to induce us to
the adoration of his Divinity which is present in all places, by that of his
humanity which is present in one particular place. Ibid. That we receive the
body of Jesus Christ upon the tongue, and that it is sanctified by his divine
touching. Let. 32. That he enters into the mouth of the priest. Let. 72. That
though Jesus Christ be made inaccessible in the Blessed Sacrament through an
effect of his love and clemency, yet does he still continue his inaccessibility
therein, as an inseparable condition of his divine nature; for though there be
therein only the body and blood by virtue of the words, vi verborum; as the
School speaks, yet that hinders not but that his whole Divinity as well as his
whole humanity may be there by a necessary consequence and conjunction*
Vindication of the Rosarie of the Blessed Sacrament, page 217. And lastly, That
the Eucharist is as well a Sacrifice as a a Sacrament, Fam. Divin. Lect. 15.
And that though this Sacrifice be a commemoration of that of the Cross, yet is
there this difference between them, that that of the Mass is offered only for
the Church, and for the faithful included within its communion, whereas that
of the Cross was offered for all the world, as the Scripture speaks. Ibid p.
15.

This is sufficient, Fathers, to let the world see evidently, that there has
not been happily since the beginning of it a greater impudence then this of
yours. But yet I will go a little further, and make you pronounce this sentence
against your selves. For what caution would you have to take away all suspicion
of a man's conspiring with Geneva? If Monsieur Arnauld, says your Father
Meyni^r, p. 83. had said that in this adorable Mystery there were not any
substance of the bread under the species but only the flesh and blood of Jesus
Christ, I should have confessed that he had absolutely declared himself against
Geneva. Confess it then, Impostors, and make him public reparation for this
public injury. How often have you seen as much in the passages before cited?
But besides, the Familiar Divinity of Monsieur de Saint Cyr^n being approved
by M. Arnauld must needs contain the sentiments of both. Read then the whole
fifteenth Lecture, and particularly the second Article, and there you shall
find the words you desire, and that more formally then you have expressed them
your selves: Is there any bread left in the host, and any wine in the Chalice?
Not any; for the whole substance of the bread, as also that of the wine are
taken away to make place for that of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, which
remains therein covered only with the qualities and species of bread and wine.

Now, Fathers, will you still affirm that Port Royal teaches nothing which is
not received by Geneva; and that Monsieur Arnauld has not said any thing in
his second Letter, which might not have been said by a Minister of Charenton?
Do you make Mestrezat speak as Monsieur Arnauld does in that Letter, page 237,
etc. That is an infamous falsity to charge him with denying
Trans-substantiation; that he takes for the foundation of his book the truth
of the real presence of the Son of God, opposite to the heresy of the
Calvinists; That he thinks himself happy to be in a place where the Holy of
Holies, who is present in the Sanctuary, is continually adored: which certainly
is a thing stands at a greater distance from the belief of the Calvinists then
the real presence it self, since that as Cardinal Richelieu says in his
Controversies, page 536. The new Ministers of France being united with the
Lutherans who believe it, have thereby declared, that they are not separated
from the Church as to what relates to that mystery, but only by reason of the
adoration which the Catholics do to the Eucharist. Get all the passages I have
cited out of the books of Port-Royall subscribed at Geneva, and not only those
passages but the whole treatises written concerning this mystery, as the book
of Frequent Communion; The Explication of the ceremonies of the Mass; The
Exercise during Mass; Reasons of suspension from the Blessed Sacrament; The
Hymns of the Hours of Port Royal translated, etc. In a word, cause that
sacred institution of constantly adoring Jesus Christ enclosed in the
Eucharist, to be established at Charenton, as it is at Port Royal, and it will
be the most considerable service you can do the Church, since that then
Port Royal shall not conspire with Geneva, but Geneva with Port Royal, and the
whole Church.

You could not certainly, Fathers, have been more unfortunate in any thing then
in charging Port Royal with not believing the Eucharist; but I will discover
what it was that engaged you to do it. You know I am a little acquainted with
your Politics: you have stretched them very hard upon this occasion. If
Monsieur de Saint Cyran, and Monsieur Arnauld had only delivered what was to
be believed concerning that mystery, and not what men ought to do to be
prepared for it, they had been the best Catholics in the world, and there had
been no equivocations found in their terms of real presence and
trans-substantiation. But since there is a necessity that all those who oppose
your degenerate principles should be Heretics, nay in that very point wherein
they condemn them, how could Monsieur Arnauld escape upon the Eucharist, when he
had writ an express Treatise against your profanations of that Sacrament? How,
Fathers, Should he say, with hope not to be called to an account, That the body
of Jesus Christ ought not to be given those who fall often into the same
crimes, and discover not the least hope of amendment, and that they ought to be
kept for some time from the Altar, that, having purified themselves by a
sincere repentance, they may approach it afterward to their comfort. Do not,
Fathers, by any means suffer such things to be spoken; you would not be
importuned by so many people at your Confession-seats. For your Father
Brisacier says, that if you followed not this method you should not apply the
blood of Jesus Christ to any one. 'Twere much better for you that men followed
the practice of your Society, which your Father Mascarennas cites in a certain
book approved by your Doctors, nay even by your Reverend Father General, and is
this; That all manner of persons, even Priests themselves may receive the body
of Jesus Christ the very day wherein they have defiled themselves with
abominable sins: That men are so far from being guilty of any irreverence in
such communions, that, on the contrary, they are to be commended, when they
frequent them in that manner: That the Confessors ought not to divert them,
and that, on the contrary it is their duty to advise those who have but newly
committed those crimes, to communicate immediately, in as much as though the
Church has forbidden it, yet that prohibition is abolished by the universal
practice of the whole earth.

This it is, Fathers, to have Jesuits scattered over the whole earth. This is
the universal practice that you have introduced, and which you endeavor to see
established. It matters not that the tables of Jesus Christ be filled with
abomination so your Churches be thronged with people. Be sure then to make the
opposers hereof Heretics upon the Blessed Sacrament; it must be so what ever
it cost. But how will you be able to do it after so many irrefragable
testimonies as they have given of their faith? Are you not afraid I should
quote the four grand proofs you produce of their heresy? You might very well,
Fathers, and I know no reason I should spare you so much shame. Let us then
examine the first.

Monsieur de Saint Cyran, says Father Meynier, comforting a friend of his upon
the death of his Mother, Tom. 1. Let. 14. says, that the most acceptable
sacrifice that a man can offer to God upon these occasions is that of Patience;
ergo he is a Calvinist. This is very subtly argued, Fathers; and it is a
question with me whether any one see the reason of this consequence. Take it
from himself. Because, says this great Controvertist, he therefore believes
not the sacrifice of the Mass; for that is it which is the most acceptable to
God of any. Who now dares say the Jesuits cannot dispute? They can do it in
such a manner, that they are able to make heretical what discourses they please
even to the Scripture it self. For is it not an heresy to say, as the wise man
does, There is nothing worse then to love money; as if Adulteries, Murders,
and Idolatry were not greater crimes? And who is there almost who does not
frequently fall into such expressions; and that, for instance, the sacrifice of
a broken and contrite heart is the most acceptable in the sight of God; for
that in such discourses, a man only makes a comparison between certain
interior virtues among themselves, without reflection on the sacrifice of the
Mass, which is of a different order, and of an infinitely higher Nature. Is not
this to be ridiculous, Fathers, and must I needs, to heighten your confusion,
acquaint you with the terms of that very Letter, where Monsieur de Saint Cyran
speaks of the sacrifice of the Mass, as of the most excellent of all, saying,
That men offer unto God every day, and in all places the sacrifice o the Body
of his Son, who could not find A MORE EXCELLENT WAY then that, whereby to
honor his Father? And afterward; That Jesus Christ at his death obliged us to
take of his sacrificed body to make the sacrifice of ours to be the more
acceptable to him, and that he, being also united to us when we die, might
strengthen us by sanctifying with his presence the last sacrifice we make unto
God, of our lives and of our bodies. Now play the Sycophants, take no notice of
any thing of all this, and confidently affirm that he avoided communicating at
his death, as you do page 33. and that he believed not the sacrifice of the
Mass. For there is nothing too difficult for such as are Detractors by
Profession.

And that you are such, your second proof is a great testimony. To make late
Monsieur de Saint Cyran, (to whom you attribute the book of Petrus Aurelius) a
Calvinist, you produce a passage, wherein Aurelius explaines ( page 89.) the
carriage of the Church toward such Priests and Bishops as she would depose or
degrade. The Church, says he, not being able to take away the power of the
order, because the character of it is not to be blotted out, she does all she
can: she puts out of her memory that character which she cannot out of the
souls of those who have received it. She considers them as if they were no
longer Priests or Bishops. So that according to the ordinary language of the
Church, it may be said they are no longer such, though they still are as to
what concerns the character; ob indelebilitatem characteris. You see, Fathers,
that this Author, approved by three general Assemblies of the Clergy of
France, says expressly, that the character of Priesthood is indelible; and yet
you make him say but quite the contrary in that very place, That the character
of Priesthood is not indelible. This is a transcendent calumny, that is to
say, according to you, a Peccadillo, a trifling venial sin. For that book had
done you some prejudice, as having refuted the heresies of your
Brethren-Jesuits of England concerning Episcopal Authority. But certainly, it
is a signal piece of extravagance, and a very high mortal sin against Reason,
in the first place, fasly to suppose that Monsieur de Saint Cyran held that the
character might be taken away, and to conclude thence, that he does not believe
the real presence of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist.

Do not expect I should make any answer to it, Fathers; if you have not common
sense, it is not in my power to give you any. All those that have will
liberally laugh at both you and your third proof, which is grounded upon these
words out of the Frequent Communion, 3. p. chapter 11. That God gives us in the
Eucharist THE SAME FOOD as he does to the Sai^t^ in Heaven, without any other
difference, save that here he allows us not either the sensible sight or taste
of it, reserving both till our coming to heaven. These words, Fathers, do so
naturally express the sense of the Church that I ever and anon forget what it
is that you quarrel at in them so as to pervert them. For to me they signifi^
nothing but what the Council of Trent teaches Sess. 13. c. 8. That there is no
other difference between Jesus Christ in the Eucharist, and Jesus Christ in
Heaven, but that here he is veiled, and there he is not, Monsieur Arnauld does
not say that there is no other difference in the manner of receiving Jesus
Christ, but only that ^h^^e is no other in Jesus Christ who is received. And
yet you would, against all reason, make him to say by this passage, that Christ
is eaten with the mouth here no more then he is in heaven; whence you conclude
his heresy.

I cannot but pity you. Fathers. Does this require any further explication?
Why do you confound this divine Nourishment with the manner of receiving it?
There is, as I have already said, but one only difference between this
nourishment upon earth and in heaven, which is, that here it is hidden under
veils that deprive us of the sensible sight and taste of it. But there are many
differences between the ways of receiving it both here and there, whereof the
principal is, as Monsieur Arnauld says, part. 3. chapter 16. Here Christ enters
into the mouth and breast of both the godly and the wicked, which he does not
in heaven.

And since you are ignorant of this diversity I shall tell you, that the cause
why God has established these different ways of receiving the same food is
the difference there is between the state of Christians in this life and that
of the b^^ssed Saints in heaven. The state of Christians, as Card nal du Perron
says after the Fathers, is a m^an state between that of the Blessed and that
of the Jews. The Blessed poss ss Jesus Christ really without figures and
without veils. The Jews possessed not Christ but under figures and veiles, such
as were the Manna and the Paschal Lamb. And the Christians possess J sus Christ
in the Euch^rist truly and really, but yet hid under ve^^es. God, says Saint
Eucharius, made himself three Tabernacles; the Synagogue, which had only the
shadows without truth; the Church which both the truth and the shadows; and
heaven where there are no shadows, but truth it self We should go out of the
state wherein we are, which is the state of faith, and is by Saint Paul, as
much opposed to the Law, as to the beatifical vision should we possess only
the figures without J sus Christ, because it is the property of the Law to
have only the shadow and not the substance of things: and we should also go
out on the other side, should we possess him visibly; because faith, as the
same Apostle says, is not of the things that are seen. Thus is the Eucharist
proportioned to our state of Faith, because it truly involves Jesus Christ, yet
veiled. So that this state were on the one side destroyed if Jesus Christ were
not really under the species of bread and wine, as Heretics pretend he is not;
and on the other, should we receive him nakedly as in heaven, since it were to
confound our estate either with that of Judaisme or with that of Glory. And
this, Fathers, is the divine and mysterious reason of this wholly divine
mystery. This is it makes us abhor the Calvinists, as reducing us to the
condition of the Jews; and withal what makes us aspire to the glory of the
Blessed, wherein we shall have the full and eternal enjoyment of Jesus Christ.
Whence you see that there are several d fferences between the ways wherein he
communicates himself to Christians and to the Blessed, and that, among others,
he is received here by the mouth, and not so in heaven; but that they all
depend merely upon the difference there is between the state of Faith, wherein
we are, and the estate of the beatifical vision wherein they are. This it is,
Fathers, that Monsieur Arnauld says so clearly in these terms, That, there
should be no other difference between the purity of those who receive Jesus
Christ in the Eucharist, and that of the blessed Saints, but as much as there
is between Faith and the beatifical vision of God, on which alone depend the
different manners wherein he is eaten on earth and in heaven. You should,
Fathers, have had a reverence for the sacred truths in these words, rather then
corrupted them, to find in them an heresy they are incapable of, which is,
that Jesus Christ is only eaten by faith, and not by the mouth, as your
Fathers Annat, and Meynier maliciously affirm, making it the principal head of
their accusation.

You see then, Fathers, how little you are beholden to proof; and therefore you
are forced to fly to a new artifice which is to falsify the Council of Trent,
so to bring it about that Monsieur Arnauld should not be conformable thereto:
so many ways are you furnished with to make people heretical. And this is done
by your Father Meynier in no less then fifty places of his book, and eight or
ten times in the single page 54. where he pretends, that for a man to express
himself like a true Catholic, it is not enough to say, I believe that Jesus
Christ is really present in the Eucharist; but that he must say, I believe WITH
THE COUNCIL that he is present therein by a true LOCAL PRESENCE, or locally.
And thereupon he cites the Council Sess. 13. can. 3. can. 4. can. 6. Who would
not think, when he saw the words Local presence cited out of three Canons of an
Ecumenical Council, but that those words were to be found there? This might
have served your turn before my XV. Letter was abroad, but now, Fathers, people
are not so easily caught in that snare. We consult the Council, and find that
you are Impostors. For these terms of Local presence, locally, locality, never
were there. And I tell you further, Fathers, that they are not in any other
place of that Council, nor in any other Council before it, nor in any Father of
the Church. I would therefore desire you to tell me, whether you pretend to
fasten the suspicion of Calvinisme on all those who have not made use of that
term. If so, the Council of Trent lies under it, and all the Fathers without
exception. You have more honesty in you then to make so great a confusion in
the Church upon occasion of a particular quarrel. Have you no other way to
make M. Arnauld a heretic, but you must disoblige many who never did you any
injury, and among the rest, Saint Thomas, who is one of the greatest defenders
of the Eucharist, and is so far from making use of that term, that on the
contrary he has rejected it, 3. p q. 76 a. 5 where he says, Nullo modo corp^^
Ch^ist^ st in hoc Sacramento local^t^r? What are you then, Fathers, that you
should by your own authority, impose new terms, which you would oblige men to
make use of, the better to express their faith: as if the profession of Faith
made by the Popes according to the order of the Council, wherein this term is
not to be found, were defect v^, and so brought an ambiguitie in the creed of
the faithful, which you only should discover? What temerity is it to
prescribe them to the Doctors themselves? What foul play to impose them upon
general Councels? And what ignorance not to know the difficulties which the
most illuminated Saints have made to receive them? Be ashamed then, Fathers, of
your ignorant impostures, as the Scripture says to such ignorant impostors as
you are: Be ashammed of whoredom before father and mother; be ashamed of lies
before the Prince and men in Authority.

Do not pretend to play the Masters any more: you have neither the character
nor the abilities to be such. But if you will make your propositions with more
modesty, you will happily be heard. For though this word, Local presence, was
rejected by Saint Thomas, as you have seen, because the body of Jesus Christ is
not in the Eucharist in the ordinary extent of bodies in their places; yet has
this term been received by some late Authors of Controversies, as only
understanding thereby, that the body of Jesus Christ is truly under the
species, which being in a particular place, the body of Jesus Christ is there
also. And in this sense, M. Arnauld will make no difficulty to admit it, since
that M. de Saint Cyran and he have declared so often, that Jesus Christ in the
Eucharist is truly in a particular place, and miraculously in many places at
the same time. So that all your purifying of expressions comes to nothing, and
so you have not been able to give the least likelihood to an accusation, which
it should not have been lawful to advance without pregnant and undeniable
proofs.

But to what end is it, Fathers, to oppose their innocence to your calumnies?
you do not charge them with these errors out of any belief that they maintain
them, but out of a belief that they prejudice you. There needs no more,
according to your Theology, to calumniate them without being guilty of any
crime in so doing, and you may without any confession or penance celebrate the
mass at the same time that you charge Priests, who say it every day, with a
belief that it is pure Idolatry, which certainly were so horrid a piece of
sacrilege, that you your selves caused your own Father Jarrigius to be hanged
in effigy, because he had said mass during the time he held correspondence
with G^neva.

I cannot therefore but stand amazed, not that you with so little remorse
impose upon them crimes that are both so heinous and withal so false; but that
you impose upon them, with so little prudence, crimes that have in themselves
so little probability. For you do indeed dispose of sins, at your pleasure,
but do you imagine you shall accordingly dispose of men's belief? Certainly,
Fathers, were it necessary that the imputation of Calvinisme must fall either
upon them or upon you, I should find you in a very sad condition. Their
discourses are as Catholic as yours, but their carriage confirms their faith,
yours is disconsonant to yours. For did you believe, as they do, that bread to
be really changed into the body of Jesus Christ, why do you not, as they do,
require that the stony and icy hearts of those whom you advise to approach it
should be sincerely converted into fleshly and affectionate hearts? If you
believe Jesus Christ to be there under a qualification of death, to teach those
that approach it to dye to sin, the world, and themselves, why do you admit
those to come near it in whom vices and sinful passions are still living and
predominant? And how can you account those worthy to eat the bread of heaven,
who deserve not to eat that of earth?

O what a transcendent veneration have they for this sacred Mystery, who
employ their zeal to persecute those that honor it by so many holy communions,
and to flatter such as dishonor it by so many sacrilegious communions! How
does it become these Assertors of so pure and adorable a sacrifice to fill up
the rabble of Jesus Christ with inveterate sinners coming immediately from their
scandalous deportments, and to place among them a Priest whom his very
Confessor sends from his uncleanness to the Altar, there to offer up, instead
of Jesus Christ, that most holy victime to the God of holiness, and to direct
it with his most polluted hands into mouths equally polluted? Is it not a
proceeding worthy those who practice this through all the earth, according to
the approved maxims of their own General to charge the Author of the book of
Frequent Communion, and the Nuns of the Bl^ssed Sacrament, with not believing
the Blessed sacrament?

And yet this does not satisfy them; but to fi l up the measure of their
passion they must needs accuse them of having renounced Jesus Christ and their
Baptism. These, Fathers are not trivial stories, such as yours. No, they are
the desperate sallies whereby you have filled up the measure of your detraction
and calumnies. So transcendent a forgery had not been in hands, fit to manage
and maintain it, had it continued in those of your good friend Fillian, who
first started it; no, your Society has owned it publicly, and your Father
Meyneier has lately maintained it, as a certain truth, that Port Royal has,
for these 35. years, been engaged in a secret plot, whereof Mr. de Saint Cyran
and Jansenius were the chief, to destroy the Mystery of the incarnation, to
make the Gospel be looked upon as an apocryphal story; to exterminate
Christian Religion, and to build up Deisme upon the ruins of Christianity. Is
this all, Fathers; will you at last be satisfied if the world believe all this
of those whom you hate? Will your animosity be satiated, when you have made
them detestable not only to all those who are in the Church; by combining with
Geneva, which you charge them with, but also to all those that believe in Jesus
Christ, though out of the Church, by the Deisme you accuse them of?

But who will not be surprised at the blindness of your proceedings? For who
do you expect will be persuaded upon your bare word, without the least shadow
of proof, and that with all the contradictions imaginable, that Bishops and
Priests, who have constantly preached the grace of Jesus Christ, the purity of
the Gospel, and the obligations of Baptism, had renounced their Baptism, and
the Gospel of Jesus Christ that they endeavored nothing so much as to
establish that Apostasy, and that it is still the design of Port Royal? Who
will believe it Fathers? Do you believe it your selves, wretches as you are?
But to what extremities are you reduced, since that you must of necessity
either make good this charge, or pass for the lowdest Detractors that ever
were? Prove it, then, Fathers; name that Ecclesiastic of good worth which you
say was present at, and one of that assembly of Burg-fontain, in the year
1621. and had discovered, to your friend Filleau, the design then and there
undertaken to ruin Christian Religion. Name those six persons, who you say did
in the same place lay down the grounds of the conspiracy. Name him Who is meant
by these Letters A.A. who, you say, page 15. is not Anthony A nauld, because he
has convinced you that he was not then nine years of age, but another who is
yet alive, and is too much a friend to Monsieur Arnauld, to be unknown to him.
It seems then, you know him, Fathers, and consequently, if you have any the
least respect for Religion, you are obliged to make discovery of this impious
wretch to the King and Parliament, that he may be punished according to his
demerits. You must speak freely, Fathers; you must name him, or expect the
confusion of never being looked on hereafter otherwise then as infamous Liars
and sycophants, unworthy ever to be credited. It Is in this manner, that the good
Father Valerian has taught us, that such Impostors are to be racked and put to
their utmost shifts. Your silence hereupon will be a full and absolute
conviction that this is nothing but a diabolical Calumny. The most implicit
friends you have be forced to acknowledge, that it will not be thought an
effect of your virtue, but your weakness; and admire that you have been so
wicked as to make it reach to the Religious women of Port Royal, and to
affirm, as you do p. 14. that the secret Rosary of the Blessed Sacrament,
composed by one of them, was the first fruits of that conspiracy against Jesus
Christ; and p. 95. that they are inspired with all the detestable maxims of
that book, which if you may be credited, is an instruction of D^isme. Your
imposters upon that writing have received a total rout already is the defense
of the Censure of the late Archbishop of Paris against your Father Brisacier.
You have nothing to reply thereto, and yet can you not forbear wresting it,
after a more shameful manner then ever, to fasten on Religious women, whose
piety is known to all the world, nothing less then the height of impiety?
Barbarous and base Persecutors! are not the most retired monasteries
Sanctuaries against your calumnies? While these sacred Virgins do, day and
night, adore Jesus Christ and the Blessed Sacrament, according to their
institution, you cease not, day and night, from publishing it abroad, that they
believe him not to be either in the Eucharist, or yet at the right hand of his
Father: and you publicly cut them off from being members of the Church, even
while they are secretly praying for you and the whole Church. You traduce those
who have neither ears to hear you, nor tongue to answer you. But Jesus Christ, in whom they are hidden, so not to appear but with him, hears you and
answers for them. This day is that holy and terrible voice heard, which
startles Nature, and comforts the Church. And it is to be doubted Fathers, that
those who harden their hearts, and ostinately refuse to hear him when he
speaks as a God, will be forced to hear him with confusion, when he shall
speak to them as a judge?

For, in a word, Fathers, what account will you be able to give him of so many
calumnies, when he shall examine them, not according to the fantastical
imaginations of your Fathers Dicastillus, Gans and Pennalossa, but according to
the rules of his eternal truth, and by the holy ordinances of his Church,
which is so far from palliating or excusing that crime, that she not only
abhors it, but has punished it in the same manner as voluntary homicide. For
she has suspended calumniators as well as murderers from the Communion till
the hour of death by the I. and II. Council of Arles. The Council of Lateran
thought those unworthy to be received ino the Ecclesiastical State, who were
convicted thereof, though they were reformed of it. Some Popes have threatened
those who had calumniated Bishops, Priests or Deacons, to be denied the
Communion at their death. And the Authors of a scandalous Libel, who could not
prove what they had advanced, were by Pope Adrian condemned to be whipped; note
Reverend Fathers, flagellentur. So far has the Church ever been from the
errors of your Society; which is grown so corrupt, as to excuse crimes, great
as that of Calumny, that you may commit them with more impunity.

No doubt, Fathers, but you might by this means, do abundance of mischief in
the world, if God had not so ordered it, that you your selves should furnish
the means to prevent it, and to render all your calumnies ineffectuall. For
there is no more to be done then to discover this strange maxim that exempts
them from crime, to deprive you of all credit thereby: Calumny is unprofitable
if there be not joined with it a great reputation of Sincerity. A detractor can
never compass his ends, if he be not thought to abhor detraction, as a crime
he is incapable of. And so, Fathers, your own principle betraies you. You have
established it for the security of your Conscience. For you would detract, and
yet not be damned, but be of the number of those holy and pious calumniators,
of whom Saint Athanasius speaks. You have therefore, to keep your selves out
of hell, embraced this maxim, which indeed keeps you out as far as the credit
of your Doctors can secure you? but the very same maxim, which, according to
them, frees you from the evils you fear in the other life, deprives you, in
this, of the advantages you expected to make of it. So that while you endeavor
to avoid the vice of Detraction, you lose the benefit of it, so contrary is
evil to it self, and so is it ravelled and destructive to it self by its own
malice.

You might calumniate with much more advantage to your selves, should you
pretend to affirm with Saint Paul that simple evil-speakers, maledici, are
unworthy to see God, since that your calumnies would thereby be the more
credited, though, the truth known, you would condemn your selves: but when you
say, as you do, that calumny against your enemies is no crime, your reproaches
will not be believed, and yet you will nevertheless be damned. For Fathers,
there is nothing so certain, as that your grave Authors can neither abrogate the
justice of God, nor you give a greater demonstration of your not remaining in
the truth, then that you make lies your refuge. If truth were of your side, the
would fight for you; she would overcome for you; and what enemies soever you
had, Truth would deliver you out of their hands, according to her promise. You
have not recourse to lying, but to maintain the errors wherein you flatter the
sinners of this world, and to keep up the calumnies whereby you oppress those
godly people who oppose them. Truth being contrary to your designs, it was
requisite you put your trust in lies, as the Prophet says. Because you have
said, we have made a Covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement;
though a scourge run over and pass through, it shall not come at us; for we
have made falsehood our refuge, and under vanity are we hid. But what answer
does the Prophet make them? Because, says he, you despise this word, and t^ust
in oppression and perverseness, and stay thereon; therefore this iniquity
shall be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose
breaking comes suddenly at an instant. And he shall break it as the breaking
of the Potters vessel that is broken in pieces, he shall not spare: so that
there shall not be found in the bursting of it, a sherd to take fire from the
hearth, or to take water withal out of the pit. Because, as another Prophet
says, with lies ye have made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I have not
made sad: and strengthened the hand of the wicked that he should not return
from his wicked way, by promising him life. I will therefore deliver my peopl
out of your hand, and ye shall know that I am the Lord.

We must therefore needs hope, Fathers, that, if you do not reform, he will
take out of your hands those that you have so long deceived, either by
suffering them to continue in their disorders through your ill conduct, or by
poisoning them with your calumnies. He will raise in some an apprehension that
the erroneous rules of your Casuists will not secure them from his indignation;
and will engrave in the minds of others a just fear of their own destruction,
for hearing you, and giving credit to your impostures, as you destroy your
selves by inventing them, and scattering them about the world. This cannot
admit any thing of circumvention: God is not mocked, and no man shall, without
being accomptable therefore, break the commandment he has given us in the
Gospel, of not condemning our neighbor, till we are well assured that he is
guilty. And therefore, what professions soever they may make of Godliness who
are so ready to entertain your forgeries, and under what pretense soever of
devotion they may do it, they may well fear being shut out of the Kingdom of
Heaven, for that only sin of having attributed such enormous crimes as those
of heresy and schism, to the charge of Catholic Priests and Religious Women,
without any other proofs then such palpable impostures as yours are. The Devil,
says Sales, Bishop of Geneva, is upon the tongue of the evil-speaker, and in
the ear of him that hearkeneth to him. And Detraction, says Saint Bernard,
Cant. 24. is a poison which mortifies charity both in the one and the other. So
that one single calumny may prove mortal to an infinite number of souls; since
it destroies, not only those that divulge, but also all those that do not
renounce it.

Paris, December. 4. 1656. Postscript.
Reverend Fathers,
MY Letters were not wont to come so close one in the neck of another, nor yet
to be so large The short time I have had has been the cause of both. I had not
made this longer then the rest, but that I had not the leisure to make it
shorter then it is. The reason which obliged me to be the more hasty, is better
known to you then to my self. Your Answers proved very unfortunate to you. You
have therefore done very well to take a new course; but I am not absolutely
satisfied that you have made a good choice, and have some jealousy what the
world will not say, viz. that you were afraid of the BENEDICTINES.



To the Reverend Father F. ANNET, Of the Society of JESUS, Confessor to the
KING. LETTER XVII.
REVEREND FATHERS,
YOur late proceeding had brought me into a kind of belief that you would have
been glad both sides had given over and sat still, and I was willing it should
be so. But you have since spawned so many writings in a short time, that it
seems there is no great certainty of a peace when it depends on the silence of
the Jesuits. I know not whether this r^prute will prove much to your advantage;
but for my part, I am not troubled at it, were it only that it gives me
occasion to refute that ordinary reproach of Heresy, wherewith you fill all
your books.

It is indeed time, that once for all I give an unavoidable check to the
confidence you take to treat me as an Heretic, which grows stronger and
stronger in you every day. You are so far guilty of it in the book last
published by you, that it is not to be suffered, and I might well incur the
suspicion of it, should I not make such an answer thereto as a reproach of that
nature deserves. I had slighted this injury in the writings of some others of
your Society, as well as many others which they had shuffled into them with
it. My XV. Letter had answered them sufficiently; but you speak of it now after
another manner; you very earnestly make it the maine head of your vindication:
it is in a manner the only thing you have to allege for your selves. For you
say, That for a final answer to my XV. LETTERS, it is enough to say 15 times,
that I am an Heretic, and that being declared such, I do not deserve any
credit to be given me. So that you make my Ap stasie to be out of all
controversy, supposing it as an undeniable principle, upon which you build so
confidently. It Is therefore in good earnest that you treat me as an heretic,
and it is therefore in as good earnest that I answer you thereto.

You know, Father, that a charge of this nature is of such consequence, that it
is an insupportable temeritie to put it in against any man if it cannot be
fully proved. I therefore desire you to produce your evidence. When was I seen
at Charenton? When have I neglected coming to Mass, and doing those duties
which Christians are obliged to in their practices? When did I any action
arguing the least compliance with Heretics, or schism in the Church? What
Council have I contradicted? What constitution of the Pope have I violated?
Answer must be made to these questions, or -- you know what I would say. And
what answer do you make? I entreat all the world to observe. You suppose in the
first place, That he who writ the LETTERS has some relation to Port Royal.
Then you assume, That Port Royal has been declared heretical, and thence
conclude, that he who writ the Letters is declared an Heretic. This kind of
accusation reflects not on me at all, Father, but only on Port Royal, and you
charge me with it no further then you suppose me to relate to that place. So
that I shall have no hard task to vindicate my self, since I need do no more
then tell you, that I am not of that place; and refer you to my Letters, where
I have said that I am alone, and in express terms, that I am not of
Port Royal, as I have done in my XVI. Letter, which came abroad immediately
before your book.

You must then take some other course to prove me an Heretic, or you betray
your weakness to all the world. Prove then by my writings, that I submit not to
the Constitution. I have not written so much: there are only XVI. LETTERS to
be examined, in all which I defy you, nay all the world, to find the least
expression tending to any such thing. But I can show you in them the quite
contrary. For when I said for instance, in the XIV. that a man killing, accord
ng to your Maxims, one of his brethren in mortal sin, damnes him for whom
Jesus Christ died, do I not evidently acknowledge that Jesus Christ died for
that damned soul? and consequently it is false, That he died only for the
Predestinate; which is that that is condemned in the first Proposition. It is
therefore clear, Fathers, that I have not said any thing, whence it might be
thought I assert those impious propositions, which I detest with all my soul.
And though Port Royal should maintain them, you cannot thence infer any thing
against me, because, I have not, I praise God, any dependence save that on the
holy Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church, wherein I am resolved to live and
die, in communion with the Pope the sovereign head thereof, out of which I am
persuaded there is no salvation.

What course can you take with a person that talks after this rate, and which
way do you intend to set upon me, when neither my discourses nor my writings
afford you the least occasion to charge me with heresy, and that I find my
safety against your menaces in my own obscurity? You find your selves wounded
by an invisible hand which makes your extravagances apparent to all the world.
And you vainly assault me in the persons of those with whom you imagine me to
be in union. I fear you not, either out of any concernment of my self or any
other, as having no relation to any Community, nor to any person whatsoever.
All the credit you can make amounts to nothing as to what concerns me. I hope
not any thing from the world, nor do I fear any thing from it; nor do I desire
any of it; having the grace and assistance of God, I neither want wealth, nor
any man's Authority. So that I can elude all your attempts; you cannot fasten
on me, endeavor it which way you please. You may have something to say to
Port Royal, but nothing to me. Many have been turned out of So^bonne, but all
makes me not quit my lodging. You may well prepare your violent remedies
against Priests and Doctors, but not against me who can pretend to no such
qualities. And so perhaps, you never before had to do with a person that stood
so much in defiance of your attempts, and so fit to engage against your
Errors, as being free, without engagement, without dependence, without
obligation, without relation, not meddling with affairs, one sufficiently
acquainted with your Maxims, and fully resolved to put them forward as far as
I shall find God encouraging me to do it, so that no worldly consideration
shall retard or take off the edge of my prosecution.

What advantage is it to you, Father, when you can do nothing against me, to
divulge so many calumnies against persons that are not concerned in the d
fference between us, as all your Fathers do? These evasions shall not serve
your turn. You shall feel the weight of Truth which I oppose against you. I
tell you, that you take away Christian Morality by separating it from the love
of God, from which you give men a dispensation; and you tell me of the death of
Father Mester, a man I never saw in my life. I tell you that your Authors allow
one man to kill another for an apple, when it is a shame to part with it, and
you tell me that a Poor's-box has been opened at Saint Merry. What do you
mean, when you charge me daily with the book of Holy Virginity, made by an
Oratorian Father, whom I never saw, no more then his book? I cannot but admire
you, Father, when you thus consider all that are different from you as one
individual person. Your indignation grasps them altogether, and makes them as
it were one body of Reprobates, whereof you would have every one answer for the
rest of his company.

There is a vast difference between the Jesuits and those that oppose them. You
do really make up one Body united under one Head, and your rules, as I have
already discovered, allow you not to print any thing without the approbation of
your superiors, who by that means become accountable for the errors of every
one of you in particular, so as that they cannot excuse themselves by saying
that they observed not the errors taught therein, because they ought to have
observed them, according to your Ordinances, and according to the Letters of
your Generals, Aquaviva, Vitteleschi, etc. It is therefore not unjustly that
you are charged with the extravagances of those of your fraternity that are
found in their works, when approved by your Superiors and by the Divines of
your Society. But for my part, Fathers, the case is much otherwise. I have not
subscribed the book of Holy Virginity. Though all the poore's boxes in Paris
were opened, I should be never the less a Catholic. In a word, I openly and
clearly declare it to you, No man is to be responsible for my Letters but my
self, and I am not accountable for any thing but my Letters.

Here might I sit still, Father, and not say any thing of those other persons
whom you treat as heretics, so to exempt my self from that charge. But since I
am the occasion of it, I think my self, in some sort obliged to lay hold of the
same occasion so as to make three advantages of it. For it is one considerable
advantage to clear up the innocence of so many calumniated persons. It Is
another, and that very pertinent to my purpose, to discover still the artifices
of your Politics in this accusation. But that I look on as of most
concernment, is, that I shall satisfy the world of the falsehood of that
scandalous report which you scatter so much up and down, That the Church is
divided by a new heresy. And whereas you abuse abundance of people, by making
them believe that the points, upon which you endeavor to raise up so great a
tempest, are essential to faith, I conceive it a business of very great
importance to destroy these false impressions, and clearly to explain wherein
they consist, so to make it really appear that there are no Heretics in the
Church.

For it is not true that if it be demanded, wherein consists the heresy of
those whom you call Jansenists, it will be presently answered, that it is for
that they affirm, That the Commandments of God are impossible to be observed:
That Grace cannot be resisted; and that a man is not at liberty to do good and
evil: That Jesus Christ dyed not for all men, but only for the predestinate,
and in a word for that they maintain the five Propositions condemned by the
Pope. Is it not upon this account you would have the world believe that you
persecute your adversaries? Is not this that you assert in your books, in your
discourses, in your Catechism, as you did at Christmas last, at Saint Lewis's,
when asking one of your little shepherdesses, For whom came Jesus Christ into
the World, sweetheart? For all men, Father, replies she. How then,
sweetheart, it seems you are not one of these new Heretics who affirmt he is
come only for the predestinate? Upon this do children believe you, and with
them diverse others; for you entertain them with the very same fables in your
Sermons, as your Father Crasset did to Orleance, for which reason he was
suspeaded. And I must acknowledge that I have sometimes believed you. You had
given me the same representation of all those persons. So that when you began
to ascuse them of maintaining these Propositions, I very attentively observed
what answer they would make; and I was much resolved never to see them again,
if they should not have declared that they renounced them as evident impieties.
But they did it much more loudly. For Monsieur de Saint Beaue King's Professor
in So^bonne did, in his writings published censure those V. Propositions long
before the Pope; and those Doctors put out diverse treatises, and among others
that of Victorious Grace, which they produced at the same time, wherein they
renounce those propositions both as heretical and as new. For they say in the
preface, That those propositions are heretical and Lutheran, foysted and
advanced at pleasure, such as were not in Jansenius nor his defenders; these
are their expressions. They take it ill that they are fathered on them, and
thereupon direct to you these words of Saint Prosper, the first disciple of
Saint Augustine their Master, to whom the Semipelagians in France attributed
the like, purposely to make him odious. There are some, says this Saint, who
are hurried on by so blind a passion to discredit us that they have taken a
course that ruins their own reputation. For they have out of design foysted
certain propositions fraught with Impieties and blasphemies, which they scatter
into all parts, to make men believe that we maintain them in the same sense
that they express in their writings. But the world shall see by this Answer,
both our innocence, and the malice of those who have charged us with these
mpieties, whereof they are the only inventors.

I must needs confess, Father, when I heard them speak to this effect before
the Constitution; when I saw them receive it afterward with all possible
respect; that they offered to subscribe it; and that Monsieur Arnauld had
declared all this more expressly then I can allege it, throughout his second
Letter, I should have thought it a sin to doubt of their faith. And
accordingly those who would have denied their friends absolution before
Monsieur Arnauld's letter came abroad, have since declared, that after he had
so clearly condemned the errors laid to his charge, there was no reason, that
either he or any of his friends should be cut off from being members of the
Church. But your proceeding has been otherwise; which gave me first occasion
to mistrust that you were not free from passion.

For whereas you had threatened to make them sign that Constitution when you
thought they would have opposed it, when you saw they were inclinable thereto
of themselves, you let the business fall to the ground. And though it might
have been expected that you should afterward have been satisfied with their
carriage, yet must you needs treat them still as heretics, because, said you,
there was a disconsonancy between their hearts and their hands, and that they
were Catholics externally and heretics internally, as you have expressed your
selves in your Answer to certain Questions, p. 27. and 47.

What a strange proceeding did this seem to me, Father! For what man is there
of whom there might not as much be said? And what disturbances might not such a
pretense as this raise? If a man refuse, says Saint Gregory the Pope, to
believe their confession whose faith is conformable to the sentiments of the
Church he brings the faith of all Catholics in question. I therefore was in
some doubt, Father, that it was your design to make these persons heretical,
though they were not such, as the same Pope says, upon a dispute of the like
nature in his time, because, says he, it is not to oppose heresies, but to
make a heresy, to refuse to believe those who by their confession make it
appear that they are in the true faith: Hoc non est haeresim purgare, sed
facere. But I was convinced that in effect there were no heretics in the
Church, when I saw they had so well cleared themselves from all these heresies:
that you were not able to charge them with any error contrary to faith: and
that you were reduced to that extremity, as to quarrel with them only about
questions of fact, concerning Jansenius, which could not be matter of heresy.
For you would oblige them to acknowledge that these propositions were in
Jansenius, word, for word, wholly and in express terms, as you have it;
Singulares, individuae, totidem verbis apud Jansenium contentae, in your
Cavilli, p. 39.

From that time I looked on the Dispute between you with much indifference.
While I thought you disputed about the truth or falsity of the Propositions, I
heard you with attention, for so far it concerned matter of Faith: But when I
saw that the business in controversy was only to know whether they were word
for word in Jansenius, there being no concernment of Religion in it, I troubled
not my self any further with it. Not but that it might be very likely you spoke
truth; for to say that such a sentence is word for word in an Author, it is a
thing not much subject to mistake. And for that reason can I not much wonder
that so many persons, both in France and Rome, should, upon an expression so
free from suspicion, be persuaded that Jansenius had really maintained them.
But it must withal needs add to my astonishment, when I understood that even
that very matter of fact, which you had proposed as so certain, and of such
consequence, was false, and that you were defied to cite the pages of Jansenius
where you had found those Propositions word for word; which yet you were never
able to do.

I will give you an account of the whole proceeding, because, methinkes, it
very much discovers the spirit of your Society in all this Affair, and that
men must needs wonder, to see, that notwithstanding all I have said, you have
not forborne to give out that they are still heretics: but you have only
changed their heresy according to time. For proportionably to their vindicating
of themselves from one heresy, your Fathers still fastened another on them, to
the end they might never be free. Thus in the year 1653. their heresy was
about the quality of the Propositions. Thence it was translated to the word for
word. Then you brought it into the heart. But now all this is vanished, and
they must needs be heretics, if they will not give it under their hands, That
the sense of the Doctrine of Jansenius is included in the sense of the five
Proposi^ions.

This is the subject of your present dispute. You are not satisfied that they
condemn the five Propositions, and, together with them, whatever Jansenius must
contain that were conformable thereto, and contrary to Saint Augustine; for all
this they do. So that the question is not, for instance, to know whether Jesus
Ch is it dyed only for the Predestinate, that they condemn as well as you, but
whether Jansenius be of that opinion or no. And upon that ground, it is that I
declare to you more freely then ever, that I value your dispute little since
the Church is not much concerned in it. For though I am no more Doctor then you
are, Father, yet can I well perceive there is not any matter of Faith in it,
since the only question is to know the judgment of Jansenius. Did they
believe that his Doctrine were conformable to the genuine and literal sense of
those propositions; they would condemn it; and they refuse not to do it but out
of a persuasion that it is very much different from it; and so though they
should misunderstand it, they were not therefore heretics, since they
understand it only in a Catholic sense.

To clear up the business by an example, I will instance in that diversity of
sentiments which happened between Saint Basil and Saint Athanasius concerning
the writings of Saint Denis of Alexandria, wherein Saint Basil thinking he had
met with somewhat of the sense of Arius aagainst the co-equality of the Father
and the Son, he condemned them as heretical. Saint Athanasius, on the
contrary, thinking they contained only the true sense of the Church,
maintained them as Catholic. Do you think, Fathers, that Saint Basil who held
these writings to be Arian, had any right to treat Saint Athanasius as a
Heretic because he maintained them? And what reason should he have had to do
so, since it was not the Arianisme that he maintained therein, but the true
faith which he thought they contained? If these two Saints had agreed about the
true sense of these writings, and that they had both discovered that heresy in
them, Saint Athanasius could not certainly have maintained them without heresy:
but since they differed about the sense, Saint Athanasius was Catholic in
maintaining them, even though he mis-understood them, since it would have been
only an error of fact, and that he maintained not any thing in that doctrine
but the Catholic faith which he supposed had contained.

This, Father, I apply to you; were you agreed about the sense of Jansenius,
and should they grant you that he holds, for instance, that grace cannot be
resisted, those that should refuse to condemn him were heretics. But when you
are in dispute about the sense, and they think that according to his doctrine
grace may be resisted, there is no reason you should rreat them as heretics,
what heresy soever you may your selves attribute to him, since they condemn the
sense you suppose to be therein, and you dare not condemn the sense they
suppose therein. If therefore you would convince them; make it appear that the
sense they attribute to Jansenius is heretical; for, in that case, they
themselves will be such. But how can you make them so, when it is evident,
according to your own acknowledgement, that the sense they give him is not
condemned?

To make the business yet more clear, I shall take for a principle that which
you will grant to be such your selves, that the doctrine of efficacious Grace
has not been condemned, and that the Pope has not meddled with it in his
Constitution. And in effect, when he would judge of the V. Propositions, the
point of efficacious was put out of all hazard of censure. This appears clearly
by the judgment of the Consultors, to whose examination the Pope referred the
business. These judgments I have in my hands, as well as diverse others in
Paris, and among the rest, my Lord Bishop of Montpelier, who brought them from
Rome. There we find that they were divided in their opinions, and that the most
eminent among them, as the Master of the Sacred Palace, the Commissary of the
holy office, the general of the Augustine Friars, and others, conceiving that
those propositions might be taken in the sense of efficacious grace, were of
opinion that they ought not to he censured; whereas the rest granting that they
ought not to be censured if they had had that sense, yet thought they should be
censured; for that, according to what they declare, their proper and natural
sense was far from it. And thereupon the Pope condemned them, and the world
has submitted to his judgment.

It is therefore certain Father, that efficacious grace has not been
condemned. And indeed it is so vigorously maintained by Saint Augustine, by
Saint Thomas and all his School, by so many Popes and Counsels, and by
universal Tradition, that it were impiety to charge it with heresy, Now all
those that you treat as Heretics declare that they find not any thing in
Jansenius, but that doctrine of efficacious grace. And this is the only thing
they maintain at Rome. You have acknowledged it your self Cavil. p. 35. where
you have declared, that speaking before the Pope, they said not a word of the
Propositions, ne verbum quidem; and that they spent the whole time in
discoursing of efficacious grace. And so whether they are deceived or not in
this supposition, thus much is at least clear, that the sense they suppose is
not heretical, and consequently they are no heretics. For to cut the knot in
a word: either Jansenius has not taught any thing but efficacious grace, or he
has taught something else: in the former case he is charged with no errors;
in the latter, he has no compurgators. All the question then, is to know
whether Jansenius has taught any thing in effect besides efficacious grace,
and if it be found that he has, you shall have the reputation of having
understood him best; but they shall not be so unfortunate as to have erred in
matters of faith.

We are therefore to give God the praise, Father, that in effect, there is no
heresy in the Church, since that the business in agitation concerns only
matter of fact, whence there cannot any issue. For the Church decides points of
Faith, with a divine authority, and she cuts off all those that refuse to
embrace them: but she proceeds otherwise in matters of fact. And the reason of
it is, that our Salvation is fastened to the faith that has been revealed to
us, and is preserved in the Church by Tradition; but it has not any dependence
on other particular matters of fact which have not been revealed from God. Thus
is a man obliged to believe that it is not impossible to keep the Commandments
of God, but is not obliged to know what Jansenius has taught upon that
subject. God therefore, in the determination of points of faith guides the
Church by the assistance of his spirit which cannot err; whereas in matters of
fact, he leaves her to sense and reason the natural judges thereof. For it is
God only that can instruct the Church in matters of Faith; but there needs no
more then to read Jansenius, to know whether such and such propositions be in
his book. And thence it comes that it is heresy to oppose decisions of faith;
because it is the opposition of a man's own spirit to the spirit of God. But it
is not heresy, though it may happily be temeritie, not to believe certain
particular matters of fact; because it is no more then opposing Reason which
may be clear, to an Authority that is great, but, in that, not infallible.

This is generally acknowledged by all Divines, as is apparent by this Maxim
of Cardinal Bellarmine of your Society; General Councils legally convened
cannot err in defining articles of Faith, but they err in questions of fact.
And elsewhere; The Pope as Pope, though in the head of an Ecumenical Council
may err in particular controversies relating to matter of fact, such as
principally depend upon information and the deposition of witnesses. And
Cardinal Baronius in like manner; We must absolutely submit to General Councils
in point of Fai h; but for what concerns particular persons and their writings,
the censures that have been past upon them have not happily been observed with
the rigor they ought, because there is not any one, whose case i^ may not be
to be mistaken therein. '^as upon this ground that my Lord Archbishop of
Toulouse drew this rule ou^ of the Letters of two eminent Popes, Saint Leo, and
Pelagius II. That the proper object of Councils is Faith, and that whatsoever
is resolved herein besides what relates to Faith, may be reviewed and examined,
whereas wh t has once been decided in matter of faith ought not to be brought
into any after examination, because, as Tertulian says, the rule of Faith is
inalterable and irretractable.

Thence it comes to pass, that whereas General and Legitimate Councils have
never been found contrary one to another in points of Faith; because as
Monsieur de Toulouse says, it is not allowed that what had been already
decided in matter of faith shoul be brought into after-examination, these very
same Councils have been observed to differ in matters of fact, where the d
fference was ab^ut the understanding of an Author, because as the same Monsieur
de Toulouse says, it is not allowed that what had been already decided in
matter of faith should be brought into after examination, these very same
Councils have been observed to differ in matters of fact, where the difference
was about understanding of an Author, because the same Monsieur de Toulouse
says, after the Popes whom he cites, whatsoever is determined in Councils out
of the sphere of matters of Faith may be reviewed and re-examined. Thus do the
IV. and V. Councils seem to be contrary one to another in the interpretation of
the same Authors; and the same happened between two Popes upon a Proposition of
certain Monks of Scythia. For after that Pope Hormisdas had condemned it, as
understanding it in an ill sense, Pope John II. his successor, examining it
anew, and taking it in a good sens^, approved, and declared it to be Catholic.
Will you hereupon affirm that one of these Popes was an Heretic? Or must you
not rather confess, that, provided a man condemn the heretical sense which a
Pope had supposed to have been in a writing, he is not an heretic because he
condemns not that writing, taking it in a sense wherein it is certain the Pope
has not condemned it? since that otherwise one of those Popes must needs have
fallen into Error.

I thought it not amiss, Father, to accustom you to those contrarieties that
happen among Catholics upon questions of fact about the understanding the
sense of an Author, by giving you thereupon instances of one Father of the
Church against another, of a Pope against a Pope, and of a Council against a
Council, so to lead you by the hand to other examples of a like opposition, but
more disproportionate. For in those you shall find Cou cils and Popes on the
one side, and Jesuits on the other, opposing their decisions concerning the
sense of an Author; and yet you are so far from charging those of your
Brotherhood with heresy for so doing, that you think them not guilty of
temerity for it.

You know, Father, that the writings of Origin have been condemned by diverse
Councils, and several Popes, and particularly by the fifth general Council, as
containing heresy, and among others that of reconciliati n of the Devils at
the day of Judgment. Do you think hereupon, that it is of absolute necessi^^e
for a man to be a Catholic, that he confess that Origin did really maintain
those errors? and that it is not enough that a man condemn them without
attributing them to him? If this be so, what will become of your Father
Halloix, who has maintained the purity of Origens faith, as well as diverse
other Catholics, who have undertaken the same thing, as Picus of Mirandala,
and Genebrand a Doctor of Sorbonne? And is it not further certain that the same
fifth general Council condemned the writings of Theodoret against Saint Cyril,
as impious, contrary to true faith, and containing the Nestorian heresy? and
yet Father Sirmond, a Jesuit, has not stuck to vindicate him, and to affirm,
in the life of that Father, that those very writings are free from that
Nestorian heresy.

You see then, Fathers, that when the Church condemns any writings, she
supposes in them some error which she condemns; and then it is matter of faith
that that error is condemned: but it is not of faith, that those writings
contain, in effect, the error which the Church supposes therein. I think this
has been sufficiently proved; and so I shall conclude these examples with that
of Pope Honorius, whereof the story is so well known. About the beginning of
the seventh Age, the Church being in some disturbance by reason of the heresy
of the Monothelites, this Pope, to determine the difference made a Decree which
seemed to favor those Heretics, so that many were scandalized at it. Yet the
business was smothered with little noise during the time of his Popedom: but
about fifty years after the Church being assembled together in the sixth
general Council, wherein Pope Agatho pre-presided by his Legate, this decree
was brought in thither, and after it was read and examined, condemned, as
containing the heresy of the Monothelites, and, as such, burnt in a full
assembly, together with the other writings of those Heretics. And this
decision was received with so much veneration and uniformitie throughout all
the Church, that it was afterward confirmed by two other general Councils, nay
by the Popes, Leo II. and Adrian II. who lived two hundred years after, no man
offering to disturb so universal and so quiet a conformity for the space of
seven or eight Ages. And yet some Authors of these late times, and among others
Cardinal Bellarmine, were not in any jealousy of being thought Heretics,
though they maintained against so many Popes and Councils, that the writings of
Honorius were free from the error which they had declared to have been
therein; because, says he, it being possible that general Councils may err in
questions of fact, we may confidently affirm that the sixth Council was
mistaken in that particular fact, and that having not well understood the sense
of Honorius 's Letters, they undeservedly put that Pope into the Catalogue of
Heretics.

I pray observe, Father, that a man runs not the hazard of being an Heretic,
who affirms that Pope Honorius was not any, though diverse Popes and several
Councils had declared him such, and that after examination of the business. I
come then to our question; and I give you leave to make your cause as good as
you can. What will you say, Father, to make your adversaries heretics? That
Pope Innocent X. has declared that the error of the five propositions is in
Jansenius? I allow you to say all that. What conclusion will you draw thence?
That it is heresy not to acknowledge that the error of the five Propositions
is in Jansenius? What think you of it Father? Is not this a plain question of
fact, of the same nature as the precedent? The Pope has declared that the
error of the five Propositions is in Jansenius, just as his predecessors had
declared that the errors of the Nestorians and Monothelites were in the
writings of Theodoret and Honorius. Whereupon your Fathers have written, that
they willingly condemned those heresies, but are not satisfied that those
Authors did maintain them; in like manner do your adversaries say now, that
they do indeed condemn those five propositions, but do not grant that Jansenius
ever taught them. These cases, Father, are certainly much of the same nature.
And if there be any difference between them, it is easily perceived how much it
makes for the advantage of the present question by the comparison of diverse
particular circumstances, which being visible of themselves, I shall not insist
upon. How comes it then, Father, that in the same case your Fathers are
Catholics and your Adversaries heretics? And by what strange exception do you
deprive them of a liberty which you allow all the rest of the faithful?

What will you say to this Father? That the Pope has confirmed his
Constitution by a Brief? I answer you, that two general Councils and two Popes
have confirmed the condemnation of Honorius's Letters. But what force do you
pretend to give the words of this Brief by which the Pope declares, That he
has condemned the doctrine of Jansenius in those five Propositions? What does
this add to the Constitution, and what may be inferred thence, but that as the
VI. Council condemned the doctrine of Honorius, because they believed it to be
the same with that of the Monothelites; so the Pope says, that he has
condemned the doctrine of Jansenius in those five Propositions, as supposing it
to be the same with those five Propositions. And indeed, how could he but
believe it? Your Society publishes nothing else, and you your self, Father, who
have said they were there word for word, were in Rome at the time of the
Censure; for I meet with you every where. Could he have distrusted the
sincerity or the abilities of so many grave Religious men? And how could he
but believe that the doctrine of Jansenius was the same with that of the five
Propositions, when he had your security that they were word for word in that
Author? It is therefore evident, Father, that if it happen Jansenius held them,
we shall not need say, as your Fathers have done in their examples, that the
Pope was deceived in the matter of fact, which to publish argues always the
indiscretion of the publisher; but there need be no more said then that you
have deceived the Pope, which implies nothing of scandal, you are now so well
known to all.

Thus, Father, is this matter far from being able to form an Heresy. But it
being your desire to make it one at any rate, you have endeavored to turn the
question from matter of fact, to translate it into a point of Faith. And that
you do thus. The Pope, say you, declares that he has condemned the doctrine of
Jansenius in those five Propositions: it is therefore of faith, that the
doctrine of Jansenius concerning these five Propositions is Heretical, whatever
it be. This, Father, is certainly a very strange point of Faith, that a
doctrine is heretical whatever it may be. What, if according to Jansenius a man
may resist the internal grace, and if it be false according to him that Jesus
Christ died only for the predestinate, shall that also be condemned because it
is his doctrine? shall it be true in the Constitution of the Pope, that a man
has the liberty to do either good or evil, and shall it be false in Jansenius?
By what fatalitie must he be so unhappy that truth becomes Heretical in his
book? Must it not then be acknowledged that he is heretical only in case he be
conformable to these condemned errors, since the Popes Constitution is the
rule to which we must apply Jansenius, to judge of him according to the
compliance there will be between them; and that this question, viz. whether his
doctrine be heretical, will be resolved by this other question of fact, viz.
whether it be conformable to the genuine sense of these propositions, it being
impossible it should not be heretical if it be consonant thereto, and
Catholic, if it be contrary thereto. For in fine, since that according to the
Pope and the Bishops, the Propositions are condemned in their proper and
genuine sense, it is impossible they should be condemned in the sense of
Jansenius, unless it be in case the sense of Jansenius be the same with the
proper and genuine sense of these Propositions, which is matter of fact.

The question therefore sticks still at matter of fact, so as that it cannot by
any means be brought into matter of right, and consequently it cannot be made
matter of Heresy. But you might well make it a pretense of persecution, were
there not some hope left, there will not any so far engage into your
concernments, as to further so unjust a proceeding, and be prevailed with to
give it under their hands, as you would have it, that they condemn those
propositions in the sense of Jansenius without explaining what that sense of
Jansenius is. There are few will be drawn in to sign a blank confession of
faith. Now to sign that, were to sign such a one, which you would afterward
fill up with what you pleased, since you were at liberty to give what
interpretation you thought fit to that sense of Jansenius which had not been
explained. Let it therefore be explained before hand; else you will put us off
with a next power, abstrahendo ab omni sensu. You know this does not do well in
the world. There men hate ambiguity, especially in matters of faith, where it
is but just men should understand at least what they condemn. And how could it
come to pass, that Doctors who were persuaded that Jansenius had no other
sense then that of efficacious grace, should be drawn to declare that they
condemned his doctrine without explaining it, since that according to the
judgment they have of it, and which they still persist in, it were only to
condemn efficacious grace, which cannot be done without crime? Were it not
then a strange Tyranny they should be reduced to this wretched extremity,
either of making themselves guilty before God by signing that condemnation
contrary to their consciences, or being treated as Heretics if they refused?

But all this is carried on with mystery; all your motions are political. I
must needs discover why you would not explain this sense of Jansenius. I write
merely to betray your designs, and by such discovery to make them
ineffectuall. I am therefore to acquaint those that know it not, that it being
your main concernment in this dispute to keep up the reputation of the
sufficient grace maintained by your Molina, you cannot do it without destroying
efficacious grace which is absolutely opposite thereto. But seeing it
countenanced at this day in Rome, and among all the most learned of the Church,
being not able to oppose it in it self, you have thought fit to assault it, so
as it might not be perceived, under the name of the doctrine of Jansenius.
Hence was it necessary you should endeavor the condemnation of Jansenius
without being explained, and that to compass your design you should give out
that his doctrine is not that of efficacious grace, that so it might be
believed that one was condemned without the other. Thence it comes that you now
endeavor to persuade those that are not acquainted with that Author, that it
is so. Nay this you do in particular, Father, in Cavilli p. 23. by this subtle
kind of discourse; The Pope has condemned the doctrine of Jansenius; but the
Pope has not condemned the doctrine of efficacious grace; the doctrine
therefore of efficacious grace is different from that of Jansenius. Were this
kind of argument conclusive; it might be shown in like manner that Honorius and
all those that defend him are heretics, thus. The VI. Council has condemned
the doctrine of Honorius; But the Council has not condemned the doctrine of
the Church, the doctrine of Honorius therefore is different from that of the
Church. All therefore that defend him are heretics. It is evident that this
concludes nothing; since the Pope has only condemned the doctrine of the five
Propositions which he has been persuaded is that of Jansenius.

But it matters not, for you will not make use of this argument long. It will
serve well enough, weak as it is, till you have made the advantage you intend
of it. All the end you have in it is to draw in those who would not condemn
efficacious grace, to condemn Jansenius without any difficulty. When that is
once done the argument will be forgotten, and the signations will remain, to
the eternal remembrance of the condemnation of Jansenius, so that you will
take occasion to fall directly upon efficacious grace, by this more solid way
of disputation, which you will put into form when the time is come: The
doctrine of Jansenius, will you say, was condemned by the universal
subscriptions of the whole Church; but this doctrine is evidently the same with
that of efficacious grace, and that you will easily prove; the doctrine
therefore of efficacious grace has been condemned even by the acknowledgement
of the defenders thereof. This is the reason why you propose the condemnation
of a doctrine to be signed without explaining it. This is the advantage you
expect to make of these subscriptions. But if your adversaries refuse to sign,
you spread another net for them upon that refusal. For having craftily riveted
the question of faith into that of fact, not permitting they should be
separated, nor that they should sign one without the other, though they cannot
subscribe both together, yet will you give it out every where that they have
refused both together. So that though, in effect, they only refuse to
acknowledge that Jansenius has maintained the Propositions they condemn, which
can make no heresy, you will confidently affirm that they have refused to
condemn the propopositions in themselves, and that therein consists their
heresy. And this advantage will you make of their refusal, which is no less
considerable then what you would have made of their consent. So that if they
appeal to the signations they ever fall into your ambushes, whether they sign
or do not sign, and you will be savers on both sides: so cunningly have you
shuffled your cards, so as to be always winners, what ever may turn up trump.

Ah Father, how intimately am I acquainted with you, and how am I troubled to
see that God has so far forsaken you as to suffer you to be so fortunate in so
unfortunate a procedure! your happiness is is to be pityed, and cannot be
envied but by those who know not what true happiness is. It Is a kind of charity
to oppose that felicity which you seek after in all this proceeding, since you
ground it only on falsehood, and that it is your main design to make one of
these two falsities to be credited, viz. either that the Church has condemned
efficacious grace, or that those that defend it maintain the five condemned
errors. Be it known therefore to all the world, both that efficacious grace is
not condemned according to your own confession, and that no body maintains
those errors, that it may be evident to all, that those who should refuse to
sign what you would have exacted from them, refuse it not but by reason of the
question of fact; and that being ready to sign that of faith, they cannot be
heretics for that refusal, since that it is indeed of faith that those
propositions are heretical, but that it will never be of faith that they are
Jansenius's. They are without error, that is sufficient. Perhaps they interpret
Jansenius over-favourably, but you happily do not interpret him favorably
enough. That it shall not be my business to discuss. This I am certain of
that according to your maxims you believe you may without crime proclaim him a
heretic contrary to your own knowledge, whereas according to theirs, they
could not, without crime, say he is a Catholic, were they not persuaded he is
such. They therefore infinitely exceed you in sincerity, Father, they have
examined Jansenius better then you have; they are not less intelligent then
you are, they are consequently as much to be credited as you are. But come what
will of this point of fact, they certainly are still Catholics; since that to
be such, it is not necessary to say that another is not: and that without
laying error at any man's door, it is fair if a man can but be clear of it
himself.

Jannuary 23. 1656/7. S. N.
To the same Reverend Father F. ANNAT, Of the Society of JESUS, Confessor to
the KING. LETTER XVIII, and last.
REVEREND FATHER,
IT is a long time since you have made it your business to find out some error
in your Adversaries, but I am confident you will at last acknowledge, that
there is not happily any thing more difficult then to make those Heretics, who
not only are not such, but endeavor above all things to avoid being so. I
have made it appear in my last LETTER, how many heresies you have laid to their
charge one in the neck of another, because you could not meet with any one you
could make good for any considerable time, insomuch that all the refuge you had
was to charge them with refusing to condemn the sense of Iansenius, which you
would needs oblige them to condemn without any explication of what it is. It
argues you extremely unfurnished with heresies to reproach them with, that you
were reduced to that extremity. For, who ever heard talk of any heresy that it
is impossible to express? It was therefore a matter of so much the more ease to
answer, by alleging, that if Iansenius be free from all errors, there is no
reason he should be condemned, and that if he be guilty of any, you ought to
discover them, that so men may be satisfied what is to be condemned. Yet this
could you never be induced to do, but have only made it your design to give
your pretenses some weight from certain Decrees, whence you could not derive
any advantage, there being not in them the least explication of the sense of
Iansenius, which they say was condemned in the five Propositions. Now this was
not the way to determine your differences. Were all sides agreed about the true
sense of Iansenius, and were no longer in dispute save to know whether the
sense be heretical or not; then the judgments who should declare that the sense
were heretical, would doubtless come to what were most material in the
question. But the great controversy being to know what the sense of Jansenius
is, some affirming they cannot see any thing in him but the sense of Saint
Augustine and Saint Thomas: and others, that they find in him a sense that is
heretcal, which yet they do not express, it is evident, that the Constitution
which has not a word concerning this difference, and only condemns in general
the sense of Jansenius, without explaining it, does not decide any thing of
what is in controversy.

For which reason you have been told an hundred times that your difference
regarding only matter of fact, you would never have it determined but by
declaring what you meant by the sense of Jansenius. But this though you were
ever extreme loath to condescend to, yet have I brought you to the stake in my
XV. LETTER, where I make it appear it was not without mystery, that you had
made it so much your business to get that sense condemned without any
explication, and it was your design to make that indeterminate condemnation
fall upon the doctrine of efficacacious grace; by discovering it to be no other
then that of Iansenius, which you would have found it no hard matter to do.
This it was that put you into a necessity of answering. For if you had still
stood out and refused to explicate that sense, it would have been apparent to
the least apprehensive sort of people that all your quarrel was against
efficacious grace, which would have turned to your utter confusion, considering
the veneration which the Church has for a doctrine so holy.

You therefore have thought your selves obliged to declare; and that you have
but just done by answering my Letter, wherein I had represented it to you, That
if Iansenius had, as to the five propositions, any other sense then that of
efficacious grace, he had no compurgators; but that if he had no other sense
then that of efficacious grace, he was not chargeable with any errors. This
you could not acknowledge, Father, but you think to save all with a
distinction, thus, p. 21. It is not sufficient, say you, to justify Jansenius,
to affirm that he only maintains efficacious grace; for that may be held two
manner of ways. One is heretical, according to Calvin, which consists in
affirming that the Will, moved by grace, has not the power to resist it;
another orthodoxe, according to the Thomists and the Sorbonists, which is
grounded upon principles established by Councils, which is, that efficacious
grace does, by its own force, so govern the will, that the latter has
nevertheless a power still left to resist the former.

All this is easily granted you, Father, and you conclude saying, that
Jansenius were a Catholic should he maintain efficacious grace according to
the Thomists, but that he is an heretic because he is contrary to the
Thomists, and conformable to Calvin, who denies the power of the will to resist
Grace. I shall not here, Father, examine this point of fact, viz. whether
Iansenius be really conformable to Calvin. It is enough for me that you stand
upon it, and that now at length you are pleased to let us know that by the
sense of Iansenius you have not understood any other then that of Calvin. And
was this all, Father, that you would have said? Was it only the error of
Calvin which you would have had condemned under the name of the sense of
Iansenius? Why did you not declare so much sooner? You might have spared your
self abundance of pains. For, without either Bulls or Briefs, all the world
would have joined with you in the condemnation of that error. How necessary
wasiit to decleare things up thus, and what abundance of difficulties does it
disperse! We were to seek, Father, what error the Popes and Bishops would have
condemned under the name of the sense of Iansenius. The whole Church was
extremely at a loss about it, and no body would take the pains to explicate it
to us. You now do it, Father, you I say, whom all your party looks upon as the
principal and first mover in all your designs, and who know the mystery of all
this Intrigue. You tell us then that the sense of Iansenius, is no other then
that of Calvin, condemned by the Council. See, abundance of doubts resolved! We
are now satisfied that the error which they made it so much their business to
condemn under these terms of the sense of Iansenius, is no other then the
sense of Calvin, and consequently, that we continue our obedience to their
Decrees, by condemning with them that sense of Calvin, which they would have
condemned. We are no longer astonished to see there are Popes and some Bishops
so zealous against the sense of Iansenius. Alas! how should they be otherwise,
Father, when they gave credit to those who affirm publicly that sense to be
the same with Calvin's?

Take it then from me Father, that you have not any thing to object against
your adversaries, for that no question but they detest what you so much detest.
All I wonder at is, that you knew not so much, and that you have so little
acquaintance with their Sentiments upon this matter, they having declared
themselves so often in the r works. I am confident, were you better informed,
it would trouble you, that you have not been instructed by a a spirit of peace
in a doctrine so pure and so Christian-like, which your passion engages you to
oppose because you do not know it. You would find, Father, that they do not
only hold that a man may effectually resist those weak graces, which are
called exciting or inefficacious graces, by not performing that good which they
inspire us with: but also that they as resolutely maintain, against Calvin, the
power which the will has to resist grace even when efficacious and victorious,
as, against Molina, the power of that grace over the will; being equally
jealous of the truth of both these Tenants. They are but too well satisfied,
that man, of his own nature, has ever the power of sinning and resisting
grace, and that ever since his corruption he carries about him an unhappy
leaven of concupiscence which infinitely strengthens that power: but that
nevertheless when it pleases God to touch him out of his mercy, he makes him
do what he pleases, and act as he would have him, yet so as that the
infallibility of Gods operation does not any way destroy the natural liberty
of man, by reason of the secret and admirable ways whereby God works this
change, which S. Augustine has so excellently well explicated with such
clearness, as disperses all the imaginary contradictions, which the
adversaries of efficacious grace think there are between the sovereign power
of grace over the Free Will, and the power which the free will has to resist
grace. For according to this great Saint, whom Popes and the Church have
assigned as a rule in this matter, God changes the heart of man by a celestial
sweetness which he inspires it with, and which, transcending the delights of
the Flesh, makes a man sensible on the one side, of his nothingnesse and
mortality, and discovering, on the other, the greatness and eternity of God,
conceive an aversion for the delights of sin separating him from the
incorruptible good; and finding his greatest enjoyment in God charming him, he
is infallibly inclined toward him, of himself, by a motion absolutely free,
absolutely voluntary, absolutely loving, so that it were a pain and punishment
to him to be divided from him. Not but that it is possible for him still to
estrange himself, and that he effectively may do it if he will; but how should
he since his will must ever be inclined to that, which pleases it most; and
that it is not taken with any thing so much at that time as that only good
which comprehends in it self what ever else is good? Quod enim amplius nos
delectat, secundum id operemur necesse est, as S. Augustine says.

And thus does God dispose of the free will of man, without imposing any
necessity upon him; and the free will, which may at any time resist Grace, but
will not at all times do it, is inclined, as freely, as infallibly, to God,
when he would draw it to him by the sweetness of his efficacious inspirations.

These, Father, are the divine principles of S. Augustine and S. Thomas,
according to which it is true that we may resist grace, contrary to the opinion
of Calvin; and that, nevertheless, as Pope Clement VIII. says, in his writing
directed to the congregation de Auxiliis; God forms in us the motion of our
will, and disposes efficaciously of our hearts, by the supreme power which his
Majesty has over the wills of men, as well as over the rest of the Creatures
that are under heaven, according to S. Augustine.

It is further according to these principles that we act of our selves, whence
it comes that we have merits, which are truly ours, contrary to the error of
Calvin, and that nevertheless, God being the first principle of our actions,
and doing in us what is good and acceptable in his sight, as S Paul says, our
merits are the gifts of God, as the Council of Trent says.

This is that which has destroyed that impiety of Luther condemned by the same
Council, that we do not any way cooperate to our own salvation no more then
things inanimate: and it is this that in like manner destroys the impiety of
Molina's School, which will not acknowledge it to be the force of grace it self
that makes us cooperate with it in the work of our salvation; whereby he takes
away that principle of faith established by S. Paul, That it is God that
works in us both the will and the deed.

It is lastly by this means, that all those passages of Scripture which seem to
be most contrary are reconciled. Turn ye unto God: O Lord turn us unto thee:
Cast away iniquity from you. It is God who takes away iniquity from his
people: bring forth works worthy of repentance: The Lord has wrought all our
works in us. Make ye a new heart and a new spirit; I will give you a new
spirit, and will create in you a new heart.

The only way then to reconcile those apparent contradictions which attribute
our good actions sometimes to God sometimes to our selves, is to acknowledge,
that, as S. Augustine says, our actions are ours, because of the free will
whereby they are produced; and that they are also Gods because of his grace
which causes our free will to produce them. As also that, as he says
elsewhere, God makes us to do what he pleases, by making us to will that which
we might not have willed: a Deo factum est ut vellent, quod and nolle
potuissent.

Thus, Father, is there a perfect harmony between your adversaries and the new
Thomists, since the Thomists hold, as they do, both the power to resist grace,
and the infallibility of the effect of grace, which they make profession to
maintain so resolutely, according to this capital maxim of their doctrine,
which Alvarez, one of the most eminent among them, repeats so often in his
book, and which he expresses disp. 72. n. 4. in these terms. When the
efficacious grace moves the free will, it infallibly consents, for the effect
of grace is, to prevail with it, that though it might not have consented, yet,
in effect, it does consent. Whereof he gives this reason of his Master S.
Thomas; That the will of God cannot but be accomplished, and consequently when
he would have a man consent to grace, he infallibly, nay necessarily does
consent, yet not through an absolute necessity but a necessity of
infallibility. Wherein yet grace derogates nothing from the power of resisting
if a man will, since its only effect is that a man will not resist it, as your
Father Petavius acknowledges in these terms, to. 1. p. 602. The grace of Jesus
Christ makes us infallibly to persevere in piety, though not through necessity.
For a man may not consent thereto if he will, as the Council says; but the
same grace obliges him that he will not but consent thereto. This, Father, has
been the constant doctrine of S. Augustine, S. Prosper, the Fathers that
followed them, of Councills, of S. Thomas, of all the Thomists in general. It
is also that of your Adversaries, though you have not thought so much; and in a
word, it is the very same that you your selves approve in these terms; The
doctrine of efficacious grace, which acknowledges that a man has the power to
resist it, is orthodoxe, grounded upon Councills, and maintained by the
Thomists and Sorbonists. Be ingenuous once, Father, had you known that your
adversaries really held this doctrine, would not the interest of your Society
have hindered you from giving it this public approbation? And imagining they
held the contrary thereto, has not the same interest of your Society obliged
you to authorize sentiments such as you thought contrary to theirs? and by that
mis-apprehension, where it was your design to undermine their principles, you
have your selves absolutely established them. So that we now find, by a strange
kind of prodigy the defenders of efficacious grace justified by the defenders
of Molina: so admirable is the conduct of God, who makes all things contribute
to the glory of his Truth.

Be it then known to all the world, that by your own acknowledgement, this
truth of efficacious grace, requisite in all actions of piety, a truth the
Church is so tender of, and which is the price of the blood of her Savior, is
so apparently Catholic, that there is not any Catholic, even to the Jesuits
themselves, that does not acknowledge it to be orthodoxe. And it will be
discovered at the same time, that they are not to be charged with the least
suspicion of error, whom you have so prodigally accused. For as to those secret
errors you laid to their charge, without making any discovery thereof, it was
as difficult for them to clear themselves of, as it was easy for you to load
them with accusations of that nature; but now that you declare, that that
error, which has obliged you to oppose them, is that of Calvin, which you
thought they had maintained, there is not any one but clearly sees they are
free from all error: since they are so far contrary to that only one you
impose upon them, and that they protest by their discourses, by their books,
and by what ever they can produce to express their sentiments, that they
condemn that heresy with all their souls, and that in the same manner as the
Thomists do, whom you make no difficulty to acknowledge to be Catholic, and
who were never yet suspected to be otherwise.

What will you now have to object against them, Father? that notwithstanding
they do not follow Calvin's sense, they are nevrthelesse heretics, because
they will not acknowledge that the sense of Jansenius is the same with that of
Calvin? Will you presume to say that this is matter of heresy? And is it not a
pure question of fact whence there cannot any be derived? It were indeed a
heresy for a man to say that he has not the power to resist efficacious
grace: but is it any to doubt whether Jansenius holds it? Is it a revealed
Truth? Is it an article of faith, that ought to be believed upon pain of
Damnation? Or is it not, in spite of your teeth, pure matter of fact? for
which it were ridiculous to pretend there should be any heretics in the Church.

Do not call them therefore any longer by that name, Father, but by some other
that is proportionable to the nature of your difference. Say they are ignorant
persons and dunces, and that they mistake Jansenius very much: these will be
reproaches suitable to your difference; but to call them heretics, there is no
color in the world. And since it is the only injury from which I would
vindicate them, it will cost me no great pains to show that they understand
Jansenius very well. And for his part, all I shall say of him, is, that in my
judgment, Father, measuring him even according to your own rules, it will be
hard if he pass not for a Catholic: for these are the grounds you would have
him examined by.

To discover, say you, whether Jansenius be free from error, we must know
whether he defends efficacious grace after Calvin's way, who denies that a man
has the power to resist it; for in that case he were a heretic: or after the
way of the Thomists, who admit that he has; for in that case he were a
Catholic. See then, Father, whether he holds that a man has the power to
resist or not, when he maintains in whole Treatises, and among others, to. lib.
8. cap. 20. That a man has always the power to resist grace, according so the
Councills, THAT THE FREE WILL MAY AT ANY TIME ACT AND NOT ACT, will and not
will, consent and not consent, do good and evil, and that a man has ever in
this life those two Liberties, which they call of contrariety and
contradiction. See also whether he be not clear from Calvin's error, such as
you represent it, as showing throughout the whole 21. chap. That the Church had
condemned that Heretic, for denying that efficacious grace works not upon the
free will in the manner it has been believed so long in the Church, that is,
so that it may be afterward in the power of the free will to consent or not to
consent; whereas, according to Saint Augustine and the Council, a man has
always the power not to consent if he will, and according to Saint Prosper,
God so bestows on his elect the will to persevere, that he takes not away from
them the power of willing the contrary. And lastly, see whether he be not
consonant to the Thomists, when he declares, cap. 4. That whatever the Thomists
have written to reconcile the efficacity of grace with the power of resisting
it, is so conformable to his sense, that there needs no more then to look into
their books to learn his sentiments thereof. Quod ipsi dixerunt dictum puta.

Thus does he speak to all these heads; and I think this ground enough for me
to imagine that he believes the power of his will to resist grace; that he is
contrary to Calvin, and conformable to the Thomists, because he says it, and
consequently that he is Catholic according to you. But if you know any way to
discover the sense of an Author otherwise then by his expressions, and that
without citing any one passage of his, you will nevertheless maintain, contrary
to his words, that he denies this power of resistance, and that he is for
Calvin contrary to the Thomists; never fear, Father, I shall charge you with
heresy for so doing, I shall only say, that you understand not Jansenius very
well, but we shall nevertheless be the children of the same Church.

Whence comes it then, Father, that you betray so much passion in your
proceedings about this difference, and that you treat as your most cruel
enemies, and as most dangerous heretics, such as you cannot charge with any
error, or any thing else but that they understand not Jansenius as you do? For
what difference is there between you but about the sense of the Author? You
would have them condemn him, but they ask you what you mean by it. You say you
mean Calvin's error, their answer is that they condemn it; so that if your
quarrel be not with the syllables, but with the thing they signify, you ought
to be satisfied. If they refuse to say that they condemn the sense of
Jansenius, it is because they believe it to be that of Saint Thomas. And so that
word is very equivocal between you; in your mouth it signifies Calvin's sense,
in theirs, Saint Thomas's: so that these different Ideas you have of the same
term being the occasion of all your divisions, were I moderator of your
disputes, I should forbid both sides to use the word Jansenius. And so
expressing only what you mean thereby, it would be found that you desire only
the condemnation of the sense of Calvin, whereto they consent; and that all
they desire is to vindicate the sense of Saint Augustine and Saint Thomas,
wherein you all agree.

I tell you then, Father, that for my part I shall still look on them as
Catholics, whether they condemn Jansenius in case they find any errors in
him; or condemn him not, when they find nothing in him but what you declare to
be Catholic; and shall speak to them as Saint Hierome did to John Bishop of
Jerusalem, who was charged with maintaining eight propositions of Origin;
Either condemn Origin, says that Saint, if you acknowledge that he has held
those errors, or deny that ever he held them: Aut nega hoc dixisse eum qui
arguitur, aut si locutus est talia, eum damna qui dixerit.

You see, Father, the proceedings of those who only oppose men's errors and
not their persons; whereas you who have a greater quarrel at persons then their
errors, think it nothing to condemn errors, if you do not withal condemn the
persons on whom you would fasten them.

How violent is your proceeding, Father, but withal how unlikely to prove
fortunate! I told you so once before, and I tell it you again, Violence and
truth can prevail nothing one upon another. Your accusations were never so
outrageous; nor was the innocence of your Adversaries ever more manifest: never
was efficacious grace assaulted with more artifice, and never have we seen it
better fortified. You do all that lies in your power to make the world believe
that your differences concern matters of faith, and it was never better known
that all your dispute is only about matter of fact. To be short, you leave not
a stone unmoved to make men believe that this matter of fact is true, and
people were never in so good an humor to question it. And the reason of it is
clear. It Is, Father, because you go not the ordinary way to make a matter of
fact credible, which is to satisfy the sense, and to show in a book the words
alleged to be therein. But you take courses that are at such a distance from
this simplicity, that even the duller sort of people are sensible of it. Why
did you not go the same way I did in my LETTERS, where I discover so many
corrupt Maxims of your Authors, which is, faithfully to cite the places whence
they are taken. The same course was taken by the Pastors of Paris, and it never
fails winning the people into belief. For what would you have said, and the
world thought, when they reproched you, for instance, with this proposition of
your Father Amicus, That a Religious man may kill him that threatens to traduce
him or his Community, when he cannot otherwise prevent it; if they had not
cited the place where it is in express terms; if, how much soever you might
press them to it, they should still refuse to cite it, and, instead of that,
had been at Rome to procure a Bull, commanding all to acknowledge it? Would it
not be thought, that, without all question, they had surprised the Pope, and
that they had not taken that extraordinary course, but for want of those
natural ways, which truths depending on matters of fact do ever furnish those
with that maintain them? So that having only alleged that Father Amicus
teaches this doctrine in to. 5. disp. 36. number. 118. page 544. of the Douay
Edition, all those who were desirous to see whether it were so, have found it,
and all are satisfied. This now is an easy and ready way to resolve questions
of fact.

Whence comes it then, Father, that you do not make use of it? you said in your
Cavilli, That the five Propositions are in Jansenius, word for word, all in
express terms, totidem verbis. You were told they were not What then was to be
done, but either to cite the page, if you had really found them there, or to
confess you were mistaken? But you do neither, and waving that, and finding
that all the passages of Jansenius alleged by you sometimes, only to daze the
world, are not the individual, and singular condem^ed Propositions which you
were engag d to show in his book, you present us with Constitutions which
declare that they are taken out of them without citing the place.

I am not ignorant, Father, of the respect that Christians owe the holy See,
and your Adversaries have given sufficient testimony that they are resolved
ever to own it: but do not you imagine it shall argue the least defect thereof
to represent to the Pope, with all submission, as Children ought to their
Father, and Members to their Head, that it is not impossible he might be
surprised in that matter of fact; That he has not caused it to be examined
since his coming to the Chair; and that his Predecessor Innocent X. had only
caused it to be examined whether the propositions were heretical, not whether
they were Iansenius's: (which gave the Commissarie of the H. Office, one of the
chiefest Examiners, occasion to say, That they could not be censured in the
sense of any Author: Non sunt qualificabiles in sensu proferentis; because they
had been presented to them to be examined in themselves, and without any
consideration who the Author of it might be: in abstracto and ut praescindunt
ab omni proferente; (as it may be seen in their suffrages newly printed.) That
above ^0. Doctors, and a very great number of other able and godly persons have
read over the book very exactly, yet found them not there, but met with some
that were contrary thereto: That those who had made those false
representations to the Pope might very well be thought to abuse the trust he
reposed in them, it being their main concernment, as interessed persons, to
discredit that Author, who had discovered in Molina above 50. errors: That
what makes all this the more credible, is that they hold this Maxim one of the
most authentic of all their Theology, viz. that they may, without crime,
calumniate those by whom they think they are unjustly molested; and
consequently, their testimony being suspicious, and that of the others so
considerable, there is some ground to entreat his Holiness, with all possible
humility, to order this matter of fact to be examined in the presence of
Doctors of both sides, so to determine it by a solemn and regular decision. Let
able and competent judges be assembled, says Saint Basil, upon such another
occasion, Ep. 75. before whom let every one be free; Let my writings be
examined: Let them see whether there be any errors contrary to faith: Let both
the Objections and the Answers be read, that the judgment may be formal and
according to the merits of the cause, and not a defamation without any examen.

Think not, Father, to make those be accounted refractory toward the holy See
that shall take this course. The Popes are far from treating Christians with
that Tyranny which some would exercise under their names. The Church, says S.
Gregory the Pope, upon Job. lib. 8. c. 1. which has been brought up in the
School of Humility, does not command with authority, but persuades by reason
what she would teach her children whom she thinks ensnared into some error:
Recta quae erantibus dicit, non quasi ex authoritate praecipit, sed ex ratione
persuadet. And they are so far from thinking it any way dishonorable to
retract a judgment wherein they had been surprised, that they as it were
triumph in the contrary, as S. Bernard witnesses, Ep. 180. The Apostolic See,
says he, has this for which it is much to be celebrated, that i^ stands not
upon punctilio's of honor, but is easily prevailed with to revoke what had
been procured from it by surprise; it is indeed but just that no body should
thrive by injustice, and that especially before the holy See. See here, Father,
the true sentiments ought to be suggested to Popes; since that all Divines do
unanimously hold they may be surprised; the transcendent quality they are of
being, as to that, so far from securing them, that, on the contrary, it many
times makes them the more subject thereto, by reason of the infinite business
whereby they are distracted. And this is acknowledged by the same S. Gregory,
to some persons who wondered at another Pope that was overreached. Why do you
wonder, says he l. 1. Dial. That we are deceiv d being but men? Have you not
observed that David, that King who had the spirit of prophesy, having credited
the false suggestions of Z^ba gave an unjust judgment against the son of
Jonathan? who therefore will think i^ strange that impostors should surprise us
sometimes, us, I say, who are not prophets? We are orewhelmed with affairs*
and our spirits being diverted by so many things are the less attentive to any
thing in particular, and so may be the more easily mistaken in some one thing.
I am persuaded, Father, that the Popes know better then you whether they may be
surprised or no. They acknowledge themselves that Popes and the greatest Kings
are more subject to be overreached then persons whose affairs are of less
consequence. We must take their words. And it is no hard matter to imagine by
what means it comes to pass that they are so surprised: S. Bernard makes a
description of it, in a Letter he writ to Innocent II. in this manner. It is
not a thing strange and to be wondered at, that the spirit of man may deceive
and be deceived. There are some Religious men come to you, with a spirit of
lying and illusion. They have spoken to you against a Bishop whom they hate,
though he be a man of an exemplary life. These persons bite like Dogs, and
would turn good into evil. In the mean time, holy Father, you are exasperated
against your Son. Why have you given his adversaries occasion to rejoice?
Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God. I hope,
that, when you have understood the truth, whatever has been built upon a false
report will vanish into air. I earnestly beseech the spirit of truth to give
you grace to separate light from darkness, and to reprove the evil, that you
may encourage the good. You see then, Father, that the eminent degree wherein
Popes are, exempts them not from surprise, and that he endeavors to make their
surprises seem the more dangerous and of greater consequence. That is
represented by S. Bernard to Pope Eugenius, de consid. lib. 2. c. ult. There is
yet another general default, which I have not met with any of the great ones
of the world that does avoid. That is, holy Father, over-easinesse of belief,
the dame of so many disorders. For thence do violent persecutions proceed
against the innocent, the prejudiced are unjust against the absent, and those
that are inclined to choler, grow terrible for things of no consideration, pro
nihilo. This, holy Father, is an universal evil, from which if you are free, I
shall affirm that you only have that advantage over your brethren.

This methinkes, Father, must needs in some measure convince you that Popes are
subject to be surprised. But that you may take a full and perfect view of it, I
shall only put you in mind of the examples, which you allege in your book, of
Popes and Emperors that have really been surprised by Heretics. For you say,
that Apollinaris surprised Pope Damasus, as Celestius had done Zozimus. You say
further that one named Athanasius circumvented the Emperor Heraclius, and drew
him in to persecute the Catholics. And lastly, that Sergius obtained from
Honorius that Decree, which was afterward burnt in the sixth Council, by his
colloguing and insinuations with that Pope, as you say.

It is therefore evident from your self, Father, that those who make such
advantage of their interest with Kings and Popes, do sometimes craftily engage
them to persecute those who defend the true faith, while they think they
persecute heresies. And thence it comes that the Popes who have nothing in so
much horror as these surprises, have of a Letter of Alexander III. made an
ecclesiastical Law, inserted into the Canonical, to permit the suspension of
the execution of their Bulls and Decrees, when it is thought they have been
misinformed. If it happen sometimes, says the Pope to the Archbishop of
Ravenna, that we send to your Fraternity such Decrees as you are not satisfied
with, trouble not your self at it. For you may either with reverence put them
in execution, or give us an account why you think they ought not, and we shall
take it well at your hands that you execute not any decree which might have
been procured from us, either by surprise or artifice. Thus do those Popes
proceed who endeavor nothing so much, as to clear up the differences among
Christians, and not to comply with their passions who endeavor their
distraction. They use no domination, as S. Peter and S. Paul say after Jesus
Christ, but the spirit which guides all their proceedings is that of peace and
truth. Whence it comes that ordinarily they put into their Letters this clause,
which indeed is understood in all; Si Ita est: si preces veritate nitantur: if
the thing be as we have been informed; if the matter of fact be true. Whence it
is evident, that since the Popes give not force to their Bulls but so far as
they are grounded upon truth in matter of fact, the Bulls alone do not prove
the matter of fact to be true; but on the contrary, even according to the
Canonists themselves, it is the truth in matter of fact that authenticates the
Bulls. Whence then are we to learn the truth in matter of fact? From the eyes,
Father, the legal judges thereof, as reason is of things natural and
intelligible, and faith of things supernatural and revealed. For since you
oblige me to this discourse, Father, I must tell you, that according to the
opinions of two of the greatest Doctors of the Church, S. Augustine and S.
Thomas, these three principles of our knowledge, have every one their several
objects, and with in that extent their certainty. And whereas God thought fit
to use the mediation of the senses to give Faith entrance; Faith comes by
hearing: yet so far is faith from derogating from the certainty of the senses,
that, on the contrary, 'twere to destroy Faith, to bring the faithful report
of the senses into question. For which reason S. Thomas expressly observes,
that God would needs have the sensible accidents to subsist in the Eucharist,
to the end the senses, which judge only of accidents, should not be deceived:
Vt sensus a deceptione reddantur immunes.

Conclude we hence then, that what proposition soever be presented to our
examination, we must in the first place discover the nature of it, to see which
of the three principles it is referrible to. If it relates to something
supernatural, we are not to judge of it either by sense or reason, but by the
Scripture and the decisions of the Church. If it concern a proposition not
revealed, and proportionable to natural Reason, she shall be the proper judge
thereof. And lastly, if the dispute be about matter of fact, we must submit to
our senses, to whom it naturally belongs to take cognizance thereof.

This rule is so general, that according to S. Augustine and S. Thomas, when
the Scripture it self presents us with some passage whereof the litterall sense
is contrary to what the senses and Reason judge of it with certainty, we must
not endeavor to weaken the testimony of these to submit them to that apparent
sense of the Scripture; but we must interpret the Scripture, and find out some
other sense thereof reconcilable even with that sensible truth: because the
word of God being infallible even in matters of fact, and the report of the
senses and of reason acting within their limits, being also certain, these two
truths must of necessity be reconciled; and as the Scripture may be interpreted
several ways, and the report of the senses can be but one, so must we in such
cases take that for the true interpretation of Scripture which is most
consonant to the faithful report of the senses. We are, says S. Thomas 1. p.
q. 68. a. 1. to observe two things according to Saint Augustine; one, that the
Scripture has ever some true sense; the other, that whereas it may admit of
diverse, senses, when a man meets with one that reason finds guilty of
falsehood, he must not be so obstinate as to affirm that to be the natural
sense thereof, but find out another not disconsonant to reason.

This he explaines by a passage out of Genesis, where it is written that God
created two great Lights, the Sun and the Moon, and the Stars also; So that the
Scripture seems to say that the Moon is greater then all the Stars. But in
regard that it is evident by unquestionable demonstration that this is false,
we ought not, says this Saint, obstinately to maintain the literal sense, but
find out another conformable to that truth in matter of fact, as to say, that
the word Great light signifies only the greatness of the light of the Moon in
respect of us, and not the greatness of her body considered in it self.

Should we do otherwise, we should derogate from the veneration due to the
Scripture, nay, on the contrary, it were to expose it to the contempt of
Infidels; because, as the same Saint Augustine says, when they should discover
that we believe, out of the Scripture, such things as they know to be perfectly
false, they would laugh at our credulity in other things that are more
mysterious, as the resurrection of the dead, and eternal life. And
consequently, says Saint Thomas, we should render our Religion contemptible to
them, and divert them from embracing it.

And certainly, Father, it is also a way to hinder Heretics from embracing, it
and to make the Popes Authority contemptible, to refuse to account those
Catholics who would not believe that such words are in a book where they are
not to be found, because a Pope had declared it by surprise. For it is only
the examination of a book that can discover that such words are in it. Matters
of fact are only proved by the senses. If what you maintain be true, show it:
if not, persuade none to believe it; it were to no purpose. All the powers in
the world cannot, by authority, persuade men that a matter of fact is so, no
more then they can change it; for there is nothing can make that which is, not
to be.

'Twas to no purpose, for instance, that the Religious men of Ratisbonne
obtained of Pope Saint Leo the IX. a solemn Decree whereby he declared that the
body of Saint Denis the first Bishop of Paris, who according to the common
opinion was the Areopagite, had been translated out of France and brought into
the Church of their Monastery. This hinders not but that the body of this Saint
ever was and still is in the famous Abbey that bears his name, where you would
have found it a hard matter to get this Bull received, though it pretends that
he had examined the business with all possible diligence, diligentissime; and
that with the advice of diverse Bishops and Prelates; so that he strictly
charges all the French, districte praecipientes, to confess and acknowledge
that they have not those holy Relics any longer. And yet the French who by
their own eyes knew the matter of fact to be false, and who, having opened the
shrine, found all those relics entire, as the Historians of that time
testify, believed then, as it has ever been believed since, the contrary to
what that Pope had enjoined them to believe, as knowing that even Saints and
Prophets are subject to be surpised.

Nor was it to any more purpose that you obtained against Galilaeo that decree
of Rome that condemned his opinion concerning the motion of the Earth. There
must be something else to prove that it stands still; and were it once evident
by constant observations that it is the earth that moves, all men put together
would not hinder it from moving, nay would be forced to move with it. In like
manner, you are not to imagine, that the Letters of Pope Zachary for the
excommunication of Saint Virgilius, for affirming that there were Antipodes,
have dissolved that new world; nay though the Pope had declared that opinion to
be a very dangerous error, yet the King of Spain gave more credit to
Christopher Columbus who came thence, then to the judgment of the Pope who
never had been there; and consequently you are to acknowledge that the Church
reaped no small benefit thereby, since it proved a means to communicate the
Gospel to so many people, who otherwise had perished in their infidelity.

You see then, Father, of what nature matters of fact are, and by what
principles they are to be judged of; whence it is easy to conclude, as to the
business we have in hand, that, if the five Propositions are not in Jansenius,
it is impossible they should have been extracted thence, and that the only way
to judge aright of them, and to persuade the world of the truth thereof, is to
examine that book in a regulated conference; a thing you have been a long time
pressed to. Till then, there is no ground in the world you should charge your
adversaries with Obstinacy; for they shall be as free from blame, as to what
concerns the matter of fact, and innocent as to both.

Who then, Father, can avoid astonishment, to see on the one side, so clear a
vindication, and on the other such violent accusations? Who would think that
all the difference between you were about a matter of fact of no consequence,
which yet you would have believed without the least demonstration? And who
durst imagine you should raise such a disturbance in the Church for nothing,
pro nihilo, Father, as Saint Bernard says? But it is a main piece of your
policy to make men believe that all lies at stake in a business that amounts to
nothing, and to persuade those who are in power that give you any credit, that
the matter in dispute is about the most pernicious errors of Calvin, and
relating to principles wherein faith is most concerned; so to engage them by
that persuasion to employ their utmost zeal and authority against those you
think your adversaries, as if the welfare of Christian Religion depended
thereon; whereas if they were but once convinced, that all the difference is
about that inconsiderable matter of fact, it would never trouble their
thoughts; nay on the contrary, it would be no small regret to them, that they
had been so far over-forward to comply with your particular passions, in a
business wherein the Church has not the least concernment.

For in fine, to take things at the worst, were it true, that Jansenius had
maintained those Propositions, what inconvenience would ensue that some persons
were not satisfied he did, it being granted that they detest them, as they
publicly do? Is it not sufficient that they are condemned by all the world
without any exception, even in that sense wherein you have declared that you
would have them condemned? Could they be more censured, though it should be
affirmed that Jansenius had held them? To what end then is this acknowledgment
so much pressed, unless it be to discredit a Doctor and Bishop, who died in the
Communion of the Church? I cannot conceive this so great an advantage, as that
it should be purchased with so much disturbance. What concernment has the
State, the Pope, the Bishops, the Doctors, and the whole Church in this
business? It has not the least reflection on them, Father, and indeed there is
none but your Society that would derive some satisfaction from the infamy of an
Author that had a little offended you. And yet all is in tumult, because you
would have it believed that all is in danger. This is the secret engine that
occasions all those great motions, which would soon cease, were your
differences but ones rightly stated. And therefore, since it would contribute
very much to the quiet of the Church, that things were once well cleared up, is
was a matter of great consequence to insist upon it, to the end that your
sycophancy being discovered, all the world may be convinced, that your
accusations are without any ground, your adversaries without error, and the
Church without Heresy.

And this, Father, is the end I aimed at, which I thought so considerable in
regard of Religion, that I cannot easily apprehend, how those whom you have
given so much occasion to speak, can still be silent. Though they were not
moved at the injuries you do them in particular, yet those the Church endures
should methinks engage them to some resentment thereof; besides the question I
make whether Ecclesiastics may expose their reputation to calumny, especially
in matters of faith. And yet they give you leave to say what you please;
insomuch that were it not for the occasion you have accidentally given me to
say something, it may be there had been no opposition made to those scandalous
suggestions you so liberally scatter up and down. So that I am astonished at
their patience, and that so much the more by reason I am confident it cannot
proceed either from weakness or want of courage, as knowing they cannot be
unfurnished either with reasons for their own vindication, or zeal for the
truth. And yet I find them so religiously silent, that I fear me they are
guilty of some excess as to that point. For my part, Father, I thought it
matter of duty to do what I have. Disturb not the peace of the Church, and I
shall be tender of yours. But while you make it your business to put all things
into tumult and distraction, the children of peace must needs be obliged to do
all that lies in their power to have the peace kept therein.

March 24. 1657. S. N.
The French Author having not, by reason of the violent prosecutions of the
JESUITS, the liberty to print his Letters as he pleased, was forced to send the
XVII. to OSNABRUK, an obscure place in Germany, where things are commonly ill
Printed. Being done there in a very small character, it occasioned the ensuing
Postscript.
Reverend Father,
IF you are troubled to read this Letter, as being not in an handsome full
character, you have none to quarrel at but your self. I cannot get privileges
as you can. You have such whereby you oppose even MIRACLES, I have not whereby
to vindicate my self. The printing houses are perpetually haunted. Would you
not advise me your self to forbear writing any more to you, amidst these
extremities? For it is too great a distraction to be reduced to the impression
of OSNABRUK.


In the Postscript to the XVII. Letter is this expression, you have
privileges to oppose MIRACLES, meaning the Jesuits. The Author alludes to a
Miracle wrought the last year at Port Royal, upon a young Gentlewoman. It was
attested to be such by diverse Physicians and others; and yet the Jesuits would
never acknowledge it to be any, but writ against it with all the bitterness
that could be, the more to discredit it, because done at that place.

ERRATA.
Page 42. l. 23. r. met. p. 48. l. 13. r. grounded, p. 52. l. 6. r. as. p. 62.
l. 15. r. away with these. p. 79. l. 25. r. dis-circumspection. p. 82. l. 4. r.
Directors. p. 84. l. 7. r. by. p. 86. l. 4. r. were as. p. 105. l. 16. r.
whether. ib. l. 17. r. superfluity. p 112. l. 14. r. probable. ib. l. 25. r.
persons. p. 113. l. 1. r. to. p. 114. l. 5. r. dispose. p. 125. l. 22. r. when
there. p. 140. l. 4. r. et. p. 142. l. 5. r. Tannerus. p. 162. l. 19. r. that.
p. 166. l. 13. r. title. p. 167. l. 16. r. was. p. 168. l. 24. r. rather then.
p. 173. l. 3. r. even. p. 188. r. over. p. 191. l. 8. r. resolutions. p. 200. l
ult. r. being. p. 212. l. 17. r. change. p. 228. l. 11. r. truly. p. 237. l.
17. r. is not. p. 256. l. 22. r. passages. p. 285. l. 4. r. we, p. 302. l. 24.
r. may. p. 304. l. 28. r. this. p. 305. l. 4. dele and. p. 306. l. 19. r.
probable. p. 308. l. 13. r. one. p. 318. l. 10. r. for. p. 324. l. 11. r. must.
p. 364. l. 6. r. probable. p. 379. l. 6. r. these. p. 381. l. 19. r. it not. p.
390. l. 22. r. hasty. p. 398. l. 27. r. is. p. 402. l. 7. r. it is. p. 418. l.
14. r. fleshly. p. 422. l. 27. r. impostures. p. 423. l. 24. r. so as. p. 433.
l. 9. r. parishes. p. 439. l. 20. r. is it not. p 440. l. 16. r. at. p. 449. l.
7. r. efficacious grace. p. 473. l. 21. r. dis-acknowledge. p. 475. l. 1. r. to
clear. p. 469. r. 1657. p. 489. l. 9. r. at men's.

THE END.
A CATALOGUE of some books Printed for Richard Royston at the Angel in
Ivie-lane, London.
I.
Books written by H. Hammond, D. D.
A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Test. by H.
Hammond, D. D. in fol. 2. The Practical Catechism, with all other English
Treatises of H. Hammond, D. D. in two volumes in 4. 3. Dissertationes quatuor,
quibus Episcopatus Jura ex S. Scripturis and Primaeva Antiquitate adstruuntur,
contra sententiam D. Blondelii and aliorum, Authore Henrico Hammond, D D. in 4.
4. A Letter of Resolution of six Queries, in 12. 5. Of Schism. A Defense of
the Church of England against the Exceptions of the Romanists, in 12. 6. Of
Fundamentals in a notion referring to practice, by H. Hammond, D. D. in 12. 7.
Paraenesis or seasonable exhortatory to all true sons of the Church of England,
in 12. 8. A Collection of several Replies and Vindications Published of late,
most of them in defense of the Church of England, by H. Hammond, D. D. Now put
together in three Volumes. Newly published in 4. 9. A Review of the Paraphrase
and Annotations on all the Books of the New Testament, with some Additions and
alterations, by H. Hammond, D. D. in 8.
II.
Books and Sermons written by Jer. Tailor, D. D. viz,
(...), A Course of Sermons for all the Sundays of the Year; together with a
Discourse of the Divine ^nstitution, Necessity, Sacredness and Separation of
the Office Ministeal, in fol. 2. The History of the Life and Death of the
Ever-blessed Jesus Christ, second Edition, in fol. 3. The Rule and Exercises of
holy living, in 12. 4. The rule and Exercises of holy dying, in 12. 5. The
Golden Grove, or, A Manual of daily Prayers fitted to the days of the week,
together with a short Method of Peace and Holiness, in 12. 6. The Doctrine and
Practice of Repentance rescued from Popular Errors, in a large 8. Newly
published. 7. A Collection of Polemical and Moral Discourses. in fol. Newly
published. 8. A Discourse of the Nature, Offices and Measure of Friendship, in
12.

