A REPLY to the Popular Arguments used for Confirming the present East India
Company, by Grafting upon them, with a Word or two in behalf of the New
Subscriptions.
FIRST the Friends of the present Company make a great Out cry, That the Widows
and Orphans will sustain great Loss by a Dissolution of the present Company.

I answer, That considering the Number of those concerned, the Widows and
Orphans will be found to be very few, as appears by the Lis^ of the
Adventurers. But supposing it were true what they alledg, and that the Number
were much greater, I would only ask the Adventurers, whether they think the
Parliament obliged to establish them, whether they shall find it practicable
and reasonable or no? But surely this they will not aver; if not, then their
Argument will appear to have no weight, and none can have reason to complain,
it being impossible to obviate, but that in such great Mutations and
Alterations, some seeming Hardships will fall on some or others of such a
Community.

SECONDLY, they say, That if they have an Act, they shall be able to carry on
their Trade without the aid of an additional Subscription.

I hope they will not pretend to do it with 38000 l. which is the balance of
all their Estate in Europe, by their own Accounts given in to the Parliament.
But I answer, That any Twelve Merchants of Experience and Reputation, with the
help of an Act, can do the same as well as their worthy selves. For how is this
to be effected? Why, by the credit of an Act, say they; and that truly, they
cannot fail to take up what Money they please at Interest: So that this their
Assertion, although very true, is yet rather a Jest than an Argument that they
should have the Preference of so noble an Experiment, which any others of their
Fellow Subjects are as capable of improving to as good Purposes as they can
themselves.

THIRDLY, they give out, That a Dissolution will be a great Hardship on them
upon this consideration, that their Factors and Servants abroad, in such a
Case, may be apter to imbezzle and wast their Effects, and so their Estate may
come shorter home, than if they had the Countenance of the Government, and the
Sanction of an Act.

To this I answer, first, That I have good Grounds to believe, that
notwithstanding the plausible Accounts given in to the Parliament by the
Company, touching their Estate here and in India, that if our August Senate
should think it worth their while to enter upon the Scrutiny of that Maze and
Labyrinth of their perplexed Accounts, and that it were possible by any human
means to make a true Judgment upon them, they would appear as bold and
fallacious an Imposition as ever was offered to that grave Assembly. But
supposing their Estate to be what they suggest, yet still they may blame
themselves, and none else, that they have embroiled and embarrast their Affairs
in such a manner, as to render it so difficult, even to the Wisdom of the
Nation, to extricate and set them right again.

And now I have done with replying to their Arguments, I cannot but make some
Reflections on their Folly; that these few Adventurers should be so fond, as to
expect, that so extensive and advantageous a Trade should, by a Law, be
confined to the narrow limits of them and their Successors, exclusive of all
other their Fellow Subjects, which Point the Managers give out among their
Friends they hope to obtain. Methinks they should have patience till they can
bring better Testimonials of their former Behavior, or show that they have
been more meritorious in some instance or other in discharge of their Trusts,
than hitherto it appears they have been, before they presume to make suit for
so Royal a Donative, as would prove the richest was ever granted in England to
so few Men, should they have the good fortune to gain so important a Point.

What I have to add is in behalf of the new Subscribers, and is this, That the
Adventurers can depend upon a real Fund and Estate; whereas Grafting upon the
old Company, although at never so low a value, will subject the new Adventurers
to a possibility of being imposed on, till a term of Eighteen Months or Two
Years give them a clearer satisfaction, upon what bottom they have embarked
their Estates; whereas, confirming the New Stock can be attended but with one
Difficulty that I know of, and that not considerable, which is to determine
What shall be that equitable and valuable Consideration to be made good to the
old Company for their Forts, Customs, and other Pretensions in India.


