A Reply to Sir William Killigrews dispersed Papers, by the Owners and
Commoners in Lincolnshire.
TO the first. We are civilly sensible of the Parliaments affairs, as appeared
by the manner of our petitioning: We conceive there cannot be a time found to
settle the Fens in the Earl of Lindsey, who petitions not for them, nor in Sir
William Killigrew, who has nor produced to the Committee any Deed or
Conveyance, whereby to derive a Title to himself. We may complain of
unhappiness, who have been delayed and interrupted in our Drainings these sixty
years by Court Undertakers: We cannot be called obstructors of a Bill, that
petitions for one: If it was good manners for us to print what we hear and are
credibly informed, we could tell to whom Sir Thomas Dawes is indebted, and to
whom Sir William Killigrew is engaged; and that our Lands must discharge those
debts and engagements; and who are interessed in other Undertakings. But to
avoid calumniation, we will hold our babbles; persons of quality are seldom
tatlers. To invite and encourage people in a good cause, is noble, honest, and
commendable: humbly to petition, cannot be called clamor by a tongue well
guided. We cannot learn of any Votes that passed against us, neither can we
believe it, nor that any of this Parliament is against us, who was so much for
them; nor that the Fens can be lost, if kept out of the hands of
Parliament-destroyers. We shall never be so uncivil or unnatural, as to leave
our wives and children at the Parliaments door: no^ can we imagine that ever
any thing will come from thence to cause them to beg at other men's doors.

To the second. Sir William knows the poor need no invitations; it was they
only who were found guilty, and punished for pulling down their houses, etc.
as appears by several Indictments, when Sir Williams friends and sharers was by
Court power made high Sheriff and Justices of the peace, and Parliament men put
out: The riots committed by Sir William, Agents and parties, was far more
notorious, as appears by record, then those committed by the poo^ people. Had
Sir Williams charity sooner appeared, it might have been better for him and us.
He argues Leveller-like, to gain the poor by telling them that is theirs they
have no propriety in; for all Lawyers will tell him, right of Common belongs to
the Lands and Houses of men, and not to their persons; and such poor as have
Land or Cottage, has as good right of Commons, as he that has a hundred
acres. We are as willing our Common should be stinted and enjoyed in common, if
so thought fit, as any poor man can desire it; practice that only, and condemn
us if we oppose it. When Sir Williams power prevailed, it is well known how the
poor was oppressed; so that his charity and arguments are but self ends. He
says the rich men of Boston eat up the Common with great stocks, and so he
says of the rest of the Towns, which great stock those Fens ever maintained
before Sir William knew the Country, and is an argument the Fens are not at all
hurtfully surrounded grounds, and needs draining, since they bear such great
stocks. He says the Commoners would defraud the State of eight thousand acres
in the eight hundred Fenne: It is he that would defraud the State, by inviting
them to own what was condemned in the King; and so metamorphize a dear-bought
Commonwealth into a Kingdom again. He knows the King, when Court-power ruled,
having no Title, could never out the Commoners, though he perplexed them with
long and tedious suits in the Court of Exchequer, where he was cast; and the
Commoners possessions never interupted.

To the third. Witness the ^^une Remonstrance, page 7.
We say, it is great discretion in Sir William not to reply to books, he is so
unable to answer. But we much value, that after a cause so fully heard in
Parliament, as to be remonstrated a grievance, it should now be a question,
whether the grievers should be recompensed or not. What our petitions or
repetitions signify, we must leave to the judgment of the Readers, who will
soberly determine who is most clamourous. He faith it is but some few men that
oppose him: We will join issue with him there, if he can either of persons or
hands procure four in ten, of rightful Owners and Commoners, we will cease in
opposing him. Sir William much insisteth upon the Act or Bill that is ordered
by the House to be brought in by Jo: Gooding Esquire a Member thereof, as if it was
either made by or with his and his sharers privity; for he says the delay of
it will starve them (it is better starving ten then ten thousand.) But we
cannot but imagine he abuses that worthy Member, in fomenting cause of
jealousy, being well assured the House ordered no compliance more with them
then us. Sure we are, we have had no insight or privity at all to the Bill, and
why they should we wonder. It is strange that one who has received so much
mercy, should be still so foul-mouthed, as to call humble Petitioners riotters
and abettors. He falsely accuses us for riotters, we having recovered our
Estates by trial at Law, and yet invites us to be so, in excepting against many
rich men, being trusted to represent the grievances of thousands; as if it was
fit to trouble the Parliament with multitudes. But as before, if Sir William
can procure the greater number, we will be silent. We know none in England that
opposes drainings, neither do we believe any in England think us such fools or
mad men, that we need Guardians for our Estates. We are persuaded few of the
Nation knows how we have been abused by Court Undertakers: if they did, they
would wonder such Propriety-destroyers should go unpunished.

To the fourth. We are sorry to hear Sir William glory in oppression, our
imprisonments, fining, selling our cattle, without any account making, taking
our Land against our consents, and commanding Commissioners by the Kings
Letters, deserves little applause, and expresses less equity. Produce the
consent gained of the greatest part of the eminentest Lords, Owners, and
Commoners, otherways then by force, and we will acquies^. As for the
improvement made, we shall submit to the view of indifferent honest Gentlemen,
who may judge by the soil turned up, what was the former condition of the
Fens. Sir William argues much for Recompense (we can easily prove a good
retompence he has received) for our parts, Micah 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, shows what
recompense such deserve.
we have more cause to expect it, many of the Commoners having lost their lives
and estates in the Parliaments service, by the violence of Sir William and his
participants, which blood was of greater value then any estate Sir William ever
had. If we be unable to satisfy his pretended estate, he is far more unable to
answer for our blood and estates, he and his paticipants in the late war so
lavishly shed and spoiled. In the pardon of his violence done to the five
Members, and his hostility to the Parliament, he has received more theu ever
we did for our lives and estates we lost and hazarded. What Bedford Act is,
concerns not us, their convenience and inconveniences may not be the same with
ours. It is high presumption for such an offender as Sir William has been, to
say its vain to petition a Parliament. Could his birds prevail there as they
did at Court, he would anticipate the justice thereof, and divide betwixt them
and the people; the which we hope providence (that in our extremity raised us
up a parliament) will prevent. In a late paper Sir William boasts of 78
Commissioners that did act for him. Its well known how unwilling they were to
act, until they were commanded by the Kings letters. Again, those Gentlemen
were not actors in that which was the root of the evil; for the view of what
grounds was hurtfully surrounded betwixt Broune and Kime Eae, was taken only by
Undertakers and Sharers, viz. the Earl of Lindsey, the Lord Willoughby his son,
Sir Edward Heron, Sir John Brooks, William Langton, and Robert Long Esquire these
being for themselves, were tempted with that sin of covetousness (yet
unreformed) and certified that all was hurtfully surrounded; the other
Gentlemen not privy to the design, being commanded by the Kings Letters to
proceed accordingly; and did, until they understood the evil of that design,
and then they endeavored to oppose it. But when the Undertakers perceived
their dislike of the proceedings, they put out of Commission of Sewers those
Gentlemen, of which number Sir William Armin and Mr. Lister were two; and
neither of them viewed the Fens now in question. We wonder Sir William
Killigrew should so unworthily charge Sir William Armin, that worthy deceased
Member, as a Viewer, who cleared his innocence of that act before the Committee
of the Fens. Though what he said, and what Sir Anthony Irby testified before
the Committee, what Fens he and others meaut, when they writ to the King for an
Undertaker, be left out of the depositions, yet many worthy Members and
Gentlemen standing by remembers it. Sir Anthony Irby being still living, we
desire he may against, if occasion requires it, declare himself; he formerly
testified, that it was not meant the Fens between Bourne and Kime Ea^. If Sir
William, etc. have any legal right, we will willingly join with him in fair
Trial at Law or Equity.


