A REPLY To the Danish Papers presented to the members of Parliament the 23 of
February last, Concerning the Question: Whether England should not assist the
Swede, as well as the Dutch do the Dane. Answered by a true English man.
Sir
YOu have desired to know, what the Swedish Party can answer for themselves and
their King concerning the Papers which were offered to the Members of the
Parliament in favor of the King of Denmark, to dissuade England from
intermedling in the quarrel which is between the Swede and him; to the end that
both sides being heard, and the Circumstances of the Controversy being opened
in a sober way and without passion and partiality, (...) power of those that
oppose you, is to make your selves ridiculous, and to give the Cause lost. To
conclude then, it is conceived that England must now either renounce wholly all
Relation to the Protestant Cause, and give it up into the hands of the Enemy,
or else appear, and that suddenly in this instant, in this way to uphold it.

As for the Plea which the Papers make for Denmark and Holland, it is grounded
upon four main Arguments, to which all particulars may be referred.

1. Because (as they say) the King of Sweden is the unjust Invader and
Oppressor of the Dane. 2. Secondly, Because the States of Holland by their
Interest in Trading in the Balthick Sea, and by their special League with the
Dane, are bound to assist him. 3. Thirdly, Because England is obliged by the
Peace made with the Dane not to see him wronged. 4. Fourthly, Because the
States of Holland have communicated unto this State their design of succouring
Denmark, and not being dissuaded from it, they did take silence for consent.
Concerning the first; namely that the Swede has invaded the Dane, is only
said, but not proved; whereas the contrary is a most evident truth, as can be
undeniably proved, namely that the Dane and the Dutch have, without any cause
given to them by the Swede, most injustly invaded him, so that he is a mere
Defendant of himself against them. For it is known to all the world, that when
the Swede was engaged in the War with Poland, and also in League with Denmark
and the Dutch, that the Dutch made a League with the Dantzikers to oppose him;
that they and the Dane together brought a Fleet of Ships of War into the
Balthick sea (the Dutch of forty and odd, the Dane of nine or ten sails, to
show his dependence upon them) to overpower him: and that the Dutch sent
soldiers unto Denmark to fight against him, that he might not settle in the
possession of that which he had taken from his enemy; and when this was not
enough to hinder him, both the Dutch and the Dane dealt with the Muscovite to
assault him in Liefland, promising to stop all succor from Riga by sea, whiles
he did besiege it by land; and when this would not yet sufficiently divert him,
the Dane by the Hollanders instigation, (contrary to all Leagues formerly sworn
and ratified between them, and notwithstanding all instances made by the Swede
to treat, and offers to give all due satisfaction to the Dane, if any injury
was done since the former League concluded) I say the Dane raised three potent
Armies, and invaded the Swede in Bremen, and in Sweden it self both where it
joins to Sconen, and where it borders upon Norway: and all this was done before
the Swede showed the least Hostility against Denmark or the Dutch, nay whiles
the Dutch were treating to renew or confirm their former Leagues with him at
Elbing; nay, after they had obtained all their Demands, and had promised to
ratify the Treaty: so that the breach having been made by the Dutch and Dane
so many ways without any cause given by him, and after all satisfaction offered
by Treaties, as is known to all that know any thing of these Transactions, it
must be thought to be a wonderful impudence to call the Swede the Invader of
Denmark, or to assert that he gave cause to the present breach which is between
the Northern Kingdoms; for it had been madness in him to have given any cause
of breaking with the Dane, when both the Pole and the Muscovite were joined
against him. But the truth is, that at the persuasion of the Dutch, and upon
their engagement to him to maintain with him the War against Sweden, the Dane
broke the peace with Sweden, which the Danish Agent in the Hague has publicly
declared to their face, when they lingered to send his Master succor: the
design then of the Dane was to take his time when the Swede was beset round
with enemies in Poland, to invade him in his own Country, that he might be
ruined at one instant, both at home and abroad; hoping by that means that the
three Northern Crowns (as then the King of Denmark was heard to say) might
again come upon one head, meaning his own; and indeed, in humane appearance it
might have been so, if God had not wonderfully carried him along out of Poland,
and brought him over the sea to march with an Army toward Coppenhagen to be
revenged of the treachery which was used against him. These Truths are so
undeniable, that no man can have a face to deny them; for this cause the Papers
pass by the first occasion of the War, and would fasten the crime of an
innvasion upon the Swede only since the Treaty concluded at Roskild, as if the
Swede had without cause broken the Peace concluded there in February, 1657. But
when the cause shall be weighed, as then it was, and as afterward it fell out
to be by the malice of the Dutch, and falsehood of the Danish, then it may be
determined impartially, whether the Swede or the Dane did give cause to the
continuance of the War. The case at that Treaty was a just defense of himself
on the Swedish part, and a just Revenge against the Danish invasion, who had
deserved to be dealt withal as he purposed to have dealt with the Swede, that
is, to be deprived of all his Dominions, as he had designed to deprive the
Swede thereof by his invasion; yet the Swede was so merciful to him, that when
he had all in his power, he restored unto him more then be deserved: for
contenting himself with such Territories as were a part of his security, he
remitted unto him the money, the Soldiers and the Ships, etc. chief things,
which by the conditions of Peace he was bound to furnish him withal, and so
put him in a condition to live still as a King of Denmark, upon condition that
he would be faithful to the League made between them in time to come, which
was not to be leagued with his enemies any more, nor to contrive any further
disturbance to his affairs, when he should be retired from him to march back
again into Poland; But his back was no sooner turned, when he was in a posture
to march into Poland, but the Confederacy of his enemies, the Brandenburg, the
Dutch and the Austrian, with whom the Dane was also secretly comprehended, was
discovered; for it was manifest that the Dutch had not gained their ends,
neither at the Treaty of Elbing, nor at the Treaty of Roschild; this made them
put to all their strength and Industry to bring over the Brandenburger to their
Party, and to put the Dane upon a resolution with their help to regain what he
had lost, to whom the Polish and Austrian assistance being joined, they lay the
plot to compass their first ends at an after game. Of this design the Swede had
undoubted discoveries, not only by the Danish not surrendering of the places
necessary for his security in due time, according to conditions, but by the
Transactions which he found agreed upon amongst these Confederetes, to work his
ruin by besetting him on all sides before and behind; for which cause he was
necessitated to prevent the unavoidable danger wherewith he was threatened, by
shutting the backdoor, and providing for his own safety; so that the effect of
the Treaty of Roschild not being performed, but violated by the Dane, there was
no new invasion made by the Swede upon the Dane, but the former defensive War
was continued, Nam durat bellum, dum belli causa durat; nec pro Aggressore
habendus est, qui primus ferit, sed qui causam dat feriendi; which is manifest
by the immediate effect of their Confederacy; for the Swede no sooner went back
again to make sure the passage of the Sound for his own safety, but all these
Confederates were instantly in Arms against him; by which it was apparent, that
their designs had been formed before hand: So that if there had been no more in
the Case but that the Dutch having made the Treaty of Elbing void by their own
default of Ratification, and being justly excluded from the mediation at the
Treaty of Roschild, and the Dane being still in League with them who were his
chief enemies, and who had more power to do him mischief through the Sound then
the Dane himself there was an absolute necessity that the Swede should secure
himself from the invasion which was prepared against him; by all which it does
appear, that both first and last the Swede is the Defendant and oppressed, and
not the Aggressor; and that the Dutch are the Original cause, and the Fomenters
of all this War, and all to maintain their pretended Interest of Trade into the
Balthick sea by force, when they might have done it by amiable agreements, both
for themselves and their friends the Dantzikers.

Concerning the second Argument, which is taken from the Interest of the Dutch,
that their Trade in the Balthick sea should be maintained in Peace, Wars being
prejudicial thereunto; and that the respective Northern Kings should be
maintained in their Kingdoms and Territories; to which effect they say, That
they did first contract with Sweden a defensive League and Alliance in the year
1640, and afterward to the same end made another Defensive League with the King
and Kingdom of Denmark, with the approbation of Sweden in the year 1649. by
which they are obliged to assist him, and in conformity to that Obligation have
sent their Fleet to relieve him, as they say.

First, It is to be granted, that their Trade in the Balthick Sea is one of
their great concernments, and that Wars ordinarily are prejudicial to Trade, is
also a Truth: but if so, then their conscience ought to be searched and tried
upon these Interrogatories.

1. Why they did stir up War in the Balthick Sea?

2. Why they did stir up the Dane to break his Covenants with the Swede, after
that they brought a strong Fleet of men of War into the Sea?

3. Why they did not secure their Trade by amiable Treaties with the Swede, as
well now, as formerly they did with the King Gustavus Adolphus?

4. Why they did make themselves his Enemy in the Polish War? had it not been
better for all Protestants to have had a Protestant Prince there then a
Jesuited Papist?

Therefore the Allegation and Plea for Peace being so directly contrary to
their manifest practice, shows that either this pretense is a Politic
Deceit, under the color whereof they seek something else, or else they think
all men fools, and not able to discern the Language of their actions, which
speak clearly another thing, namely, that having set their Northern Kings one
against another, they would weaken them so that both should fall under their
power, whereupon they would be able to command the Trade at their own pleasure:
for when the Dane should not be able to subsist without them, and the Swede
should be ruined by them, then they should do what they would in the Trade; And
all Intelligent men can see that their actions all along speak nothing else but
this. It is true, that their great concernment is Trade in the Balthick Sea:
and it is also true, that Wars are ordinarily prejudicial to Trade, namely when
they cannot manage the War to their own advantage; but if by War they can
hinder all others from Trading besides themselves, or that none can Trade
without their leave, (as now in the Indies they have begun to do) then War is
so far from being prejudicial to Trade, that it becomes the only advantage
thereof; and that their presumption is such that they mean, to carry it this
way is clear, not only by all their proceedings hitherto, and by their care
that England should not intermeddle (which is only able to break this Design)
but by their Resolution expressed in opposition to Englands intermeddling, by
these words used in their Consultation concerning England, Aut caedas aut
cedas, either beat or give way. By all which it appears, as also by the Letter
which their Ambassador Van Beuning wrote to his Masters the States, that the
name of Peace is indeed in their mouth, but nothing but War in their heart,
Counsels and Actions; and which above all this is yet so much the more evident,
because that since the time that the public Ministers of England and France
have at the Hague dissuaded the States from promoting the War in the Sound,
declaring in the name of their Masters that it would be taken as promoting it
against themselves, they have made greater preparations for War then ever, by
leavying an extraordinary Contribution to maintain it; and preparing a greater
Fleet then any heretofore to employ in it: and yet they would have the world so
blind and foolish, as to believe that no such thing is intended.

As concerning their Leagues with Denmark and Sweden (for they allege 1649.
before 1640) they prostitute their Credit very shamefully in that business;
because they mention only their Obligation to Denmark, whereas their League
with Sweden is more ancient then that with Denmark; and then it was a double
League; one in 1640. and another in 1645. and both very strict and special for
mutual Defense, whereas the League with Denmark was but in general terms, and
made with consent of Sweden, so that in it nothing is concluded to the
prejudice of Sweden; but in their League with Sweden there is particular
mention made of the Dane by name, as being complained of that he had many ways
transgressed Contra Jus Gentium, Pacta, Conventa, and morem ab antiquo
observatum, which they never yet could say of the Swedes; but chiefly it is
observable that in the forenamed League whereas on the Swedish side France and
the Princes of Germany, and on the Dutch side, France, England and Venice are
comprehended as Confederates, Denmark is left out by both parties, which in the
League between them and Denmark cannot be in reference to Sweden, seeing it was
made with the consent of England and Sweden: not did that League respect only
the occasion of the War then composed between the two Crowns, whereof mention
is made in the first and second Articles, but it relates to future times, as in
the third Article appears: Si post modium alia quacunque de causa and praetextu
Sm. Rm. Mtem. and Regnum Swesiae and Ei subjectas Provincias and subditos bello
adoriatur, which in the sixth Article is thus enlarged, Vt neuter alterutrius
hostem (nempe imprimis Danum contra quem Foedus intendebatur) qui nunc est in
praesens hostis, aut deinceps existere poterit, consilio, open, pecunia,
commeatu, milite, Navibus, nautis, armis, pulvere pyrio aut munitionibus
ullisve rebus bellicis adjuvet; and all this was confirmed by an express Treaty
of Warantie or Security for 49 years from that time forward, with these plain
words: Si quid a Rege Daniae ejusve successoribu^ aut Ministris in alterutrius
Partis Subditorum prejudicium ac detrimentum actum, and Pactis contraventum
fuerit, nec amice ademonitus Rex Daniae emendaverit, Pactisque satisfecerit, ex
praescripto initi Foederis hujusq promissi opem laturi sunt. So that the Dutch
are guilty of a threefold breach of Covenant against the Swedes. 1. That they
did not assist the Swede when the Dane did so treacherously invade him, as has
been showed. 2. That they themselves did stir up the Dane to invade Sweden, as
also has been made to appear. 3. That they have assisted Denmark against
Sweden, when according to their own and all men's Confession the Dane was the
Aggressor and Invader of Sweden; for when the King of Sweden was the first time
in Holstein, before ever he came into Zealand, they did send to the Dane money,
Soldiers, Ships, and all other things, whatever they could send, and he
desired of them.

And whereas in this place, they make mention of the Treaty of Elbing to blame
the King of Sweden, that he did wave it upon a pretense that some preliminar
Declarations were first to be made, and assurances given; and in the mean time
on the ninth of August, 1658. he went unto the Island of Zealand, this is like
all the rest; for it is to be noted that the Treaty of Elbing was concluded
between the. Swede and the Dutch Ambassadors on the first of September, 1656.
then the Ratification, was promised to be made by the Stater within some few
months; but they performed not their promise but protracted the time till the
King of Sweden went into Zealand which was two whole years, wanting three weeks
(...) is, till the ninth of August, 58. Then when (...) Miracle was become
Master of Zealand, they (...) ^^^rication of their own accord, when as before
that (...) the Swede had urged them almost a hundred times to send it with much
entreaty; whereupon when it came being too late, it was justly refused to be
accepted till some preliminary Declarations should be made, and assurances
given to prevent future juglings, which formerly they had used on their part;
and yet this is now alleged as a great wrong done to them that the League was
not confirmed, when they themselves were the only cause of it by delaying the
Ratification, that they might deal underhand with the Moscovite and with
Denmark to betray the Swede, whiles they pretended to treat with him: which
Treaty was indeed altogether (if they had been honest) needless, because there
were two Leagues in full force between them at that time: but they proposing a
confirmation of these Leagues, the King would not refuse it, but was extreme
willing to have it done, seeing it would have secured him against the Dane; but
their Design was only to propose it to make him more secure, and the better to
color their perfidious dealing in stirring up enemies against him; so that it
is to be wondered they should have the impudence now to allege for their
justification a thing so notoriously shameful and known to all the World to
have been a color of their Treachery.

The third Argument alleged concerning the League between England and Denmark,
is all of a piece with the former. For the Dane sent Ambassadors into England
to Treat for a League before the War broke forth between the Parliament and
Holland: this he did not so much for himself, ss to serve the turn of the
Dutch; that is to help them to deceive the Parliament; for when the Treaty was
even upon concluding, the Dane arrested without any color or pretense of
Justice, the English Fleet in the Sound to gratify the Hollanders who were
resolved to break with England. So under the pretense of a Treaty he favored
the Dutch designs of weakening England by sea. Then when the War was at an end,
the Dutch who promised to save him harmless, made conditions for him with
England, and made restitution of damages for the ships and goods arrested. Thus
the Dane was nothing in all his applications to England but the Vassal of the
Dutch to do their work: and now in the War with Sweden he must be their drudge
to bear the burden of their Interest; therefore the Leagues made with him are
broken by him, or kept at their pleasure. Now if he and they have had no
conscience to break all their Leagues with Sweden, who is the Confederate of
England, without any communication of Counsel with this State, or without any
endeavor to have matters of differerce (if any were) composed, nay against all
fair offers of satisfact on, in case of wrong done; I say, if the Dane has
thus behaved himself in the observing of that League, in a manner as if it had
not been, I see not any Obligation lying upon England to favor him for it; for
England had no respect unto him but for the Dutch-sake, nor did he ever respect
England but upon their account at that time: Whereas in all former occasions he
has showed himself rather an Enemy then a Friend to this State; and in this
occasion he has made himself the Chief Enemy to the Protestant Cause, which is
the great and main Interest of England to have it supported; for this is the
great Wheel upon which all the Leagues which England has with Forraigners, and
chiefly with Protestants, do turn and are grounded; so that if any State does
overthrow that Interest, which Denmark in this Case has endeavored to do, the
Obligation which England has unto it, must cease, because the Foundation of it
is made void; therefore the Dane at this time having done this, England should
be so far from assisting him, that it ought rather to help him to receive his
just reward, which is, that he should suffer that which he has endeavored to
bring upon his harmless Neighbor.

The last Argument is, that the Dutch having communicated their design to
assist Denmark with England, they were not dissuaded from it; but it silently
was assented unto; whereupon the Admiral Opdam was sent thither, and did not of
set purpose, but occasionally come to fight with the Swedes; seeing the States
intention was to work out a peaceable agreement, whereunto the concurrence of
England was desired. Now to show that there is no more truth in this then in
all the fore going Allegations: let us examine first that which does concern
Opdam by the action it self, and his behavior in performing of it. First, the
preparation of so many fireships which Opdam brought along with him, shows
that a fight was purposely intended to destroy the Swedish Fleet; And the
Instructions which he had from the States his Masters, whereof a Copy was found
in the Vice-Admirals Wit Wittson his Cabinet, * Sub Lit. A. whose ship was
taken by the Swedes, do show that he was charged in express terms to destroy
the Swedish Fleet in whole or in part, wherever he should meet with it; Nor is
there any one word of any peaceable transaction mentioned therein: And indeed
Opdam his behavior in passing through the Sound was answerable thereunto; for
when the King of Sweden had sent a Message unto him, before he did enter into
the Sound to know the purpose of his coming thither, he returned him no answer,
but sent the Letter and Message which came from him with a Galiot to his
Masters, and in the mean time came on toward the Sound, and when he came
within it, his behavior was altogether hostile; for having cast Anchor
directly over against the Castle of Chronenburg, and being saluted by it in a
friendly manner, he returned to it no friendly re-salutation, but the wind
serving him favorably, he fell directly upon the Swedish Fleet with whole
broad-sides to overthrow it, which accordingly they so answered, that the Dutch
have had no cause to boast of a Victory, although in Holland they made the
people believe so. And this will suffice to show the falsehood of that which is
alleged, concerning the purpose of their Fleet in going to the Sound.

As concerning their Intention of Peace, wherein they should have desired
England to concur with them, that is no more true then the reft; for at the
same time when this Intention was held forth unto England, it is known that in
Holland a Fleet was preparing of 200. Sails, not to bring the Anstrian,
Brandenburgish and Polish Forces into Zealand and Tunen only, but even into
Schonen, and over the Swedish Frontiers, whereupon Letters were sent unto the
Dane to dissuade him from all Treaties of Peace with the Swede, promising him
that they would employ their whole might in the quarrel; and to this effect the
two hundredth penny was yielded unto, for which a long time had been
endeavored, which without a great and urgent concernment would never have been
granted, and which does amount to many Millions; and the design of these
preparations was openly given out in Holland to bring England under the Command
of Holland at sea, to receive the Law from them, and to cut off the
Correspondency which might be between England and Sweden; whereupon the words
formerly mentioned, Aut Caedas aut Cedas, were made use of to declare their
design toward England: And were not these peaceable intentions? Were they not
amiable Purposes with which England should concur, and at which it should sit
still and be silent?

But that at the communication of their design of sending a Fleet into the
Sound to assist the Dane, there was no such silent Assent given by England, as
they pretend, is manifest by that which is publicly known, concerning the
Remonstrance which the French Ambassador and English Resident made jointly unto
the States about this very business, declaring unto them, that if they did
proceed in a hostile way to oppose the Swede, that it would be taken by their
Masters as done unto themselves, would and accordingly resent it. It is not
unknown to the world what the Heroic designs and intentions of the late Lord
Protector of blessed memory were, what esteem he had of the King of Sweden, and
how well he wished him success, and intended the Welfare of the Evangelical
Cause in all his Enterprises; therefore it will be understood by all that knew
him, that he never would be silent, or seem to give any assent unto such a
Communication: therefore this Allegation is a manifest Calumny against his
upright meanings; and the contrary is most evidently true, that he has both
publicly and privately, both here and in Holland made it known and declared,
that if they did not alter their Purpose, he would also put himself in a
posture to cross them therein; and if his untimely sickness and death had not
prevented the effect of his Resolutions, perhaps the Dutch before this time
would have seen it; but since his death, his Highness who now is treading in
the glorious steps of his renowned Father, has showed by the effects that
England does not intend to connive and to be silent at such a threacherous
design, whereby for covetous ends the Protestant-Interest in Europe will not
only be undermined, bat directly overthrown, if the Swede be ruined in favor
of those who for self ends make no conscience of breaking Leagues, and concur
even to betray the common Cause into the hands of the professed enemies
thereof, with whom they confederate themselves to fight against it; and how far
the Dutch have joined themselves with Spain to this effect against the Interest
of their ancient friends, and concur with the house of Austria in Germany to
strengthen him against the Protestant Party, God to whom these Papers in the
Close have made an Appeal, does see and will judge: and as hitherto he has not
altogether connived at their Juggling with their friends in their Treaties, but
has turned all their craftiness and plots into folly, and taken them in their
own devices; (for he knows the secrets of hearts) so it will be their wisdom
henceforth to learn plainer dealing, and not to lift their horn on high, nor to
speak with a stiff neck, as their custom is, and has been: which I shall
beseech the Lord in Mercy to grant unto them for their own good, that yet they
may partake of the Blessings which the God of Righteousness has in store for
those that walk uprightly and humbly in his presence; and this shall be all the
evil that I shall wish them.

Lit. A. The Copy of the Order to the States Admiral Opdam intercepted.
My Lord,
I Have acquainted their High and Mighty Lordships with the Clausule your
Lordship mentioned in your Letter of the second Current, wherein your Lordship
refers to consideration, whether you ought not to be ordered, that in case
Coppenhagen should be surrendered, you should notwithstanding fall upon the
Swedish Fleet wherever you could find them, and if possible, ruin same?
Whereupon their High and Mighty Lordships have thought good to command me to
give you notice, (which by Virtue of their Order these presents do give you)
that it is the intention of their High and Mighty Lordships, that the Tenor of
the sixth Article of your Instruction should be executed without any respect;
not only if Coppenhaguen should yet hold out, but likewise if the same should
be taken, according as your Lordship shall plainly see out of the Orders of the
States General, which ere long shall be sent to your Lordships hands. In the
mean while your Lordship may assure your selt by these presents in the name of
their High and Mighty Lordships, that in case Coppenhaguen should be lost, and
any opportunity present it self to be Master, or spoil and ruin the Swedish
Fleet, your Lordshig laying hold on such an occasion should do well, and by so
acting, deserve Commendation and Honor; and contrariwise, if any such
opportunity should be neglected, your Lordship should expect nothing but
disgrace and blame; To which purpose these presents are only intended, the
which I now conclude.

Hague, the 19. of October. 1658. This Letttr was read and approved of by their
High and Mighty Lordships in a full Assembly. JOHAN de WIT.


