A REMONSTRANCE OF THE Northern Associations:

Communicating to the whole Kingdom their Miseries, Desires and Resolutions.

Their Miseries many.

Printed Anno Dom. 1647.

A REMONSTRANCE OF THE Northern Associations, etc.
IT is not unknown unto these Western parts of the world, into what a
deplorable condition this Kingdom, together with Scotland, and distressed
Ireland, of late years have been implunged; and what ease, relaxation, or as
yet hope of peace, or reducement of an unhappy people, into their former
safety, enjoyed properties, appears not yet so much as any shadow of hope.

From what principles, these bloody and unparalleld differences had their first
touch and progress (except our sins) to the general ruin of many millions, both
in person and estate, we know as little as the conclusion of them; neither
(were they obvious to our knowledge) are we willing to rip up old sores, or
uncharitably to uncover to the public eye, the weakness (we say not
wickedness) of our brethren; only thus, as copartners of a most agreived
Communalty, we are made sensible of our ruin, under the glorious outsides of a
promised happiness. We were not unacquainted of those innumerable and incessant
revolutions of promises, often engagements, and too many pretenses, and
seemingly real Charracters of affection, both from the Royal and Parliamentary
Parties: We have not yet forgot the many Remonstrances, Declarations,
Exhibitions, with their annexed Commands, either to engage or disingage us,
which we have at several times, on al opportunitys, receivd unto a double
interest; each tying us (according to their prevalence) to different respects,
and the fatal Tragedy, and mutual destruction of each other: We yet remember
thereupon, the settling our selves upon a mixt-confused posture, to a defensive
War; and how of united friends and neighbors (by dispartite affection to each
cause) we were divided into enemies. It is yet fresh colored in our memories,
the bloody issue of the Kingdom, especially of these Northern parts; how when
all passages of Peace were stopped up, we were enforced to swim through a red
Sea, mixed with the blood of our dearest brethren, to repurchase it. We are not
insensible (looking back into our days, and comparing the former with the
present condition of our being) that the burdens (which then we patiently
endured) were but molehills to the mountanous pressures, which now we are
crushed under; Nevertheless, we should account it (though an embittered)
happiness to loose our Parents, Children, Friends, Estates, could we but
perceive the least beam of Redemption from this miserable thraldom yet arise
unto us; but alas! our eyes are even dim with expectation, being as far from
hope as we are far from happy. We have considered the many Oaths and
Protestations tendered to us, approved and accepted of us; above all, that
Solemn Covenant taken with hands (we say not hearts) lift up to heaven, as the
instrument of mercy or misery, a blessing or a curse upon the violation of
performance of it; but (to the sadding of our souls) we see the Pillars and
Foundation of it shaken; and those unhinged from their principles, who first
gave life and motion to it. This National sin, will produce a National judgment.

We easily foresee the extirpation of Monarchy, under which we and our
progenitors have enjoyed so many calmed years of external Freedom and
Tranquillity; we see the subversion of our Fundamental Laws, Customary
Immunities and Municipal Privileges derived to us and our posterity as our
proper Birthrights, (if not prevented) by a mutatitious and tyrannical Equaity
level with us, if not inferior to us. We see Religion turned out of her
garments of needle work and wrought gold, into a linsey-wolsey, stupious and an
unclean vesture; painted over with resemblances and mere shadows of truth;
precipitating into Anarchy, any thing, every thing that may speak this poor
Kingdom the object of shame and pity; and all this (contrary to Covenant)
countenanced, if not authorized, by that superior Power elected only for the
establishing of our Peace, confirmation of our Privileges, removal of our
grievances, and the dissipating of all those thick fogs of Error, Tyranny, and
Division, which hitherto dictates nothing but our ruin, and overclouds that
glory yet deducible to an once flourishing Church and Commonwealth.

These things seriously and sadly debated in our hearts, and weighing our past
and present calamities with our imminent destruction, impending for the future,
not by accident but by evident demonstration; we are bold to present the
insides of souls to all our Brethren and Concomitants in this common misery.

First, That we do wish and ever shall endeavor the honor, safety and
preservation of his Majesty's person, power and just derived Rights, according
to our Oaths and Covenant, without any mental evasions or secret reservations;
desiring only to live under his Kingly Government and Protection, and the
Government and Protection of his Royal Issue after him, according to the
ancient Laws established in this Kingdom.

Secondly, We shall to our uttermost defend and maintain the power of
Parliaments and their lawful Privileges, as being the only visible
Interporation of the Kingdom, from whom, and from his Majesty, as from the
Fountain and pure Channel, may flow th^se wholesome Courses of good Laws and
Justice, that we his people and our succeeding generations may live in peace
all our days.

Thirdly, We shall with our best of power oppose all Arbitrary and Tyrannical
Usurpation, Government, or Dominion Military or Politic that may or shall
produce alteration, detriment or nullity of any Fundamental Law, legal Act or
Acts (yet unrepealed) heretofore confirmed by Authority of King and Parliament.

Fourthly, We shall with our hearts profess, and with the hazard of our dearest
blood protect the true and truly received Protestant Religion, in the truth and
substance of it, as it has been embraced by, and communicated to us and our
progenitors; desiring such holy Discipline may be exercised (having respect to
Decency and Order) as may keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.

Moreover, seeing as we daily grow, so we daily groan under the unsupportable
weight of Oppression, Taxes, Free Quarter, (besides murders, rapines,
robberies, not mentioning the deep exhaustings during the late time of War, and
since, both by the English and Scottish Forces, no part of the Kingdom being so
infested) we humbly desire a speedy alleanement and retardation thereof; that
yet (if it be possible) we may have bread to sustain the lives of our poor
wives and children; many thousands being ready to perish through want, and
unable to support themselves, much less of power to supply the rigid desires and
demands of an useless and insaturate Soldiery; else we shall be enforced,
through necessity (heaven knows our unwillingness) to acquit our selves (by the
readiest way) of our any longer tolerable calamities, and purchase freedom,
though with the Sacrifice of our dearest blood. Nature obliging in the behalf
of our selves and ours to exchange a miserable and disconsolate life, for a
happy and honorable death. And we doubt not, but that all our faithful fellow
Commoners, as well in the South as Northern parts, being equally sharers with us
in our sufferings, as joint Members of one languishing body, will not only be
partakers in our firm resolves, (which no affliction shall cause us to desert)
but also communicate their assistance; to the re-inthroning of his Majesty, the
securing and protecting of Parliaments, the Maintenance of the Laws, the
Confirmation of the true Religion, the freedom of our Estates and Liberties
from Usurpation, and the renewing that ancient and sweet Peace (now violated)
to the Glory of God, the Honor of his Majesty, and the general rejoicing of
all his faithful and loyal Subjects.

Subscribed with the Hands of 164247, within the Northern Associations.


