A REPLY TO Mr. William Prinne, His Unsafe, Uneasy, Dangerous, etc.

Expedient, for the Concord, Unity, and Settlement of these Nations, by
restoring the ancient Nobility, part of the old decripit, decayed, and
gray headed Tyranny, Usurpation, and Oppression upon the Bodies, and
Consciences of every poor Subject, who have been formerly as Balaams Ass,
being made slaves at their lusts and pleasures, but now have kicked their
Masters off.

TOGETHER, With a few Directions to the Persons now in Authority, opening a
door to Peace, Righteousness, and Prosperity, by building upon that little
Stone, which hitherto has been refused by the Builders, but is chosen of God
and precious.

And Joshua adjured them at that time, saying, Cursed be the man before the
Lord, that rises up and builds the City Jericho, for he shall lay the
foundation thereof in his Firstborn, and in his youngest Son shall be set up
the gates of it, Josh. 6. 26.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
Elephant and Castle near Temple Bar, 1659.

A REPLY TO Mr. William Prinn, His Unsafe, Uneasy, Dangerous, etc. Expedient,
for the Concord, Unity, and Settlement of these Nations, etc.
I Am between hope and fear, fearing to displease God, hoping to persuade and
convince all impartial and unprejudiced persons, that the proverb may be made
true, sepe desperatio spei causa est, et ignaviam necessitas acuit. I never had
yet an opportunity put into my hands, amongst the many unskillful and ungodly
dissections of the good Old Cause, to speak one word of bringing back the King.
Wherefore God has been pleased to put it into my heart (though an unworthy
instrument) as amicus patriae to oppose, and contradict that wicked and filthy
Spirit, of making a Captain to return back again unto Egypt, (because it was
better with them then, than it is now) which Spirit does appear in the Priests
and Lawyers of this Nation, having set awork Mr. Prin, that Engine of mischief,
and confusion, who is a Spirit of a fiery exhalation, as constant in affirming
a bad Cause, as suffering for a good one; and likewise to tender to the persons
now in Authority, some few directions, that may be as Landmarks, to guide them
to a firm, durable and immovable Settlement, upon a foundation of
righteousness and truth, least they dash themselves against that little stone
cut out of the little Mountain without hands, on which their predecessors have
been broken to pieces, who to the ignorant and disobedient is a stone of
stumbling, and a rock of offense. I am not so sorrowful, but I am as much
through the grace of God rejoiced, when I hehold all these symtomes, and
characters of trouble and perplexity hanging over our heads, when I consider
and meditate on the holy Scriptures, for Christ has commanded; Luke 24. 25,
26, 27.
then when these begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up your heads,
for your redemption draws near. And seeing there shall be signs in the Sun,
in the Moon, and in the Stars, and upon the earth distress of Nations, with
perplexity, the Sea and the Waves roaring, men's hearts failng them for fear,
and for looking after those things that are come nigh on them, for the powers
of Heaven shall be shaken, and then shall they see the Son of man coming in a
Cloud, with power and great glory. And in the mean time let all the faithful
of the Lord, be traveling and groaning together with the whole Creation, Romans
19. 21.
for the manifestation of the Sons of God, because the creature it self shall
also be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberties
of the Sons of God, etc.

The generality of the poor ignorant, and deceived people, who are led by the
Spirit of the Prince of the air that rules effectually in the Children of
disobedience, (for whom I am sorry in my Soul, when I consider the Son of man
will come as a Thief in the night, and as I fear will find them unprepared for
receiving of the Bridegroom) that cry out (as the Children of Israel did of
old) against the glorious cause and interest of King Jesus, and bring up an
evil report of the good Land, saying, stone Caleb and Joshua with stones; Oh
these Sectaries, these Seditious Persons; that utter threatening words against
Caesar, against the Kings, and Princes of the World; That God the Father will
make his Son above the Kings of the Earth. O let them be crucified! But why do
I only speak of the flock? is it not so with Shepherds and Doctors of the
Chair? Why do I mention the unlearned, is it not so with the Pleader, the
Counselor, and the Judge? Solomon says, that at the windows of my House, I
looked through my Casement, and behold among the simple ones, I discerned among
the youths, a young man void of understanding; But I may say, I looked among
the wise men, I discerned among the old men, an old man void of understanding;
although it may be judged a great presumption in me, to examine Mr. Prins, safe
and easy, etc. Direction to a Settlement, now these destractive and
destructive dispensations do appear. Yet I make no question, quasi penicillo
adumbrare, that every ingenuous Reader may see Mr. Prinns Reason is worse than
Bedlam madness.

He does first very pathetically endeavor the restoring of the ancient
Nobility (that have not forfeited their lives and fortunes, by engaging against
the Rights and Liberties of the People of this Nation) to their right, and
inheritance lineally descended unto them from their Ancestors for many hundred
years; and though, as jus dormit nunquam moritur, and though of late it has
been discontinued, yet there is such an inherent right in them that may work a
remitter. Oh he is very desirous, that though David be anointed King, and is
King, de jure, yet that Saul may keep the Throne; no, the House of Saul must
grow weaker and weaker, and the House of David stronger and stronger, Christ
must increase, but Antichrist must decrease, and he knows no reason why Esau
being the elder Brother should not have the inheritance; no, Saviors shall
come upon Mount Sion, and judge the Mount of Esau, and the Kingdom shall be
the Lords.

I answer, They have neither, Jus in re, nor Jus ad rem, Oed. the last.
but as they are subordinate to the Kings, and coordinate with the Lords
Spiritual, as does appear by the words of the Writ.

Rex, etc. E. B. de, etc. Salutem Quia de advisamento, and assensu consilii
nostri quibusdam arduos and urgentibus negotiis statumet desensionem Regni
nostri Llb. 6. fol. 52 53. Cuntess of Rutlands cause 8. H. 6. 10 48. E. 3 30.
36. H. 6. 46. Plond. 223. Cokes. 1. 1. Inst. 16. b.
angliae, etc. Concernentibus quoddam Parliamentum, apud civitatem Westminst. a
21. Oct. Prximo futuro teneri Ordinavimus, and ibidem vobiscum, and cum
praeletis, Magnetibus, and Prooceribus dicti Regni nostri; Colloquium habere
and tractatum, vobis in side and legriencie quibus nobis tenemeni injeugendo
mandamus, quod considiratis dictorum negotiorum and arduitate and periculis
miminentibus, cessante excusatione quacunque, dictis die and loco personaliter
intersitis nobiscum, and cum Praeletis, magnetibus, and Proceribus supradictis,
superdictis negotiis tractaturus, and vestrum consilium impersurus, etc.

Which first clause, Vobiscum and cum Praeletis, etc. and in the close of the
Writ, Personaliter intersitis nobiscum, and cum Praeletis, etc. Which proves
they have no right thereto, but jointly with the King and Lords Spiritual, if
you (as Mr. Prinne does so earnestly desire) go to the ancient Constitution and
Frame of the Government of this Nation. And now their Right (if they have any)
may be properly said to be in abeysance or consideration of Law, in nubibus vel
in gremio terrae. And seeing the King is the Primum mobile, from whence all
inferior Orbs have their principle of vigor and motion, and like the Sun that
is, Cor planetorum primum vivaeus and ultimum moriens, it does follow, that
without the King, such a Government will be but an Vtopian Idea, formed by Mr.
Prinns operative fantasy. It is a Maxim in Philosophy, that nihil agit in
seipsum, and these that have been dead and buried for so many years, should
raise themselves, or be again vivified by the generative and prolifick faculty
of Mr. Prinns fruitful Pen: but admitting they have a right in radice, and in
semine, yet I humbly conceive that now there is no actual inter regnum, as he
does suppose: for there may properly be said to be two administrations of a
Commonwealth, the one is Military, the other togata, togata pacis spectat
temporae, militaris belli spectat tempora, though there be rebellions and
commotions, like hot exhalations set on fire by their own motion, amazing the
common people, who are usually surprised, with a Spirit of fear and bondage:
yet, If the Soldiers will be true to their principles, we may find out the
most righteous government that ever we were under. And certainly there is no
Title more lawful and indubitible then that which is jure belli, neither that
which is elective successive, jure connubiorum, donative, Or testamentary, both
by the Law of God and man. They having got it upon the account of
righteousness, and liberty for the body and consciences of every individual
person, though (I have cause to believe) that they have since sought their own
things and not the things of Jesus Christ. But had it been an unjust and
inoffensive quarrel, then they had been Pirates and Robbers, as Lucan calls
Alexander M. orbis terrarum praedonem.

The other thing that I did observe in Mr. Prinns pamphlet was, that after the
Nobility were invested in their ancient right, they should issue forth Writs
unto all the places of this Commonwealth, to choose persons for every County,
Shiere, City, etc. as may be every way qualified for the service of that
Country, to sit at Westminster on the third Monday in January next, according
to the common custom and usage of this Realm. I cannot imagine what this
Parliament should do but revest Charles Stuard in his ancient right, for they
would be altogether inservisable, to settle us upon a firm and lasting Peace.
For all their Ordinances, Acts, and Statutes, would be invalid and of none
effect, without the consent of King in Parliament, they would be in Eodem Jure,
with a person, 33. H. 6. 17. Tort. Cap. 18. P. 20. 4. H. 7. 18. 22. 53. 3. Br.
Parl. 4. 42. 25. H. 6. 17. 15 E. 4. 2. 13. 4. H. 7. 18. F. H. 7 14. 7. H 7. 14.
16. 11. H. 7. 27. 1. H. 8. 18. 4. Co. 8. Rep. 15. 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 24. 25,
26. 8. 34. 4. 37. H. 8. 19. to H. 7. 20. 2. H. 4. 3. Dyer. 1. 31. ^ Dyer. 144.
6.
who cannot grant an anuity, etc. without the consent of his Patron and
Ordinary, or Covent, who neither can enfeoffe or enfeoffed, no not in time of
vocation, as has been resolved in all succession of ages. And in my Lord Dyers
reports, 1 Reg. Maer. 93. In the Duke of North. his Case, it was a great doubt
among the Justices, whether the King, after a Bill passed by the Lords and
Commons, may Commissionate certain persons, by his Letters Pattents, regium
suum assensuum consensuum, eadam billae, and omnibus in eadem specificatis,
with a sciatis igitur, that he does thereby ratify and confirm whatsoever they
should do in his name. So that now you see Mr. Prinns airy notions and
plantasmes fall unto the ground. Oh that such an eminent person, for piety and
godliness, should turn as the dog to his vomiting, and as the Sow that was
washed, to her wallowing in the Mire; the Philosopher says, that optimi
corruption est pessima, Hypocrites and Seducers shall wax worse and worse, and
bring upon themselves swift destruction. Oh what shall we say to these things,
let them that stand take heed lest they fall.

Now that I may wind all in a sheet of Paper, I would put the great ones in
mind of performing their solemn promises and declarations to exalt Jesus
Christ, who is more glorious and excellent then the Mountains of prey. Abraham
who is the Father of the faithful, as he came from the slaughter of the Kings,
having rescued his Brother out of their hands, Melchisedech met him and blessed
him; you are the persons that have delivered Gods people, and in former times
Christ has met you, and blessed you (as you have come from the slaughter of
the King and the Nobles) with all divine and spiritual blessings, who is a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech. But now I am afraid you are
like Sompson, your strength is departed from, your honors have put out your
eyes, and now the House of this Commonwealth is like to fall upon your heads.
Therefore (I pray) hear one word.

I. Return unto the most high, from whom you have departed. And though you
presume that God will not destroy you, because you are a Bull-work, and a
defense to his People; Oh I must tell you, I rather believe, they by the
weapons of the Spirit, have averted the Judgment, that otherwise might have
fell upon you. Saul was a professor, and prophesied among the Prophets, yet
after he came to be King, he forgot that God called him from following his
Fathers Asses (as now some do not remember their pedigree, nor their Fathers
House) and launched out into all sinful licentiousness, and God dethroned him,
and set up his Servant David in his stead.

II. Secondly, Make no peace with unrighteousness, say not a confederacy with
them that say a confederacy, for you must be a Nation in the midst of a Nation,
how dear was it like to cost good Jehoshaphat for entering into a league with
wicked Ahab, saying, I am as thou art, and my people as thy people, and we will
be with thee in the war.

III. Thirdly, Endeavor the taking away the burdens that lie upon us, both as
Men and Christians, as men, you ought to impose your great taxes and
impositions upon your enemies, as Solomon that oppressed the Cananites and the
Perinites, etc. that were enemies to his Kingdom, and spared his natural born
subjects, as Christians: how long shall we be villeins regardant, to set out
the persons Titles. It is a strange thing, you will not have the judicial Law
to be in force, (which is not abolished,) and will have the ceremonial Law
(which is established) to continue.

IV. Lastly, and so I will conclude; If you think to hold on your course, Kiss
the Son lest he be angry, and you perish from the way; Proclaim him to be both
King of Saints, and King of Nations. It is the eternal purpose and Decree of
God, to make him above the Kings of the World, for he is the Prince of the
Kings of the Earth, and all the holy Angels have done him fealty, for only the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah is worthy to open the Books, and loose the Seals
thereof. And therefore seeing, you have kept Jesus Christ out of the Throne so
long, the Lord give you Repentance unto Salvation, never to be Repented of.

And now I shall put you in mind of a few Scriptures among many; In Dan 7. 13,
14, 27. and in Isa. 61. 23. and in Isa 63. 1, 2. Who is this that comes from
Edom, with dyed Garments from Bozar? this that is glorious in his Apparel,
traveling in the greatness of his strength? I that speak in righteousness
mighty to save. Wherefore art thou red in thine Apparel, and thy Garments like
him that treads the Winefat? The Garments of Christ shall be dyed in the
blood of his Enemies, as the Garments of the Priests was dipped in Jordan.

THE END.

