A REPLY TO A PAPER Written by one of the Six CLERKS, ENTITLED, An Answer to a
Printed Paper of the under-Clerks in Chancery, ENTITLED, Reasons to be
offered, etc.
THE Respondent or Author of the Paper does well to Entitle himself A Lover of
Truth and Justice, else no man by his Writing could ever have thought him so.
And where he conjectures the Reasons to be framed by some under-Clerks in
Chancery, he may possibly be so far in the right, but not a word further: And
for the satisfaction he desires, who will own it, he may please to understand
that the Clerks of the Court do generally own it, and many of them have so
expressed themselves unto me, and for the truth of the matter, no man need to
doubt it; for if it might be put into a way of Examination, it would be made
appear upon the Oaths of 100 several persons, and if the Author thinks
himself, and the rest of his brethren scandalized with matter of truth, I
cannot help it.

And the Author having finished his Prologue (instead of giving an Answer to
the Reasons) falls a railing at the Clerks for saying their Allowances are too
small, and calls them sherks for that they share with the six Clerks in the Fees
which the Clients pay.

In Vindication of whose Reputation, although I forbear to say, that the six
Clerks have first sherked upon the Clerks, yet I shall truly inform the Reader
how they have used the Clerks, and not the Clerks alone, but even the Lord
Protector himself, and all the people of the Nation, and leave it to others to
give their actions a name according as they deserve. For anciently when the
business of the Court was but little, and the six Clerks were not only
nominall, but real Attorneys, advising and directing Clients, and laying out
and disbursing money for them, and thereby adventuring the loss thereof, and
with their own hands writing all the special business of the Court (wherein
any Clerkship was required) and had but one or two young Clerks apiece, to
write and copy things of an ordinary and easy nature, even then the same young
Clerks (their meniall servants) had all the Fees which the six Clerks of late
allowed to the practizing Clerks, and had also their Diet, Chamber-rent, Paper,
Ink, Parchment and Candles, Blank-writs of all sorts, second Copies, renewed
Writs, and Copies of Decrees and Dismissions, and the whole Fees of many Writs,
some of which the six Clerks themselves afterward took from the Clerks, and
others they suffered to be taken away by Patentees, as making Subpenas,
engrossing of Grants and Leases to the great Seal, and the like, which the six
Clerks opposed not, it trenching upon the Clerks only. And when the six Clerks
ceased to act for the Clients as Attorneys, making it their chief employment to
keep Books of Entries, whereby to exact their pretended Fees, all the care and
burden of Causes being cast upon the Clerks, and they compelled to disburse all
moneys to be laid out for Clients, and very often with their own money to pay
the Clients Fees (which grew due for their own labor) to the six Clerks, which
they never received again from the Clients, and undergo all other hazards and
losses. And when all the aforesaid allowances were likewise withheld from them,
and the benefit of diverse Writs gone as aforesaid, it may be truly said that
there was a necessity laid upon the Clerks to withhold a greater part of the
Fees, which the Clients paid, then the six Clerks would seem willing to allow
them, and this they might lawfully do without violation of the Laws of God or
man, for I find no text of Scripture that erects such Officers as the six
Clerks to live upon the peoples purses, without any care or regard of, or
ability to do them service in their Causes, nor is there any Statute or other
Law that creates them save only their illegal Parent granted in the time of
Monopolies by the late King Charles, but there are several Acts of Parliament
prohibiting the buying and selling of Offices: And I likewise find a Text of
Scripture where the righteous God (taking upon himself the business of
Reformation) promises his people to send them Judges as at the first and
Officers as at the beginning. From whence it may be concluded, that Officers
and others in Public employment had need sometimes to be reformed and brought
to their Primitive constitution. And if the six Clerks were still so continued
and made to become working Attorneys as at the first, Ao 12o Ri. 2^ they were
increased from three to six.
and so many more added unto them and made Attorneys likewise, as are necessary
for dispatch of the business of the Court, I think no man would desire to
remove them out of such their proper employment, or to receive one penny of
their Fees. But they have not only thus abused the Clerks, but have in a much
higher nature abused the Lord Protector, and all the people of the Nation,
Witness their receiving very large Fees for inrolling all such Grants and
Pardons and other things as pass the Great Seal, and never inrolling or
estreating many of them, whereby the Lord Protector and Commonwealth are very
much abused, and the Rents and Reservations upon them (for want of sending
Estreats into the Exchequer) never appear, whereby they may be demanded or
levied as they ought to be. And the people are greatly abused, not only their
Estates, but their Lives being in danger, for want of inrolling the Grants and
Pardons, there having been few or none enrolled for these fourteen years last
past. And the Warrants and Privy Seals for passing them are so ill kept, that
many of them within these nine or ten years last are quite rotten, not to be
read again, so that now its impossible ever to have them enrolled: and the
truth hereof would appear, were the Clerks appointed for keeping the Records
examined upon Oath, and search made at the Hamper Office what Patents have
passed within these fourteen years last past, and then see in the Chapel of
the Rols and Exchequer how many of the Rols are sent to the Chapel of the
Rols, or Estreat into the Exchequer. And now what name these doings and actions
of the six Clerks shall have, I leave to the Reader to judge. But I am sure,
that which the Author of the Pamphlet calls sherking in the Clerks, is but the
receiving of less then one half of the wages due for their own labors, which
some of the greatest and most wise of the late six Clerks have acknowledged to
be due, and of right belonging to them. For I remember when I waited upon one
of the six Clerks, some of the younger sort of them proposing Rules of practice
to tie the Clerks to a more strict Account, I heard that grave and wise
Gentleman Mr Saunders (sometime one of the six Clerks) express himself to this
effect, viz. Let them alone, they do the Work that we ought to do, they
disburse their own money, and save us from disbursing ours, they bring us a
great profit, and run all the hazard, and if they do receive one half of the
Fees paid by the Clients, it is no more then is necessary to maintain
themselves and families.

And I appeal to all indifferent men, whether if one of the six Clerks receive
clearly into his own Purse 1500 or 1600l per Annum or more, by the labor of
the Clerks in his Office, which are seventeen or eighteen persons, (as by their
own Certificate to the Committee for Regulation of the Chancery appears,)
Whether those seventeen or eightteen persons should not receive amongst them
all to maintain their families, so much as one six Clerk had to maintain his:
The six Clerk in the mean time, having no hazard, but receives his money ready
down from the Clerks whether they receive it or no, and the Clerks adventuring
that which they pay down to the six Clerks, their own Fees, and all other
disbursements which many times are lost.

And as touching the Estates which the Pamphlet mentions to be gained by the
practicing Clerks out of their former allowances; I say, That although the
Clerks did at the time he speaks of, share with the six Clerks, and receive as
much of the Fees paid by the Clyents, as they have done at any time since; Yet
he cannot name above two persons, that ever gained any considerable Estate by
that imploiment E. R. H. P.
. And for any others, the Estates they have gotten are but small, and much
inferior to the Estates that many other industrious men have acquired in
imploiments much inferior to theirs. But it may be truly observed, that the
small Estates gained by the Clerks have prospered better then the large Estates
gotten by the six Clerks; For memory has scarce recorded, that ever an Estate
gotten by a six Clerk remained to his posterity one age after his death.

In the next place the Author of the Pamphet seems much to undervalue the
Clerks pains, saying, They take pains to part stakes with the six Clerks, and
that the servants of the Clerks take more pains then the Clerks themselves. But
here (as in all the rest of the Pamphlet) although he styles himself a Lover of
the Truth, yet he loves not to speak the truth; Witness his mis-reciting the
Ordinance, and mentioning thirteen Groats allowed to the intended Attourneys;
where it is but ten Groats, and his mis-repeating the Reasons likewise; and
where the Reasons say, the Clerk might justly receive part of the Fees which
the six Clerks claimed, he repeats it, That they might easily do it. And I
would know of the Author, Where (in the Paper which he calls the Clerks paper)
he finds any acknowledgement, That the Fees allowed by the Ordinate to the
intended Attourneys, are as great as the Fees allowed to the Attourneys of
other Courts? I am sure I can find no such thing therein, but his paper is
stuffed with nothing but untruths: And touching the Clerks pains, I would know of
him, Who are the Persons that direct and advise all the Clyents of the Court in
their Causes, and draw all the special Writs, Commissions, Decrees,
Dismissions, and other things? Surely he will not say, that either the six
Clerks, or the Servants to the practicing Clerks do, or can do any of these
things. And whether these things can be done without much care and pains, I
leave it to any other (except the Author) to judge: As also, Whether the case
be the same twixt the six Clerks and Clerks, as betwixt the Clerks and their
menial servants, or between a man and his servant whom he teaches and instructs
in an employment, and maintains with meat, drink, lodging, and other
necessaries? The six Clerks being none of them bred in the employment, and so
know nothing of it, when they purchase their Offices, and what knowledge they
after attain to in the employment they learn from the Clerks, and not the
Clerks from them.

And where any untruth is laid down as a foundation in the Reasons (as the
Author would insinuate) I cannot see; I hope he does not mean that the Clerks
say untruly, in saying, they were compelled to pay the six Clerks the Fees due
from the Clyents, and never received them again: For the Author by his long
experience cannot but know, that he has compelled the Clerks to pay him some
hundreds of pounds, that they never received again from the Clyents: And every
Clerk that has had any considerable practice, if examined upon his Oath, would
depose, that the six Clerks have exacted from him some scores of pounds that he
never did or could receive again from the Clyents. And although I believe the
Author be a better Divine then a Clerk or Lawyer, yet he can hardly find it
resolved amongst all the Casuists, that the Clerks are bound in conscience to
pay their Clyents Fees, out of their own purses to the six Clerks, although
they never received them of the Clyent, or that it is fraud or unjust
covetousness, if they (being unjustly compelled so to do at one time)
re-imburse themselves at another time. As for the pains pretended to be taken
by the six Clerks, I leave to all the Clyents in England to judge what it is.

And seeing the Author by his paper gives occasion to lay forth their
nakedness, which I never found the Clerks to have done, I will with moderation
(not with railing, as he does) tell you what they do; They only keep Books,
wherein they enter the names of the Clyents for their better receiving the
Fees, to which none have access but themselves; for as soon as they go from
their Offices in the vacation, they either take those Books along with them, or
lock them up, so as no man has use thereof, or benefit thereby, but
themselves, so that this labor might be very well spared, and the Cause would
proceed somewhat the faster. They likewise attend in Court, and read Clyents
Books, but the Clerk must attend likewise to give him the Book or Writing that
he is to read: And might not this formality then be likewise spared? And were
it not as little labor for the Clerk to read them himself in Court, as to
give them to the six Clerk to read?

They allege, Dispatch of references, but they arc chiefly of their own
occasioning, and if they were able to give a present account to the Court of
the course and practice of Court, and the proceedings in Causes as able
Attourneys might do, the references would be spa^ed, and the Court and Clyent
much eased.

The Author further says, By the same Argument the Clerks would share with the
six Clerks in the Fees, so might a Plowman or Soldier claim as much as his
Landlord or Commander, and that the Clerks proceed unjustly in making their
pains the rule of propriety, and not Law and Justice, and that they promised
the six Clerks upon their Admittances to be content with their Allowances, but
never kept their words. And that they teach the Lord Protector, and the
honorable Committee what Fees should be paid; And that they go along with the
Levelling Party, and are dangerous Persons to be trusted, and diverse such like
untrue and scandalous Assertions.

In Answer whereunto, I desire the Reader to peruse the later end of my Paper,
entitled, A Discovery of certain grievances in the Court of Chancery, etc.
where he will find a full Answer to these slight Objections. Whereunto I add
further, That the Clerks may well make the pains to be taken for Clyents the
best Rule of Propriety to entitle them to Fees suitable to their pains and
service, especially where the matter and Fees are under consideration of
Parliament to be reformed and appointed to every one according to desert, and a
quantum meruit lies at Common Law for recovery of meet satisfaction for pains
taken; Therefore the Author of the Pamphlet does well to confess ingeniously,
that he and the rest of his Brethren had need of a further help then a quantum
meruit to recover their Fees, and therefore may well disclaim to have the pains
taken for Clyents to be the Rule of Propriety.

And surely the Clerks would have been too blame, if they had been altogether
silent, when they found that some of the Fees intended to them are so small,
that the Parchment will cost them more then they are to receive for the same
when it is written: With this, that they no ways went about to teach the Lord
Protector, or the honorable Committee What Fees are to be paid, but humbly
offered their Reasons, and left it to their consideration in an humble and
private way, not making their Reasons public, as the Author of the Pamphlet
has done them, and his own Paper, by selling them publicly to the Stationers,
I suppose, partly to make profit to himself, but chiefly to asperse and
calumniate the Clerks; for had I not found the Pamphlet so public at every
Stationers shop, I had spared this labor, though now in respect of my former
relation to them, I thought my self by way of gratitude bound to vindicate
them, I finding them silent herein. Neither do the Clerks, as the Author of the
Pamphlet falsely insinuates, Run with the levelling Party; for I never
understood that it was a levelling principle, for an Apprentice when he has
paid his money, and served his Apprentiship, to desire to be free of his Trade:
Or for a Student of the University or Inns of Court, after he has continued a
convenient time, and done his Exercise, to desire to take Degrees, or be called
to the Bar: And if this be levelling, all the Attourneys of the Common Pleas
and Upper-Bench have been Levellers for many ages last past; for that
Attourneys Clerks of those Courts, after they have served a convenient time,
and fitted themselves for that imploiment, have never been denied to be admitted
Attourneys.

And surely the Gentleman discovers a high Principle of Tyranny, that would
have so many Freemen of England, men of Repute and Fortune, Masters of
Families, etc. to be under a Yoke of Servitude, and be accounted as their
menial Servants all the days of their lives; And he is no less injurious and
unconscionable to appropriate the practicing Clerks Fees to the six Clerks,
that so the Clerks might be at their Will and Pleasure only; For what greater
Tyranny and Oppression can there be in the world, then when a man has given a
sum of Money to be bred up in an Employment, and then served in it all his
life, perhaps twenty or thirty years, to have a stranger illegally to step over
him into an Office, and without any cause hold him to any unconscionable Terms
and Conditions by promise or other Engagements, and to exact and extort the
Fees (paid by the Clyents) from the Clerk, and compel him to pay the same out
of his own Purse, though he never receive it himself, or else turn him out of
that employment, wherein he was bred, and upon which he depends for his
subsistence?

And as touching the Petition annexed to his Paper, although many of the
persons mentioned to be Petitioners, disown the same, and diverse names are put
thereto of men who never were heard of the be Clerks in the Office? yet I say,
that the three pence per sheet then desired together with the profit of the
Dedimus Potest. and such other Fees, as they then received, did amount to as
much as the whole Fees now allowed by the Table of Fees annexed to (...)
Ordinance, and yet not more then was necessary to support themselves and
Families.

And whereas the Author of the Pamphlet would insinuate into the Soldiery, to
have the six Clerks looked upon as the Officers of the Army, and the Clerks as
the common Soldiers; and thereupon concludes, That it is as unjust for the
Clerks to desire their Fees, as for the common Soldier to desire their
Commanders pay: He therein mistakes the case: For the six Clerks are but
Attourneys, and the Attourneys of every Court, are, or should be as the common
Soldiers in an Army (the men on whose shoulders the most hard and laborious
work of the Court does lie.) And as well he might say, That if an Army
consisted of five thousand common Soldiers, and there were a necessity in
respect of some service to be done to increase these five thousand to twenty
thousand, that these five thousand should monopolize the pay of the other
fifteen thousand, and put on them the whole burden of the service, and allow
them what pay they pleased, and disband them at pleasure: And the Indenture
being tripartite, I have sealed him a third part thereof; Whereby he may see,
That the case he puts concerning others, is their own, which is that they being
in the nature of common Soldiers, viz. Attourneys of a Court of Justice,
desire and receive Officers pay, whereby their profit (as it was formerly) was
not only much greater then the Fees acquired by most Council which are before
them in place, but as great as the Master of the Rolls, or any other Judges in
England, even the Lords Commissioners themselves (as I conceive) so that I may
truly say to him, Mutato nemine de te fabula narratur. But I have spent more
time then need in clearing this, for that every man knows, That an Army cannot
admit of any such idle, useless, and exorbitant Officers, as are the six
Clerks, and some other pretended Officers in Chancery, who were originally but
Clerici secundae formae scribentes in rotulis prepr^is manibus. But they have
received Officers pay so long, that they would now fain be Commanders, and
forget that they are but Attourneys in the nature of common soldiers.

And whereas the Author of the Pamphlet unworthily goes about to persuade the
People, That the Clerks have principles of fraud radicated in them, and are not
fit to be trusted, I say, that if the Clerks did not perform the trust reposed
in them, both to the Court and Clyent, better then the six Clerks performed
their trust, the business of the Court would have been in far worse
condition then now it is (although it be bad enough) for certainly all the care
and faithfulness that has been performed either toward the Court or the
Suitors, as to the practical part thereof, has been performed by the Clerks,
and by none but the Clerks. As to instance in the passing of a Decree (being a
thing of as great moment, as any thing in the Court betwixt party and party)
the Clerks take much pains and care truly to collect and compose it out of the
Pleadings and Orders of the Court, and then examine the same with the same
Pleadings and Orders, wherein he often spends three, four or five days, and
then presents it to the six Clerk to be signed; who thereupon certifies the
Court that he has examined it, and receives twenty shillings for the same,
although in truth, he knows not one word that is contained in it; nor can most
of the six Clerks say (if they speak the truth) that ever they examined a
Decree in their lives, nor if they should examine them, do they know whether
the same are done, as they ought to be, or not. And hereupon the Register upon
the Clerks credit, presents it to be signed by the Lords Commissioners, so that
there is no pains or care bestowed about it, but what is done by the Clerk; nay
I will boldly affirm, If the Clerks of the Court had been such as the Author of
the Pamphlet styles them, it had been no hard matter for them (till of late
that a greater care has been taken by the Lords Commissioners) to have passed
Decrees against any man in England for ten thousand pound, there being no care
taken what was presented to the Lords Commissioners to be signed, but what was
done by the Clerks: And as in Decrees, so I might instance likewise in almost
every thing that is done in the Court.

And I hope, if there be just cause (as certainly there is) to make sixty or
seventy Attourneys in the Court of Chancery, every judicious man will think it
reasonable, that the Attourneys of the Court (now) should have half so much
allowed them for their Fees, as the Attourneys of the same Court had two
hundred years since; careful, laborious and able Attourneys, being men of so
great trust and absolute necessity in every Court of Justice, that the business
of the Court cannot be done without them.

But as for superintendent Officers, such as are the six Clerks, chief Register
and chief Examiners, Subpena Officers, etc. Although many think it to be an
honor to a Court to have such Officers in it, and therefore Prophecy that
their removal will occasion many inconveniences and disorders, yet I will
tell them, that these and such like Officers are the disgrace and dishonor of
a Court of Justice: And the Chancery never was in so great Honor, as when
there were none but working Attorneys and Clerks, viz. (Clerici primae and
secundae formae) every of which truly performed the work and labor for which
they were ordained: Nor was the Court ever in such dishonor and ignominy, as
it has been since these Clerks became Officers. And give me leave (like a poor
Micaia) to foretell, that there never will nor can be any effectual
Reformation, as long as there are superintendent Officers continued, between
the Master of the Rols and the Clerks of the Court, (who dispatch the Clients
business) to receive the greatest part of the Fees which the Clients pay: For
whatsoever Fees are allowed, whether it be the same in the Ordinance, or more
or less, if the Clerks receive the same to their own use, the business will
be well dispatched, and the Records well kept; whereas if the greatest part of
the Fees (which are paid pending the suit) be given to Superintendent Officers,
business will never be well done. And the Rule observed in ancient time is
very remarkable, where we may see how careful and prudent men were, that
Clients Causes should not be obstructed; for when the Master of the Rols was
only a Ministerial Officer ( viz. chief Clerk) and the six Attorneys acted for
Clients in all respects as Clerks do now, the Master of the Rols received no
Fees from any Clients pending the suit, but the Attorneys who did the whole
business received the whole Fees due for the same to their own use. But at and
after the hearing of the Causes, the Master of the Rols received Fees, viz. for
every Decree and Dismission vjs -- viijd, and for every Exemplification Vidimus
and Constat, the like Fee.

And no doubt this was so done that the Attorneys might have no cause to
neglect or delay the Clients Causes, which they would undoubtedly have done, if
the Master of the Rols being the then chief Clerk had received the greatest
part of the Fees, due for their Labors; but especially if he had compelled
them to pay their Clients Fees out of their own Purses, whether ever they
received them of the Clients or not, as of late has been practiced; for it is
impossible to make a Law to bind the Consciences of men, with their own Money
to pay other men the rewards and wages due for their own Labor. And (with
sorrow it is spoken) I am now become of the same opinion with those (though I
have formerly much opposed them) who think that a Court or Courts of Justice,
or other thing that is of a public, concernment to the Commonwealth, when the
same has proceeded in an irregular and disorderly way, grievous to the people,
without any through and full Reformation for the space of eighty or an hundred
years, that then it is altogether impossible to reform them: For they say (and
I find it too true) That in so long a continuance of time there will be so
many men of quality and estate immediately concerned, and so many others
mediatly concerned upon the Account of friendship or other like account, that
this of it self will be a great Bullwork against an impartial Reformation.

I have heretofore answered this and the like Objections, and urged to the
Objector thus, Why might not men of ability and integrity, and men no ways,
concerned neither immediately nor mediatly, call every man one by one that has
any relation to a Court of Justice before them and examine him, and also such
others as are fit to be examined, what Fees every man receives from the
Clients, and what service they perform for the same Fees, and whether, this be
for the good and advantage of Clients, and necessary to be done, or whether
superfluous and unnecessary, and performed only for the Fees sake, and not for
any good it brings to the people. And by this narrow scrutiny it might be
brought to such a perfect and exact Reformation, that no man should be
continued to receive ten groats or ten pence from the Client, that could not
give a good Account why he receives it, and that he performs some necessary
service for the Client, deserving the same. But I do not see that this course
is like to be taken; For they that are exalted and stand on the upper ground
(because they see more then I do) think they see all; whereas I, and others
like me, that stand much below them, do see things which they by reason of
their distance of place cannot see. Yet I hope and pray that I may see a real
Regulation and Reformation of the Court of Chancery, which if I do not see
effected, I shall not yet cease, (having little else to do) to tell the people
of this Nation (and that more plainly then I have yet done) where the fault
lies.

FINIS.

