A REMONSTRANCE OR NARRATIVE* By way of Complaint.

To the KINGS most Exellent Majesty, and to the Lords and Commons Asembled in
PARLIAMENT.

In behalf of Robert Oxwicke and Company, Owners of the Ship Endeavor, and of
Richard Baker and Company, Proprietors of the said Ships Lading. The vall^w of
both being 16587 lb. sterling against Giles de la Roach and Company, all
Subjects to the

Wherein is faithfully ^^^cribed their horrid Act of PIRACY AT SEA; Committed
the 21 th of November 1655. English style, against the said English, by the
said de la Roach and other FRENCHMEN.

Together with their BARBAROUS USAGE and MAKING AWAY of many of the English
Mariners. Wi^h the RELATION of their denial of Justice, and notwithstand^ng all
Lawful endeavors used to obtain the same, the English can get no satisfaction
to this Day.

Contrary to the ARTICLES of PEACE concluded the 3 d of November 1655. New
style* as also against Common Right, and the Law of Nations, the Obstruction of
Trade, and the utter Ruin of many of his Majesty's Loyal Subjects.

June 12 th Anno 1660.

LONDON, Printed by Joseph Moxon, in St. Michaels Churchyard on Cornhill.
1660.

BEtween the Islands of Palma, and Teneriffe, this Piratick Tragedy had its
beginning, as appears by the Depositions of those Witnesses in the Margent:
Bowers. Harpley. Tuskin. Teat. ^n Jopp. ^^nphrie

which remain upon Record in the Register of the high Court of Admiralty of
England: They being first Legally Sworn, and examined after due intimation
thereof, first given to the French Ambassador, and public notice thereof by
way of General monition First hung on the Royal Exchange in London, according
to Law, and the accustomed practice in such Cases.

These said Witnesses thus duly Sworn, and examined, do depose, and fully
prove as follows,

1. That the said Ship the Endeavor did belong in property and actual
possession to Robert Oxwicke and Company, Merchants of London: and by them
built in the River of Thames.

2. That the said Ship was laden in Teneriffe, with 313 Pipes of Canarie Wines,
by Evan Pugh and others, Factors and Agents for Richard Baker, and Company,
Merchants of London: and for their sole and proper account: and the said Ship
was by them freighted of the aforesaid Owners in London, to go for Teneriffe,
and from thence to return for London.

3. That the said Ship being there so laden for the account aforesaid, did
therewith set Sail from Teneriffe, and as she was Sailing in her direct and
peaceable Course for the Port of London, were met withal by four French
Ships, under the Command of Giles de la Roach: who in an hostile manner
assaulted them, and violently seized surprised, and took the said Ship
Endeavor, with all her lading, on the 21th of November 1655. English Style.

4. That after they had the said Ship and her lading in their possession, then
they put the English Master and Mariners under close restraint, using them most
inhumanly and barbarously.

5. That there being 3 other ^^^^^sh Ships (...) or in View at the time when
the French, seized on the Ship Endeavor and (...)g, (w(...) the said Fren^^
(...) meddling) they were de(...) f(...) of the said (...) ^ndeavou^
(...)Mari(...) surprised the Ship Endeavor and her (...) and suffered the
other English Ships to escape unmolested? The said de la Roach, and other the
French Commanders answered that they had no Commission for what they had
already done in taking the Endeavor, nor against any English Ships: and
although they had met with diverse other English Ships, yet they had not meddled
with any of them, nor would they have seized on the Ship Endeavor, had not her
lading consisted in Wines, which was so necessary for their Voyage for
Madagascar or the Red Sea.

6. That the said de la Roach and others of the French did say that they had
stayed several days in Rochel in expectation to have had letters of Marque
against the English, but could obtain none, because that the Peace was
concluded between France and England: and said, that their Owners and
Imployers, viz. the Marshall de Mill Ree in France, was Rich and able enough,
and that he ought to pay and make satisfaction to the English for the said Ship
and her lading.

Thus, as before, themselves confessed this spoil to be an Act of Pyracy,
having no Commission, so now they do as plainly acknowledge that satisfaction
ought to be made, and that by the Marshall de Mill Ree.

7. That the said de la Roach and Company did neaver-the-less most ravenously
plunder the said English Mariners, taking away all the goods they had in the
said Ship, to the utter ruin of themselves their Wives and Children at home, (
and to fill up the measure of their detestable proceedings by leaving no one
circumstance of the worst of Pirates unatempted,) they refused (more like
infidels then like Subjects to the Christian King) to set the now distressed
English on any Christian shore, least they might get to England, and so the
truth might come to light. For when these miserable English implored the said
de la Roach and other the French Commanders the favor of being landed on some
of the Canarie Islands (that being also contrary to common ^umanity denied,) and
when afterward on their knees with infinite of tears, they beseeched the like
favor of being put on the Islands of Cape de Verde, answer was again made them
most churlishly, and peremtorily, that they should not be set on any Christian
shore, because they should not return for England (as they said) to tell tales.

8. That after this, in order to destroy the said English and to deprive them
of their lives, and to do it without appearance of direct Murder, (as these
merciless French supposed) having beaten stripped and most barbarously used the
said English, they landed the Master and thirteen more of the English on the
Guinea shore amongst the Barbarous Negroes; leaving them no other sustenance
then one hundred weight of Biscuit dust, and one Pipe of Wine, ( least otherwise
their expected Ruin by death might not be lingering enough,) where they
remained fifteen weeks in most eminent hazard, and continual Jeopardy of their
lives, exposed to nakedness, famine, and to the fury of the Barbarians: till by
a most miraculous providence they were rescued from death by an unexpected and
unusual opportunity of transportation in that place, in a Flemish Vessel, To
the Glory of God, and the perpetual shame of these inhumane Frenchmen.

9. That having so landed, the said English Master and 13 more of the English,
two of the English Mariners being part of many more of the English which the
said de la Roach and the French did carry away in their French Ships, did
afterward in another place in Guinea cast themselves by night into the Sea
through a Port-hole, and so most strangely escaped, and afterward by as
wonderful a providence these two arived also in England.

10. Thus much besides the sum of 16587 lb. for the loss hereby sustained by
the English, the testimony of the said witnesses does clearly and
authentically prove: nor is it to be omitted that these Frenchmen also
confessed that they were ordered by their Imployers, for to have gone for
Lixboa, to have taken in Wines for their Provissions, for which purpose they
carried Credits: but being impeded by contrary winds, they resolved to go for
the Canaries, in expectation to be supplied thereabouts: it being the season of
the Year when Wines were usually Shipped off from thence.

To this may be added, that neither the said de la Roach, nor any of his
company or imployers did ever afterward (as by law they ought ^o have done)
bring the Master of the Endeavor, to the French Admiralty or (...)of the
Comp^^y, or in (...)vall and judication cause any examination to b^ taken of
the (...) ^^glish (so Piratically surprised) (...) any thing to be Judicially
done about (...) their (...)o direct and prescribe, upon pain of loss and
Corp^^^^ punishment (...) it is (...)they acted like most Notorious Pirates,
both a part ante, by attempting this Vyolent assault after that the Peace was
Concluded, and without Commission as by their own Confession: and like
Notorious Pirates a part in, by the seizure, Plundering and Barbarous usage of
the English: and like Notorious Pirates a part post, by not bringing it to any
Court of Justice for a legal Trial and Judication, as the Law of all Nations
received requires, and also as by the said Articles of Peace they ought to have
done.

The Peace between England and the French King was Concluded and Published the
3d of November 1655. New Style, as appears by the date of the very Articles of
that Peace; and this Piracy was Committed the 21th of November, English Style.
The proofs of all which, together with a true transcript and exemplication of
the testimony and deposition of the aforesaid Witnesses, were by special order,
and from the high Court of Admiralty, on behalf of the said English (so robbed
and despoyled) transmitted to Paris, where by order of the Kings Council, they
were there translated into French in the Year 1656.

In September 1656. and in June 1657. Oliver late Projector, wrote and sent
special letters to the French King, and to Cardinal Mazarine, pressing for
Justice to be speedily administered in this deplorable case; the like letters
were writ and sent by Thurloe to the English Agent Lock-hart, pressing him also
to use all possible means by urgent intercession for the same, according to the
Articles of Peace between England and France, whereby it was Capitulated and
agreed, that in all such Cases Justice should be effectually administered within
three Months.

Whereupon the said Agent Lockhart interposed when our said Proofs and
Petitions were presented in the Council in France; yet they would not admit
them, till they had given advice thereof to the Marshall de Mill Ree, and
received his Answer thereto. At last after some Months fruitless attendance we
were permitted to proceed in the Course of Justice, and they made a Decree,
that the said Marshall de Mill Ree should Appear by such a certain time set and
limited: notwithstanding which, neither he in his own Person, nor any other
for him Appeared; whereupon we obtained a second Decree from the French King
and his Council, dated 27 January 165^. That the said Marshall should yet have
two months time more, to make his appearance for his defense, before Judgment
should be given: and on the 20 th of F^bruary following we caused the said
Decrees to our great expense and hazard to be signified and notified to the
said Marshall de Mill Ree, And on the 8th of May following, it was certified us
by the Notarie of the Council, that neither he, nor any for him had appeared
but stood out in contempt to both the said Decrees of the King and his Council
in France.

Whereupon the said Agent Lockhart, again most urgently pressed for a hearing,
and for sentence, which according to Justice and their own Laws they ought to
have given: But it was the first of September following 1657. ere the Court
could be prevailed with, to hear the Cause. And then their Sentence was only
this viz. That they, (viz. the Court) should write to their French King to
beseech his Majesty, that he would write to the Marshall de Mill Ree.

The sixth of October following, the Master of Request was sent by order of the
Council of France, into Brittany to recover our Montes of the Marshall de Mill
Ree; whence returning the second of January 1657/8. re infecta Offered the said
Agent Lockhart for our use the sum of 8000 Pistols by way of Composition.

Thus having been at vast expense and charge in prosecution of this business in
France, and all our Endeavors (through the interest and petency of the said
Marshall) rendered Elusorie, and to no purpose: no Justice to be there had
(notwithstanding the sadness and equity of our Case) we were necessitated to
have recourse again to the usurping Powers then in England, and solicited them
for Letters of Marque against the French by way of Compensation and
satisfaction for this wrong, according to the said Articles of Peace, and the
Law of Nations.

Whereupon order being given the ^5 of March 1658. to the high Court of
Admiralty to Examine and peruse our Proofs, Papers and Proceedings in this
Case, and to report their opinion upon the whole matter. They did upon long and
serious debate and deliberation of all the Circumstances in Fact at last Report
and unanimously certify* that we ought to have from the said French full
Restitution for the said Ship and Lading, for the Principle and Damages 16587
lb Ster^^ng* The said report saying That it was a Tort and fowl spoil done and
committed, contrary to the said Trea^y of Peace ^h^ Law of Nations* and Common
Right,

When they had notice in France that we were Soliciting in England for Letters
of Marque against them* and that the Court of Admiralty were ordered to Report
the State of the case* and how Barbarously and Cruelly they had used the
English. Then we received advice from Paris of certain other strange and
illegal proceedings there; (which to omit would be a favor they have
forfeited) and to the end that the World may know of such their un-nationall
illegalities, we have thought i^ Consonant to the (...)at ^^^lish it in
^^^^ssimis verbis.

(...) (...)wed Advice (...). From our Corres^^^^^nts there residing for this
affair in th^se words, viz. There is a Decree against you h(...)nd Mounsieur
Petit our Ambassadors Agent, desired to have it out, but they will not give it:
the ^aster of Request has been made against you, yet he says he is not
satisfied in it.

And by another of the 26th of the same month, in these words, viz. It is true
that they have Condemned your Ship as Prize, but how the Condemnation is, I
know not: for they will not give it out; by which you may perceive their
Justice (or rather Injustice.) And the Reporter Busherat (much against the
interest of the English) confessed to Mr. Petit, and Mr. Morrel, that it was
not done according to a Legal course of Justice.

And by another of the 16th of June, in these words, viz. Your Councellor has
Petitioned the Court for a Copy of your Papers, and of the Sentence; but it is
denied, saying, that they are in several men's hands, and that we could not
have them.

And by another of the 27th of July, in these words, viz. That the Papers
cannot be got, unless the Powers (then usurping in England) make it their
request. Besides* it was also advised, that the French Secretary of State has
forty Thousand Livers stock with the Marshall de Mill Ree, in that unluckie
Madagascar design.

We had an Agent in Paris no less then nigh four years Attending and Soliciting
this business, who never had the least notice, Summons or Monition, (as by Law
he ought to have had,) that any Sentence was to be given, neither were our
Procurator nor our Council so much as Summoned to appear, or heard to speak in
the cause, at the time of such their Sentence. So that if any such were at all
it was done Secretly, Surreptiously, and Clandestinely, (and as such it is void
and null in Law) when for two years before we were most urgently and instantly
pressing daily the Court for a hearing, and for Justice, but could obtain
neither.

Of all which their proceedings, we the English were necessitated to complain
to the powers then here usurping; who (upon the 10 th of June 1658.) perused
the aforesaid Report from the said High Court of Admiralty of England. And it
was ordered, that Thurloe should (together with his Letters) send Copies of the
said report, both to the French Ambassador, and to the said Agent Lockhart,
pressing them to renew their Addresses, that (notwithstanding the pretended
Sentence given in Paris) full and speedy satisfaction might be made to the
afflicted English complaynants, which being writ, sent, and delivered
accordingly, the said Agent Lockhart wrote thereupon to Count Bryene (the
Secratary of State in France) with intimation that Letters of Reprizal would be
issued for the relief of the English; in case satisfaction were not otherwise
speedily made them.

The second of December following, relation being made by Thurloe (to the new
usurping powers here) how that he had sent letters with the coppies of the
Report of the Court of Admiralty (in conformity to the former order of the 10
th of June past) and had desired the French Ambassador, and the Agent Lockhart
to make their earnest addresses that satisfaction should be forthwith made to
the aforesaid English: and yet notwithstanding the same was not done. It was
ordered that letters of Reprizall should be granted to the said English for
reparation of their said losses, against the French, in case satisfaction be
not given them, by, or before the first of March next, until which time, and
no longer the issuing thereof is to be respited and forborne: whereof the said
Thurloe was again ordered to give notice to the Lord Ambassador Bourdeaux, and
also to the Agent Lockhart, that they might Communicate the same to the French
King.

Thurloe having accordingly wrote and sent intimation to the said French
Ambassador, and to the said Agent Lockhart of the aforesaid order, how that
letters of Reprizall would be issewed (in case satisfaction should not be made
to the English) by or before the first of March then next ensuing.

Whereupon the said Agent Lockhart having recourse to the Cardinal and to the
Secretary Count Bryene about it, and complaining of their illegal Sentence
given, without having given the English so much as notice that the cause was to
be heard or sentenced* ( a thing never before heard of:) The said Secratary
made reply and promised both A ^^vocation of the Sentence unduly past to the
prejudice of that cause, and satisfaction to be given to the English within 15
days, which appears by the Certificate under the hand of the said Lockhart,
dated the 13 th of June 1659.

And by another Certificate of his the said Lockhart, dated the 10 th of March
1659/60. how that at his being in St. John de Luz, in compliance of an order
from the Rump Parliament, the said Cardinal Mazarine promised him that the
business should be dispatched as soon as he and the Council met, and that full
satisfaction should be given to the English. But to this day the English have
not received a penny, to the utter ruin and decay of many of his Majesty's
good Subjects, their Wives and Children.

We cannot (...)eal, but here insert the Declaration upon Oath of Thomas
Atkinson, one of the English Mariners of the Ship Endeavor, who with many
more of the English of the said Ships Company, the said de la Roach and Company
carried away in their French Ships.

1. How that the said de la Roach did (after his being aboard the French Ships,
and long after the casting the Master and many more of the English a shore in
Guinea) take another English Ship, whose Masters name was Fisbell, and threw
eighteen men into the Sea, and having taken out of the said Ship what they
pleased, they set her on Fire. 2. That the four French Ships had 56 great brass
Ordinance belonging to the Crown of England, which they had from Prince Ruper.
3. That de la Roach met with Captain Taylers Ship, as she was coming from the
East Indies, with whom he fought but could not take his Ship. 4. That after the
said de la Roach and Companions were arrived at Madagascar, they made ready,
and manned out the English Ship Endeavor, with intention to have carried all
the English to Arabia, to have sold them for slaves, but the Monson (or Wind)
turning, prevented them. 5. That the chief mate of the Endeavor was starved,
and died in Irons. 6. That all the rest of the Ship Endeavors Company were
either famished, and died for want, or by inhumane usage, and that none
remained alive but himself. 7. That being most miraculously returned to Nance,
and there Petitioning the Marshall de Mill Ree for wages, he threatened him, and
bid him go to his Owners and Imployers for his pay: saying that he must pay
16000 lb. for their Ship and Goods. 8. That the said de la Roach did carry him
before a Judge, in Nance: and bid him declare that the Ship Endeavor and her
lading did belong to Spaniards, and showed him a handful of Pistols, (whereof
he threw one to him) and said that he would give him all that Gold, and would
moreover pay him his wages, if he would swear so; and when they had understood
that he had not so declared before the said Judge, one of the Captains that was
with the said de la Roach in his Voyage did run at him, with his drawn Swords
and having escaped from him, and receiving advice that they had determined to
kill him, by the help of some English, he got in the Night aboard of a Vessel
that lay at the mouth of the River, and so got for England.
Neither can we omit the setting down also, the Declaration upon Oath of John
Stone, chief-mate of the English Ship Adventure, whereof Joseph Tailor was
Commander.

That as they were Sailing from the East India to London, in the month of
April 1656. they met with one of the four Ships belonging to the Marshall de
Mill R^e. And after they had haled them, and told them that they were of
Rochel, and that there was Peace between France and England, and that both were
joined in a War against Spain, and desired the English to come aboard their
French Ship, which the English refusing to do, the French shot at the English,
and after two days fight, were left by them, seeing that none of their ^ Ships
appeared, having before lost company. By the fight the English had above a 1000
lb. damage.

THE PREMISES CONSIDERED. It is most Evident and Notorious, that the said Ship
and Lading in property, and in right, belong only to Subjects of his Most
Exellent Majesty: that they being in the quiet and peaceable possession
thereof, were Despoyled, Robbed, and Piratically dispossessed thereof, in an
Hostile manner, though in a time of Peace, by the said de la Roach and Company,
all Subjects of the French King.

That those Ravenous Captors have by their own confession, concluded themselves
under the horrid guilt of Piracies, not only by acknowledging they had no
Commission for what they did, but also by declaring their knowledge of the
Peace then concluded between England and France: whence their guilty
Consciences could not be tongue-tyed from confessing that the Marshall de Mill
Ree (their Principal Owner and Imployer) ought to make satisfaction to the
English.

That not contented with the spoil and depradation they had Committed on the
goods and interest of the Innocent English, they afterward proceeded to extend
and exercise their Diabolismes and Infernal Cruelties on their Persons also;
and having what adventures they had, they kept them under close restraint, and
treating them most inhumanly and barbarously: not suffering them to Land on any
Christian shore, though begd on their knees with floods of Tears; and having
thus far proceeded in their Cruelties against the said distressed English,
they do then stripp them of their wearing Apparel, and instead thereof give
them many and many a stripe, beating and most doggedly affronting them with all
manner of additional aggravations of misery: In the next place they Landed the
English Master with 13 more of his Mariners on the Coast of Guinea among the
Barbarous Negroes, exposing them to Nakedness, and Famine, by leaving with them
just no more sustenance then what might serve to multiply the terrors of Death,
by antedating the fear of death: and others of the said distressed English did
afterward cast themselves through the Port-hole of the Ship, into the more
merciful Ocean, to avoid their Barbarous usage aboard of their French Ships.

And thus, having exposed so many of the English to the mercy of the
Barbarians, leaving them only stripes for Raiment and Tears for Food: they now
proceed in their mischevious malice against the residue of the English
Mariners, of the said Ship Endeavor, and had resolved to have sent them to
Arabia, there to have sold them for Slaves, had not the Almighty by contrary
Winds counter-manded their hellish design, and so in mercy gave a check to
their unlimitted resolves; which slavery though they providently escaped, yet
afterward all of them, save one, (which was as a reserve of Providence on
purpose to bear witness of the Truth) by these unparalled Barbarismes perished,
some in Irons starved to death (as the Chief-mate of the Endeavor) and others
famished through the extremity of those wants, and Barbarous usages, dyed by
those intolerable hardships of those inhumane Frenchmen: who not satisfied
with so stately a Ship as the Endeavor was, nor with so rich a Lading as she
had, nor with the more precious blood of so many English as Sailed in her, did
yet after all this upon their surprizal of another English Ship cast no less
then 18. of her English Mariners into the Sea, plundered her Lading, and so
fired the Ship, and many months after attempted to have taken also the Ship
coming from the East India aforesaid.

Having treated of the matter of Fact: we beseech your Majesty to take a short
review of the proceedings of the French in order to satisfaction; for though
the loss which the English sustained amounted to no less then 16587 lb.
(besides the Lives of so many English Subjects) and that the said de la Roach
nor any of the French ever bring the said Ship and Lading to any Tribunal for
Justice, in order to a Legal Judication; insomuch that the English were for
prevention of Famine, to many Widows, and Fatherless Children at home, (as
before had happened to their Husbands and Parents abroad) necessitated to make
their application to the Powers then usurping in England, and having procured
examinations to be taken upon oath of the whole matter of Fact in due form of
Law did Transmitt them to Paris, where they were Translated into French, by the
French Kings order: whereupon the said usurping Powers in England sent their
several special letters to the French King and Cardinal Mazarine, instantly
pressing for speedy Justice on the behalf of the English; with like letters to
their Agent Lockhart, to Solicit most earnestly at the Court of France; which
he did accordingly, though Ineff^^tually: For notwithstanding all this, such
was the power, prevalency, and interest of the said Marshall de Mill R^e at the
Court of France, who slighting the Decrees of the Court made for his
Appearance, stood out in peremptory Contempt of the said Court, and Appeared
not. At length after years attendance spent in Soliciting his business, that
unparralled order ( Evasion or Delusion) was made by the Supreme Court of
France requesting that his Majesty would write to the Marshall de Mill Ree, we
had thus a Cipher Instead of Justice from the French, and no more in point of
satisfaction for the English. And all this, notwithstanding the said de la
Roach had confessed that the said Marshall de Mill Ree ought to pay for the
Ship and Lading; yea, and the Marshall himself had also said that he must pay
16000 lb. for the same. And the Secratary of State did promise that the English
should have full satisfaction within 15 days. And the Cardinal promsed both in
Paris and again afterward in St John de Luze, that the English should be
forthwith paid, as by the aforesaid Agent Lockharts Certificates.

Now forasmuch as the oppressed English, for the most sad and weighty reasons
aforesaid, were necessitated to have recourse to the Powers then usurping in
England, for letters of Marque and Reprizall, against the French, upon this
their denial of Justice, according to the Articles of Peace, and the Law of
Nations, the distressed Complaynants in behalf of themselves and a great number
of poor Widows, and Fatherless Children, so made and undone by the said
French. Humbly Imploring his Majesty's Gracious Pardon, for their enforced and
necessitated address to the said usurping Powers, do now (as Loyal Subjects to
his Most Sacred Majesty,) fly to his Royal Person, and his Regal Authority,
(as next under God, the only Sanctuary of his distressed People,) and to his
Majesty's Two Houses of Parliament, as the Supreme Council and Judicature of
these his Majesty's Dominiors for speedy Justice in this most deplorable Case,
against the French, that they may be Required forthwith to render to the
oppressed Complainants full and effectual satisfaction for the Principal, with
Interest, together with all Costs and Damages sustained by the said English,
by reason of the said spoil and depredation unjustly Committed by the said
French, as also by reason of the said denial of Justice, subsequent to that
spoil, whereby the French are strengthened, the English weakened, Pirates
countenanced, Trade discouraged, much English-Innocent Blood exhausted,
Free-Subjects of England by Forrayners Enslaved: the Articles of Peace
Violated, and the Law of God, of Nature, and of Nations contemned and despised:
that so the great sufferings of these his Majesty's oppressed Subjects may at
last by a meet and equivalent reparation and satisfaction be Balanced
according to Justice, and Equity: And that in case they shall on his Majesty's
demand of Justice, still (as formerly) deny it, that then according to their
own Articles of Peace and the Law of Nations, his Sacred Majesty would be
Graciously pleased to cause Letters of Marque or Reprizall upon this Specia^l
Case to issue against the French, or such other course to be taken as to his
Majesty shall seem expedient, for the relief and satisfaction of his Poor,
Distressed, Suffering Subjects, in a Cause so Just, so Deplorable, so Loudly
Crying for Justice, so Emphatically pleading for Pity and Commiseration. And
the Complaynants, your Majesty's ever Loyal Subjects shall ever Pray, that he
by whom Kings Reign, and Princes Rule. would still preserve your Sacred
Majesty, as his Anointed, ever under a Guard of Angels, Bless you in your
Government, and in both your Houses of Parliament, Enthrone you in the hearts
and affections of all your Majesty's Subjects in all your Dominions, for many
years here, and in the presence of Angels and Glorified Spirits in the Kingdom
of Heaven to all Eternity hereafter.

FINIS.

