THE REMONSTRANCE OF THE SOLDIERY To the Right Honorable, the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common council of the City of LONDON.
WHile the Loud Cry of our oppressed Country, is now every where resounding and
reaching up to Heaven, against the intolerable Tyranny of our false and
Treacherous Masters, who with good words, a Bit and a Knock have drilled us on
to the utter Ruin and Dishonor of this once Glorious Kingdom; and being now
made sensible that we carry our Arms merely for the Safeguard and upholding
of a Desperate Crew, whose demerits suffer not their guilty souls to think of
any Expedient or Remedy to cure any Distresses but their own; that therefore we
may Ease their Mischievous brain of any further Designs tending to the
accomplishment of our poor Countries Slavery, which they can obtain and effect
by no hands but Ours; and to ease Our minds and consciences of that accessory
guilt, with which we may be justly charged.

We do Remonstrate and Declare, That seeing it has pleased God by his Wisdom
and Justice to make Our Old Officers that were the Instruments and Authors of
all that Confusion and Ruin which has overwhelmed these Nations since 1648 a
hissing and shame to all the World, and that by a Rod of their own making,
Thereby to undeceive and rightly inform Us of Our unlawful continuance in this
Our present Military employment; That We do from Our very Souls desire a
dismission from under the Command, and (we were a going to say) Pay of this
arbitrary tyrannical power, and would presently disband Our Selves, and desert
Our Colors if it were not folly and madness to expose Our single individual
Selves to the fury and rage of Our Masters, who being backed by General Monks
near assistance, would otherwise wreak their utmost revenge upon us.

We do therefore unanimously, cordially, and readily tender Our service, Our
Lives and Fortunes to the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor of the City of
London, to be directed, employed, and ordered as to his Lordship and his Grave
Council shall seem convenient, being ready with any the utmost hazzards (though
we suppose the name of our assistance to his Lordships just endeavors after a
Free Parliament will do the work) to redeem our miserable Country, and our
former honor and renown.

To that purpose we have secured our Arms, and are resolved never more to
submit to the members at Westminster, till it be a free and full House; and if
room must be made for the Scotch Army our lovely brethren, it shall be no way
inconsistent we think with the liberty of the City to admit and entertain us
for guests, seeing it has pleased God out of mercy to this Nation to make us
all of one mind and heart, to the bringing about his intended mercy to it.

We have now ecchoed the universal desires of the Nation, and if your
Petitions and civil extraordinary addresses to (as we hope that honorable
person) General Monk do not prevail, say but the word only, and give us
some Commanders, and you shall see the answer and effect of our Drums and
Trumpets.

POSTSCRIPT.
The purport of this Remonstrance was in our intentions long before; but the
change of our Officers and the distrusts and divisions cunningly fomented by
them among us, retarded the addressing of it to your Lordship; but we hope it
is now come in its best time.


