THE LIFE AND ADVENTURES OF BUSCON The Witty Spaniard.

Put into English by a Person of Honor.

To which is added, The PROVIDENT KNIGHT.

By Don Francisco de Quevedo, A Spanish Cavalier.

London, Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the Anchor in the New-Exchange in the Lower-Walk, 1657.

To his much Honored Friend T. P.
SIR,
I Had no sooner boarded the Adventure, but I thought my self bound to send you
the Prize; She Is Spanish, and so your own, whose approbation set me first out
to scowr those Coasts: Her main burden is mirth; for since the Donn's lost the
last Plate-Fleet, they have Traded very little with Money.

J. D.

Reader.
WIll you buy a Glass, a Mirror that flatters not? Bid fair, here it is that
will show you your whole proportion; for it represents the greatest part of the
world Fools and Knaves; and it is two to one but you may see your self here. Fox
and Geese is the whole Game, and if sixteen Geese can pen up one Fox, the Game
is well played.

The whole matter of this Book consists of these two diverse qualities:
Sometimes you will find them cheek be jole together, like a Sergeant and his
Yeoman; Sometimes in a greater Decorum, like a Country Justice and his Clerk,
who never divide but in their Fees. Here you may learn after your own way, be
fooled into wit; and be taught as Dancing-Masters first teach Bumpkins, by
laughing them out of their old Garb: You Will say, it is too light; no, you are too
grave: Nothing but has something of lightness; The Soldier his Feather, the
Priest his Tassel, and the Citizen his Wife: But if you will be grave, you may
here read a Lecture of your whole life past, sit in your Chimney and see what
your Son does, or rather suffer under a merciless Pedant; Or if you are a Form
higher you may read the Politics here, and by Buscons last Knavery, see what
necessity there was for an Act of Marriage.

Buscon's Extraction, with the Quality of his Father and Mother.
GEntle Readers, I was born in Segovia, a City of the Province of Casteele, in
the Kingdom of Spain: My Fathers name was Ysidore, Native of the same City and
by Trade a Barber; but such was his courage, that he was much troubled, when
any one called him Barber, and would reply, he was a Circumciser of Hairs, and
a Metamorphoser of Beards: His Wife, who as I believe, was my Mother, was
called Roguille. It was the opinion of most of the Neighborhood, that she was
of the race of the Jews: she was of indifferent good behavior, and tolerably
handsome, and for that reason, most of the Poets and Rimers of Spain made copies
of pleasant Verses upon her. When she was first married, as also some time
after, she had many vexations; for some of our Neighbors tongues were so
lavish as to report, that she had changed the Roman I of my Fathers name into a
Greek Y. He poor man was accused, and in fine convicted, that at any time when
he shaved his Customers, or dressed his Patients about the Groin, holding up
their noses aloft, a young Brother of mine about seven years old, was wont very
dexterously to pick their pockets; but that poor little Angel, (peace be with
him) dyed in prison, under the penance of a discipline which was applied to
him with a little too much rigor. My Father was very much afflicted at it, for
that he drove a pretty trade with him: he had often times before his death, and
never so much as once after, been Prisoner; but as I have been told, he always
was delivered with a great deal of honor, accompanied by people of all
conditions. I have heard too, that the women used to be Spectators at their
windows of this Comedy; I speak it not by way of vainglory, for every one
knows, I am not that way inclined.

To return unto my Mother; Once upon a time, an old woman, who attended me in
the nature of a Nurse, said unto me by way of commendation of her, she had so
many attractions, that she had bewitched every one who frequented her company;
knew how to soder up a cracked Mayden-head, to retrive lost love, and to renew
old age: Some called her the Bone-setter of dislocated affections, and
othersome of the more vulgar sort, styled her in plain English, Bawd, and said
that she played at all Games for money: but for her part, she smiled at them
all, that she might the better snap them, when they came within her Duckquey. I
shall not scruple to tell you, the penance she did undergo; she had a Chamber
into which no one went but her self, which to say the truth, was much like a
Charnel-house, being full of sinners bones, which, to make use of her own
phrase, she kept to put her in mind of mortality, and to make her despise life;
it was garnished about with Images of wax, Vervain, Hern, and other herbs of
St. John's Eve, of which she made strange compositions.

Upon a certain day a dispute happened between may Father and her, unto which of
their two Trades I should betake my self, but I who from my youth, had always
generous and noble thoughts, would not addict my self to either one or the other
of them. My Son, said my Father unto me, the Proression of a Thief is one of
the liberal Sciences, and does not at all relish of the mechanic, though
somewhat of the handicraft: the honestest men do now adays make it their
profession; and who so steals not, knows not how to live in this world; and why
think you I pray do their Sergeants and Bailiffs so persecute us? only because
one Trade envies another: why do they banish us, why whip; and hang us up? (I
can scarce proceed any farther without weeping, for the good old man cried like
a child at the remembrance of the sundry times his shoulders had been brushed)
it is, because they would suffer no other Thieves but themselves to cohabite
with them: but providential craft does sometimes deliver us out of their
clutches. In my youth, I usually walked the Churches, and other places of
public meetings, and though I was sometimes snap'd, yet I still got off by my
wits, which were good at a dead lift; so that by this handicraft, I have
maintained both thy Mother and self, in very good fashion: How, Blessing of me,
quoth my Mother, all in a rage, do thou offer to say thou have maintained
me? thou lie, It is I, who have provided bread for thee, at the cost of my
own flesh, and who have diverse times drawn thee out of prison, by my own
industry, and tell me now by your faith, when you were put to the Rack, and
that you that confessed nothing, did it proceed from the strength of your
courage, or those Broaths I made you, which cost me no small sum of money?
No, no, you are an unworthy, ungrateful wretch, and did I not fear some one in
the Street might hear me, I could remember you of a time when I got by the
Chimney into a Chamber, when you were once snap'd as in a Rat-trap, and brought
you out like a cat through a Garret window. More she had said, (for she was
very much provoked) had she not amidst the violence of her passion broken the
string of her Beads, which were of dead men's teeth, who she had made away,
which she began to pick up. Now I, that I might neither exasperate one nor
the other, I resolutely told them I would follow goodness and my own virtuous
inclinations; to which end I desired them to send me to School, that I might
learn to write. That proposal of mine seemed very reasonable unto them, however
they left not off quarrelling between themselves; My Mother betook her self to
threading her Beads of teeth, my Father he went to shave one, but whether of
his beard or purse I know not; for my part, I was left all alone, and began to
thank my Stars, that I was born of two so illustrious, so ingenuous persons,
and so sollicitous of my good education.

Buscon is sent to School, and the pleasant adventure which befell him, whilst
he was King of the Scholars.
NOt long after, they bought for me the first Rudiments of Art, vulgarly called
the Horn-Book; and having agreed for fifteen pence a month, they sent me to
School. My Master received me with a very smiling countenance, for he newly
came from eating a rasher of Bacon; he had broke fast when we came to him, and
told my Father that any Phi^nomie, meaning I suppose Phisiognomy) promised that
I should one day be a greater Personage then I was at that present. I had not
been above eight days at School, before my Mistress, who was a bonny Lass
perceived that I was a Lad of mettle, and might be proper to do her errands,
and for that reason, she was more kind to me then the other Scholars, which
made them envy me. Now to let you see, that I had ever a good courage, I began
from that time, to keep company with those, who were bigger then my self,
insomuch that I became intimate with a Cavaliers son of the City, whose name
was Don Alonso de Sougniga. We ate and drank together, Every Holy Day I went to
play with him; to be short, I was never out of his company; whereupon the other
Scholars, either angry, that I slighted them, or desirous of correcting my
presumption, would be ever and anon twitting me in the teeth with my Fathers
Trade. One called me Lord of the Razer, Master of the Cupping-Glasses, and
Diaculum, another laid it in my Dish that my Mother had debauched two of his
Sisters; a third, that my Father had been sent for to his house to drive away
the Rats, as much as to say, he was a Cat, with many the like injurious
speeches, and though I was not a little nettled at those indignities, yet I
seemed not to regard them, until upon a certain day, one of my Comerades with
whom I fell out at play, called me Son of a whore, and witch; now because he
spoke it so plainly that every one heard it, (for had he spoken a little
softlier peradventure I should have taken no notice of it) I threw a stone so
hard at him, that I broke his head, whereupon away ran I to my Mother, to
acquaint her with what had passed; who answered me, well have thou done my Son,
thou now show who thou art, only thou were to blame for not asking him who
told him so. I hearing that, and having always my wits about me, answered her I
was only vexed, that some then present, had told me I had no reason to be so
angry, and that I had not asked them, whether they said so in regard of the
boys childishness; thereupon I desired of her to let me know, whether I might
give him the lie, whether I was extraordinarily begotten, or the Son of my
reputed Father. How quoth she smiling, art thou already so subtle and
inquisitive? By my troth, I see thou art wiser then I thought thee to be: well
have thou done to revenge thy self, thou ought to have broken his pate; for
feeing those things are done in secret, it is a sign that they should not be
published: with that I was struck dumb as a Bell-founder, when he runs his
mettle, and resolved to get whatever I could finger in the house, and to betake
my self to the wide world, to see how great an Empire Honor had already
obtained over me! however I dissembled my intention; away went my Father to
seek out the Boy, that he might wipe off this reproach, who asked him
forgiveness, and so peace being made, I was returned to the School, where at
first my Master received me in great anger, but having considered what
provocations I had, he abated his fury.

Whilst I remained there, I was ever and anon visited by that Scholar with
whom I before told you, I had contracted a great friendship: his name was Don
Diego, and he had a particular kindness for me; I used to exchange my Giggs and
Tops with him, though mine were the better of the two. I gave him part of my
junkets which I brought to School, and never asked any of him. I presented him
also with Pictures, in fine I became so complaisant to every of his humors,
that at last his Father and Mother who knew nothing of the ill report of mine,
seeing their child took such delight in my company, were very well pleased when
I did dine, supp, or lie with Don Diego, Withal I was very courteous to such as
visited me, nature having befriended me with a countenance and shape which
every one thought to be indifferent handsome. Now it so fell out upon a day
just after the Christmas Holy Days, that we going together to School, met with
one whose name was Ponce d' Aguire, a rag of the Law, who was not very well in
his wits: Let us call yon fellow Ponce Pilate, quoth little Diego, and then run
away; I to content my friend did so, before he had quite desired it; whereupon
the man became so furious, that he ran after me with a knife in his hand,
resolved to kill me, insomuch that I was forced to double my pace, and save my
self in the School-house under my Master; presently in came the man and fell
upon me, but my Master took him off, and promised to whip me soundly; and
although my Mistress came to my relief, and begged my pardon, in regard of the
good offices I did her, yet he forthwith caused me to untruss, and whipping me,
at every lash, would ask me, will you any more say Pontius Pilate? and I
answered crying, No Sir, insomuch that having once and again renewed my promise
to him, and he bethinking the great punishment I had received, forbore further
correction: It so fell out that the next morn, whilst we were saying the
Creed, and our other Prayers, as we daily used, when I came to those words, who
suffered under Pontius Pilate, I remembered my fault, and said, who suffered
under Pontius d' Aguire, to see my Innocence, my Master seeing my great
simplicity, could not forbear laughing, but presently promised me to forgive me
the two first faults I should commit, and though they deserved the lash, yet
that I should not be whipped. I could not but be well pleased therewith.

It was then near about the time for choosing of Kings, and my Master intending
to give some recreations to his Scholars, resolved to make a Royalty. The cake
was divided, and the Kingdom of the Bean came to my share without any artifice.
Forthwith I acquainted my Father and Mother, that they might provide me clothes
and trinkets The day of triumph being come, I was mounted upon a Rocinant of
Don Quixot, a perfect Enchanters Horse, the leanest that was ever seen, his
Chine was at least a quarter of a mile long, and withal so humble, that more
could not be, for he went making of Reverences; he had but one eye, a neck like
a Camel, and a tail like an Ape, that is without any tail at all. To be short,
he was a dumb witness who accused his Master of the austere life, and the many
fasting days he forced him to keep, by detaining the better half of his
sustenance from him. Mounted I was upon this sprightly Barb, attended by all
the rest of my School-fellows, dressed up in the most egregious Ornaments their
Mothers could procure for them. In this gallant Equipage we passed through the
market place; I assure you I cannot yet but shake for very fear, whilst I
think of it; for coming near the Herb-womens stalls, Libera nos Domine, from
their fury! my hunger-starved Horse, fell upon a Basket of Coleworts, and
forthwith devoured them, stuffing his Guts, and not a little overjoyed with so
pleasant a bait. The Herb-woman, whose coleworts they were; being a sort of
women as impudent as Oyster-wives, began to cry after me with open mouth, at
which the whole tribe of them ran flocking about her, with a number of canting
Beggars and Porters, who snatching up their handfulls of great Turnips and
Onions out of the Hampers, fell to pelting of the poor King, who knew not what
shift to make. And I seeing it was a Turn-up combat, had a good mind to
turn-down, but at that very instant, one of those cuckoldly Rogues gave my
horse so great a charge upon the nose, that he began to stand on end, and being
none of the strongest fell backwards together with my worship, not upon dry
land, but with reverence be it spoken, into a bottomless Jakes, which to my
misfortune was there at hand. I give you leave to guess with your self; how
sweetly I was pickled. Amidst this scufle, my Companions armed by this, in
their Kings defense, broke two of the herb-womens necks: In came the Officers,
who seized upon the Herb-women, and such Scholars and arms, as they could
catch; for my Subjects had made use of their weapons in an offensive way, which
they intended only for show, as Daggers, Swords and Spears.

At length, the Sergeants came to me, who though I had no arms, they having
been taken into a house, together with my Hat and Royal Robe to be dried, yet
did they not forbear to demand them, whereunto I answered all beshit as I was;
that I had none offensive as to matter of life, but only to the sense of
smelling. How ever my worship being the chief Actor in the Tragedy, the
Catchpole-rogue, would needs have me away to prison, but he was forced to leave
me there, for that he knew not to lay hands on me I was so bedawbed. Some went
one way, some another, and at last home got I affronting every ones nose I met.
Being got home, I related my misfortune to my Father and Mother, but they
instead of laughing, were so enraged to see me in such a stinking condition,
that they resolved to bestow a good beating upon me. I endeavored to plead my
excuses the best I could, by laying the whole fault on the horse, which they
had lent me, but finding all was to little purpose, away ran I to Don Diego,
who was newly come home with a cut in his head, which he received in the fray,
which made his Father and Mother conclude not to send him any more to School.

By this, one came and brought me news of poor Rocinant, he told me, how he
had seen him in such extremity, that he was constrained to make a virtue of
necessity, and by often plunging to get out of that villainous slough, had
broken his Girts, Breast Plate, and Crupper, and so remained ready to breath
his last in that golden Mine. Seeing then that all our sport ended in a Turd,
and that all the market was in an uproar, my Father and Mother at their wits
ends to think of paying for the horse, and my friend wounded, I made a vow
never to go to School more, nor indeed to my Fathers house, but to keep close
with Don Diego, to wait upon him, or to speak more truly, to keep him company
to his Father and Mothers great content, for they knew their Son did love me
very dearly. In order to this design I sent home word, that I had no more need
to go to School, for indeed though I could not write well, yet I could do well
enough for a Cavalier; which profession I proposed to my self to imitate,
amongst whom, to write ill and pay worse, are two great virtues, and for that
reason I would forsake the School, to ease them of their charge, and their
house to rid them of my trouble. I acquainted them with the place of my abode,
assuring them, I should never return to them any more, without their permission
pre-obtained.

Buscon becomes Servant to a Scholar, and relates the Penance they underwent
whilst his Master and himself were in Pension, wherein he describes the
Coveteousness of a Podant.
NOt long after, Don Alonso concluded to send his Son unto some Master of Arts,
to table with him, and my self to accompany him, that he might wean him as it
were, from his Parents fondness, which commonly makes children Dunces and
Cocknies. He was at last informed of one Ragot, who used to teach Gentlemen's
children. To him was Don Diego immediately sent, and my self to wait upon him.
The very first Sunda^ after Easter, we entered into the Territories of Famine,
for indeed the misery and villainy of that man could not properly be called by
any other name. I will give you a brief description of him: He was broad
shouldered, his head formed like a Sugarloaf, his hair red, from which color
God deliver us: His eyes were so sunk into his head, and withal so hollow,
that their stations would have been very proper to have made shops for Brokers,
who cheat the world by selling in the dark; his nose like a Saddle, you would
have imagined, some one had broken the bridge of it with a clap; his Beard like
a Palisadoe, not so much with age, as with fear, for being so near his
hunger-starved mouth, which seemed perpetually to threaten the devouring of
him. He had not full six teeth in his mouth, his Throat was as long as a
Cranes, his Arms lean, his Hands like a Skeleton, if he stirred never so
little, all his bones ratled within him, just like a wicker bortle at a Dogs
ta^l; he never cut his beard, that he might loose nothing of it, and used to
say, he would as soon loose his life, as suffer a Barbers hands to come upon
his chopps; he wore a cap which the rats had all to beeaten, for the Grease
sake; it was now worn stuff, though once called cloth; he had a Cassock, some
called it miraculous; for that no one could tell of what color it was, or ever
had been; some seeing it, and that it had no napp upon it, concluded it to be
made of Frogs skins, othersome said it was an illusion, at a distance, you
would have sworn, it had been black, and nearer at hand blew, he had no Collar,
girdle nor Sleeves; in a word, so accoutred, that every one would have taken
him for a Scar-crow. In his house was neither Rat nor Mouse, he had a trick to
conjure them away, least they should eat up the Crusts of bread, which he
always kept in his Pockets: his bed was the bare ground, and he ever lay on one
side^ for fear of wearing out his clothes, to conclude, he was an arch Villain,
and a miserable Hound.

Behold us now, under the tuition and Government of this gallant Person. At our
first coming, he appointed us a Chamber, and read us a Laconique Lecture, that
he might not loose too much time, for every thing went through his hands. He
set us our daily task, which lasted till Supper-time. It was his custom, that
when our Masters were at meat, we their Servants waited upon them, which was
none of the greatest works, for indeed there were not above five boarders, they
being young, and Gentlemen's sons of the Country. The first thing which came
under my observation, was, that there was never a cat in the house, I desired
to know the reason of it, and addressed my self to an old Servant in the house,
who was nothing but skin and bones; he half weeping said unto me, from whom
have you ever learned that cats were lovers of Fastings, or such austerities as
are here used? One may see by your gaping, that you are a newcommer; you cannot
imagine, what an afflictive impression this reply made upon me, our good Master
the Doctor sat him down, and having said Grace, they made a dinner like
eternity, for it had neither beginning nor ending: they had broth brought unto
the Table in little wooden Saucers so transparent, that had Narcissus been
there, he had run the same danger of being drowned, as at the Fountain. I
observed how industriously the Pensioners lean fingers were playing upon the
Virginals, as it were, to snap up a poor pea, which endeavored to save
himself, sometimes by swimming, and sometimes by diving. At every sup of this
warm water which the Doctor swallowed, I do not know any thing, would he say,
which may compare with Broth. Let people say what they will, every thing else,
is but excess and superfluities; do but observe how it preserves the body in
health, and the mind in full vigor. The Devil take you thought I to my self,
when behold in came a Servant, more like a Ghost then a body, so shin he was,
who brought with him a dish of meat (which seemed to have been cut off from his
own body) with a Turnip upon it, set out like a grand Sallet, how quoth the
Doctor, here is a Turnip according to my own wish, for my part, I think there is
no Patridge like it; eat, eat, my Lads, it does me good to see you feed so
heartily, with that he cut every one a little piece, so little indeed, that I
think I may safely swear, there stuck as much in either of their Nayls and
teeth, as went into their Bellies. Ragot observed them saying, cheer up, you
are young, and I rejoice to see you have such good stomachs, consider I pray
you, what good entertainment this was for such as gaped for very hunger.

They made an end of eating, and there remained upon the Table, nothing but a
few scraps and bones, which our Doctor seeing, there quoth he, there is for our
Servants, who are like to make as good a Dinner as their Masters. Having given
God thanks, let us rise said he, and make room for them; as for you, get you to
play until two of the clock, that what you have eaten may the better digest in
your stomachs. A pox on thee said I to my self, and for very anger began to
smile, which the Doctor perceiving, gave me a check, and bid me learn modesty,
and so ended with three or four old sentences upon that Subject. I did not
forbear to sit down at Table, with the rest of the Servants, and being older
then some, and stronger then others, I began to lay about me with both my
hands, and that so nimbly, that in three or four mouth-fulls I had consumed
above half of what our Masters had left upon the Table. My companions seeing my
diligence, began to grumble, which the Doctor perceiving, came toward us, and
said, live and eat quietly, seeing God has sent you sufficient. I protest to
you, there was amongst us one Servant, called Basque, who had so utterly
forgotten how to eat, that he carried a crust three or four times to his mouth,
without being able to find his lips: I called for somewhat to drink, which
none of the rest did, because they were yet fasting, one brought me a dish of
water, (for as to matter of wine, we were enterta^n'd after the Turkish
fashion) and just as I was putting it to my mouth, that visible Spirit of whom
I told you, snatched it out of my hands: I rose from Table very much
discontented, yet however with a great desire to untruss, though my belly was
not half full; I enquired of an ancient Servant, where the house of Office
stood, who told me, there was not any about the house, but said, if you have
for once occasion to make use of any such place, you may do it where you
please; for during two months that I have been here, I never went to Stool but
once, and then too, it was the effect of what I brought in my belly from my
Fathers house, which peradventure may have befallen you this day.

I cannot fully acquaint you with the anguish in which I found my self, when he
made me this sad account. In short, perceiving so little was to pass into my
belly, I durst not let any thing go out, though I had a great desire. Being in
this pain, comes Don Diego to me, and asked me what Rhetorique he should use,
to persuade his guts that they were well stuffed, for that they would not at
that time believe him. In this house there was an Epidemical complaint of wind
Collicks, as in others, of crudities and repletion: Supper-time came, (for as
for afternoon's lunshions, there was no such thing known,) we made a light
Supper, such almost as Cameleons use; a little of an old roasted Goat, was our
whole Bill of fare, there is not any thing said our Doctor, more conducing to
health then not to overcharge the Stomach, he made several Encomiums upon diet,
and recited some Aphorisms of the Doctors; alleging that it prevented ill
dreams: The truth is, with him I think no one ever did dream, unless that he
were eating, so much desirous were we of it; to be short, every one supped
without supping; and so went to bed. Don Diego and my self, could not shut our
eyes that whole night; we had not any of those sweet fumes, which proceeding
from meat, cause sleep, insomuch that we were at leisure to contrive a letter
of complaint unto his Father, with an humble supplication to deliver him from
the jaws of this Famine. Some things I inserted, Sir said I, you cannot well
tell whether we are alive or not, for I am of opinion, that we dyed at the
Battle of the Herb-women, and that we are now only Souls in Purgatory, without
foolery, write unto your Father to deliver us. Amidst our discourse it became
day, the clock stroke six, and our Master called us up to our Books, I was
almost at my wits end, whilst I was making my self ready, for I found my
doublet and hose a great deal to big for me, I began to suspect some one had
changed my clothes, but one of my Fellow Servants told me, such accidents
usually hapened in that house, for that he had seen a cart-horse brought
thither and presently transformed into a Light Horse, so thin shaped, that he
might have flown in the air; as also great fat Mastiffs turned into
Greyhounds; and that one day he saw several men, who put some their feet, some
their hands, and others their whole bodies but only within the house doors, and
having asked what good they found in it, it was answered, one of them was
troubled with the Itch, another with a canker, and a third with crab-lice, all
which by only stepping over the threshold dyed of hunger, and could eat no
further into their bodies.

Whilst we were expecting for delivery from Don Diego's Father, and found no
way to stuff out our Doublets, we concluded together not to rise so early in
the morning, which to effect, we counterfeited our selves to be sick, but we
durst not say we had a Fever, for so by feeling our Pulse we should have bin
discovered, nor that we had the toothache, or headache, for then they would
have laughed at us: we resolved then to complain of the belly-ach, for that we
had not been at stool for three days together, imagining our Master would not
put himself to a farthing charge, to any cure for us: but the Devil would so
have it, that it fell out quite contrary, Ragot had a receipt derived to him
from his Father, who had been an Apothecary, now upon our relating our griefs,
he made us a Clister; then he brought into our Chamber a certain old woman, of
about threescore and ten, to be our Nurse, he gave her a Spring, with direction
to give us each our dose; whereupon the old woman full of civility and respect,
began with Don Diego, but by reason of her feebleness, her hands did so
tremble, that when the Patient began to feel himself tickled, he could not
forbear stirring, insomuch that she squirted all out upon his back, just up to
his head, Poor Diego fell a roaring as if he had been killed. Our Master came
in at the out cry, the old woman told him she had levelled the Cannon aright,
the sick man he denied it, but without deciding their controversy, he charged
the old woman (...) give me my Clister, and to provide another for Don Diego,
now I having accustomed my self to beware at other men's harms, began to put on
my clothes, and told them I found my self very well, but all to little purpose,
for Ragot and two Servants seized upon me, and held me down per-force, whilst
the old woman accomodated her Pipe; she had no sooner done her feat, but I did
mine too, for I let all go in her face, which so enraged our Master, that he
said he would turn me out of his house, for he saw I did it wilfully, but it
was not my good fortune to be so served. We sent new complaints to Don Alonso,
but Ragot prepossessed him, that we used all those inventions, only to neglect
our books, so that he was heard and we not. Behold us there condemned for a
longer time, to undergo the remainder of our miseries which that old woman did
help to complete upon us: she was so deaf, that she heard not any thing,
insomuch as we were forced to discourse with her by Signs, she could see but
little, and always went mumbling her Paternoster: once as she was at it by the
fire, her Beads broke, and most of them fell into the Porridgpot, she poor
woman perceived it not, and dinnertime being come, she served us up the most
devout Caudle that ever Zealot sipp'd. Her Beads were dished up like pease, one
of the Tablers said, here are pease in mourning, what kinsman of theirs is
lately dead? No, no quoth another they are Ethiopian pease: Besides all this,
sometimes she mistook the Fire-shovel for the Ladle, I had many times in my
Broth, brands-ends, sticks, Coals and ashes, which she got out of the chimney.
We endured all these miseries until Lent drew near, at the beginning of which,
one of our fellow Pensioners fell sick. Our Master unwilling to put himself to
charge, delayed to send for a Physician, until the sick youth called for the
Minister, thereupon he sent for a Doctor, who having felt the Patients pulse,
said aloud, Famine has prevented me from being accused, of this sick man's
death; his hour was come, at the same instant he was confessed, and when the
holy Sacrament was brought unto him, he cried out aloud, O my Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, It was necessary for me to see you come within this house, that I
might be assured I was not in Hell. He had scarce said so but he dyed: we
buried him meanly enough God knows, for that he was a Stranger. You cannot
imagine, but we were very sad at this accident.

Don Alonso heard of it, and having no other Son but Don Diego, he began to
believe the Stories we had told him, of Ragots cruelties, and to give credit to
the relations of the two Ghosts, for by this we were reduced to a pitiful pass.
In fine, he came to deliver us from those Tyrannies of Famine, under which we
were become so lean, that although we stood before him, he called to have us
brought to him, so much altered we were. He wanted but a little of slaying that
perpetual Fast-monger, but loath to put himself to the trouble, he resolved to
be patient: He sent to hire a coach for us, we being so lean and feeble, as we
were unable to travel. We took our leaves of our School-fellows, who
accompanied us with their tears and prayers, like those in Algiers, when their
fellow-Slaves are redeemed.

Buscon and his Master being delivered from the Jaws of Famine, are sent to
study at Alcala.
BEhold us then arrived at Don Alonso's house, where we were presently put to
bed; but with much ease and care, that our bones might not start out of our
skins, so dry and thin were we. There were Oculists sent for, to search out our
eyes, for they were so sunk into our heads, that we stood in need of a wormer
to scrue them up again. For my own particular, I had been hardlier used then
Don Diego, and hunger had wrought more powerfully on me, for that I was treated
like a Servant, insomuch that it was a good while before they could find where
my eyes were; Physicians were sent for, who prescribed that the dust of our
Books should be wiped from us with Fox-tails, as they use to do unto Pictures,
(and indeed there was no such great difference between us and pictures) and
then that we should have good Broths made for us; and so be well again; Oh what
man is able to express the great joy our Bowels received at the first dish of
Barley-broth that was brought to us! The Physicians ordered, that no one should
talk aloud for nine days in our Chamber, because our Stomachs being full of
concavities, the least word which was spoken, resounded like an Echo, but
somewhat oftener then that of Ovid.

With thee Observations, we began to recruit our former strength, and at four
days end we sat up in our beds, yet all this while, we did but look like
shadows in respect of others. We were so disrobed of our flesh, and withal so
yellowish, that a man would have taken us for walking Ghosts; we spent the day
in rendering thanks unto God, for having delivered us from the bondage of
barbarous Ragot, and beseeched him most devoutly, to guard all Christians from
his clutches. If whilst we were at meat, we did by chance think upon the diet
of that miserable Pedant, our appetites would so increase upon us, that we ate
twice as much: We acquainted Don Alonso with Ragot's fashions, we told him,
that at our sitting down to meals, he used to exclaim against gluttony, though
he had never tried what it was. In that Commandment, Thou shall not kill, he
comprised Turkies, Partridges, Capons, and all sort of Birds, of purpose, that
we might eat none of them; nay he comprehended hunger in it, and seemed to make
it a case of conscience, whether a man might safely kill hunger by eating.

Thus we spent three months in Alonso's house, but at last, we were to turn
over a new leaf. The desire he had to make his Son a Scholar, prevailed with
him, to send him unto Alcala; that there he might go through with what he had
commenced in the Grammar. He asked of me, whether I would accompany him. I who
had no other passion then to be out of that Country where our former
Belly-persecutor lived, answered, that I would most willingly continue in his
Son's service; thereupon he provided a Steward to over see Don Diego's
expenses, him he furnished with Bills of exchange. Our clothes were packed up,
and we put into a coach: An hour before Sunset, we took our leaves, that we
might travel in the cool, and about midnight came unto Viveros, which place
may it be accursed unto Eternity: The Hostler was a Morisco, and a Thief at his
fingers ends. Those we term Morisco's, who are descended from the Moors, though
converted to the catholic Faith, and are however vilely suspected of being
still Jews: I can assure you, in all my life I did never yet hear of such a
Monster, for in the person of that man, I saw both dog and cat, which yet lived
together in fair correspondence. According to the custom of such-people, he bid
us kindly welcome. Whilst we were providing to alight out of the Coach, he
addressed himself unto my Master, he being the best clothed, and gave him his
hand to help him out, and then coming to me, asked me whether he was not going
to study? I told him he was, whereupon he brought us into a Chamber, where were
two Ruffians, who had no other livelihood, but what they picked up by
prostituring of two Trulls, then with them: In the same company was the Parson
of the Parish saying his Prayers to the tune of their discourse, an old
covetous Merchant, who was endeavoring to forget his Supper, and two tattered
Scholars, who were laying their wits together how they might insinuate
themselves into one. My Master being as I said the last comer, and but a young
man, called to the Master of the house, saying, provide me what you have left,
for my self and my two Servants: We are all your Servants, said the two
Hectors, at the same instant, as we shall testify by our endeavors. Ho there,
Master of the house, make the Squire welcome, set open your Pantry door, and
Cupboards, heel'e fee door, and Cupboards, heel'e fee you well paid, and
therewithal comes one of them to him, and takes off his cloak, saying will you
please to rest your self? Whilst they were thus diligent in attending him,
which I could not but admire at, one of the Nymphs came and accosted my
worshipful self, saying, what a handsome well behaved young Gentleman is this?
is he going to the University? do you belong to him? yes quoth I, and that
other man too, pointing at our Steward. What may I call your Master? Don Diego,
Colonel Don Alonso's Son said I. I had scarcely said so, before one of the
Bravo's went to him, and with tears in his eyes, embracing him very
affectionately; oh Squire Diego said he, who would have thought so, it is ten
years since I saw you, wretch that I am! now I see I am much altered indeed
since you have forgotten me. My Master was not a little astonished at this
passage, for we both swore, we had never seen him in our lives. The the other
Swash-Buckler was walking about my Master, and looking him on the face, said to
his comerade, making the sign of the X, is this that Gentleman's Son, whose
worth you have so often cried up? surely we are very happy in that we met thus
accidentally with him, he is grown pretty tall, God bless him. This kind of
discourse had almost confounded us, for by their talk one would have thought
they had been born and bred with us. Don Diego returned him many complements,
and just as he was about to ask him his name, The Host came into the chamber to
lay the cloth, and having smelt their design, Be pleased Gentlemen to leave off
straining of courtesies, until another time, for your Supper stays for you,
another time will serve for your Complements.

He had no sooner said so, but one of the Scholars, began to set the chairs
about the Table, and one at the upper end for Squire Diego; the other brought in
a dish, and said unto my Master, will your worship be pleased to sit down, we
shall wait upon you until our Supper be ready; For God's sake Gentlemen quoth
Squire Diego, be pleased to sit down likewise, and let us sup together; time
enough, time enough said the Bravo's, whereas my Master said not a word to
either of them, our cloth is not yet laid. Now I seeing some invited, and other
some inviting themselves, began to be in a great fear of what might be the
success. Behold we now the Scholars and roaring boys all four at Supper with
my Master, who looking him in the face, told him, It were not handsome that in
the presence of such a worthy Gentleman, those Ladies should be supperless; be
pleased to entreat them to honor the company; whereupon my Master rose up, and
invited them to sit down, which they did at the first word, but Good God! how
like an ass did he look amongst his Guests; In a trice they had devoured a
great dish of Coleworts, and made not above four mouthfulls apeice of a loaf
which cost three shillings. Then, and there did I find by woeful experience,
that a Spaniard is no temperate man, when he eats at another charge; Then they
fell upon a side of roasted Goat, and two great cuts of powdered meat, By this
they began to be pretty full, and looking about they espied Master Parson,
whose eyes were eating as heartily as the best of them; whereupon the Scholars
rose up, and turning toward him said, how is your Reverence there, (for in
Spain that is their manner of speech to the Ministers) be pleased to draw near,
The Squires freeness and bounty may well reach as far as you too. They had
hardly made an end of speaking, but down sits me Master Parson. Our Steward
seeing his purse was like to pay for all, began to scratch, where it did not
itch, and indeed so did I too. Then there was brought to the Table two ribs of
roast Beef, and a couple of Pigeons, they carved half of one of them to Don
Diego, and then the two Bravo's, the Punks, the Scholars, and Master Parson
devoured the rest in the twinkling of an eye. Thereupon one of the Blades said
to him, your worship had not best to eat any more, for fear of over-charging
your Stomach, it is very true said one of those divelish Scholars, and besides
they that go to Alcala should accustom themselves unto temperance and sobriety.
Would to God quoth I to my Companion, (cursing of them with all my heart) they
would practice what they preach, that somewhat might fall to our shares. When
they had eaten up every bit, yet the Curate, a Pox take him, fell to romaging
over the bones which they had left, whereupon one of the Hectors turning about,
said, what forgetful wretches we were, for we have not left any thing for the
Servants, come hither said he, dear hearts, speaking to me and our Steward, you
Masters of the house there, here is a Pistol, let them have what the house does
afford, when behold of a sudden up comes that damned pretended kinsman of my
Masters, and cries out pardon me Sir, if I tell you, you do not well understand
the world or my Cousin, you do him a great injury, think you he has not
wherewithal to entertain his Servants, I beseech you put up your money. When I
saw this Stratagem, I thought I should have dyed for very anger; well, the
cloth was taken away, and the Gentlemen took their leaves of my Master, saying
it was high time to leave him to his rest. He would needs pay for the Supper,
but they replied, to morrow will be time enough.

Whilst every one of this worshipful company were retiring unto their
Quarters, one of those ragged Scholars seeing the Merchant fast asleep, said
unto the Bravo's, have you a mind to laugh a little? Let us play the wag with
this old fellow, who has eaten but one pear all this day. I warrant him a
notable rich covetous rogue: you say well quoth the Swash-bucklers, he deserves
to have a trick put upon him. The Scholar thereupon gets up close to the
Merchant, and takes away very handsomely a little Cloak-bag which lay under his
feet; he opened it, and took out a Box full of Sugar-cakes, which he emptied,
and filled up again with stones and dirt, then he untruss'd his Breeches and
shit in the box, upon which he laid about a dozen of those shining stones which
he had took out of a plaister-box, which done, he shuts the Box. This is not
all quoth he, here is a Bottle, we must see what is in the belly of it: with
that he clapped it to his mouth, and drank it almost empty, and then filled it
with flocks of wool, which he got out of one of the Cushions of our Coach; then
he put every thing in it is place, and so made fast the Cloak-bag, and not
content with that, he put a great stone into the hood of the cloak, wherein the
Merchant was wrapped. Then every one betook him to sleep for about an hour and
half, it being so near daybreak. Rising-time once come, every one awaked,
except the old Rogue, who slept it out; whereupon one of the company called
him, but he intending to rise, could not get up his cloak, whereupon looking
about, he called for the man of the house, who came to him, and being
pre-acquainted with the jest, pretended to be very angry. Why how now honest
friend, could you find nothing in the house worth your stealing, but this great
Stone? Gentlemen, I pray take notice of it, he would have carried it away, had
I not found it. I had rather have lost fifty pound, for it has an excellent
virtue against the Colic; in the mean time the old man fell a swearing, and
wishing the Devil had him, if he put it into his Cloak.

It was now almost time to be jogging. The Hectors made the reckoning, which
came to fifteen shillings, which we were fain to pay without any more ado, for
fear of a worse mischief, if we should have had to do with those people. Each
man took a bit, before we parted, and the old man got him into a corner with
his Cloak-bag under his coat, which he opened to take some Comfits out of his
Box, of which he eat some before he went out of the house, but instead of what
he expected, he put a Stone into his mouth, which beginning to bite, he wanted
little of breaking the rest of those few teeth he had remaining, Presently he
fell a spitting and making of mouths, what with the pain, and what with the
stink which he felt in his mouth; we all ran to him to assist him. Master
Parson asked him what ailed him? but instead of answering him, he fell a
swearing and cursing; one of the Scholars seeming as if he believed he were
possessed with an evil Spirit, called for some holy water, crying our, Vade
Satanas, but he presently declared his misfortune, and begged we would let him
wash his mouth with a little wine, which he had in his Bottle, which he did,
but going to pour some into a glass, he perceived his wine was grown wild,
being all over hairy, and rough, insomuch that he could not drink it, either by
fair means or foul. Then it was, that the old man began to despair indeed, but
seeing how the company laughed at him, he was forced to be patient, and so to
mount the Chariot, in which he came with the two Bravoes, the Scholars and
Punks. We got us into our Coach, and so came to Alcala, before nine in the
morning: we alighted at an Inn, where we spent the rest of the day, casting up
what we had had, which could so inflame our reckoning, but we could not
possibly make it up.

They arrive at Alcala. Don Diego pays his welcome to the Scholars, and the
ridiculous entertainment they gave Buscon.
A Little before night we went out of our Inn to the house, which had been
hired for us, being just without St. James Gate, the habitation of diverse other
Scholars. Our Landlord was one of those who did believe in Jesus Christ, but
only for fashion sake, he was a Morisco, so we call those, who as I told you,
are descended from the Moors, and though converted to the Catholic Faith,
yet are still presumed to be Jews.

This our Landlord received us with a sour scurvy look; I know not whether it
were, that we should at first use our selves to respect him, or that it is the
custom of that Nation, for indeed it is not unlikely that they who have ill
faiths, have worse looks. We housed our Trunks, our Beds were made, and to
sleep went we, which we did somewhat better then the night before. As soon as it
was day, in came all the Pensioners of the house to my Masters Chamber, and
demanded their Welcome. He knew not what their meaning was, but asked of me, and
I who knew no more then himself, hid me between the two quilts, for fear belike
of the worst, covered all over, except a little of my head and feet, like a
Tortoise. At last, they expounded their meaning, and told him, he must give
them a Pistol. Don-Diego presently made his Steward give it unto them, that he
might the sooner be out of his fear, whereupon they began to make a hellish
music, crying, Vivat, Vivat, welcome Fresh-man. Let him henceforward be
admitted into our Society, and enjoy our ancient privileges, may his skin be
embroidered with the Itch, his clothes with rents, and his Belly, with as good
an appetite as ours.

This done, they ran down stairs, as if the Devil, (God bless us) had droven
them. Observe I pray the goodly privileges with which they welcomed us. We
rose and went toward the College: The Masters presently came and embraced Don
Diego with much kindness for that they were well acquainted with his Father.
They carried him unto their Chamber, where they did him all possible honor.
Thus while I stayed at the Stair-foot, for I did not expect so much kindness as
my Master. I had not stayed there very long, before I got me into a great
court, where were a great company of Scholars, who had no sooner espied me but
they began to eat me with their eyes, to laugh in my face, and whisper amongst
themselves, but so that I could hear them say, Have at you Fresh-man; I to show
my self good company, and that I feared nothing, began to laugh as well as the
best of them; but I could no longer forbear blushing, when behold one of the
most impudent of the whole company, and who was next to me, put his hands to
his nose, saying, methinks I smell Lazarus newly raised from the dead, for he
stinks cruelly; At this watch word, all the rest took fire, and did the like,
they stopped their noses, and withdrew from me; I who still endeavored to be
thought as crafty as the best of them, did so too, saying, by my troth
Gentlemen you are in the right, oh how it stinks! presently they fell a
laughing, and above a hundred of them got about me, then they began to sneeze,
fleer and make mouths, whereupon I perceived they were preparing to give me a
volly of Spittle: One amongst them, who seemed to be the most rheumatique of
them all, fetched up a great gobbet of Phlegm out of his Stomach, saying, see
what a goodly bit here is, and therewithal threw it at me, designing it for my
face, but as luck would have it, it fell upon my Doublet, but so glewed on,
that I could not possibly get it off. Then I began to be angry indeed. The
Devil take me, quoth I, if I do not -- and so ran threatening to kill him, but
the shower of Spittle and Snot which fell upon me, was so violent, that the rest
of my words stuck in my teeth, for I was fain to cover my face with my cloak,
and to stand still, as the mark of their spittle, with which I was so bedawbed,
that one would have thought I had been in the Snow.

Nor was this all, one of the veriest Rogues of the company seeing I kept my
face whole, came to me, and pretending to be angry with the rest, said enough
enough my Masters, be quiet I pray do not kill him.

When I heard this, I was in some mistrust least they would have done so
indeed, which made me uncover my face, at which very instant the Rogue dashed a
good mouthful of Phlegm just between my eyes, whereupon all his fellow-Rascals
began to laugh, and I to contrive how I might get away. I considered in what a
sad condition I was, powdered over with the excrements of their Stomachs, I
verily imagine they never used so to purge themselves, but when they met with
some such Freshman as my self, and that thus they saved the expenses of Doctors
and Apothecaries. That I might be sure of my lading, they had a great mind to
bestow some cuffs upon my ears, but of that there was no great likelihood,
unless they intended to fill their hands with the Spitttle wherewith they had
covered my whole body, from the crown of my head to the Sole of my foot. For
that reason they forbore me, and did me the favor to let me go off accoutred
as I was: Away I hyed me as fast as I could toward lam den day our lodging,
and as good luck would, it was so early in the morning, that I only met with
two or three Servants of the College, who were pure rascals indeed, for they
threw but three or four handfulls apiece of lime at me, which to my misfortune
was not far off them, to perfect my painting.

Thus pickled I arrived at our lodging, the Morisco espied me, and with that
began to laugh, as if he had been ready to split; I thinking he intended to
fill up some place of me, which had escaped, Sir said I to him, pray have a
care what you do, for I am not an Ecce homo: this I said in respect of his
Nation, but would to God I had been mute at that time, for he gave me two such
furious blows with the handle of a besom which he then had, that he thought to
have laid me on my back, whereas to say the truth, I sell flat upon my face. At
last up I got, and went to my Chamber, where I was at least half an hour,
pondering where I should begin to undress my self. At last I had finished it,
and hung them out in the air, then I went to bed, and slept soundly. Not long
after in came my Master, who finding me sleeping, and ignorant as he was of the
vile mischance which had befallen me, he became very angry, and handled me, as
Butchers do Piggs when they go to kill them; he pulled so much hair off from
me, that at two handfulls more my head had been as bald as the skull of a
Sceleton. I rose up crying and weeping, my Masters anger increased, How now
Sirrah, said he, is it thus that you serve me? do thou not know me? I shall
make you change your course, and lead a new life, when I heard him talk of a
new life, I verily thought I had been dead in good earnest. And well Sir quoth
I, is it thus that you comfort me in my afflictions? I pray Sir do but open the
door said I weeping, and behold my clothes, which have this day served for
handkercheifs and spitting-Basons, to the foulest noses and loathsomest
throats, that ever were in the Jewish Synagogue. My Master seeing me weep,
opened the door, to see what ailed my clothes, which done, he began to relent,
and pity me; Buscon said he, have a good heart, cheer up thy self, and though
thou have not Father or Mother near thee, yet be not dismayed. Then I recited
to him, what had befallen me, He commanded me to be removed into another
Chamber, for my better assistance, where four other Servants lay. I lay me down
and fell asleep again, and having made a good supper, found my self in as good
plight as ever: But when one misfortune befalls a man, it should seem more are
at hand, and that disgraces do draw on one another. Night being come, the
Servants who lay in the chamber with me, came to bed, they bid me Goodnight,
and asked me how I found my self? I made them a short rehearsal of what had
betided me, at which they blessed themselves with the sign of the cross,
seeming to be astonished at my mischance, and as if they had no wickedness in
them, is it possible, would they say, there should be such roguish people
living amongst Christians? The Proctor is much too blame, for not establishing
better order in the University. Every other day, there falls out some new
disaster, do you know any of those Rake-Hells, who have thus abused you? I told
them not, and thanked them verv kindly for their good will. Whilst we were
thus talking, they undressed themselves, put out the Candle and went to bed.
Behold us then in a profound Silence, and I thinking my self as safe, as if
with my own Brothers, betook me to sleep. When about midnight I was alarumed
with the noise of Murder, Murder, Thieves, and withal heard one laying on with
a whip upon one of the beds, as hard as he could drive, up I got me in my bed,
crying out where is he, what is the matter, I had hardly opened my mouth,
before I felt one lay me on seven or eight blows, about the wast, all in an
instant, with a whip of as many cords as I had backs. At this up-rising, I
began to second him in his complaints, who had first wakened me, who continued
roaring like mad, though no body felt the smart but my self. I called out for
help, and for the Justice, but no body stirred. The best remedy I found was to
get me under the bed, for my sheets and coverlet were gone; there I thought my
self pretty secure. On a sudden the three others began to cry: When I heard
the salutations of the whip continue, I said not a word, but thought it might
be some body not belonging to our chamber, who was come to bestow that morning
visit upon us. In this interim, he who made the first outcry, got into my bed,
and dung'd it; he returned to his own bed, and the whip was silent. All four of
them rose up, saying what a mischance is this? things must not go thus, we will
find out, who it is that has been in our Chamber, withal they made fast the
door, pretending they had found it open. All this while I lay close under the
bed, grunting like a Dog, between two doors, and finding all still, I got out,
and asked if they had any hurt. The Devil take them quoth they, our skins are
flayed. By great chance I found my bed, into which I got me the soonest I
could, and presently fell asleep, without perceiving the bedfellow I had
gotten, my sleep was not so sound, but that I often turned from one side to
another, insomuch that when I awaked, I found my self anointed all over, with
Pilgrim-salve. Day being come, every one got up, but my self, for I kept close
to conceal my trouble, and pretended the blows of the whip made me sick. I was
so bedawbed with the Sir Reverence, that a Gold-finder would hardly have found
in his heart to have touched me, and that which did as much perplex me, was,
that I knew not how it came to pass, unless the cold and fright might cause it.
The truth is, I found my self both guilty and innocent, unable either to accuse
or excuse my self. My Companions being up and ready, came about me, complaining
some of one place, some of another, and dissemblingly asked me how I felt my
self, very ill quoth I, for that I think I was worse handled then all of you
put together; indeed I then little thought how true I spoke. I asked them who
they thought had done us that mischief, I had almost caught him said one, but
he got from me, however I will find him out, though I go to a Conjurer; well
patience per-force, but let us see, if you are so bad as you seem to be, sure
you have roared sufficiently. Saying so, they made as if they would pull off
the clothes, at which instant, to complete my affront, up came my Master, Is it
possible Buscon, you should have so little care of your duty? it is at least
eight a clock, and you are still a bed, rise, rise for shame. The others to
excuse me unto him, acquainted Don Diego with what had hapened; and desired him
to let me lie a little longer, and in case you will not believe us, do but take
up the Coverlet, and see in what condition he is, and withal began to move the
clothes, but I held them with my hands and teeth, as fast as possibly I could
for my life, that they might not see how I was bewrayed. When they perceived
they could not have their design that way, do you smell nothing, quoth one of
them? for my part methinks I smell an ill savor; Don Diego said the like,
whereupon all of them began to look about, to see if perchance they could find
any close stool with a Clyster in it; In conclusion they could discover
nothing, they searched the beds, and turned them out, to see if any thing were
under them. Doubtless said one of them, this smell must needs be about Buscon.
Let us remove him, into one of our beds, and look under him. I seeing the
little likelihood of escaping those Devils, pretended I had a qualm upon my
Stomach, I stared with my eyes, counterfeited the Hiccox, and made ugly faces,
they who knew the meaning of it, came and held my head, whilst Don Diego bowed
my finger. To be short, they five lifted me out of my bed, and opening the
sheets, they thought they should have dyed with laughing, when they saw how
finely the sheets were guilt. Alas! poor boy cried they, this he did when as he
swounded; I almost dead for shame, counterfeited as if I had swounded away;
bend his fingers hard said they, and my Master thinking to do me a good office,
pulled them so hard, that he put one of them out of joint. After all these
torments, there they left me. I cried for shame and anger both together; they
told me, in a jeer, pretending though to pity me, come the business is not
much, a little water will make all clean again, better so then break a gut.
Then they put me to bed, and away they went. When I found my self alone, I
began seriously to reflect upon the hardness of my fortune, as also how I had
more mischiefs befallen me in one day at Alcala, then in all the time I had
been with our before-named Doctor. I did what I could to make clean both my
self and my clothes; about noon I rose, and went to wait upon my Master. As I
passed along a Gallery, the rest of the Fellow Servants espied me, and after
they had heartily laughed, they told me what a trick they had put upon me,
which augmented my shame, and doubled my anger. Thus was I entered a free
denison, and from that day forwards, we were all as good friends as any in the
world, and I had no more mischiefs done me.

Buscon's first knaveries, and the fright he put his Landlady into, as also an
other piece of Roguery.
HAz como Vieres, says the Spanish Proverb, do as thou shall see cause;
instructed with this noble sentence, I resolved to turn over a new leaf, to
halt with the Cripple, and amongst Rogues, to be as bad as the worst of them; I
cannot tell whether I was as good as my resolution, but I assure you, I did my
weak endeavor to attain it. In the first place, I made sure of all the
roasting Pigs that came within the doors, proclaiming they should keep thence
under penalty of life, or more properly upon pain of death: the like I did by
all our Landladies Pullets, which came within my Chamber. I had no sooner made
publication thereof, but up came two sucking Pigs toward our staircase, the
fattest and tamest I had ever seen: I was then at play with the other Servants;
as soon as I had spied them, I said unto one of my Comerades, Prithee go see
who is that keeps a grunting without; he did so, and told me, there were two
little Sowes Babies; let them alone quoth I, have a care you drive them not
away, open the door they are kindly welcome, and withal I slipped out of the
Chamber, drove them in, and laid hold on them, and punished them very severely
for their presumption, in coming to grunt so near us. When night came, we
clapped them upon the Spit, and my companions and my self made a brave feast
with them, and paid those arreages which hunger did require at our hands. Don
Diego heard of it, and was very angry with me, but all the Gentlemen of the
house laughed at it, and interposed in my behalf. Don Diego asked of me, what I
would do if the Justice should seize on me? I told him I would appeal from him
unto Famine, the Asylum of all Scholars, and in case he would not admit of my
plea, I said I would tell him, they came into our Chamber, without ever
knocking at the door, which made me believe they did belong to us; they all
fell a laughing at my reasons. By my troth Buscon, quoth my Master, you begin
to be a right Rake-Hell indeed, if thou do but proceed, thou will in a
little time commence Master of Arts; it is worth your observation to consider
how modest and religious a Gentleman my Master was; and how subtle and crafty a
knave his man was; for the truth is, we were of two contrary inclinations, he
loved virtue, and I roguery, better then my meat. Our Landlady was glad at the
heart to see my humor, for we had made an agreement together, and conspired
against our Steward; whereupon I was made Caterer, and from that hour, I took a
great delight to be of Judas his Trade, and to bring in round reckonings. The
Elesh which our Mistress brought in the house, did never hold out, according to
the true rules of Proportion, but kept still in Abatement. If there was any
beef or goat to be had, she never bought Mutton, insomuch that we had always
Physic Broth, so lean and transparent, that had it been frozen, you would have
sworn it had been Crystal; sometimes indeed to keep us in heart, she put a
candles end or two into the pot. When ever she saw me before my Master, she
would be telling him, Buscon was the best Servant she ever yet knew, but that
he was somewhat knavish, however I advise you, would she say, not to part with
him, for in consideration of his great trustiness, you may wink at his smaller
pranks. The like I did by her, as occasion served, and in this manner we
cheated the whole house.

When there was any Candles, Salt, Pease or Bacon to be bought, we always kept
at least half of it for our own use, which we sold-unto my Master, when he next
wanted any. That we might appear good Servants indeed, we did often tell him,
he was too too profuse, that his expenses were too great, and that a Kings
Exchequer would hardly maintain him. If I bought any thing, and told my Master
the truth of what I paid for it, presently in came our Land-lady, and making as
if we had no intelligence with one another, how now Buscon would she say, do
you think to make me believe, that this cost you twelve pence? then I pretended
to step aside and weep, afterward I would go to my Master, and complain of the
ill offices some endeavored to do me, and would press him to send his Steward
unto the market, to be informed of the truth, that I might thereby stop our
Land-ladies mouth, who was ever prattling. He would then send him, who
returning, satisfied my Master with the truth: by this means Don Diego and his
Steward were very well informed of my honesty, and not displeased with our
Mistresses good will, and then would my Master say unto his Steward, would to
God Buscon were as free from vice, as he is full of honesty. By these devices
did we suck his blood like Horse-leeches, but much better. Perchance gentle
Reader, you will tell me that our booty at the years end might be considerable,
and that I was in conscience bound to make restitution; the one I confess, the
the other I utterly deny, for that our Landlady confessed and received the
Communion every eight days, and yet I could never hear or perceive, she had
the least intention of restoring, or indeed that she made any scruple of it,
insomuch that imitating such a godly religious Saint as she was, I thought I
had done no fault at all: she did ware about her neck a pair of Beads so heavy,
that one less devout then she, would as willingly have carried the Morters.
There hung upon it, several metals, Images, Crosses, Pictures, and
indulgences, with which, to use her own terms, she prayed for her benefactors:
She had above a hundred Saints, who were her Advocates; and the truth is, she
had need of so many more intercessors, to procure remission of the sins she
committed. She lay in a Chamber over my Masters, and said more Prayers then the
ablest of the three hundred blind Beggars of Paris; in which she used such
latin words as Cicero never knew, so that we would almost kill our selves with
laughing: She had besides these, many other good qualities; she was a great
reconciler of such as differ in affections; a Doctress of delight, which is as
much as to say, a Baud. If at any time I fell out with her, she would excuse
her self, saying, it is an ill bird which defiles his own nest.

Gentle Reader, I would not have thee believe that we were always good friends
no, no, you must know, it is impossible for two covetous friends, who are
continually gaping after their particular profit, to hold good correspondence
any long time together; for they will be endeavoring how to deceive one the
other, and for my own particular, I must needs confess, I should do so, if I
found any handsome opportunity, as I am now going to let you see.

She bred up in a back-court of the House, good store of Poultry; I once cast
mine eyes on them, and began to long like a woman with child, for to see a
couple of the best Chicken there, ready roasted in a dish: It chanced upon a day
that she went to feed them, and there cried Pio, pio, pio, which she did
several times together: I presently fancied what that might allude unto; in
order to my satisfaction: Oh God! Mistress Cyprian (for such was her name)
would to Christ you had either killed a man, or clipped money, rather then done
that thing, for I must of necessity go and accuse you: Oh how unfortunate are
we both, that it should thus fall out! She was not a little troubled seeing me
make such complaints; well, what is it I have done, said she, prithee dear
Buscon, tell me whether thou art in jest or in earnest, and rid me of the
fright in which thou have put me: How, quoth I, whether I am in jest, would to
God it were no worse: I must go and acquaint the Inquisition with it, else I am
excommunicate, ipso facto: To the Inquisition, said she; why have I committed
ought contrary to the Catholic Faith? Nay it is worse, said I, do not mock at
the Inquisitors, but confess your blasphemy, acknowledge your own wickedness,
and recant what you have said: If I should recant it, quoth she, pale and
trembling as she was, would they condemn me to undergo any corporal public
punishment? no, said I, they would then absolve you; then I eat my words, said
she, but you must then tell me what I said, for I know not: Is it possible you
should be so ignorant, replied I, I can-well tell how to express it unto you,
for the hainousness of the offense is so great, that I shake for very fear, at
the thought of it. Do you not remember that when you called your Chickens, you
cried, Pio, pio, pio, and that Pio is the name of the Popes, who are Gods
Vicegerents, and the Keys of the Church: She was almost dead with grief. It is
true Buscon, I said so indeed; but if I said it out of any ill will, I wish I
might never go more. Prithee try if thou can not find out some invention to
avoid accusing of me; for I had rather be hanged then go before the
Inquisition. I told her, provided she would swear upon the Holy Altar, that she
said it not out of malice; I were then dispensed withal for accusing her; but
then of necessity, those very two Chickens which first came to eat (I observed
them both very well) when you said those blessed names of the High Bishops,
must be delivered into my hands, that I may carry them to a Familiar, for so
one of the Ministers of the Inquisition is called, that he may burn them, for
they are accursed. Afterward, you must solemnly vow, never to fall again into
the like horrible blasphemy: She was overjoyed to hear this expedient; Buscon,
said she, I prithee take those two Chickens immediately, and let them suffer
for my sin, and too morrow I will make my solemn vow before the Alter. I told
her, there was yet one inconvenience unprevented, for said I, the Familiar will
ask of me, if I were the person who had committed this great crime, and in this
uncertainty he might do me a mischief; wherefore I am of opinion, continued I,
that you your self go; for I must needs confess, I do not desire to have to do
with those kind of people, for they spare no man. Alas! dear Buscon, said she,
hearing me say so, for Gods sake pity me, and carry them, I hope you will not
be in any danger; and I assure thee thou will rid me of a great vexation. I
made her beg me a good while, before I would yield unto her: in fine, I
condescended, and away I went with the two Chickens, which I conveyed into my
Chamber: I pretended to go about it, and at last home I came, and told her all
things had succeeded better then I expected; The Familiar indeed, said I, was
once in the mind to come along with me, to see the woman who had done the fact,
but I put him off with much ado, whereupon she hugged me, and gave me another
Chick for my pains, which with its other two companions, were eaten that night
by my self, and the rest of the servants of the House: Not long after, Cyprian
smelt out the trick I had put upon her, whereat she was like to burst for
spite, nay she wanted but little of discovering my tricks to my Master, but she
being party to the crime, feared lest she might become partaker of the
punishment.

Behold me now at open defiance with Madam Cyprian, and without hopes of
reconcilement, whereupon I was forced to seek out new inventions to pass away
the time, for I could not forbear my Rogueries, which I had learned amongst the
Scholars. One night I walked a broad into the Town, about nine at night, at
which time, there are not many people in the Streets.

I passed close by a Drugisters shop, and perceived a frayl of Raisins lying on
the stall, I seized on them, and ran away with all my force; the Apprentices of
the shop, together with the Neighbors, began to run after me as hard as they
could drive. I was the better Footman, and had gotten a good way before them;
but the weight I carried, hindered me so much, that they had taken me, had it
not been for a Stratagem which came into my head, which was this, turning at
the corner of a Street, I made a short stop, and getting upon a Stall, began to
cry, holding one of my legs in my hand, The Devil take you rogue, he has lamed
me, just as they were passing by, Where is he? where is he? said they all out
of breath. Yonder said I goes a boy, the Devil go with him, I think he has
broken my leg, the Devil break his neck. I know not whether it be he you look
for.

Away they went down the Street, and I went my ways with the Frail: home I
came, and told my Companions what had passed, but they would not believe it; to
convince them, I invited them out the next night to see me run, not at the
Ring, but at the Grocers box; whom I had so newly met with. The hour being
come, I observed that the Frails were not now on the stall, but within the
Shop, and that I could not reach them with my hands, besides the Grocer himself
was there upon his guard, having been so lately bitten, however I would not
relinquish my design. I got me on the other side of the Street, just over
against the shop; with my sword in my hand; which was a good stiff tuck; then I
began to run directly into the shop, as hard as I could, and crying kill him,
kill him, I made a full thrust, which missed little of Master Grocers beard,
but entered into one of the Boxes; the Master of the Shop fell down under his
Counting-board as if he had been killed indeed, though he was not so much as
touched; and I in the mean while carried away the the Box upon the point of my
Sword. Thus I made my companions see, that I wanted neither wit nor courage to
undertake any good design, and they themselves confessed, that I alone was
able to maintain the whole House, provided I could but see enough to take,
which in plain English was as much as to say, I was a good Thief. I was young
and very proud of being so commended; whereupon I gave up my self to study
what Prank I should play next.

Now because I perceived Don Diego did not mislike it, seeing I came cleverly
off, I laid a wager with him one day, I would get all the Swords of the Round
which was duly made every night in Alcala. To see the effect of it, we all got
out of the house one night, and went to a certain place, where we knew the
Round must pass of necessity: When we perceived them coming, I marched up
before the rest of the servants, and began to cry out in a pitiful tone,
Justice, Justice: Who Is there, said they? Is the Captain there, quoth I? Yes
said they, thereupon I fell on my knees: Sir said I, I demand Justice of you,
it lies in your power to do me right in an outrage which was committed against
me; and withal, do the Commonwealth good service: I beseech you Sir hear me
but two words in private, I shall acquaint you with a brave discovery:
Presently he withdrew from the rest of his Company, and came to me: In the mean
time the watchmen began to look about, and to see whether their Swords were
clear, and their Pistols in good order: I have followed six men from Sevil
hither, the wickedst Rogues that ever lived; in a word, they are both Thieves
and Murderers, one of them killed my Mother, and a little Brother that I had,
having broken into our house to rob us: there are witnesses enough of it; and
it is said that they came to guard a certain French Spy, whom I suppose to be
Antonio Peers, speaking very softly. I had no sooner said so, but he opened his
ears; Where are they? In the College, said I; I conjure you to use the utmost
diligence, the fouls of my Mother and Brother will reward you with their
Prayers, and the King with temporal benefits: Patience, replied he, we will
lose no more time; follow me, quoth he, to his Archers, and give me my Target:
No no, Sir said I, taking him aside, you will undo all, and endanger your
selves besides, if you go that way to work; you had better go in one by one,
and without Swords, for they have all of them Pistols; and in case they
perceive you with the Arms, they will suspect you, seeing none but Officers
dares wear a Sword in this place, and then doubtless they would fire upon you:
Your best way is to carry your Daggers close under your Cloaks, and then we
shall be sure of them, for we are enough of us. The Corrigidore approved of my
advice; by this we were come unto the place, and he commanded his followers to
hide their Swords in the grass, which was just before the House, which they all
did, and so went on; They all entered in, my self being the last man: Now I had
pre-instructed my Companion, that as soon as they should lay down their Swords,
he should seize on them, and away, which he did very dexterously: They all
marched in, and my self in the rear of them; but without more ado, I hy'd me
into my Chamber with my Companions: In the interim, behold the Corrigidore with
his Archers, who finding nothing in the House but Scholars, went out to look
for me, he perceiving me vanished, began to conceive how he was gulled. Out he
goes with all his men, whom he sent for their Swords; but with all their
diligence, they could not find so much as half of one. It were superfluous to
acquaint you with the many searches and re-searches, which the Corrigidore and
Rector of the College made that very night: I shall therefore only tell you how
they sought up and down every Court and corner of the House; all the Chambers,
nay, the very Beds: Now I for fear of being discovered, got me to bed, with a
night Cap on my head, a wax Candle in one hand, and a Crucifix in the other, and
a young Priest at my beds-head, instructing and assisting me to dye; all the
rest of my Companions were at their Letanies; when behold up came the Rector
and Corrigidore, who seeing so sad a spectacle, presently retired, thinking I
had little need of so many Swords to defend me from death; but on the contrary,
they said certain Prayers in my behalf, and went away without the least hopes
of recovering their Swords. The Rector vowed unto the Corrigidore, to deliver
into his hands him who had done this affront; and the other swore he would hang
him, though he were a Dukes Son: Day came, I arose again and made my self
ready. In Alcala they talk of this adventure to this very day; All the people,
the Porters, Barbers, Coster-mongers, and reverend Hearb-women, (for I shall
never forget them, with th'pox to them, since they affronted me when I was King
of the Scholars) entertain themselves with the discourse of it upon the
highway: I shall not acquaint you with the Tributes I took of green Pease and
Beans, upon Raisins and Herbs, of our neighbors Gardens, which lay near our
lodging: By these and the like devices I acquired the reputation of being the
archest Crack in all the Country; for which I was so beloved by all the Gentry,
that I had much ado to stay with Don Diego, whom I ever respected for the
affection he bore unto me.

Buscon receives the news of his Fathers death: He leaves his Master, and
changes his Profession.
ABout this time Don Diego received a Packet from his Father; wherein was one
enclosed for my self, from an Uncle of mine, the most noted man in all Segovia,
and a Retainer to the Justice; in a word, he was the Hangman, but withal, very
expert in his Office, for whoever had seen him at his Trade, would have even
longed to have been hanged. This Personage it was, who sent me the Letter from
Segovia unto Alcala: In which I pray you do but observe the Fatherly affection
he bore unto me.

A Letter from Grimpant, unto his Nephew.
THE great employments which I have under his Majesty, have hindered me from
writing unto you any sooner: I must confess it a troublesome business to be in
his Majesty's service; yet the honor and glory we take in that Title, does a
little mollify the trouble thereof. I am much afflicted to be the conveyancer
of such news unto you as cannot be very welcome: Your Father dyed eight days
since; but the most generously that I ever yet saw man. I must needs give that
testimony of him in all places, for it was my self who trussed him up: He
marched along looking up to the Windows, and making Civilities to all such as
had neglected their other affairs to behold him: He came unto the Pillar of
wood, commonly called the Gibbet, The Non plus ultra of his life: He got to the
Ladder, which he mounted up with a good grace, and being a lover of order,
having spied one of the Rounds of the Ladder broken, over which he got, he
turned about to the Justice, and desired it might be mended for the next
commer, who perhaps might be less active then himself. I cannot well represent
unto you, how handsomely he appeared in the eyes of all the Spectators; He sat
him down in a most becoming posture; he took the Cord himself, and fastened the
knot of it; and seeing the Friar, who assisted him, began to exhort him unto
constancy: Father, quoth he, I have long since prepared my self for this
action; Let us only say a little of the Belief, and so make an end, for I would
not be troublesome to the company; which done, he threw off himself, without
folding of his legs, or making any ugly faces, and so he continued a pretty
while, with a most incomparable gravity. I quarterd him, and bestowed him in
the highways. God knows how I was troubled to see him in that condition, when
he was cut out into Crows meat; but I hope the Pie-makers of the Country will
oblige us to lodge him in a better place. As for your Mother though yet living,
I can say little better, for she is in the hand of the Inquisition of Toledo,
accused of unburying the dead, (notwithstanding she never spoke ill of any one)
as also of killing laborers Cattle: The truth is, there were found about her,
more Heads, Legs, Arms, of wax, then are in a Chapel of miracles: In a word,
it is thought she is a Jew and a Witch. I am exceedingly afflicted that she
should so dishonor our Family, in which I have no small interest, being an
Officer of the Kings; for the relation I have unto her, is no mean discredit to
me amongst persons of quality: Besides, my dear child, I have something which
belongs to you; as Heir to your Father and Mother, in all about four hundred
Ducats: Moreover, I am your Uncle, I have not any children, but shall resign
mine Office unto you: You may therefore on sight hereof, provide to come
hither; for with that Latin and Rhetorique which you know, I persuade my self
you will be a very dexterous Proficient in our Trade. I pray your speedy
Answer; And in the Interim, God have you in his good keeping, etc.


I must needs confess, I was much out of countenance at the shame and discredit
of my Parents, but I was quickly comforted, when I considered of the money. I
went unto Don Diego. whom I found still reading of his Letters; in which his
Father commanded him to return unto Segovia, and to leave me at Alcala, for he
had heard some of my Pranks. He told me, his Father had commanded him thence,
and that he was sorry to leave me; but withal, that he would recommend me in
case I liked it, unto a Gentleman, a friend of his, to be his servant: Sir,
said I to him, I have my thoughts a little higher then so; I renounce the
meaness of all those conditions; I intend to scale Honor; and if hitherto I
have had one foot upon the Ladder, as every one knows: You may be pleased to
understand, That my Father has mounted up to the very top of it. I expounded
my meaning unto him, and showed him the Letter which my Noble Uncle had written
to me; for he knowing who I was, I might the more freely, and with less shame,
discover the whole affair unto him: He was very sad at it, and asked me what I
intended to do. I acquainted him with my designs, and the next morning he went
to Segovia; very sad I stayed behind in the Lodging, dissembling my grief, the
best I could; I burned my Letter, for fear least some one might find it, and so
discover my shame. Then I resolved to go for Segovia, to take possession of my
Birthright, and also to know my Kindred, that I might the better avoid them,
and shun the place of their Habitation.

Buscon's departure from Alcala toward Segovia; His meeting with two Coxcombs,
with whom he passed the time on the way; one was an Engineer, 'tother a Fencer.
AT length the day came that I was to abandon the most pleasant life I had yet
known: God knows what a regret it was unto me, to bid adieu unto so many
friends and companions. I sold those few things I had, amongst my fellow
servants, and by the help of some certain devices of mine, I picked up about six
hundred Ryals: I bought me a Mule, and got out of the house, having little
besides my shadow to carry with me. I cannot express unto you in what
lamentations I left the poor Cobbler, for the shoes where with he had trusted
me, nor the sadness of Dame Cyprian our Landlady, for the moneys she had lent
me, nor the clamours of her husband for the hire of our Lodgings; for to say
the truth, I carried away the money my Master had left with me to pay him; one
said his heart did always mis-give him; another, that he ever thought me a
rogue. But so it was, I went away so well beloved, that at least half of those
who knew me, wept for my departure, and the other half laughed at those who wept.
In the way, I entertained my self with thinking on those affairs, when
having passed Torote, I overtook a man upon a little mule, talking to himself,
and so much given over to his frenzy, that though I was come up close by his
side, yet he savv me not; I rouzed him out of his ecstasy, by saluting him, he
returned my civility, I asked him whether he went, and being each of us
satisfied in our demands of that nature, he began to question me, concerning
the Turks coming into Christendom, and of what forces the King had to oppose
him.

Then he asked me what means there were to regain the holy Land, and how
Argiere might be taken; by this I smelt him to be a fool of the Commonwealth.

We continued our discourse, and from one thing to another, we came at last
into Flanders, that is, to talk of those Countries. There it was that he began
to look about him indeed, Those States quoth he, stand me in more then the King
himself; for it is fourteen years since I fell upon a design, which but that it
is impossible, had produced a general peace. Wherein I pray, said I, does
consist the convenience and also impossibility together, that it cannot be
effected? what is it that you say, replied he? that it cannot be effected? Yes,
it may be effected, but to be impossible is quite another thing, and were it
not for fear of troubling your patience, I would acquaint you with it, for I am
now upon printing of it, with some few other works of mine, wherein I will show
his Majesty how to take Oastend two several ways. I beseeched him to make me
acquainted with it, whereupon he fell a groping in his pockets, and at last
drew out a map, both of the enemies and our Fort, saying, you see all the
difficulty of the business consists in this arm of the Sea there, now I shall
furnish you with a device to dry it quite up, which may be done with Sponges. I
no sooner heard that word, but a fit of laughter came into my mouth, and he
instead of being any way offended there with, began to laugh in like manner,
it is true, said he, all men unto whom I have discoverd this my invention, have
done the same, as you do, so well pleased they were with it. I believe so said
I, they could do no less, hearing such a new invention, and founded upon such
solid reasons, yet I must needs tell you, under favor, that having drained up
all the water in it, yet would the Sea quickly fill it up again; Oh I have a
device for that too, replied he, for I would have the Sea there undermined
about a dozen Fathom, I durst not say one word more to him, for fear lest he
should tell me of a device to pull Heaven down upon earth, for in good earnest,
I never met with such extravagant follies; with these admirable proposals we
came unto Torregeon, where my Engineer stayed, for he was to visit a kinsman of
his: I rode on, laughing at the conceit of his inventions. That day fortune was
very favorable to me indeed, much more then usually, by her care of
entertaining me; for she brought me to see a mule bridled and sadled, a good
way from me, feeding at full liberty, and not far thence a man looking on a
book, and drawing lines therein with a pen, which he measured with a pair of
Compasses. Then I beheld him retreating and advancing, holding out his arms, as
if he were fighting, and ever now and then his arms would be crossed one over
the other, in a thousand several postures, as if he were at Sword and Dagger.
Never was man so astonished as my self at the sight hereof: To be short, I
concluded it was some Conjurer, God bless us, in which apprehension, I durst
hardly adventure to go any farther, However I took heart at grace, and on I
marched; at last he spied me, and with that shut up his book, and clapping his
foot in the Stirrup, by accident he slipped out again, and fell all along upon
the ground. I went to him, and helped him up again, and he looking somewhat
scurvily upon me, said, I did not take the due center of my circumference in
mounting. I understood not what he said, but I perceived him to be the most
absolure fool, that ever yet frighted woman. He asked me whether I were
traveling toward Madrid in a direct or circumflex Line? He demanded what
manner of Sword it was I wore by my side, and whose it was? I told him it was
my own; Those cross bars of your Hilt should have been longer, to have
defended the down right blows which are formed in the Center of the Stocadoes,
said he. When I heard him canting in such strange and hideous terms, I took the
boldness to ask him, of what profession he was? he answered me that he was a
most accomplished Master of defense, viz, a Fencer, and that he would make
trial of his skill, in any place whatever, at single Rapier, or at Sword and
Dagger; I believe it, I believe it, said I in a great deal of have, for fear
lest he should have challenged me. To tell you the truth, said I, I took you
rather for some Conjurer, then a Fencer, before I came up to you. I was,
replied he, endeavoring to find out an Idea which then came into my mind,
wherewith by means of the fourth Circle and Rule of Proportion, I might engage
any man's Sword living, in a Duel, and so kill him, with a confession that he
might never be able to discover who did it, and when you were just come to me,
I was trying it by the rules of the Mathematiques. Why said I is it possible
there should be any Mathematical rules in it? do you doubt it quoth he, nay,
there is not only the Mathematiques, but also Divinity, Philosophy, Music, and
Physic; as for the last I doubt it not, said I, for that treats of killing; do
not laugh at it replied he, for I will instantly teach you a notable thrust
against a downright blow, which shall comprehend in it, all the spiral lines
of the Sword. For my part said I, I understand not one syllable of what you
speak, neither little nor great. Hold said he, there is a book which expounds
all of them, it is called the Swords Dexterity, It is an excellent good one,
and contains miracles, and that you may no longer doubt it, when we come to
Rejas, whither we are going, you shall see me do wonders with a couple of
Spits; therefore I pray believe, he who reads this book may easily kill, whom
he will, and as many as he will. He had need then replied I, get a receipt how
to make the Plague, or turn Doctor of Physic. Whilst we were thus
discoursing, we came to Rejas, and as we were alighting at the Stable, he cried
out to me, that I should make an obtuse angle with my legs, and then reducing
them into parallel lines, that I should alight perpendicularly. The Host, who
was at the door, seeing me laugh, did the like, and asked me if the Gentleman
were a Jew or an Hebrew? With that question I thought I should have dyed. Well,
he put his Mule into the Stable, and then spoke to the host saying, Ho lo, you
within there, pray lend me a couple of spits, that I may roast two or three
Angles, I shall restore them immediately; Yes Sir said the Master of the house,
but you need not put your self to the trouble Sir, only give me the Angles, my
wife shall dress them, though I must confess I never yet heard of any such
Birds. How? they are not birds said the Fencer, and looking upon me, began to
smile, to see what ignorance is, lend me two Broaches, I mean only to fence a
little, and peradventure what I shall show you, may be worth you more then all
you ever got in your life. To be short, the spits were all used, and instead of
them he was forced to be contented with two Ladels: never was there seen a more
pleasant spectacle; he stood upon his guard, in this posture quoth he, I
advance, and I make my thrust, and gain the point of the eye: Remember it, for
I make use of it, at this day to kill to the life.

Now I pray see the difference between a thrust and a cut, he never came within
ten paces of me, but went round about me; whoever had seen us with our Ladels
in our hands, would have sworn we had been inventing some secret design against
a pot of Pottage which was ready to run away by boiling over: then all out of
breath with the exercise, look you quoth he, this is the true secret of Arms,
not of your swaggering companions, who can only wield a flagon, and call
themselves fencing Masters, but indeed know nothing but how to drink well. He
had scarce made an end of speaking, but I spied coming out of a Chamber over
against us, a certain Personage, who seemed to be somewhat discontented, his
Mustachio's of the color, and as big as the mane of a bay-horse well made, a
broad brim'd hat, with one side buttoned up, the the other hanging over his face,
a kind of a collar, made of an old Table cloth, just like an Ox-coller, his
legs displayed like the Emperial Eagles, his countenance with a great Per
Signum Crucis de Inimicis suis. His Mustachio's like a pair of Spindles, a
Sword by his side, a Dagger upon his Kidneys, with the bars shining like a Nuns
Parlour, and looking on the ground, I have been said he in my days -- as these
marks will testify, and by my head, I will give him a hundred cuts with my
Sword, nay I Will kill him outright, that shall dare to injure the
Fencing-Masters; with that he laid his hand on his hilts, and withdrew three
paces backwards. I was afraid of a quarrel, to prevent which I stepped in
between them, and told him there was no body spoke to him, nor gave him any
provocation: However he continued in his fury, let him come cried he, with his
naked Sword, if he has ever a one, and leave his Ladles, that we may show
wherein lies the true secret of arms, Therewithal my poor Companion took out
his book, and said, look you here is the Book which contains it, it is printed
by the Kings Privilege, and I will maintain the truth of it with this Ladle
here, and in all places whatever; for look you, let us measure, and then
drawing his compass, this Angle is obtuse, but the 'tother drawing his Sword, I
know neither Angel nor Obtuse, nor did I ever hear of any such Fencers names;
but with this Sword in my hand, I Will cut off all their heads that shall despise
our Art; therewithal he held up his hand to strike, but the poor Rogue my
Companion, at the same time began to look about him; and run away toward our
Chamber. It is our of his power to hurt me, cried he, for I have gotten the
height of his eye: with much ado, at last the Master of the house, an my self
made them friends; for my own part, I could hardly speak for laughing. We lay
in the same Chamber, we went to supper, and so to bed: About two in the morning
he rose up in his shirt, and began to grope about the Chamber, advancing and
retreating, withal uttering a thousand extravagances in Mathematical Language;
he wakened me, and not only so, but called for the Chamberlain to bring him a
Candle, saying, he had found the object fixed to the Stoccade; our Landlord
cursed him to the pit of Hell for troubling of him, and at last called him
fool; with that he returned back to his Chamber, and told me, if I would rise,
I should see what a rare invention he had found against Turkish Cimiters, which
he was then going to make his Majesty acquainted withal, for that it greatly
imported the welfare of Christendom. Not long after the day began to appear,
we rose, my Companion and the Fencing Master shook hands, and I paid our
Reckoning, and so we proceeded on our Journey.

The conceited Extravagancies of a certain Poet whom Buscon overtook going to
Madrid.
I Took my way toward Madrid, and my Companion parted with me, for he was
bound another way: He had no sooner left me, but he cried out to me aloud; I
stayed for him, and though we were in the open field, and no body near us, yet
he came to me, and whispered me in the ear, saying; For Gods sake Sir, let me
beg you not to discover unto any man, those rare Mysteries which I have showed
unto you, but make use of them for your own occasions, I promised him so to do:
He went his way, and I mine, laughing at the conceit of his Extravagances. Thus
I rod on above a League without meeting any one, ruminating with my self upon
some difficulties which presented themselves to my thoughts, concerning my
profession of Honor and Virtue; for first I was of necessity to obliterate the
memory of my Father, and then to lead such a life as might serve to conceal my
self. I conceived those very proposals to be a good beginning, and said in my
mind; Could I but once, of my self, produce such actions as might savor of
Honor and Virtue, I should be a thousand times more to be commended then those
who derive them from their Grandfather. These were my contemplations, when
behold I overtook an old man on a Mule, making toward Madrid. After usual
salutations we fell into discourse; he demanded of me whence I came: I told him
from Alcala: A curse light upon those Countries, replied he, for there is
hardly one man of understanding thereabouts: I wonder said I, you should so
undervalue them, for I assure you, there are many ingenuous men in those parts.
Ingenuous men say you, (replied he all in a fury) whereabouts I pray you? I am
sure I lived fourteen years since at Majabond, where I was a Schoolmaster and
the man that made all the Christmas Carols they sung there, yet they had never
so much wit as to make me any present for it; but that you may be made sensible
both of their ingratitude and ignorance, I shall show you a Song, which is here
in my Satchel; with that he put his hands into his Breeches, I observed his
action, and could not but much wonder at his behavior: After he had fumbled up
and down on both sides, a pretty while together, he drew me out a certain
Fardle of papers, as greasy as a Cooks clothes; amongst them he picked out
one, in which was described the meeting of the Shepherds going to Bethlehem,
made up in as pitiful sad Rhimes as ever was seen in a Ballad. It was
impossible for me to say any thing in opposition against him; for I gave up my
self to such a fit of laughter at the sight of his simplicity, that I could
scarce fetch my breath.

So I began to flatter him, for my better pastime, and told him I was much of
his opinion concerning the beastiality and stupidity of those people, who were
unable to judge of things according to their worth; and that for my own part, I
had never seen any thing in my life, which pleased me better. I beseech you
said he, since you like them so well, to hear a little piece of a Book I have
made upon the eleven thousand Virgins; upon each of which I have made fifty
Stanzas of eight Verses a piece: I assure you it is a rich piece: I to excuse my
self from hearing so many Millions of Stanzas, beseeched him to talk to me no
more of godly affairs: I think the Devil is resolved to vex me with this
importunate Rascal, said I to my self, turning about my head, and making a sour
face: He without more ado, fell a groping for a Comedy, in which were more days
work then a man had need to have made in going to Jerusalem; I did it in two
days, said he, this is but the foul draught; it will take up at least half a
Ream of Paper when it is completed; I have named it Noah's Ark: All the
Representations are of Cocks, Birds, Foxes, Asses, and Boars, in imitation of
Aesops Fables. It is my own, added he, and in deed I believe the world never
yet saw the like; if I could but once get it acted, I am confident all the
Spectators would be ravished: Well, said I, but how can that be, when all the
Interlocutors must be beasts, which cannot speak; Ah th'Devil on it, that is all
the difficulty in it; but I have a trick for that too: I can change my figures,
and put in Parrots, Jayes, Magpies, and Starlings, all which may be taught to
speak: and for the Interludes, I will bring in Apes, Monkies, and the like: Yes
marry, said I, now I hold with you, now you have hit the nayl on the head. This
is not all, replied he, I have some other fine toys, which I made upon a woman
whom I loved: Look you, said he, here are nine hundred and one Sonnets, and
twelve Copies of Verses, (when I heard him naming those numbers, I verily
thought he had been talking of money) all which I made upon her feet. I asked
him if ever he had seen her feet, not as yet replied he, but the conceits are
by way of Prophecy. I was much pleased with the man's ingenuity; but the fear I
was in, least he should begin to read some of his Iliads, made me alter my
discourse. Looking about, I spied a Hare, which I showed to him; in good time,
said he, for in one of my Sonnets I have compared her to that creature; and
withal he began to recite it, and I to divert him, told him, look yonder is the
Star which ushers in the day. Every thing falls out to day according to my
wish, said he, I will now, ending his former, recite you the thirtieth, in
which I compare her to a Star; when I heard that, I began to despair, fearing
there was not any thing on earth, or in Heaven, upon which, he had not made
some Rhimes. But when I found we were almost come to Madrid, I was in hopes he
would not have rehearsed his stuff in the streets; but to my great affliction,
it fell out quite contrary, for to show what he was he spoke so much the
louder. I begged him to be quiet, telling him, that should the children hear he
was a Poet, they would throw Lime, and rotten Apples at us, because of late
they had been declared to be all fools, by the Politic Ordinances, Published
against them, by a certain person, who had once been of the Poetique Sect, but
since reclaimed, and brought to his right wits. He was stark mad to hear me say
so, but however entreated me to let him see them, if I had them. I told him I
would, when we were at our Lodging. Now because he was acquainted in the Town,
and I not, I was guided by him. We went then to an Inn where he used to lodge:
At the door we found about a dozen Fiddlers and blind Rascals, who were waiting
for him: After mutual embracements, they asked him for some fresh Carols, new
Songs, Lampoons, or any other pieces of wit: He drew them out a good many, from
a Wallet which he had, and got five Ryals a piece for his Papers. In fine, he
bid them farewell, and turning to me, look you, said he, I will get above three
hundred Ryals of those people before I go hence; and therefore that I may
dispatch their desires, I must needs beg leave to retire from you a little
while, and after supper we will see those accursed Ordinances, of which you
told me.

Buscon plays the Box with his Poet, and shows him the Ordinances against
Poets. The Ran-counter he had with a Soldier, pretending a Recompense for his
services; And of a Hermit who cheated him at play. Buscon's reception by his
Uncle.
A Way went my Poet into a Chamber by himself to make some Ballads: In the mean
time Supper was providing, having stuffed out our Doublets, he entreated me to
show him the Ordinances; now because I had little else to do until bedtime, I
drew them out of my Pocket, and began to read them unto him as follows.

Ordinances against the Poets of Bale, The giddy-headed Muses, Mechanical and
Hackney Rhimers.
ALthough we are duly informed that there is a certain kind of Vermin, called
Poets, who are totally addicted to Idolatry, worshipping Hairs, Teeth, Gloves,
Shoo-strings, and the like; as also who daily commit infinite other sins much
more heinous, as if they were Barbarians or Pagans: yet are we nevertheless
desireous of their conversion, and inclined to use them charitably, in regard
they are Christians, and our neighbors. We do therefore Ordain, That in Easter
Week, they be assembled together in some public place, then, an there to hear
the reproval of their errors, and such other admonitions, as shall be thought
proper to reduce them into a way of salvation: And in case there are any who
touched with the sense of their crimes, shall be willing to renounce their
former detestable life; we shall prepare Colleges for them, (as there are for
the penitent Whores) that they may there expiate their offenses; the rest we
shall send to the Houses of Correction.

Item considering the great droughts which usually rage in the houses of the
fiery Poets, during the dog days, by reason of the many Suns and Stars
wherewith they are stuffed. We do therefore in that behalf, impose a perpetual
silence on them, as to heavenly things.

And as there are certain Months in the Year, during which fishing and hunting
are inhibited, so we do expersly prohibit them, not to open their veins in
certain Months, least they should shrink up, by reason of the fury and violence
which then might transport them.

And for as much as this infernal sect of Poets are of the same fraternity with
the Barefoots and Carters of the Kingdom: We do therefore order, as a remedy
against their extreme necessities, That all their works shall be burnt, as
likewise their old Fringes and Embroideries, for the chiefer experimenting of
the Philosophers stone in their behalf: And that the Gold, Silver, Pearls, and
all other precious Stones which shall thereby be produced, shall be reserved
for them to adorn their Goddesses.

Here our pedantick Doctor could no longer hold, but up he rose all in a fury;
I do declare and protest, said he, against your Ordinance, and shall proceed
against you in particular, if you go on any further: I appeal to the University
of Parnassus, where my cause ought to be tried, that I may not prejudice my
habit and profession; and moreover then so I tell you, I will spend in
prosecution of my Suit, whatever God has sent me in the world. It would be
very fine, if a man of my Quality should endure this; for I will prove that the
works of such a Poet as my self, are no ways liable to such Ordinances, which I
will justify before Apollo.

I had much ado to forbear laughing, but that I might be kept up no longer, for
it was pretty late: I told him the Ordinance was made for sport, and in jeaft,
that he who would not obey it might choose; that no one should be forced, for
that it had no seal of Authority. Now you say somewhat, replied he, and you
have rid me of the greatest trouble I was ever yet in; for you know what a
torment it is to threaten a man's works with fire, who has eight hundred
thousand Stanzas ready by him? But God forgive you the fright in which you put
me; Thereupon I proceeded.

Item, For as much as diverse have forsaken their Idolatrous life, (though they
yet retain some Relics of it) and are turned Shepherds; which is the occasion
of their Cattels being so lean; for that they suffer them to drink nothing bu^
their tears, nor feed them with any thing but their hoarse Gitars, with which
they dull them; and that moreover their wool is half buried, by reason of the
fiery sighs, proceeding from the breasts of the said Shepherds. We Ordain, That
they surcease the said Trade, and that such of them as affect solitariness,
shall go and build them Cottages in the deserts of Lybia: and as for those who
shall not submit hereunto, we give them free liberty to hire out themselves
unto Nurses to sing and rock their children asleep in their Cradels.

He must needs be some Masculine Whore, or Sodomite, or perchance a Jew, who
made such Ordinances, cried the poor Pedant: did I but know him, I would show
him a Satyr should make him mad, and all those who should read it besides: But
I pray tell me, would it not be fine to see such a Hermit as I should make,
who have no beard; Oh I should sing rarely, who have hardly voice enough to
speak; could make a shift to write, but never to Preach; Therefore I pray leave
off, for if you continue to put me into any more such frights, you will see me
fall dead at your feet: No no, said I, you must not be troubled at it, for I
have already told you, it is only a piece of Drollery, and that you need believe
no more then you please of it.

Item, For the better suppressing of the many Robberies committed by those
Cattle called Poets. We do therefore expressly prohibit all Booksellers to
Print, or buy any Books of Poetry in foreign Dialects; that is, That they be
not transported from one Kingdom to another; as those of France into Spain, or
those of Spain into France, etc. and in case any be found guilty of the said
crime or to be seized of such thefts, that he be put into the Pillory for one
whole hour, as a Robber of other men's goods.

I fear not, said the Pedant, smiling, of being brought under that punishment,
for I am but too rich in inventions, and need not borrow of others; and if you
please, I will swear unto you, that when I take Pen in hand, they do sometimes
so throng upon me, that I am four hours together expecting until the first make
way, so mightily do they stop one another. No, no Sir, replied I, you need not
use any asseverations at all, for I believe you at the first word.

Item, We do adjudge that all women who shall fall in love with these kind of
Poets, who are as dry as Tinder, shall be comprised within the number of wilful
murderers, and of such as hang or drown themselves: And we further command,
that they be not buried in Holy ground, but in the highways.

Item, Considering the great number of Comedies, Stanzas, Songs and Sonnets, of
which Collections have been made in their late years of increase. We Ordain,
That all such Bundles of Copies, as the Cooks and Butter-women have saved,
shall be forthwith carried to the Houses of Office, there to be used as
occasion shall require, any prohibitions in injunction herein to the contrary
notwithstanding; having however, first well rubbed them between their hands for
prevention of Excoriations.

Item, Considering that there are three sorts of people in the Commonwealth
which are so extreme miserable, that they cannot live without Poets; as Woers,
Ballad-singers, and Stage Players; we being charitably inclined in our desires
to supply their wants and Indigencies, do permit that there be certain Poets
purposely tolerated for their use; provided they subscribe their works, and
give notice of their dwellings, that they may be brought to give an account of
their misdemeanors and detractions, which for the most part they commit against
persons of Honor, in their Lampoons and Lanterelus.

Lastly, We command all Poets in general, to correct and amend their style; and
that in future they surcease to use that manner of writing unto which they have
accustomed themselves in commendation of women, either for their own passions,
or for money, which such as are in love give them: Scilicet, That they forbear
profaning of Heavenly things, or adopting the names of Angels, Stars, Suns, and
Divinities; unto such women as are ready for all comers, provided they have
wherewithal to pay their welcome, and this under pain of being banished unto
eternal darkness, and given up to the wicked Spirits, and infernal furies, at
the hour of their several and respective deaths

They who heard these Ordinances read, desired copies of them, except our good
Pedant, who cried out in a pet, that he need not make any defense, but would
imitate the good Poets of Spain, with whom he said, he was well acquainted; I
am not for my own part neither, said he, so inconsiderable as you imagine, for
I have lain in the same Inn with Dignan, I dined twice with Espinel, and I
have been in this City of Madrid as near Lope de Vega as I am to you; I have
oftentimes visited Alonso d' Arcilla at his house: besides I have the Picture
of divine Figueroa over my chimney, and to conclude, I have bought the
Gally-gaskins which Padilla left when he took Orders. I have them to this very
day, and will carry them about me as long as they will hold together. Look here
they be, quoth he, and withal pulled out a bundle of rags, and showed us an old
pair of Breeches, which would hardly have served to have made a scarecrow in a
Hempyard.

At this passage all the company began to laugh, and hold their noses because
of the nastiness which had almost choked them, and for my own part, I seeing
it was late, got me to bed.

Day came, I rose, and took leave of my Comrade, without bidding him farewell,
and so departed from Madrid. Now the Fates, which would not let me be alone,
for fear of being in bad company, brought me to meet with a certain Soldier,
whom I accosted, and after our usual complements, he asked me, if I came from
the Court, I was only there said I, en passant. Indeed, replied he, with
somewhat an ugly look, it is well you stayed there no longer, for there are none
but Rogues and Rascals live there. God's Death, I had rather for my part be in a
Siege up to the middle in snow, and eat nothing but faggot-sticks, than put up
such abuses and tricks as they have served me. Whereupon I told him, there were
men of all sorts in the Court, and questionless some, who knew how to reward
men of valor and worth. How the devil can that be, replied he, seeing I was
there six months suing for a scurvy Colors, after twenty years service in the
wars, and the spending of my blood in diverse occasions for the Kings service,
as is to be seen by the wounds which I have received? With that he let down his
Breeches and showed me his buttocks, where he had many scarrs received in the
French wars, which he would needs persuade me to be wounds of a sword. Then he
showed me his back, Look said he, three pistol-shots, which I received from
mine enemies in defense of my Country, and withal showed me three cuts, which
were healed up of so equal a distance, and just parallel, that I concluded some
Buskin had bestowed them upon him with a dung-fork. I had the more reason to
guess so, because I had received such another mischance. Then he took off his
Hat, and showed me a forehead of the long sixteens, for so many smaller cuts I
could count which thwarted a great slash cross his face, and parted his nose. I
received this blow, in Paris, in Gods and the Kings service, for all which, I
had never any thing but good words, which I look upon as ill payment. Read
those papers there, pray, for God's Death? said he there is not a man living, the
Devil take me if there be, so remarkable as I am. He had reason for what he
said, for he had terrible marks upon his face. Then he drew out of his Breeches
a tin-box full of parchments, which I suppose he had stolen from some other man,
whose name he had taken upon him. To pleasure him I read them, and began to
commend his great valor; I told him, that neither Syd nor Enham, two famous
Marquesses could compare with him. How, with me said he? making one step
backwards, no nor Garcia de Perades, nor Julian Romero, nor many other stout
men ought to be named in the same day with me. There were no great Guns in
their time, for had there been, hardly one of them would have stood to it, by
this good light, above one hour at most. Pray do but go into Flanders and ask
what manner of man Breachtooth is, and you shall hear what they will tell you.
Probably you may be the man, said I to him, looking him in the face, you are in
the right, replied he, do you not see that vacant place in my mouth, but we will
talk no more of that, for it is not handsome for a man to commend himself.

Whilst we were in this discourse, we met an Hermit mounted upon an ass, with
a Beard almost down to his knees, his countenance very pale and lean, in a long
gray Gown. We saluted him with a Deo gratias, as is the custom to those people;
he returned the like, and began to discourse of the fairness of the wheat, and
the Providence of God Hah dear Father, said the Soldier, I have had the Pikes
thicker about me, than this wheat you see here, and that at the Siege of
Antwerp: God's Death, I did all a stout man could do, and by this light, had -- At
this second oath the good Hermit interrupted him, and besought him to swear no
more. The Soldier left off that discourse. It Is to be seen, Father, said he,
that you were never in the wars, in reprehending in me that thing which is most
commendable of all others in our profession. At this I could not but smile to
my self, for I began to perceive by his discourse he was some counterfeit
Braggadochio.

Whilst we were thus discoursing, we came to the Port. The Hermit was saying
over his Pater-nosters upon a rope of Beads, each whereof might well have
served for a bowling-Jack; The Soldier for his part, was comparing the
adjacent Rocks with those Fortresses and Castles he had seen, making his
considerations upon the strength of the place, and where would be the fittest
ground for raising a Battery; Oh, said he, I would quickly blow up those Rocks
like dust into the air; which will be an acceptable piece of service to
Seafaring men. Behold us by this arrived at Crececedilla, We lodged all three
together, we called for our Suppers, which while our Landlord was providing,
the Hermit said unto us, it will not be amiss if we used some diversion till
Supper-time, for Idleness is the Mother of all vice; Let us then play if you
will for Pater-nosters, and Ave-Maries; not so good Father, quoth the Soldier,
That kind of money I hold to be good among such religious men as you are, but,
if you please, let us play for an hundred Royals, and no more, for I have
always such a trifling sum in reserve to sport away. At that I pricked up my
ears, saying, I would venture as much, and the Hermit to show that he was not
ill company, told us that he had an alms for the lamp of his Hermitage, to the
value of two hundred Royals. When I heard that, my heart went pittepat until we
were at it, for I hoped to be the wick that should suck up all the oil of that
Lamp; but I wish all the Turks designs may thrive no better. To be short, we
went to dice at hazard. At first he told us, he understood not the game, which
was no small grief to me, we offered to teach him, as in fine we did. That
blessed Saint did at first let us win some of his Royals, but after a little
while he gave us such rude rebuffes, that he quickly dispatched us, and made
himself our Executor before our deaths. At every cast which the Soldier lost,
he cursed himself a thousand times to the pit of Hell, with many Oaths, and I
eat my fingers ends, whilst the Hermit was employing of his in drawing our
money to him: as fast as we called upon the Devil, and execrated him cursing
our misfortune, he would name the Saints and Angels. After he had thus bit us,
the Soldier of his hundred Royals, and me of six hundred, we asked him if he
would play upon tick: He replied, he would not deal so rigorously with us, for
that we were Christians and Neighbors, but hereafter when you play, do not
swear; for you see by me, who recommended my self to God and the Saints, how
favorable fortune has been to me. We were not so well skilled at that trade a
he was, but like Ingrum's believed him. The Soldier swore not only that he
would never swear more, but never to play more. I did the like, Ah plague on
it, said he, I have been oftentimes amongst Lutherans and Moors, but never
treated with so great severity, and so little charity as by that divelish
Hermit. In the mean time, the Hermit laughed at us in his sleeve, being by
this fallen to his Beads again. I who had never a cross to bless my self withal,
entreated him to bear my charges to Segovia, which he kindly did.

To be short, we went to lodge in a great Hall, which looked somewhat like an
Hospital, for that there were several people which lodged there, the other
chambers being all full. I went to bed indeed, but I could not sleep a wink, my
six hundred Royals did so run in my mind. The Soldier called for the Master of
the house, and delivered him the papers in his tin-box, with another small
packet bound up in an old sheet. The Hermit crossed himself, we addressed our
selves to sleep. During the night I heard the Soldier talking to himself of
his hundred Royals, as of a mischief past cure, and I was plotting with my self
some trick to retrive my six hundred In the interim, it was time to rise: The
Soldier called for a candle, which the Chamberlain brought him. The Master of
the house laid his packet on the Table, but withal had forgot to bring him his
box. Not long after, the Soldier looking about, and seeing only his Packet,
began to cry out as if he had been undone. Oh my business, my business at the
same time, the Hermit and I began to call out that somebody should bring him
his businesses. In a word, we made such an hurly-burly, that our Host presently
got three close-stools for us, which he brought in, saying, take every one one;
would you have any more, thinking we had bad some looseness. At that the
Soldier whipped out of bed stark naked with his Sword in his hand, and ran
after the Host, swearing he would kill him, and slash him into an hundred
thousand pieces. Does he mock me, said he? I Will make him know, I have been at
the battle of Saint Quintin, and many others, and does he think to flap me in
the nose with a close-stool instead of my papers, and business which I gave him
in custody? All that were in the Hall began to run after him to pacify him,
but all would not do. The Master of the house said to him, Sir your Worship did
call so carnestly for your business, that I verily believed you had some
looseness; nor did I understand you called for your box. At last the business
was ended, and he returned into the Hall. During this hurly-burly I lay close,
watching to have made a scramble, in case the Hermit had stirred, of the booty
he had yesterday got of us, but the crafty knave was more cunning then my self,
for he stirred not, fearing belike some conspiracy against his treasure, and
told us by way of excuse we had put into so great fear, that his heart failed
him. All being quiet, the Hermit very liberally paid for the Soldier and my
self. We went through the Town to pass the Port for my particular, I was much
troubled I could not bring about my design: Nor far off me met with a Gennoese,
I mean, one of those Antichrists of the Spanish Usurers, with a serving man
behind him that carried a Canopy to keep the Sun from him, and by this he
seemed to be a rich man. We began several discourses with him, which he still
ended in Bancos and Exchanges, for they are generally a kind of people in my
apprehension are a kin to Judas, always talking of the Purse. He began to name
Bizance, viz. whether one might safely return money at Bizance: and reiterated
Bizance, so often, that the Soldier and I asked him what that Gentleman might
be; he began to smile, and told us it was a City in Italy, where Merchants met
to set prizes upon moneys: From this answer we gathered that Birance was the
place where the money-taylors took their measures. Amongst other discourses he
told us he was undone by a Bankrupt, in which he had lost above threescore
thousand Crowns, which he said upon his conscience the least, though for my
part I believe that conscience amongst Merchants is like a Maidenhead in a
Bauds hands, which is sold without delivery. There is none that use it, for
having heard that it stings they left it at their first being born with their
navels.

Amidst our discourse, we came within sight of Segovia, which pleased me very
much; but the memory of the insufferable torments I had undergone with Ragot
did much take from me my content.

Coming near the City, I perceived my Father in the highway, expecting
company; I was much troubled at it, but dissembled it the best I could. I took
my leave of my Comrades, and went contriving how I might hear of my Uncle; I
rod in unknown to any one, for I had a little beard grown, and withal
indifferent good clothes. I enquired of diverse men where Master Grimpant lived,
but I could hear nothing of him: I was exceeding glad to find so many honest
men in my own Country. Whilst I was in this trouble, I saw a number of
pitiful Rogues running along and looking behind them; I got my self up to the
wall, as several others did; when behold there passed by a company of
Halberteers, with other Officers of justice, and in the middle of them a rope
of Penitents against their wills, half naked, and my Uncle in the rear of them,
with two-handed Handkerchiefs, with which he brushed their shoulders, to keep
of the Wasps; I was so near the way where he passed, that he presently
discovered me: Oh my Nephew, cried he, embracing me, pray stay here for me; I
shall only take a walk with these Gentlemen and return to you and carry you to
dine with me: I thought I should have dyed for shame; for there were more
Rascals stayed behind to look upon me, than followed the poor Penitents; and
had it not been for the money my Father had left me in his hands, I would that
very hour have left the City never to see it more; but I could do no less at
that time then promise him that I would there expect him as I did; and he
having dispatched his business, came to me, and carried me along with him.

The kind entertainment which Buscon received from his Uncle; The good cheer he
made him in his House; and how after he had received his Portion, he left his
company.
THis Worshipful Uncle of mine lived near the Slaughterhouse, the most
infectious and noisome place of the-whole City: This is not a Palace, said he,
as he went into his Lodging; but I can assure you, my dear Nephew, it is very
commodious for my. Office: We went up on a Ladder to the Chamber; at the first
step I set my foot on it, I looked upwards, mistrusting least some disaster
might betide me, for it looked like the highway to the Gallows. We entered a
Chamber whose Roof was so low, that were forced to go in the same posture as
those who receive benedictions, viz. with our heads in our Cod-pieces: By
chance I cast my eyes upon a row of Pins, where hung all the Utensils of his
Trade; as Whips, Cords, Swords, Knives, and Branding Irons: never was
Galley-slave more astonished or ashamed then my self at the sight of those
goodly movables: He asked me why I did not lay down my Cloak, and why I did
not sit; I told him it was my custom to do as he saw: You are very fortunate,
said he, in coming to me this day, for I shall give you some good cheer, there
being some friends of mine to dine with me. In the midst of his discourse, in
came a certain man in a long tawny Gown; he was one of those that goes about
begging for the souls in Purgatory and holding up his Box, said to my Uncle The
Souls have not been to day worth above their weight in burnt silk. With that he
laid his Box down in a corner, and trussing up his Gown, I saw his baker legs,
which were made like a greek Y reversed; presently he began to dance. Is not
Rapiere come yet, said he? No, quoth my Uncle: Thereupon came into the Chamber
a great scoundrel fellow, creeping on his knees, which he was forced unto,
either because he was too high, or the Chamber too low. His face was all
Chequer-work, flat nosed, with a Hat like a flute glass, only the brims were so
large that it might have served for a Pent-house for three or four in rainy
weather: a Sword he had by his side with more Rings about it then a Curtain
rod; he was no sooner got up, but down he sat. I must needs confess, dear
Godfather, said he to my Uncle, that you have served your Penitents to day
like good children indeed: With that the souls-beggar took up the discourse;
they were poor sneaking Rascals, that had not where withal to buy a kindness: I
gave four Duckates to Fletchill, grand Beadle of Ocaigne, to befriend me as he
did, when I was forced to dance a Coranto there: For my part, said the other, I
did not grudge my money I gave Lobrene, when he served me with the same sauce
at Mourcia, and yet the old Thief made me sensible that some one of more credit
than my self had recommended me to him. Those Officers, said my Uncle,
interposing in their discourse, are not men of honor, as I am; for when I
treat with any one, I know how to acquit my self as becomes my quality. I
listened to these discourses with abundance of regret, which that great
Ragamuffin perceiving; Is that the good man that passed through your hands
last, said he? No, no, said my Uncle, it is a Nephew of mine, who is Master of
Arts in Alcala, and a very ingenuous young man: He begged my pardon, and
proffered me his service; for which I thanked him very kindly, he being my
Uncles assistant, who helped him at a pinch. In the mean time, I was almost mad
to get my money out of my Uncles hands, that I might hye me from him. To be
short, the Cloth was laid, and a Cord which to my thinking was twenty yards
long let down at the Window, with an old Hat at the end of it, such as the
Prisoners use in Newgate, in which they drew up four or five earthen and
wooden dishes, half broken; in which were several sorts of meats, Tripes,
Sheeps-heads, powderd beef, and brains: I thought this Cord would have reached
down to the Antipodes; but I perceived that they came no further then a Tavern
in a Cellar under my Uncles House: That done, they cast out their line once
more, and fished up half a dozen Bottles of about a Pottle a piece: Ha! said I
to my self, that is a good draught indeed.

They sat themselves down, and at the upper end the blessed Beggar; To be
short, they fell to drinking, and swallowed more Raisins then ever came out of
their mouths: they never spoke so much as once of the deluge, for they had
quite forgot water. In a word, they stuffed their bellies so full, that what
with the meat, and what with the wine, the vapors crept up into their
Pericraniums, and mazed them: they began to see double, and some of them to see
such things as were not near them; for the Beggar took a Plate of fried Tripes
which swam in black sauce, and thinking it to be pottage, clapped it to his
mouth to sup it up, saying, it is good to have something of ones own, and
thinking to put it into his mouth, spilt one half on his bosom, the the other on
his clothes; perceiving himself in that pickle he rose from the Table to clean
himself; but his head was too heavy for his body, so that at the first step his
nose kissed the ground: with that he took hold on the Tables foot, and
endeavoring to rise, overthrew it upon the the other two: My Uncle tried to get
up, but being as far gone as the the other, fell upon his Colleague, who finding
himself down before he expected it, asked my Uncle why he pusht him, and
whether he used to entertain his guests so; and with that he took a bone, which
by chance was in his hand intending to slay my Uncle who lay at full length
dead drunk; but gettng upon his knees, with his arm lift up, as good luck would
have it, instead of striking him, he spewed up all his Tripes upon his face.

For my part I did not sit down with them, but contented my self with a piece
of bread and a glass of wine; for I did so nauseate the nastiness of their
meat, that I could not for my heart eat of it; so that I was in a condition to
help my Uncle, which I did, though with much ado: At last I got him up and laid
him on his bed, after he had bid a jugg good night, which he mistook for one of
his guests. In the mean time the other two were a sleep on the floor: When I
saw them all fast, I got out of the Chamber to take the air, and to deliver my
self from their infections: I entertained my self with walking up and down the
City all that evening. I passed by Ragots House, where I heard the news of his
death, I must needs confess I was not much troubled (...) it, nor did I enquire
of what he dyed; for I supposed famine had at last got the upper hand of him:
After four hours march I returned to our Lodging, where I found one of the
company crawling upon all four, groping for the door, and crying, somebody had
run away with the Chamber: I helped him up and let the other alone, who waked not
till about eleven the clock: One of them being come to himself asked what a
clock 'twas? my Uncle yet old-drunk answered him, 'twas about noon, and that he
had best repose himself till the heat of the day were past. The Beggar took his
Gown and got to the window, thinking he had been at the door, and so was
marching off, but looking up, he saw the Stars, come hither, come hither, said
he to the others, the Sky is full of stars at midday; sure there has been
some very geeat Eclipse: my Uncle and his companions blessed themselves with
the sign of the Cross, and kissing the ground, prayed that they might be
delivered from all perils and dangers. I did what I could to contain my self
till morning, which at last to my great joy came; and then away went our guests.

Finding my self alone with my Uncle, who had a little recovered himself; I
began to discourse to him of my inheritance, but he being a man who understood
little of good behavior, put me to a great deal of trouble before I could
bring him to my own bow; but at length he yielded, though with some reluctance,
for I could only make him bleed three of the four hundred Ducates, my Father
left me, which he had gotten by his handi-craft, and entrusted with a person of
Honor, who was the Depository of all the thefts committed within ten Leagues
of Segovia: To her we went who received us with many welcomes, wishing that I
might prove as honest and as able a man as my deceased Father. The Ducates were
told out in good money my Uncle seeing me taking possession of my inheritance;
my dear Nephew, said he, you will do very ill, should you squander away this
money; did I not know you to be a person of understanding, and withal mindful
of the family from whence we are descended, I should be more wary of delivering
it into your hands; but there it is, God give you grace to make good use of it,
and then perchance you may enjoy some part of my labors: I returned him many
thanks for his kind offers; and having paid my shot, my Uncle and I rerurn'd to
our damned Lodging, where we no sooner were, but up came his Colleague, unto
whom my Uncle gave an account of what we had done: I saw my self obliged to
bestow some wine upon them; I perceived by the countenance and discourse of
that Pot companion, that he had some design upon my Purse: but by good fortune,
after I had plied them with store of wine, they fell asleep, which I no sooner
saw, but without more ado, away I got me, full of respect, for I made not the
least noise to wake them: I locked the door after me, and threw the key in at a
little hole. I went and got me a lodging a good way off from that place,
designing to go to Court: but to observe a Decorum a word which I have heard in
the Latin Country, and amongst the Pedantick Rabble: I resolved to send a
Letter to my Uncle, and to give him an account of my sudden departure, which I
did, and returning to his Lodging, found them as I left them: I threw in my
Letter under the door, which was to this effect.

Buscon to his Uncle Grimpant.
Dear Uncle,
It having pleased God to take my Father out of this world by an honorable
death, and to reduce my Mother to such a condition as she can expect nothing
but the like end; there rests no more then to see you exercise your Trade
upon another. I have very seriously considered it, and thereupon have firmly
resolved to be one of my family (for two I cannot be) who shall endeavor to
secure my self not only from your hands, but your eyes: I beseech you therefore
be no more solicitous of me then I am of you, nor ever hope to see me more,
unless my misfortunes should force me into your clutches.


Buscon returns to Madrid, and in the way falls into the company of one
Piedescaux, who said he was a Knight of the Order of Industry.
ALL things fell out according to my hearts desire; for when I came back to my
Lodging, I found a Waggoner going for Madrid: he had an Ass, which I hired of
him; I rose betimes in the morning, and went out of the City before him: I had
not gone far before he overtook me, and so I began my journey, cursing my
kindred, and thinking with my self what cholar, rage, and execrations my Uncle
and his Colleague did vomit out against me, at the receipt of my Letter.

In the mean time I was accoutred much like Sancho Panza, Don Quixot's Squire:
I wished very heartily that I might not meet any one in the way, least I would
loose my self, when as I perceived not far from me a certain young man, who
seemed to be a Tassel of the Nobility; he was booted and spurred, had a great
laced Collar, his Cloak upon one shoulder, his Sword dagling in his Belt, with
a stick in his hand, as if he had been walking in expectation of some company.
I presently concluded it was some Knight that had left his train behind him: I
accosted him with a salute, he beheld me, saying, Peradventvre Sir, you are
going to Court: I am Sir, replied I; you seem by your countenance, said he,
upon that beast, to be less weary then I am with all my Equipage: I thought he
had spoken of some Coach which followed him: for my part, said I, I find more
ease in traveling upon this beast, then in a Coach, nor indeed would I
willingly change with you, for the tossing and tumbling makes my head ache: what
do you abuse me, said he? do you know whom you speak to? and at that word he
came back to me in some anger; but being tied about with one only point and
that old too, his Breeches fell about his heels and discovered all his poor
Arse to the open air, for his shirt was so short that it would not cover the
bottom of his belly: He could not so quickly truss them up again, but I had
seen all his secrecies, which forced me to turn about, and stop my mouth with
my Handkerchief, to stifle a fit of laughter which was ready to surprise me;
and he who knew not what to do, entreated me to lend him a point, Sir, said I,
unless you expect your people, you may stay long enough in the condition you
are in, for I cannot help you, having but one single Point my self; if you
intend to jeer me, replied he, you had best keep on your way, for I understand
not what you mean by Coach and Attendants: To be short, in half a Leagues
traveling together he discovered himself to me in such effectual terms, that
he gave me to understand, that unless I would do him the favor to let him get
up behind me, he could not possibly get to the Court, so weary he was with
going on foot with his Breeches in his hands: I was good natured, so I
alighted, and helped him up which without assistance he could never have done,
for he had but one hand at liberty, his the other being on his point; but I was
much astonished whilst I was doing him that good office, for his Breeches were
so pitifully torn, that I had his bare arse in my hand. He perceiving the
discovery I had made, told me, discreet man as he was, Sir, all is not gold
that glisters, when you first saw me with this great laced collar, you thought
me to be some Earl of Gascoign at least, but I beseech you know, there are many
honest men in the world as naked as my self. I did what I could to persuade him
I knew not what he meant. How, said he, have you seen nothing? that cannot be,
for one might easily have seen all that I had: You beheld a Gentleman whom if
the Nobility did maintain as I maintain it, I should not want any thing; but
Sir, we live in an age where without meat and drink, Nobility can neither be
sustained nor maintained; nor indeed should one in my condition call himself
Gentleman, for there is no Gentility in misery: I regard not those Patents of
Nobility, since upon a certain day I found my self fasting very late, and one
refused to trust me with a loaf and half a pint of wine upon it. I have sold
what ever I could make in the world to supply my wants: The Goods of my Father
which was called Torrinio Rodrigues, Ballaio, Gomez, D' Ampovero, were seized
upon for another man's debt; I have only the Don left to sell; but such is my
misfortune, that I can meet with no body that will lay out money upon it, for
they who are not of quality to put it before, have got a trick to put it after
their names; as Coridon, Bourdon, Grillardon, Randon, Gueridon, Brandon, and
such like. I protest to you, that though, me thought the calamities of that
poor Gentleman were ridiculous, yet I found good diversion in his company. I
asked him his name, whither he went, and what his affairs were? He named all
his Fathers Titles, and added those of Cardan and Lourdain: When I heard him at
this pass, I thought verily I had heard the noise of bells, sounding Din Dan
Don: He told me, he was going to Court; for said he, it ill beseems a man in my
condition to live in the Country; and to tell you the truth, I seldom trouble
my self to enquire the prises of Oil and Butter, having not wherewithal to buy
any; for this reason I betake me to that place as a common receptacle of all
Bravo's, where open house is kept all they year long, with several Tables for
all comers and goers, such whose bellies cry cup-board before eleven of the
Clock; there is my abode, and I am seldom without an hundred Royals in my
Pocket, or a good Lodging, and so I spend my time merrily: In a word, I am
beholding to the Italian Proverb.

Con il Art e co'gl'inyanno
Se vive mezzo l'anno
Coyl'Inyanno e co'l'arte
Se vive l'altra part.
Thus Englished, A Man by Art and by Deceit
Half a year may live complete.
By the same Deceit and Art
He may live the other part.


To be short, Industry at Court is the true Philosophers stone, which converts
all it touches into Gold.

I was almost ravished at his discourse, and to pass away the time, I desired
him to tell me what Arts they who had nothing but their Swords and Cloaks like
himself, did use to subsist at Court, seeing most Courtiers have hardly enough
of their own to live upon, but are many times glad to take a bit at another
man's Trencher: Some such there are said he, and other some well enough to pass;
but to tell you the truth, flattery is the chief Key and Pasport which
introduces us into the affections of those people; and to the end that I may
the better acquaint you with my manner of living, I shall make you a short
recital of my life.

The Knight of the Industry relates the History of his life to Buscon, and
possesses him with a great desire to be one of his Order.
IN the first place, you must understand the Court is like Noah's Ark, there
are all sorts of creatures in it, good and bad, wise and foolish; those who are
good, are very rare, and those who are bad, difficult to be known, for they
counterfeit themselves to an hair. Amongst the rest, there is one sort of
people, of which Order I my self am, who have neither Goods nor Chattels,
moveable or immovable, in possession or reversion; We are generally called
Knights of the Industry. Now because there are several ranks, we have
particular names by which they are distinguished. Some are called
Cloak-twitchers, others Pick-pockets, others Setters, others Snaps, others
Trappaners,, others Hectors, others Lions, Free-booters, and the like; by which
their professions are differenced: We have assumed the Title of Industry,
because she is our guide and Protectress. Our most usual food is, that of the
Cameleons, for our stomach's are seldom filled with ought but air, it being a
work of great labor when we drain our nourishment from another man's Kitchen:
We are the destruction of Banquets, the Sponges of Taverns, and the Guests of
the forced Put; however we live to our content: we are a people that feed upon
an Onyon, and yet with a toothpick in our mouths, pretend to have eaten a
Capon. If any one makes us a visit, he is sure to find our chambers strow'd
over with bones of mutton or fowl, with parings of fruit, a feather-tub, or
Rabbets-feet; all which we had picked up in the Streets in the night to credit
us: presently we would cry out, I see it is impossible for me to prevail with
my servants to make clean the room any sooner. I beg your pardon Sir, for I
have had some friends with me, and these wicked Rascals -- They who knew us not
would believe us. But what shall I tell you of our Free-Booters? If at any time
we speak but half a word with any man, we presently force an acquaintance upon
him, we enquire out his lodging, and just at dinnertime we go to wait upon
him, and tell him the inclination we had to honor and serve him, obliged us to
that visit: that we are charmed with his ingenuity and incomparable parts. If
he ask us whether we have dined, and we find the cloth going to be laid, we
answer not yet; and if we find the cloth taken away, we tell him yes. If he
once speak to us to stay, we never expect a second invitation, for we have
often found our selves deceived of our dinners by such straining of
complements. When we are set at Table, though the Master of the house know
never so well how to carve, yet we tell him (the better to lick our fingers) If
you please Sir, give it me, I shall help you. I remember Don such an one, God
bless his Soul, (and then we name some deceased Duke or Marquess) would take
greater delight to see me cut up a Partridge or Pheasant, than to eat of it,
and then we take the fork and the knife, and cut it up. Oh how finely it
smells, then say we, indeed you would wrong your Cook not to taste of it: What
an excellent fellow it is! and thus we stuff our guts.

If perchance those Opportunities fail us, then we have recourse to the
Pottadge-pot of some Convert, and we tell him that gives the Dole, we came more
out of devotion than necessity. It is worth a man's sight to behold one of us at
an Ordinary where play is, we are the most serviceable people in the world, we
snuff the Candles, bring the chamber-pots, and rejoice at the winners good
luck, and all this for six pence, which the winner bestows upon us. For our
clothes we know where the Frippery is, and because there is a set hour in
diverse places for Prayers, we have also set times for mending our clothes.

To see the diversity of things that we do, is an incomparable pastime: we look
upon the Sun as our mortal enemy, because he discovers our patches and tatters.
In the morning we lay our selves a sunning, and leaning down our heads, we
behold upon the ground the shadow of the threads and jaggs which hang about us,
then with a pair of Cissers we trim our apparel; and because most commonly we
first wear out our clothes between our legs, we draw out some pieces off the
Rear to reinforce the Van; so that we are very careful ever after how we lay
off our cloaks, as also how we mount any ladder or tree, unless by compulsion.
We practice our postures in the Sunshine; at day time we walk close-legg'd,
and make our salutations without parting our knees, lest if we should do
otherwise, the embroideries of our py-bald breeches should be discovered. To be
short, there is not any thing we wear that had not sometimes another property,
and of which one might derive another pedigree. Observe, I pray, this cloak
which I wear, it is descended in a direct line from a horse-cloth, which was
the daughter of a quondam coverlet. My Breeches proceeded from three chairs
covered with green cloth, whose Grandfather was a boat-tilt: my Doublet was
the Son of a skreen, begotten of the furniture of a Billiard-table, and in
short time will be converted into socks.

We are very careful of coming near candles, if at night-times we are in any
company; for fear of discovering the baldness and thread bareness of our
cloaks, from which a man might shave as much as from a stone. It has pleased
heaven to bestow on us a beard, which it has denied our garments. We are also
very sollicitous how we frequent such houses as are customed by any of our
companions, lest they should interfare with one another, and upon that account
our bellies are sometimes jealous. We are tied by our orders to ride once a
month, either on an horse, or a cole-staffe, it matters not which, and once a
year in a Coach, at which times we endeavor to get into the boot, that all our
acquaintance may take notice of us: to which end we carry our bodies as far out
of the Coach as we can, that we may not loose any opportunity of being seen. If
perchance we feel any thing biting us, or the regiment of lice too importunate
with us, we want not inventions to remove them before any company without the
least discovery: as for example, we talk of some battle, and tell that a
certain Soldier of our acquaintance had a slash from such a place to such a
place in his body, and with that we scratch where it itches, and thus we comply
with our necessity. If we should be thus surprised at Church, and they should
bite upon our breasts, we fall to the Sanctus, though it be not yet the
Introibo. If it take us behind, we get us to some Pillar, and seeming to look
up at something, we heave up our selves, and so rub our selves at our
pleasures: for matter of lying, you must know the word Truth never comes into
our mouths. We always bring in head and shoulders some Duke or Earl into our
discourse, some as our Kindred, others as our friends, but with this caution,
that they be either deceased or far enough from us; and that which is very
remarkable amongst us, is, we are never in love, unless with de pane lucrando,
for our Order does expressly enjoin us to avoid the acquaintance of any Ladies,
especially such who are more apt to receive than give, be they never so
honorable or handsome; so that we are forced to make addresses to the Cooks
for our meals, to the Hostesses for our Lodgings, and so to all others of whom
we may make any advantage. To proceed, do you see these boots here? You would
think now that I have Stockings under them, but you are deceived, for I am both
poor and bare, and whoever should see my collar, would hardly imagine I should
want a shirt: but what need I tell you, you know already how the case stands
with me; however a Knight may deny himself those other things, but his collar
he may not, because it serves for an ornament to his person. To conclude Sir, a
Knight who would be of our Order in perfection, ought to want as many
necessaries as a Cockney setting out a journey: sometimes perhaps he may have a
little money in his pocket, at other times be in an Hospital eating of parched
Pease, and thus we live in the Court, where who so knows how to advance his
Industry, passes his time like a disguised Prince.

Never was man so astonished as my self at the recital of this Order of Knight
hood, which so pleased me, that we got to Rozas before night, or our
expectation. IN me sure he made a Cully of me for the honor of his order, for
he rid my mule, and made me beat it upon the hoof, and not only so but I was
forced to pay his reckoning, he having neither face nor cross about him. His
discourses made a deep impression in my memory, and I resolved to make use of
them as occasion should serve, for that I found my inclinations tending toward
that Fraternity.

Before I went to sleep, I made him my privy Councellor, by acquainting him
with my intentions, which so ravished him, that he hugged me over and over
again, and told me he could not but believe the recital he had made me, was
persuasive enough to work upon a man of my ingenuity. He offered me his
assistance in order to my introduction into the Fraternity of the Industry, and
not only so but into their College too. I took him at his word, and gave him
many thanks, but did not discover what moneys I had, only an hundred Royals,
which were enough to gain me his affection. The next morning I bought him three
codpiss-points, and set out early toward Madrid.

Buscon goes to Lodge with the Knights of the Industry: The Economy there
observed, and a brangle between two Knights of the Order.
THe Sun was not above two hours high when we went to Madrid: We went directly
to the Lodgings of Don Torivio's Comrades: He knocked at the gate, and a ragged
old woman came and opened the door. Torivio asked where the Gentlemen were, he
told him they were gone to seek their fortunes; In we entered, and there
continued till noon, and our Knight that he might loose no time, began to
preach to me for my better nodification: About an hour after noon, in comes a
bodily Ghost with a black Cassock which reached down to his feet, after the
fashion of mourners in Spain; My Guide had some discourse with him in a kind of
Gibbrish, which ended, he addressed himself to me with many profers of his
service: I returned him complements of the like nature; That done, he drew out
a Glove, and shaked it over the Table, out of which dropped a dozen or fifteen
Royals, and a Letter, by virtue of which he told us had got them; it was a
License he had obtained, to beg for a poor Gentlewoman: Having emptied that
Glove, he drew out another, and clapped them up together like a Spanish Doctor. I
asked him why he did not put them on, because they belong both to one hand,
said he; and it is a part of Industry to have Gloves that cost them nothing. I
observed that he always kept his Cloak very close over his breast, and being a
Novice, I had the curiosity to enquire the reason of it; my friend and brother,
said he, it is because my Doublet is all greasy, and my shoulders worn out: it
was not long though, ere he quitted his Cloak to louse himself: With that I
began to perceive that instead of Breeches, he had two wisps of straw, which
reached from his middle to his knees, for he had neither shirt, nor shirt like;
Me thought he was so naked, that he seemed to be an Adamite, so that a Louse
had no shelter with him: Every one there did freely discover his necessities;
whereupon my Tutor told him, I came out of the Country with a great
Rentcharge in my Breeches, which had need of a recruit; and turning toward
the old woman, asked her if she had any rags, of green cloth, in her Wardrobe;
for as she walked the City, she ever used to have the Tailors shreds into her
Inquisition, a la mode de, Ragg-man; I have neither green nor gray, said she;
and for that very reason Don Granger has kept his bed this fortnight, his
clothes being so weak that they fall to pieces like Tinder for want of patches
to strengthen them.

Thereupon in comes an Industrious, I mean a Knight of the Order, his Boots on,
in gray, with an Hat pined up on both sides; he soon spied me, and seeing a
strange face, asked who I was; being informed, he gave me the welcome; with
that he dismantled himself, and I perceived the forepart of his Doublet was
indeed of cloth, but it was not so with the hinder part, which was Canvas. I
could hardly forbear laughing when I saw it, which he observing; In good time,
said he, you and I shall be better acquainted; I Will lay a wager with you, you
do not know why I wear my Hat pined up on both sides. It is, said I, for
gallantry, and your better prospect: No, no, said he, quite contrary, it is to
prevent prospect, for it has two great spots of grease on it, which by this
means are kept in the dark: With that he drew out twenty Letters, and about as
many Royals: My Tutor informed me that the industry of that Knight was to go in
this Equipage, and to carry papers folded up like Letters directed to persons
of Quality, and being very cautious that such people were not at home, he would
deliver the Letters, for which he received six pence per Letter, and how he
used this Trade as often as he could, but with care to make his addresses to
new faces. Next came in two together, disputing as they knocked at the Gate; one
had an Handkerchief about his neck, instead of a Collar, with a couple of
holsters at his girdle, and a Rest in his hand for his Plymouth-Cloak; a Crutch
under his Arm, and one of his legs tied up with old Rags and Cunnyskins, for he
had but one Stocking and one Shoe: He passed for a Soldier, and a man who had
been in the low Countries and seen hot service; for my part, I had no more wit
then to believe it; he reckoned up the many services he had done his Majesty,
and under the notion of a Soldier, had free access every where: The the other
had a maimed Doublet on, to hide which, he wore his Cloak like a Scarf, wrapped
about his left arm, which without that had been stark naked: He cried out
aloud, half of it is mine, or at least a good part; and unless you deliver it
me, I swear -- Do not swear, said the Cripple, let us get in first, and I shall
let you feel that I have hands and feet too, enough to break my Crutch about
thy ears. Thou lie, and thou too: With that* to it they went, and in a trice
the place was strewed over with Shoulders, Sleeves, Skirts; and in a word, with
more of their clothes then were left upon their backs: In good earnest, I took
him for a piece of the Resurrection: We ran in to part them; but we knew not
where to lay hold to loose them; how, quoth the counterfeit Soldier, art thou
so impudent as to pretend to a share in my booties? and with that informed us
with the ground of their quarrel: You must know Gentlemen, said he, that as I
was even now at St. Saviors, a little Boy came to yon'd Rascal and asked him
if I were not Captain John Lawrence? he told him I was, and because he saw the
boy brought me something, he came along with him, saying, Captain, there is a Boy
desires to speak with you: The Boy delivered me a dozen of Handkerchiefs which
his Mother had sent me, and presently this Rascallion would have half of them;
but I Will first give him half a hundred good bangs: I Will have them all for my
own use, or make them useless: The controversy was decided by a Decree of the
Officers of the Order, viz. That they should be delivered into the hands of the
old woman for the common stock, to serve for false shirts, as occasion should
require. Night drew on, and we went to sleep, but we all lay close to one
another as our skins to our backs; As for Supper we had none, for fear of
surfeting, and some of us too were not much troubled with putting off our
clothes.

Buscon being to practice in this Order, snap'd a Cully, and cheated a whore.
AFter some time it pleased God day appeared, and we betook our selves to our
tackling. I was already as intimately acquainted with them, as if I had been
their brother all days of my life, for in evil things there is always an
appearrance of something of pleasure, which drils on them it enticeth. It was
pretty to see a Shirt put on of a twelve-moneths wearing; to hear another
asking for a Quartermaster to take up a lodging for him in his own Doublet,
which he could hardly do in a days time; Another sewed his Comrades Doublet
under the armpit, who in the mean while standing upright, and stretching out
one arm, looked just like the Letter L with the heels upward: another mending
his breeches between his knees, and sitting cross-legg'd, looked like an Indian
Tortoise. To be short, Boscan never invented half so many postures in all his
pictures, as were here presented to the life. This ended, they went the
visitation, to see if all were right amongst them. Then every man's quarter was
allotted him; for my own part I had a great mind to show my self liberal at my
admission. I told them I would deliver my clothes into the common Treasury, and
that I would make another with my hundred Royals. No, no said they, we shall
find out by some Industry to cloth you without laying out your money: We have
stuff enough left to furnish you, and your hundred Royals shall be put into the
common stock.

I liked their contrivance very well, and willingly delivered them my money.
Presently they fell upon me, and cutting off my Cassock about four fingers
below my waste, they made a jacket of it, they likewise circumcised some half
yard off my cloak, which however was of an indifferent length: all these
parings were truck'd off for an old double died hat; they gave me a pair of
Spanish leather boots, which reached but to the calves of my legs. I was
furnished with a collar, which to say the truth, was pretty well to pass
before, but behind in a pitiful taking, when they put it about my neck; You
must be very Industrious said they, to satisfy the vanity of the world. This
collar savours of corruption, therefore remember that when any one eyes you,
you still face him, like the Marigold that turns to the Sun. If there be two of
them, march up, take off your Hat toward your Pole, that so you may cover the
nakedness of your collar. If any one ask you why you use that posture, tell him
it is not good manners to show the Posteriors. After these instructions, they
gave me a small tinder-box with it is appurtenances, as also a little box of
black and white thread a pair of dice, a couple of needles, and diverse shreds
of linen and woollen, together with a rusty indented pair of Cissers. Now said
they, accoutred as you are, you may travel all the world over without being
beholden to father or friend. As for my quarter, they assigned me that of St.
Lewis, where I might go free-booting as others did: The truth is, in regard I
was a Novice, they committed me to the tuition of that same person which had
first introduced me to this honorable Fraternity. Well, out we went very
soberly with our beads in our hands, and took our walk toward our Quarter, we
saluted very affectionately such as we met withal, we pulled off our hats to
every one, wishing at the same instant we could do as much to their cloaks: we
complemented the women, a thing they delight in, as also their Father-hood's.
My prudent Governor would be always saying something to most of those he met;
to one, to morrow I shall receive money; to another, pray excuse me one day
longer, for I have to do with a Merchant that puts me off from time to time.
One would ask him for the cloak he had lent him, another for his hat, and a
third for his belt. By this I perceived my Governor was so great a lover of
his friends, that he wore not any thing that did not belong to some of them.

We went skulking through the streets sometimes on one side, and sometimes on
another, the better to avoid certain shops, in whose books my Governors name
was written in a large Character. On a sudden there met him a man, who
demanded some house-rent of him, who was no sooner gone with a flea in his ear,
but not a farthing in his pocket, when another puts him in mind of paying him
for his sword, a third for his shirt; whereupon I perceived there were as well
Hackney-knights as Hackney-horses, and that my worshipful Governor was one of
them, As we were thus coasting up and down, he discovered a certain Dun, a good
way off him, who had often haunted him for some small trifling debt, now that
he might not be known, he draws out his hair, which at that time was clapped
behind his ears, (as the Spanish mode is) and pulled a Plaster of black
Taffata out of his Pocket, which he lays just upon one of his eyes, and
therewithal began to speak Italian to me, In the mean time up came our
Persecutor, and having eyed my Tutor, began to recollect into his memory, that
he had somewhere seen him, of which to be certain, he made three or four turns
about us, at last he crossed himself, Jesus said he, I took him for such a one,
and wanted but little of running my self into a Praemunire. I thought I should
have dyed with laughing, what at the strange disguise of the Debtor and what at
the great astonishment of the Creditor, who was no sooner gone from us, but we
got us into a porch, where my Conductor re-assum'd his former countenance, and
said unto me, thus you see dear Brother, that we are forced to our Industry,
for these and the like devices, to conceal our selves from those unto whom we
stand indebted, else we might go whistle in a Cage, oftener then we would. On we
marched, and at the corner of a street, we took each of us, about half a glass
of strong-water, which a good woman bestowed upon us, I can assure you said
she, it is a most excellent Cordial to a fasting stomach, and in the strength
of it, a man may well forbear meat for some hours; at least a little of this in
the morning is better then nothing all the day after. My stomach will never
believe the former proposal said I, which I think to be a Paradox, whereupon my
Guide replied, you are a man of weak faith, both as to the Tenets of Religion,
or our Order. The Lord is not wanting to the Crows and Ravens, will he, think
you, forsake the poor Knights of the Industry?

In the midst of our discourse, we heard a clock strike twelve, now I being but
a novice in this manner of life, my belly would not be so easily put off with
that small draught of Aqua-vitae which I had drank, but began to call upon me,
as if I had not drank a drop; with that, I turned me to my Companion, saying,
methinks I find it somewhat a strict discipline, at my first coming, to be
kept thus long fasting, especially seeing I use to have a stomach like an
horse, and to feed like a Farmer, and now on a sudden, you make me observe
Vigils, which are not marked in the Calendar. For your part, it is no great
wonder, if your appetite be not so early up as mine, for you being born and
bred up in the regions of hunger, may by this have brought your self to such a
pass, that you may almost live by the Pestle of a Lark, or dine with Duke
Humphrey a week together, but otherwise it is with me, who never used to read
such fasting Lectures to my Guts: And seeing you take no greater care to kill
that which will kill me; I pray excuse me if I leave you to go make some
provisions wherewith to allay those storms and thunders which I perceive are
ingendring in my Bowels. You are a great Greedigut, replied he, it has hardly
made an end of striking twelve, and you presently cry out you are a hungry, as
if you had not eaten a morsel of bread these three days; but I see you are very
devout in observing your guts; a beast would do as much, but you must learn a
new Lesson, and know that sobriety is that which keeps us in health and vigor:
To be short, you shall not any where find it recorded; that any one of the
Industrious Knights did ever ease his stomach, high or low, one way or the other,
upwards, or downwards. have I not already told you that God is all-sufficient,
and never wanting unto any one; but seeing you are in such have to be
exercising your Teeth, fare-you-well, for my part I Am going to the Pottage Pot
of the Fathers of the Oratory; if you have a mind to go with me so, if not so,
every one for himself: Adieu then said I, for my stomach is so torn, that it
will not be mended by others scraps and leavings: He took one way I another,
but I had not gone many paces before I stopped at a corner house, that I might
see how my companion would dispose of himself; when as I perceived he drew a
little Box out of his Pocket, full of small crumbs, which he carried about him
for that use, some he took out, and strewn upon his Doublet and Beard, that
People might think he had been at Dinner. For my own particular, I trusted to
my money, yet not without some reluctance as to my own conscience; seeing the
Statutes of our Order of Industry did expressly inhibit any one from eating at
his own cost and charge, but I found my self so hard pressed by hunger, that I
was forced to have recourse to the Proverb, which says, Necessity has no Law,
and thereupon I resolved to do as I might.

Whilst I was thus devising with my self I found I was just at the corner of
St. Lewis street, where there dwelt a Cook; on a sudden the smell of a
six-penny Pie newly drawn out of the Oven, took me in the nose, and forced me
to make a full stand, just like a setting-dog, when he winded a Covie of
Partridges: I cast my eyes upon it, and withal my mouth began to water; me
thoughts the Pie did ever and anon wast it self by my looking on it; sometimes
I was contriving how I might steal it, and anon I resolved to buy it, and so to
eat it; but as good luck would have it, in the midst of my contemplations, I
perceived a certain Master of Arts of my acquaintance, called Baldinus, who had
a most rich face of his own, for his nose was very costly, beset with Rubies,
some as big as the top of ones little finger, with a belly like an Abbot: He
had no sooner spied me, but he cast himself about me, with no little admiration
to see me; for in the habit I then was, it was hard for any one to know me:
Behold us then putting off Hats, and making of legs; he asked me how I did? I
have something to tell you Sir, said I, but such is my condition, that I must
needs go out of Town this afternoon: I am very sorry for that, replied he, and
were it not so late, for I think it be near one, I should gladly leave my
dinner a while, that we might walk a turn or two together; but the truth is, I
fear my Sister and her Husband are in expectation of me. How said I, is your
Sister in Town? nay then, though I stay in Town all night, or come what will, I
must kiss her hands: Now you must know I had a greater mind to pass a
complement upon my Belly then his Sister, for when I heard him talk of their
staying for him at Dinner, I began to open my ears, and take opportunity by the
forelock. Away I went with him, any by the way I put him in mind of a Mistress
of his, one he had very much loved, and told him I knew where she was, and how
to introduce him into the house where she lived; that is, in plain English, I
would pimp for him; at that he was more pleased, then I with the conceit of
dining with him, so well I knew where to tickle him, that I made him smile upon
me.

During our discourse, we came to his Sisters lodging, whom I saluted, and
presented my service unto her Husband; they seeing me, and at such an hour,
concluded I intended to dine with them, as indeed I did; whereupon they began
to make excuses, and Apoligies; I replied, I was one of the house, their
ancient acquaintance, and beseeched them not to treat me with Ceremony.

Master Baldinus seeing me of a sudden so intimately acquainted, began to be a
mazed, for he had not so much as spoken to me to stay Dinner; I perceived it,
and began to reassume my former discourse, which I knew would lenifie him
afresh: I told him how the Gentlewoman could never forget him, that she had
often enquired of me how he did? and where he was with many other the like
inventions: We had not stayed long before Dinner came up, and every one sat
him down: I presently fell to it, with both hands, and all my teeth: They had
set me a dish of Broth by my self, which vanished at two sups; then I assaulted
the other dishes with such haste, that our Ordinary was sooner dispatched, then
an Extraordinary Post would have been riding half a Mile. The Cloth was taken
away, but not one bit of meat with it: Master Baldinus and my self, withdrew
apart, that we might end our discourse concerning the Nymph I had told him of,
and that I might acquaint him with the means to get to her, which I assured him
might be effected with ease and safety. As we were thus talking together,
leaning at a Window, I made as if somebody in the street had called me; Sir,
said I aloud, that every one might hear me, I Will wait on you immediately, and
therewithal took leave of the company, promising them to return in half an hour
at farthest, though I never intended it, for from that day to this I never went
near them.

After I got into the street, I walked up and down toward the Gate of
Guadalajara, and sat me down upon a Bench just before a Silk-mans Shop: I had
not been long there, before two women, such as use to borrow not upon their
Goods, but their Persons, came toward the same Shop; they let me see half of
their faces, the the other being covered with a thin Hood; they were attended by
their old women, and their little Pages, (those go-betweens) they asked if
there were any new fashioned stuffs: upon this I began to speak to one of them,
and found how they hoped my being there would help them to some credit in the
Shop before which I sat; now as he who has nothing to loose runs no venture,
I proferred them all the assistances I could to serve them: They returned me
thanks, but in such a way as Doctors and Lawers use, who refuse the money they
intend to take, for they replied, they were not such women as used to receive
from those whom they knew not: At this reply I began to make my excuses unto
them; for that I had not proffered to present them any thing, but did now
beseech them to accept of a piece of stuff newly brought me from Milan, which
if they pleased so far to honor me, I would send them that night by a Page,
who stood bare headed some six paces of waiting for his Master, who was prizing
of some Stuffs in the Shop; him I pretended to belong unto me; and to make them
conceive the better opinion of me, and that I was a Person of Quality, I
saluted the Magistrates and Gentlemen that passed by in their Coaches, with so
familiar a Garb, as if I had been intimately acquainted with them. What by
this, and what by letting them see my money which I did, as if by accident, as
I was giving a small piece to a poor beggar, I had absolutely possessed them
with an opinion that I was a man of Quality; whereupon they took their leaves
very civily of me, having first acquainted me where they dwelt, and how I might
best send my Page unto them. I begged of them by way of favor and gallantry, a
certain string of Gold Beads, which the handsomest of the two did wear, at
first she made some excuses, saying it was of too small worth for me to own,
but I replied I had a very great fancy and esteem for it, since she had worn
it; and therewithal offered them my hundred Crowns of Gold in pawn for it: At
last they thought themselves sure of me, and concluded they had caught a Cully;
whereupon they gave me the Beads, which I kissed a thousand times over, not so
much for devotion, as the worth of them, which I suppose was about four or five
Pistols.

I went from that place, as if I waited on them, but I had not gone above six
paces before I stopped and called the Page I spoke of, unto me, and pretending
to the Ladies that I bid him stay there with the rest of my Attendants, I only
asked him if he did not belong to such a Gentlemen, a Cousin of mine? he told
me no: The good Ladies thanked me very kindly for the honor I did them, and
thus we marched along the streets: Amongst other discourse, they asked me where
I lay, and I the better to deceive them, told them at such a House, where there
stood a Coach as good luck would have it; I also assured them, both the Master
of the House, and Coach and all were at their command; that my name was Don
Alvaro de Cordoue: There I left them, and went into the House, they still
looking after me; I knew there was a back door belonging to the said House
which was seldom locked, unto which I hy'd me, and so got off from my two
Ladies, unto my own Quarters.

By this it was nightish, and the Knights of the Industry began to retire
themselves as I did. I was hardly gotten into the House, but in came the
Soldier of the ragged Regiment, of whom I formerly acquainted you; in he came,
I say, with a Torch in his hand, which had been given him to carry at a
Funeral, but he had come off with it, and never went to the grave; he was
called Magace, native of Olias, he vauted himself a Captain, and the truth is,
such he had been, as also that he had seen many hot days service against the
Moors, which could not be denied, for he had in Comedy acted a Captains part in
a stage play. When he fell into a company who had been in Flanders, then he had
been in China, if he met any who had been in China, then all his discourse was
of Flanders. He would be always talking of duels, and unstripping his Doublet
in the field, which he had often done, but it was for his more convenient
killing his lice, the only foes he ever met. He would prate of the Turks,
Galleys and Galligrosses, but it was only what he had read in Ballads, for he
never had seen ship, the Sea, or any thing Sea-like, unless a dish of Pottage
with a few Pease in it, which he might fancy to be a Fleet in the main Ocean.
Once I heard him, talking of the battle of Lepanto, and at last he said that
Lepanto was a very stout and warlike Moor.

The next that came in was my Governor, his nose wrapped up in his cloak, his
eyes like poach'd Eggs; his head in his bosom, his Shoo-rubber all bloody,
dropping grease and Pottage. We enquired where he had been, and whence he came
in such disorder, he told us he had been at the Fathers of the Oratory, and had
begged a double dole, pretending it to be for two poor Gentlemen, who were
ashamed to make known their necessities, that he had obtained his desires, but
that others there begging were disappointed and denied, in regard he had had so
much for his share; whereupon that they all in a fury, had fallen upon him in a
narrow lane, had robbed him of all his Pottage, excepting those few Remains
about his clothes, head, and shoulders. He moreover added, how they fell upon
him, asking him, if it were well done, to rob poor men for to satisfy his own
greedy appetite, and how from words they came at last to blows and knocks, as
also what a hailstorm of crutches and wooden arms fell upon him, he likewise
recounted to us how the blow on his nose came by a great spoon, which mistook
the way to his mouth; how that finding himself in so furious a counter scuffle,
he had often cried out to them, that he would disgorge to them whatever he had
eaten, provided they would forbear beating him, but that to his cost and smart
he found them inexorable. And that which vexed him more then all the rest; was,
how a ragged Tatter-demallion Scholar had, for his second-course served up a
dish of Lice, which he threw upon him. Now do but consider I pray and reflect a
little upon this Gut-monger, who is more writhled then a child's baby, looked
just like a Ragamuffion, has more holes in him then a Sive, more spotted then
a Magpie, and more speckl'd then a piece of Marble, yet forsooth, he must eat
by himself, and could not vouchsafe to do as we did. For my own part I am a
Master of Arts in Sigouenca, and yet I do not stand so much upon my punctilio's
as he does. He likewise added, how an old rascal came into the fray, saying,
knock down that Rascal, for I would have him know, though I come to the
Pottage-Pot of those good Fathers, yet I am as well born as himself, and have
as good friends as he for his life, nay, I am as good as he every day in the
week. He also recounted us how the Dole giver seeing the storm began to renew,
prevailed so far by his entreaties and persuasions, that in fine, they were
content to be pacified, in regard he promised them to provide enough for them
all against the next day.

The Prosecution of the Tricks of the Knights of Industry: How they were all
imprisoned, and Buscon clapped up with them.
HE had hardly ended his relation of this notable Encounter, when behold in
came one of our Fraternity, with a good Cloak on his back, which he had
exchanged for his own, made in 88. at a Billiaad-Table, where he made as if he
would play; but having the Industry not to make one, he got to the place where
the Cloaks lay, and borrowed the best of them, leaving his own in the stead;
and upon this account he always frequented bowling-Allies, and gaming-houses.
This was nothing in comparison of the next that came in, attended by a number
of children, all troubled with one disease or other, as some with the
King's Evil, some with Tetters, others with Cankers, dis-jointed members, hurts
and the-like: That which drew such a rout after him, was his pretending to cure
and charm all those sicknesses, either by saying certain words over them, or by
giving them little scrowls of Paper to carry about them; by which means he
picked up a pretty income: in case his Patient brought any thing under his
Cloak, (as the Country man did the Rosting Pig to the Justice of peace) some
good Capon in his basket, or chink'd his money in his Pocket, then his disease
was nothing, else incurable. He made any thing pass for current amongst them;
for to say the truth, he was very industrious in lying, a thing so natural to
him, that he could not speak truth, though it had been to save his life: He had
a Pasport would carry him into any place, viz. Deo Gratias, The Holy Ghost be
with you; he had always with him the whole Ensigns of an Hypocrite; in his
hands a great string of Beads, with a discipline under his Coat, which hanged
down below his knees, as if by accident, though purposely by him intended; his
Coatall bloodied, but with that of the Shambles, not of his own: He would feel
the Pulse and pick the Pocket; hold with the Hare and hunt with the Hound; he
would make you believe his great hunger was but the effects of his voluntary
fastings, though indeed willingly he never went to bed supper-less, but when he
had nothing to eat: He never named the Devil, but he always added, God bless
us; when he entered the Church he kissed the ground he never cast his eyes on
any woman, nor never cared for any of them, but how to take away their
Petticoats; so artificially did he gull the people, that every one recommended
himself to him in his Prayers, which signified as much as if he had recommended
himself to the Devil.

After him, in came another of the Fraternity, one Polanque, keeping a clutter
for his Wallet, his great Cross, his Hermites Beard, and his Bell: His trade
was to go thus accoutred at night through the streets, crying, Amend your
lives, think upon your latter ends, and do good unto faithful sinners; by this
device he got store of money; if in his walk he chanced to find any door open,
in he went with a great deal of confidence; if he found no one within, or that
they were asleep, he went not out until he had lined himself with some good
thing or other; in case he found any one, or that they chanced to wake; he told
them how he came in finding the doors open, to advise them of it, and that they
had need to be careful of night-walkers; and always his Conclusion was with a
Memento Mori.

I passed one Month in observing the many ways of stealing, which were
practiced in our society, and at last, I related unto them the passage of my
gold beads, of which I had gulled my two Ladies of pleasure; they highly
extolled my Industry, and concluded the old woman should have them to be sold,
and the money brought into the public Tresure. At any time when she had any
such like things to sell; she used to go from house to house, saying she was a
poor necessitous woman, forced to fell her goods, one thing after another, to
buy her bread; when she had happened upon any compassionate people, as some such
there are, she brought home her own toys as she said, and some of their Alms.
She would weep at every word, and crossing her hands would sob and sigh like a
child; she wore a frock of gray course freeze, which she had stolen from an
Hermit, with which, and her other industries she used to cheat charitable
people, and and sometimes to good purpose. This right venerable and no less
Reverend old woman, was grand Protectress of our Order and chief Treasuress of
our rags. But upon a certain day as the Devil (who is never idle in such
things as concern his good subjects) would have it, our good woman going to
sell an old Suit, and some other things, fell upon one who knew amongst the
rest, somewhat which once belonged unto himself; Presently he got a Constable,
and laid her up; she was no sooner in custody, but she confessed all, and
impeached our whole Order; whereupon we were secured, and guarded to Prison,
from which all our Industry could not redeem us.

Buscon's Entertainment in Prison; The Crimes, Miseries, and malice of
Prisoners, the Cruelty and griping Covetousness of Goalers, and other Officers,
and at last Buscons deliverance.
WE were no sooner within, but we were presently under lock and key; for they
laid us all in chains, clapped Bracelets upon our arms, and lodged us in the
Dungeon. Presently I drew out a Crown, and showing it to the Jailer, I told
him, I desired to speak a word in private with him; he presently stooped at the
Lure: I am, said I, a person who who knows what belongs to a kindness; one word
is enough to the wise: He has not been seen this many a day, said he,
pretending as if I had enquired after some Prisoner; I smelt his meaning in a
trice, for he presently got me out, but laid up my poor companions in those
Mansions of darkness.

I forbear to mention the hootings which were made at us as we passed through
the streets; the truth is, no one that saw us could forbear laughing, for the
Serjants and Bailiffs pushed us along with such violence that they tore most of
our clothes, which themselves were none of the strongest; insomuch that one
might have track'd us by the skirts, Arms and rags which our clothes lost
before we come to Limbo: Nay, although it was no great way from the place we
were taken to Prison, yet some of us came thither so naked, that a Louse could
hardly fasten any hold upon us without discovery.

Night came, and I was lodged in a great Hall, vulgarly called the common
Prison. I was somewhat surprised to see so many strange faces there, some lay
in their fur'd Gowns, others sang, some played, and others walked up and down,
until at last one came who put out the Candle and made fast the door upon us.

For my part it was impossible for me to sleep amidst such a confused din, and
that which vexed me worst of all, was, a close-stool which stood just at my
beds head, where every one came to make his offerings, and to deliver his
Prisoner, which upon their escape made so hideous a noise, that at first I took
it to have bin some thunderclaps, until my nose had better informed me of the
truth of the matter: I was vexed with the horrible stench of it, that unable
longer to endure it, or keep my head within the bed I rose, took up the
stool-pan and threw it with a pox into the midst of the Hall, that every one
might have a little of it as well as my self: Some of the company, whose noses
were daintier then the rest; got them up, and began to cry out that they were
choked up with the stink, that he who had done this wicked prank deserved to be
hanged: At this noise the head Jailer awaked, and mistrusting least some of his
Prisoners had escaped, ran into the Hall with all his Attendants armed: He had
us all into examination, I was chiefly, nor was I backward in excusing my self
the best I could: To conclude, the good Jailer thinking, belike, I would grease
him in the fist with to other odd Crown, that I might be delivered from the
Kennel of such Hounds, commanded me to rise and follow him, which I instantly
did, but with a firm resolution not to part with one farthing more: Away I went
with him, and was no sooner got out of the Hall, but that he began to threaten
me with a Dungeon, full of Snails, Froggs and Toads; I must submit to it, said
I, he seeing I spoke not in a golden phrase, locked me up in the same hole with
the rest of my unfortunate, Industrious Brothers, there I passed the rest of
the night, without knowing who my Chamber-fellows were.

At last day appeared, we visited each other, renewed our acquaintance, and
deplored our conditions; not long after came one to let us out, for that place
was only our night Quarters; he demanded a clensing-fee, under penalty of
Eelskins: I could not imagine what he meant by that term of Art, but was
afraid least the Eels should devour us; but I was informed they were certain
wasters, or great blows about the middle, which were applied with a reverse
slash on such as were backward in opening their Purses: I must confess my own
weakness, for to say the truth, I presently drew out six Royals and gave them
to him, whereas my poor companions having no money, were forced back again.

There was in the same Lodging with us a certain huge overgrown Lubber, with a
Beard as big as a six penny besome, and a pair of shoulders, which methoughts
had lately been scarrified by the Doctors hands who uses to cure all diseases
in public. Never did I in my life see such Bracelets, as he had on his legs
and arms, either for length bigness or number. He was called the Giant, he told
us, he was in for a trivial windy matter, which he valued not, I supposed then,
that he was in for some Bellows, Bag-pipes, Foot-balls Fans, or the like; but
when we asked him if it were for any thing of that nature, he told us, not, but
for some post-dated sins. I thought then he had been a Long-lane Merchant, and
had sold old for new clothes, but at length after much enquiry, I discovered he
had been in love with the masculine Gender. He was a fellow both terrible and
furious, insomuch that the Jailer was fain to arm all those who lay near him
with Iron Breeches, and had he not been well chained, no body durst let a foist
or fart before him, for fear of putting him in mind of the Region of Buttocks.
He was accompanied with another, as honest a man as himself, who said he was in
for being too dexterous, and for catching of fish without wetting his fingers.
I enquired a little more curiously into his meaning, and found he was somewhat
light-finger'd, and that nothing could escape him. I was likewise told, how
there was hardly a Post-horse in the Kingdom which had been so slashed as he
had been; for he had passed through all the Beadles hands; you could not speak
of his ears in the plural number, and for his face a man would have thought it
had been inlay'd with new flesh, there were such great Seames in it.

Besides those two, there were four others, whom the Justice had repriv'd from
the Gallows and condemned to the Galleys: I heard them say, how in a few days
they hoped they might be able to brag, that they had served his Majesty both by
Sea and Land. These good honest people were much discontented with my poor
Comerades, for that they had not given some clensing money, as I had; and
thereupon concluded among themselves to bestow the Eelskins upon them with a
vengeance, tuff cord which they had provided for that purpose. Night came, and
we were locked up in our old Quarter, it was not long ere the Candle was put
out, and I presently began to smell their plot, whereupon I got me under the
staircase, and could have crept into an Auger-hole, so shin I was for fear.
Presently one of the gang fell a whistling, and another to manage his whip: My
Brothers of the Industry soon perceived the meaning of it, and got them as
close one to another, as their skins was to their flesh. The whip in the mean
time went on very cheerfully, without putting any body to the squeak. But those
cunning Rogues hearing no body cry out, began to throw about certain stones and
Tyles which they had kept in reserve for that end, one of which made an
incision in poor Don Torrivio's Crupper, at least two fingers broad, thereupon
he fell a roaring, as if he had been killed, and those wicked ungratious
Varlets fell to singing and shaking their chains as loud as they could, to
prevent the hearing of Don Torrivio's outcry, who to save himself pulled the
others upon him, and each endeavoring to get undermost, one might have heard
their bones crackle like a Lazers bell. In this scuffle, all to pieces went
their clothes; nor did the shower of stones and Tiles cease for all that,
insomuch that poor Don Torrivio who lay exposed to the whole volly of shot,
seeing himself at death's door, ready to dye a Martyr, though he had neither
goodness nor holiness, cried out, that he would pay their fee, so they would
let him come out and be at quiet; to which end he would deposite his clothes in
their hands, adding he had rather keep his bed for want of clothes then health.
All of them would needs be admitted into the same Articles, but maugre all
their Industry, their heads were first as soft as so many rotten Apples, with
the hail-storm which fell upon them. But at last, a cessation was concluded for
that night. It was not long ere day appeared, and a Summons delivered for
performance of Articles, but when they came to the execution of them, they
found that all their clothes would hardly make one good pair of Socks: However
they were all seized into custody, not so much for their worth, as to leave
their Masters naked, that they might put a new trick upon them.

They were quickly uncased, not so much left them as a rag to cover their
nakedness, besides one old rugg, and then it was that they began to be sensible
of a most terrible Itch; for to complete their miseries, the Jailer laid them
just where all the rabble of the Prisoners used to louze themselves, long they
had not been there, before the merry lowse seized on them, who having been kept
long fasting, would in a few hours have made a breakfast of my poor Brothers,
had they not quickly thrown away their Coverlet, and so covered their bellies
with their Bums.

For my part I got me out of this Purgatory, and beseech'd them to have me
excused, if I took my leave of them, for that my presence might well be spared,
they having no want of company. I made new applications to the Jailer, and
tickled him in the Palm with a little more of St. John's grease, though
contrary to my former resolution; he acquainted me with the Attorneys name, in
whose hands our Informations and process were, I sent a little Boy who belonged
to the Prison for him, he came, we withdrew apart to consider of my getting
off. At first he was upon the reserve, but when I told him, I knew how to be
grateful, and would deserve any good office he should do me, he looked as brisk
as a glass of Canary, and became as pliant as a Does-leather glove. I conveyed
a brace of Pistols into his hands and desired him to befriend me, as much as
that came to. I told him, I was a young Knight, not acquainted with the world,
etc. Sir said he it is enough, I understand you, look you Sir the good or ill
success of a business is in our power, many are the disorders which happen when
our offices are conferred upon such men, as have not the honor or conscience
to do the work as I do. I Will undertake the business, fear nothing. The Judges
may prate and talk their pleasures upon the bench, but when it comes to the
execution, we do as we please, but what need I tell you any more? fear nothing,
trust to me. He bid me farewell, and went to the door, but presently came back
to me; I have a word more to tell you, quoth he, with a sour look: There is a
sort of Twatlers who will be prating, unless you lock up their mouths under a
silver seal. If you gratify the Sergeant, it were not amiss, for look you Sir,
he may else do you a mischief, by putting out a word which might spoil all. Sir
said I, will you be pleased to present him with this Pistol in my behalf, for
that I am not acquainted with him. He took it and promised to do it that day,
and withal told me, I should do well to set my collar right, which then stood
toward the Alehouse, that I should get some Lozenges for my cough, which I
had gotten by lying in the cold, and then away he went: Not long after I gave
the Jailer half a Pistol, who thereupon eased me of my chains, and permitted me
to eat and drink with him, though the sauce cost me full dearly.

After some few days passed, our process was concluded and presented to the
Judges to be signed. By it our poor old woman, together with the rest of my
Brothers: of the Industry, were condemned to dance round the City, and to live
for six years in some other Country. My Innocence was cleared, God a mercy
horse, Gold I mean, and so I got clear for that bout.

Buscon falls in love with his Landlords Daughter, pretends to be a Conjurer
the better to attain his design, and the mischance which befell him.
BEing out of Prison, I found my self all alone, forsaken by my friends, who
were beating it upon the hoof: I was informed how they were gone on Pilgrimage
toward Sevile, I must needs confess I had no great mind to make one of the
company; It was not long ere I had found out a good lodging where I intended to
make my self whole again: There I lighted upon a very pretty Wench clear
skinned, well body'd, witty, and of a good humor; she lisped a little, but it
became her mighty well, very fearful she was of a Mouse, had a lilly-white
hand, of which she was not a little proud, and would ever and anon be putting
it up to her forehead as if it itch'd, purposely that she might show it: At
Table she carved all the meat; it company she would often take off her Gloves,
either to fasten or take our some Pin or other; if she played at Tables, or
shuffle-board, because she might not want occasions to show her fair hands; she
would often pretend to yawn, that her teeth might be seen, and then with her
bare hand would she make the sign of the Cross over her mouth, and to the same
end would she often laugh.

I was kindly entertained by them they lodged me in the same Chamber with two
other Guests, one a Portugal, to other a Catalonian. At my first coming I cast
my eyes upon the young Girl, who me thoughts would serve my turn to pass away
the time, nor did the conquest of her appear very difficult, for that we were
both in the same house: I told her merry stories which I had read, and some I
made to pass away the time: In a word, I was very officious to do her service.
Now because Annetta, such was her name, was very curious and inquisitive; I
made her believe I was a Conjurer, and that I could do strange feats; that I
could make the house sink under ground in her apprehension, and presently seem
as if it were on fire; that I could make people dance naked, or fight with one
another, if I pleased, with a thousand such like crotchical devices, all which
the poor soul swallowed for truth. By these devices, together with some small
liberalities expended in Collations, and such other Knacks as I presented to
her, I became intimately acquainted, and had soon insinuated my self into the
favor, both of Annetta and her Mother; not but that I intended to make up my
Markets again upon what I could take, after I had obtained my ends on her.

The Portugal, of whom I told you, was ready to die for love of Annetta, he
never came near her but he sighed like a Presbyterian at a long Lecture; He was
much given to musing, melancholy, and the like, and withal, as convetous as a
Lawer; he drank by himself, and fasted every three days; nay, his Bread was so
hard, that the teeth of a Saw could hardly enter it: He would ever and anon be
crowing of his valor, but had he laid eggs, he had been a most perfect Hen
indeed, for he troubled all people with his cakling; yet he was not so blind as
not to perceive how I had got the start of him in Annettas good will: Now to
put a rub in my way, he would sometimes rail on me, and call me lousie beggarly
Knave, and low minded Rascal; I was made acquainted with it, and sometimes
heard it with my own ears, but took no notice of it, rather humoured him, and
collogu'd with him, least some mischief might have happened in case we should
have quarreled with one another, which possible might have forced one, if not
both of us, to leave the Lodging, by which means I might come to loose not only
my expectations, but likewise all the expense I had been at in courting Annetta.

In the mean while, I lost no time of improving that good esteem I had gotten
with Annetta; in so much that in a little time I had contracted so great a
friendship with her, that she permitted me to write unto her the stories of my
love, which I always delivered with my own hands: She was much taken with my
Letters and Love-songs, a dish she had seldom tasted, being notes of the
highest quality, and was ravished with the respects and honors I had done her.
My Letters usually began with these or the like expressions. I have presumed:
Your extraordinary Beauty: The flames which consume me: Those Suns of your
eyes; the end always full of submissions, such as in those cases are usual: I
subscribed my self, The servant of her servants: The vassal of her disdain: The
subject of her power: By these and the like ways we became in fine so intimate
that we always spoke to one another in the Quakers terms, Thee and Thou.

However, notwithstanding all these Freedoms, I could never get her to do feat:
but at last feeing she was as ambitious as crafty, I told her one day with a
great deal of confidence, that I had learnt a secret in Magic to make one be
beloved of any person he had a mind to; and that I had so great a passion for
her advancement and fortune; that I would teach it her, in case she would
gratify me with some favor: At this she began to prick up her ears, yet she
was subtle enough not to let her self be snap'd by men; what recompense would
you have, said she smiling? I should think the smalest favor thrown away, if I
should venture it upon such slender hopes; but in case you let me first see any
of your rarities, I shall then know how to proportion my gratitude. I was not
dismayed, rather overjoyed at this reply, for a Fort which so capitulateth is
half surrendered: Thereupon I promised to content her the first opportunity she
could procure of a little privacie and leisure: The great desire she had of
seeing me do what I had undertaken, made her resolve upon the night following:
An hour after midnight, said she, all the house will be fast a sleep, and then
we may securely meet at my Chamber window; for said she, in case you be so
skilful, you may easily find a way to come through the Gallery into my Chamber
by the window; That I can, said I, as easily as speak.

I was exceedingly desireous of trying my destiny, in order whereunto I got me
into the Gallery at the appointed hour; but as the Devil would have it, I no
sooner set my self to slide down out of the Gallery upon her window, but my
foot slipped, and I fell upon a house just under ours, which belonged to an
Attorney, one who was no very good friend of my Landlords: My fall was very
great, so great that it broke above twenty tiles, which left many remembrances
in my sides; the noise of my fall wakened a sleeping Lion, as the Proverb
says, for such I found it, to my grief: The Lawyer cried out amain, Thieves,
Thieves, and presently came up to to the house top with a Brother of his, and
two young Clerks; I no sooner spied them but I designed to hide my self behind
a Chimney, not far from me, but to little purpose God wot, for they fell on me
like a thunderclap, in so much that I thought that minute would have been my
last: The next thing they did was to bind me, nor would they admit of any
excuse. Annetta beheld all these passages, but she was so possessed with what I
had told her, that she thought they had been so many illusions, only to make
her laugh, so that she continued saying it is enough it is enough.

I told them I lodged in the next house, the Master whereof could assure them I
was not such a man as they took me to be, but they laughed at me: To conclude,
they cast me into a Cellar, amongst a number of Faggots, there lay I till
morning, though it were almost day when my misfortune befell me, it being in
the Summer time, and about two hours after midnight.

He is delivered from his second imprisonment: The invention he used to get out
of his Lodging without paying for his diet.
COnsider I pray the cruelty of my stars: I only intended to steal some amorous
favors, and behold me taken for an absolute Thief. I passed that night in
great affliction, which tormented more then my fall, or all the blows I had
received, which were not inconsiderable, either for weight or number; yet that
which vexed me, was, I knew not any industry, which could bring me out of the
Laberinth in which I then found my self ensnared.

Day being come, my Lawyer caused me to be brought before him, he began to
examine me, and to reprehend me for being a Thief, in which he was very
eloquent, for to say the truth, he was his Crafts-master at that feat.

When behold Annetta by this time, suspecting belike the power of my Charms,
had acquainted her Father and Mother with the mishap, making them believe that
I was showing some feats of activity before her in the Gallery, and by
mischance had fallen out of the window upon the next house, where they had
taken me for a Lurcher, and not a Tumbler: She entreated the Catalonian and
Portugal to speak in my behalf, and to inform our Lawyer of my honesty and
behavior; they were no sooner come unto the Lawyer but he began to look about
him, suspecting them to be parties and accomplices of my supposed theft. The
Portugal was highly incensed against him for it, and began to give him ill
Language, told him that for his own part he was a Gentleman belonging to the
Kings Family, and that I was a Person of Honor, that he wronged himself to
believe I was a Robber, and withal, came presently to unbind me: My Clerk
seeing himself alone, began to cry out for more help, but to little purpose,
for I was set at liberty in spite of his teeth. The Lawyer seeing things
carried by a high hand, was forced to be content, but told us, this our undue
violence might cost us full dear, but when he saw us going, at least, quoth he,
give me something for the tiles you have broken; I understood his meaning, and
presented him with eight Royals: I was indeed at that time in so liberal a
humor, that I could willingly have found in my heart to have repaid him with
interest, those many blows he had lent me the night before; but that no body
might take notice of any such thing, I carried them all quietly away upon my
shoulders, and gave many thanks unto my two friends who had redeemed me from my
Captivity.

Being come back to our Quarters, the Catalonian could not forbear playing upon
me, sometimes he would be asking me what price Faggots did bear, otherwhiles
that cleanliness was a very recommendable quality in a man; that brushing ones
clothes would preserve them much the longer and handsomer: In so much that at
last I found my self on the one side much troubled at his jeers, and yet on the
other side very much obliged to him for his assistance: Unable then to satisfy
both these my resentments, I resolved to find out some medium between these two
extremities, viz. to Eclipse my self, that is, to withdraw my self from my
Lodging; but so as I might escape paying the reckoning I owed there, which was
none of the least: There was only one thing in my way, my Cloak-bag, which
could hardly be carried out unperceived; well, I made a Scholar, a notable
Crack, and one of my acquaintance in Alcala, privy to my design, who with two
other of his friends, and their two servants, brought a close Chair one night
unto the Lodging where I was; asked for the Master and Mistress of the house,
told them he was sent by the Inquisition; that they should not make any noise,
for that it was a business which required secrecy: do but guess now in what a
fright they were, for they verily believed some one had accused me of sorcery
and the black Art, as indeed my self had given out; upon this they were as mute
as fishes; but when he demanded my Cloak-bag, they then began to open indeed,
and required some security for what I owed them; thereupon the Rogue told them
my goods belonged to the Inquisition, which would take their debt into due
consideration; fear and respect so tongue-ty'd them, that they had not a word
more to reply, but let him carry me off in quiet; they pitied my mishap indeed,
and said, they always suspected it would come to this pass in the end.

Buscon gets himself cured; falls very sick: The entertainment his Landlady
gave him; of whom he makes a description: He is taken by the Constable for her
Gallant: He takes upon him to be a wandering Beggar, by which Trade he gets
store of Money: At last he goes to Toledo.
BEhold me now out of the Attorneys Clutches, and Annettas fair hands; but
withal I found my self in a sad, weak condition, for I could hardly stand alone
for want of strength, ever since my fall, and those blows the Lawyer bestowed
upon me: I was therefore of necessity to take some rest; for the better
effecting whereof, I took a Lodging at the further end of the City, where I
light upon a very good woman, who made me kindly welcome: At first coming I put
a good face upon it, for had I told her I was not well, she would hardly have
received me into her house: There I lay sick about a Month, which cost me near
hand all that little which was left me of my small fortune. At last I began to
pick up my crumbs, when upon a certain morning, about six a clock, just as I
wakned out of a dream, in which me thought I was dead, I beheld my Landlady
standing at my beds head* which wanted little of putting me into a swoon; for
to say the truth, I took her to be death it self: She was a wrizl'd old woman,
about threescore years old; her face like a tan'd hide, and as full of chops as
a parched field in a hot Summer; she ever carried a string of Beads in her
hand, over which she would pur just like a Cat when she is made much of; she
was a woman of great repute in that Quarter, and had the name of doing many
good offices amongst her neighbors, and indeed she had more good qualities
then one; sometimes she would be making of Matches; other times she would play
the Bawd, and anon lend money upon pawns; her house was never without company;
she was excellent at teaching of young Girls, who were setting up of
themselves, how they should wear their Hoods, and what part of their face they
might show for the most advantage; such as had good white teeth she would
advise to be ever smiling, nay and to show them, though they were weeping:
Those who had fine hands she would counsel to be ever and anon playing with
their Fans, to the end the blackness of the one might set off the cleerness of
the other, to take off their Gloves every other turn, and to put them on again;
such as had good handsome Hair, she would instruct how to wear it to the most
advantage; and she would read a Lecture how the eyes ought to be turned,
according to their greatness or smallness. As for matter of Painting, she was
excellent at it; she could make one though as black as a Crow, seem so fair,
that her own Husband should hardly know her; But her Masterpiece was to
retrive a lost Maidenhead, and so to sodder it up, as the least crack should
not appear.

In less then eight days that I was with her, I saw her use all these Arts:
Besides all which she taught her Pupils how to insinuate themselves into a
Gentleman's Jewel or Ring. The young ones between just and earnest; the eldest
sort by way of favor, and the old ones in the nature of a reward; she read
Lectures of the true asking of money, toys, and the like.

I have inserted these particulars, the more to move your pity, when you
consider into what hands I was fallen; as also that you may readily apprehend
the proposals she was about to make unto me, which thus began, for she always
spoke in Parables and Proverbs.

Son always taking out, and never putting in, will empty the greatest dish in
Europe, Like dust, like dirt, like man, like match. I know thee not, nor what
Religion thou art of. Young thou art, and therefore no wonder that thou art
given to roguery, without considering that thy life wears out, whilst thou
sleep. I have more years upon my head of the two, and consequently can give
thee some good Instructions, but why should I? I have been told thou have spent
store of money in a thousand trifles; that sometimes thou art a Scholar,
otherwhiles a Beggar, and anon a Gentleman, sometimes a man, and otherwhiles a
Mouse, Oh child, tell me with whom thou have lived, and I Will tell thee of what
humor thou art. Like to like. I would have thee to know, many times the toast
is lost between the cup and lip. Ah Varlet as thou art, If thou lov'dst a
wench, where was I? did thou not know me? were thou unacquainted with my
abilities? I dare swear thou have been with some pitiful Grooms wife or other;
for my part I meddle with no such Cattle, no faith, mine are all with black
Hoods, and Holland-Smocks. Had thou come to me, I Would have saved thee a good
many Pistols, which thou have thrown away idly, it should have cost thee
nothing. It is not money I value, nor would I ever ask thee for one penny on
that thou owe me for lodging, had I not occasion to buy some Candle and
Sallets against night.

With that she ended her discourse, and I perceived all this beating of the
Bush, was to get the money I owed her for my Lodging, which I paid unto her,
and told her I should be very sorry that my forgetfulness should be the
occasion of hindering any her affairs. Whilst I was counting out her money, my
misfortunes which were never unmindful of me, and the Devil who never forgot
me, conspired together to undo me once more, for the Constable had been
informed that she kept an ugly rogue then in the house, who lay with her, upon
which account he came to lay hands on her. Now I pray do but consider how
things fell out, They came directly up stairs into my chamber, and finding me
in my bed, and her at my Bolster, they concluded me to be the Gallant for whom
they searched. Presently they seized on me, drew me out of bed, and dragged me
up and down the chamber, for I could not yet stand upon my legs. In the mean
while two others, took my poor Landlady to task, whom they kicked and called a
thousand Whores, Witches and Bawds.

With the noise of the Constable his men, my Land-lady and self, the Incubus of
our Succubus awaked, and hearing me cry out, that they mistook me for another,
who lay in the next Chamber, thought himself to be the man they sought for,
whereupon he presently got up, and contriving how to make sure of one, got down
stairs, and intended to get out at the back door, but one of the Officers had
spied him, and got hold of him. Thereupon up they came to me, and desired me to
pardon their mistake, which I did very willingly, to be rid of them. Away they
carried my Land-lady and her Gallant to Prison, and left me where they found
me. I continued eight days longer in the same house, under the Barbers hands
unable to go without crutches, and that which was worst of all, I had not one
cross left wherewithal to bless my self, for those shaving Surgeons had
sucked up my last hundred Royals, to set me upon my legs again. In this
straight I was forced to go abroad for fear of being famished, but how think
you? with my two crutches to beg for my living. But first I sold my clothes
which were indifferent good, and with the money bought me a leathern Colar, a
Canvas Doublet, and an old patched Gown. Then I got me some leather bags for my
legs, which I warpped up in a great many old rags: Thus accoutred, with a great
brass Cross hanging at my neck, and a most invincible string of Beads in my
hands, I went abroad to seek my fortune: The residue of my money I sowed up in
my Doublet. I counterfeited my voice for that of a distressed Soul, who would
move the world to pity him, and thus I began to manage the wallet which
sometimes brings a pretty income with it, if duly understood. I got some
extraordinary words in my begging, Good Christian people, would I say, Servants
of the Lord, Pity a poor distressed body afflicted with sickness and sores, who
bears his griefs with patience. This was my Dialect on working days, but
upon Holy Days I was in another Cue. Faith without Charity is dead, you Souls
devoted to God, who is perfect Charity it self, would I say, and for the Virgin
Mary's sake, that blessed Queen of Heaven have compassion upon a poor Cripple,
whom the Lord has touched with his hand. Then fetching a great sigh, I would
make a stop, and I assure you, that is a main thing. Ha! would I say, It has
pleased God to make me as you see me, though not long since I wrought for my
living, and was as healthy as any of you, but praised be the Lord. By this
Industry the pence and farthings would sometimes fall like a hail-storm into an
old hat, which I held to receive alms. Then did I begin to repent, I had no
sooner betaken my self to that trade. It was not long ere I had contracted an
acquaintance with another old Beggar, with whom I lodged, as notable a fellow
at our science as any one in the whole world, for I persuade my self he was a
Doctor at that and all other Rogueries: He had an artificial Rupture, as big as
a ninepin Bowl: He tied one of his arms about his shoulder with a good strong
Cord, so that his hand would presently appear all swollen and inflamed. He
would lie on the ground, and letting his pretended rupture appear out of his
breeches, lay his hand on a little pillow and then cry in a lamentable tone,
Consider good Christians, how it has pleased the Lord of his mercy to visit me
with sickness and Infirmities. If any woman passed by him, God keep you fair
Mistress would he say: Some there were so foolish of that sex, as that they
would chose to go by the Street where he was, purposely to be called fair,
though they had no business that way. If any Fencing Master passed by him, he
called him Captain; if of any other condition, either Esquires, worshipful
Knight, or Lord; if any Ecclesiastical man passed near him, he presently had
him by the ear with a good Master Abbot; in a word, he dispatched letters
Patents for Titles of honor, at a small rate to the buyer, and at no great
trouble to himself, not but that he got well enough by it.

In less then six weeks I had picked up about thirty pound, and having quite
recovered my former strength, I resolved to leave the Court, and to go unto
Toledo, where I was unknown to any one. I bought me a gray suite with a Sword,
and so bid Adieu to my fellow Beggars; for the truth is, I was a little too
stout to stoop unto that beggarly profession, and thus I departed toward Toledo.

Buscon happens into the Company of certain Players: He falls in love with one
of his Comrades Wife; He is almost killed upon the Stage: The Comedians
derided; A misfortune which befell them. Buscon turns Poet, and at last
renounceth that Trade.
THe first Stage I went, it was my fortune to light upon a company of Players
going for Toledo; they had three Coaches with them, and amongst the rest one
who had been of my acquaintance whilst I was at Alcala, but had now left his
study to go to Play: Him I acquainted with my resolution of leaving the Court
and going to Toledo: he no sooner heard me say so, but he embraced me very
kindly, and so far prevailed with his friends, that they gave me leave to make
one of their company. When all was ready to set forth, they called on me to pay
my part of the horse hire, by which means I got into one of the Coaches: They
went higlety piglety all together, men and women, amongst whom there was one
very handsome indeed, who danced exceeding well, and acted the Queen and
Princesses in all their Comedies. Now as good luck would have it, it was my hap
to sit next unto her Husband; and not knowing unto whom I spoke, but
transported by my passion, or bewitched by her looks; do you know said I unto
him, how a man might buy yon Merchandise, or at least how he might adventure a
twenty Crowns upon her, for me thinks she is very handsome: It would not very
well become me, replied he, to be your Schoolmaster in that particular, for
that I am her Husband; but this I may tell you, your money would not be ill
employed; for to speak without passion, I can assure you the world has not a
more delicate softer piece of flesh then her self, or one of a more gamesome,
toying humor; and withal, went out of that Coach into another, belike to give
me opportunity to speak unto her: For my part I was much taken with the
passage, which me thoughts was a very good one, and made appear that he spoke
truth, when he spoke those words without passion: Being desirous then to make
use of the opportunity I then had; I got me close to her, and accosted her in
the best Language I could: She enquired what I was, and whether I went; in
fine, we understood each other, but deferred all until we came unto Toledo, for
our better conveniencie. We passed away the time very cheerily; amongst other
discourse I began to recite a certain piece of a Play, which I had acted when a
Boy; it was a part of St Alexis, for you must know, the Spaniards are such good
Catholics that most of their Comedies are Religious. It seems I rehearsed it
with so good an action, that they asked me the question whether I would be one
of them; and to egg me on, told me many things in commendation of their
profession. The truth is, I had already a great mind to the young woman; nor
could I forbear scratching where it itch'd not, whereupon I engaged to stay
with them two years; Our Writings and Articles were drawn up, and executed; I
had my habits and speeches delivered unto me, and at last unto Toledo we came,
where in a short time I made my self famous for one of the most able men of the
Theater.

We adventured upon a Comedy made by one of our own Tribe: Now you must know,
I being but a Novice began to wonder when I saw a Stage player, and a Poet both
one and the same person; for I supposed none but men of Parts and Abilities had
undertaken that profession; but the longer I lived the more I learnt, for at
last I perceived that most of the Actors were all Composers: The time is well
changed, thought I to my self, for I remember when no one but that excellent
Lopo de Vega, durst undertake to write one: Well, we adventured as I told you
upon our Comedy, which was but ill contrived and worse acted, in so much that
the Auditors were very much discontented.

The next day our Composer supposing he had then well mended the matter,
engaged us to act it a second time: we did so; As God would have it it began
with a War, and I came upon the Stage-arm'd with a Headpiece, Back and Breast,
with a Truncheon in my hand, without which I am confident I had never come off
a live, the stones and Cudgels did so clutter about my ears; never was there
such a storm seen or heard: The truth is, the Comedy deserved it, for it
changed a Norman King into a Hermit, without Rhyme or Reason, head or tail;
Then for an Interlude it brought in two footmen; and at last to close up all
the Intricacies, it ended in a general Marriage. Sure I am we were well paid
for our pains, and some of us began to grumble at our Poet: We laid before him
the danger unto which he exposed us, and the like, unto which he replied
saying, for his part we need not fall out with him for there was not any thing
of his in the whole Comedy, but only the placing of several Speeches together,
out of diverse Plays, which he had in a Book bound up together, like a Cloak
piec'd up of several rags; and that the misfortune was, they were not well
sewed together: He confessed one day unto me, That all Comedians, meaning
Composers, were under the Statute of Restitution, for that they stole all they
did: The truth is, I was much taken with the conceit, and resolved to try how I
could make one hang together by the same Art: For to say the truth, I always
found my self inclined to Poetry: I was acquainted with some, and had read
others, as Garcilasso and the like. To be short, I fell to it, and what with
the money I got and what pastime I had with the Players Wife, of whom I told
you: I lived very merrily, nor did we ever fall into any more such praemunires,
for we began to take up and correct our former absurdities, and made Plays
indeed, by which I got for my own share no small applause, and which pleased me
better, no little sum of money.

We had not been a full month in Toledo, before I had gotten three very good
Suits of clothes on my back; nay, I became so famous, that some other sets of
our own profession would fain have corrupted me to come over to them: I was
already Prompter; I corrected their Action and Cadence: I was the only man that
gave direction for the dressing or setting out the Stage. If any one presented
a new Comedy to be acted, it was presently brought to my examination, in so
much that many days had not passed before I grew very conceited of my own
worth, and began to patch up old ends together; so that in short I became an
absolute Poet, and had the confidence, I mean, Impudence, to make a Comedy,
which so added to my former credit, that I wanted hands enough to write verses,
so plagued I was with a company of amorous fools, that haunted me day and
night, to acquaint me with the state of their Loves, and to entreat me to make
Copies of Verses for them; some upon absence, others upon disdain; some upon
jealousy, and the like, according to their several passions. Now I had a set
price upon all my pieces, though the truth is I afforded them good cheap, for
the quicker sale of them: Now as I was one day very hard at making of a Comedy,
there befell me one of the pleasantest things that I think was ever heard of:
And thus it was, for though it redound to my discredit, yet I will not be
ashamed to acquaint you with it: You must know, that when the Poetic fury came
upon me, I had gotten such a trick that I could not forbear walking up and down
the Chamber with the same earnestness, and reciting my Verses with the same
loudness, as if I had been upon the Stage. Now it so fell out, that a Maid in
the house where I Lodged, was coming up to my Chamber just about noon with my
Dinner, which was of two dishes, one of Broth, another of Rost-meat, at which
time I was by chance upon a description of the hunting of wild beasts, and of a
man pulled down by a Bear, and as if it had been my own self, I began to cry
out in a pitiful tone, Save thy self from this same Bear,
Least that thy body he should tare.
Oh! how my Limbs are rent in sunder?
Now he has got my body under.
Save thy self, for now I see
He is resolved to fall on thee.


The poor Wench was so terrified with my cry and action, that she verily
believed I had really advised her to save her self least she were devoured: The
great have in which she was to be gone, made her leap down all the stairs at
once; down she came, and the dishes upon her; away she got into the street,
crying there was a Bear in the house, killing and eating a man: I heard the
noise, and apprehending whence it came, went out that I might dis-abuse the
poor Girl: But notwithstanding all my haste, I found about a dozen men at the
door, some with Spits, some with Halberts, and others with Swords, swearing and
staring, who asked me where the Bear was? Thereupon I up and told them the
whole story, and repeated the Verses which had occasioned that Alarm: Oh! how
mad and vexed they were? so that what with shame, and what with anger, they
cursed the Poetry and Poet too, unto the pit of Hell; but that little troubled
me, that which concerned me most, was, I was forced to fast that day for want
of a Dinner, and to say Grace after meal before I had eaten a bit of any thing.

My companions hearing of this adventure, intended to make a Song of it, and
all the Town did ring again, both of this and some other misfortunes which
befell me whilst I made profession of Poetry.

Not long after, another accident betided us, which reflected on all the
individual members of our fraternity, in as much as it struck at our very head.
The Master of our Company had ran in debt with some Long-lane Merchants, for
old Clothes, and such like necessaries of our use, but they perceiving no sign
of money, arrested him, laid him up in safe custody; whereupon, all the rest of
his Creditors came in thick and threefold upon him, by which means he lay under
so many locks and keys, that there was little likelihood of his ever getting
out: By this means our society began to moulder away, and each one shifted for
himself: The truth is, there were others enough who would have been glad to
have drawn me to them, but I had no great mind to the Trade, having inga^ged in
it by mere necessity.

Buscon contracts a particular friendship with one of the Comedians; they go
together unto Seville: He falls in love with a rich Merchants Daughter: They
both get themselves admitted into service in the same house: The admirable
inventions and tricks which Buscon uses to engage the young Maid to love him:
His Marriage with her, being a very pleasant Story.
WHen I went off, I found my self well habited, and about a hundred pounds in my
Purse: I had likewise a particular friendship with him, who had first
introduced me into the society of my Stage Players; his name was Alistor, a man
both of courage and discretion. We two laid our heads together, and resolved to
travel the Country, and to see Seville, upon design of changing our garb;
being once got thither, and to bear it out like Gentlemen indeed, that we might
the more freely frequent Ordinaries and gaming houses, and consequently make
use of our skill in dice and cards, we bought us a brace of very good mules,
and came to Seville very happily. In all our journey we spent not one penny of
our main stock, for we had light upon some youngsters, whom we fleeced so well,
that their moneys paid our reckonings. We had not been long there, ere we sold
our Mules with their appurtenances, and put our selves into our intended garb,
wherein the Comedy had made us so dexterous, that no one living could have
mistrusted us, either by our behavior or language. The first thing we did, was
to inform our selves of the public meeting places, and the several companies
that were in the City: We got acquainted with the names of the several streets,
and great men who then lived in the Town. But it was not long ere we steered
another course, for as we were one day coning of our lessons, I chanced to look
upon a certain fair house, which took up my thoughts for some little time, and
at one of the windows I beheld a young Gentlewoman, exceeding handsome, and to
my apprehension, not above fifteen years old. Whilst I was taking a view of
her, she withdrew her self, and I passed on my way. I turned to my Companion,
and asked him if he took notice of the young Gentlewoman at the window, yes
said he, I should have been very sorry not to have seen her, for indeed she is
very handsome, I would to God replied I, I had not seen her, for the has
stolen my heart from me. Alistor thinking I had spoken in merriment, began to
jeer, and to say, my mouth was not out of taste, and to tell me she was meat for
our Masters. Well on we went, and in conclusion home we returned. It being near
Supper-time, down we sat; but for my part, not a bit of any thing could I eat,
nor hardly speak a word.

When Bed time drew nigh, we retired our selves, yet could not I sleep one
wink; nothing but sighs and tossings too and fro, with the like vexations, to
think that my condition hindered me from prosecuting my own inclinations.
Alistor, who had a great kindness for me, seeing me in such trouble, promised
to effect impossibilities for my comfort. Let us first said he, learn who and
what she is, and then if it be in the wit of man to win her, I Will undertake
thou shall wear her, however we will try what is to be done.

I was not so blinded with passion, but I could easily see all those projects
were but Chimaera's, yet I found some diversion in thinking on them. When day
came, we got us into the same street where I had lost both my heart and
liberty, with intention to enquire out who that fair Goddess was. We were told
she was a rich Merchant's daughter, who was gone unto the Indies about six
months before; that he had left his said daughter in custody of her mother,
and an Uncle of hers, his Partner in trading: That her name was Rozelle, that
the best in Seville had courted her, not only for her wealth, but her beauty.
This discourse made me conclude my wound was mortal, and that there was no
hopes of cure. But Love raises the mind, and suggesteth inventions, such as
without it, could not enter into the heart of man; for we learnt withal, how a
Servant of the house, who always waited on the Mother and Daughter was lately
dead, and that Rozelles Uncle had turned away his; whereupon we concluded it
would be no great matter for Alistor and my self to be admitted into their
places. I acquainted him with my thoughts, and he approved of them, to effect
which, we got us clothes of meaner degree then those we then wore. Thereupon we
addressed our selves to a Tailor, who lived just by Rozelles house, we promised
him two Pieces to get us in to service there: he presently undertook it, as
thinking it easy to be effected, and indeed he so well managed this affair,
that not many days after, we were carried unto Rozelles Uncle who looked upon
us, and having questioned us about trivial matters, at last hired us, and
appointed us to come the next morning.

Now for the better carrying on of our design, you must understand Alistor and
I contrived together, that I should wear a Millan shirt next under my Cassock,
with the Order of St. Jacques fastened to it; together with the Cross, as the
custom of that Order is, which might make me pass for a Knight of that Order,
as occasion might require. You may imagine we were not backward to wait upon
Rozelles Uncle at the time appointed, He forthwith told us what he expected
from us, and put us in charge of such places as were entrusted with us, in
which we behaved our selves so well, that both the Uncle, Mother and daughter
thought themselves very happy in two such good Servants. As for the rest of the
servants, we easily got their good wills by some small liberalities, which I
used amongst them (and indeed liberality is Loves eldest daughter) insomuch
that I dare swear there was not one amongst them that would not have ventured
his life for us. Our money being still about an hundred pounds, we entrusted
with a Merchant of whom I took no Interest, upon condition he should at any
time furnish me with Bills of Exchange for such sums as I should desire of him,
not exceeding the said sum in his hands. The Merchant accepted of it very
willingly, for that he ran no hazard, and furnished us with as many Bills as we
desired, all which he accepted, and engaged to pay us the money, when soever we
desired.

Hereupon I insinuated my self sometimes into one servant, and otherwhiles into
another, and told them as a great secret, what Letters of Exchange I had,
beseeching them not to tell one another of it. Sometimes by means of a
Collation, I could do any thing with them. Our Merchant was a man publicly
known, which made our design the less suspected; for the better carrying on of
which, I would often take one or other of them along with me, and receive the
money before them, which made them believe I was of other condition then I
seemed to be; and which most of all confirmed them in that opinion, Alistor
would now and then seem to respect me like his Master, when at any time we
thought our selves alone, which he did on purpose to deceive them, now and then
he stood bare-headed before me, and if I let any thing fall, as I often did, he
would presently take it up, and deliver it to me. Now as there is not any thing
a Secret which once a Servant knows; many days had not passed, before my
Master, Rozelle's Uncle had received some inckling of it, as we perceived by
some questions he asked us, and the manner of his deportment toward us, not
that he could in the least discover us, farther then we had a mind he should.

I made a good use of that his suspicion for I presently began to court all
occasions of serving Rozelle: If she chanced to call any of the servants, I was
still ready at her elbow, which I so often observed to do, that in fine, she
her self took notice of it.

I lost no time, but now and then cast amorous glances at her, which I knew how
to counterfeit to an hair, having learned it perfectly whilst I was a Player;
and the truth is, I did it so dexterously, that she seldom missed of taking me
at it, my eyes being never off her. It was not long ere she began to observe my
Passion, and was so far from being any ways offended at it, that she rather
wished those opinions conceived of my disguisement, had been true; and that my
quality and estate had been correspondent to my behavior and person. Sure I
am, she used her utmost Art to discover me; for she made those with whom I kept
company to observe all my actions, in so much that I went no whether, nor said
I any thing, which was not presently carried to her: Nay, she once began to set
upon Alistor, to try what she could sift out of him, but he was too cunning for
her, and did so ingenuously contramine her, that all she could get from him
was, Though my condition were at that time mean and servile, yet that I had a
heart and mind of a man of Honor.

When Alistor had acquainted me with what had passed between Rozele and
himself, I resolved by means of a Letter, which I had at my fingers ends, to
possess her with a full belief, that I was the man I would fain be thought to
be: My Letter being written, with a fair Superscription and Seal, I put it up
in my Pocket; and one day as I passed by Rozele, I took occasion to pull out my
Handkerchief and to let the Letter fall, as if unknown to me, and so passed on.
She no sooner saw me gone, but up she took it, without speaking one word (for
she even longed to know who and what I was, and and well hoped she might by
this Letter find the truth of it) presently she got her into her Chamber, and
having looked on the Letter she found it thus Superscribed;

These for Don Fernand Armendez de Mendoz, Knight of the Order of St. Jacques.
And having opened it, she found these words within written.
YOur enemies are so sollicitous to discover where you are, that a man had need
of a great circumspection when and how he writes unto you; and withal, so
powerful they are, that they spare no cost to lay out for you, This is the true
excuse of my long silence; This I must confess I have adventured, in regard it
goes by Rodigro, the Earl of Arangol, your Brothers Page, now going unto the
Indies, for that I know him to be affectionate and faithful in any of your
concernments.

Be pleased then to know, That your Friends have so far prevailed with his
Majesty, in despite of all your enemies, that you shall have your pardon and
the continuance of his favor, provided you serve him ten years in the wars of
Flanders. I must needs confess it is a kind of banishment; but we hope in a few
days to obtain your absolute pardon, without any such restrictions.

Be pleased therefore to accept of this in good part, and believe it, we have
been very industrious to procure thus much: We neither do nor will loose any
time for your service, as the Duke your Brother can inform you. In the mean
time we all desire you resolutely to submit unto the servile habit which you
have chosen for your disguisement, and be confident this hardship will not long
last. God have you in his keeping.

From Vailladolid, etc. Don Joseph Piementel.


As fast as the innocent Rozele read my Letter, so she insensibly ensnared her
self in those Nets I had laid for her: Every word was a dagger at her heart,
she recollected all my former behaviors into her thoughts, my Bills of
exchange, my fellow servants suspicions of me; and having compared all
together, love at last took full possession of her heart; she locked up my
Letter, little thinking what pains she took to undo her self, and then returned
to the place where she found it: At which instance I took occasion to pass by
her with the same respect I had always used, but with a kind of discontent in
my face; she observed all my behavior, and I seeming not to take notice of it,
began to look up and down, as if I sought for something: At last, Rozele seeing
in what a perplexity I was, asked me what I had lost, I told her nothing, nay
that cannot be, replied she, for something you have lost, therefore tell me
what it is; it is not worth your Ladyships knowing, nor my looking, I replied
unto her; thus, I pretended not to regard it; but I so well acted it, that she
perceived I was much troubled at it, so that poor Rozele was half in the mind
to have restored me my Letter; but in the interim, some strangers knocked at
the door, which made her withdraw and leave me there alone.

I presently got me unto Alister, and gave him an account of what had passed,
who concluded our design went on very prosperously. From that time Rozele made
me perceive she had as much passion for me, as I for her: If at any time she
called for any thing, Palinte was the man (for that was the name I had assumed
when first I came into the house) All her pleasure and delight was to talk with
me, and to command me, and all my joy was to see and obey her.

Rozel's Mother was not over heedful in watching of her Daughter, but would
oftentimes leave her at whom, when as her self went abroad, either to take the
air, or to her devotions, being well assured I suppose, of her Daughters
discretion.

Now it happened upon a cetain day, that the good Mother was gone abroad, and in
the interim I came in from the Town. Alistor came and opened the door, and
withal told me, that Rozelle was left at home alone, that she had called for me
two or three times, and that he thought she then was in the room over the
Gatehouse, to watch my coming in. You ravish me, said I, with this good news,
but however let us first go to our Chamber, before I go to her, for one of my
sleeves is torn, and had need be repaired. In we went, and I perceived Rozelle
looking into the Hall through a lettice-window, yet I took no notice of it, but
went on directly to our Chamber to shut the door, Alistor helped me off with my
Doublet, and I sat me down in a chair, for the truth is, I was weary with
vvalking. I had then on my Naples shirt, with the Order of St. Jacques upon it
wrought all with Cold and Silk, very rich, and being in this posture, I
perceived some body at the door, looking in through the key hole; at which
instant I gave Alistor the signal agreed upon between our selves, at which he
was to respect me as occasion should require: presently he was uncovered, and
standing by me, I began to talk in this manner unto him. Alistor, I have had
sufficient experience of thy fidelity and valor; nor art thou unacquainted with
the passion and service I have vowed unto Rozele, which however I dare not
discover unto her, no more then my Quality, until such time as my affairs are
in a better posture. Notwithstanding I am much perplexed least in the interim,
I might be engaged in her affection to my prejudice; for I am resolved to have
a past or two with some of those Gallants, who are ever and anon expressing
their passions, either in Music, or Verses, at her Window: The truth is, I
can no longer endure it, I must and will set them further off, which I believe
might be done without any noise, for that no one will suspect it is any of the
house.

I had no sooner said so, but up I rose, and walking very soberly over the
Chamber, I gave Rozele time enough to retire from the door, for I verily
believed it was she, knowing of what an inquisitive disposition she was.

She who had heard all my discourse, and was not a little alarmed at it;
presently sent one to call me, intending by some way or other, to divert me
from the design I pretended to have: I put on my clothes and followed her into
the Garden whether she went: I waited on her with the same respect I had always
used; She sat down on a green Bank, and commanded me to sit by her: I made my
excuses unto her in the best terms I could, I told her I was both ashamed and
confused, at the great honor she did me, but that I could not withal forget my
condition: You may do as you please, Signeur Don Fernand, said she, for you are
of a condition to command where ever you are: Oh God! said I, with a great
sigh, and fetching two paces backward, as in a fright; no, no, said she, all
that serves now for nothing, you are discovered, we know who you are,
notwithstanding all your inventions; but we have great cause to complain of you
for concealing your self so long, by which means we have been deficient in
paying those respects due to your Quality, but seeing it is a fault of your
own, we hope you will excuse it in us.

Whilst she was still talking, I pretended to be surprised with her discourse:
Mean you me Madam, said I? Yet Sir, your self: Look, look you there is that
which has discovered you, see the Letter you lost the other day, for which you
looked so up and down, and with that gave me the Letter: I received it,
shrugging my shoulders, and confessed it truth; After several Complements, she
entreated me to tell her the occasion of my disguise, whereupon I told her a
Tale which I had at my fingers ends; and had formerly served my turn to put a
trick upon Annetta my Hostesses Daughter. Your Ladyship may be pleased to
understand that I served a Lady of the Court, more out of Gallantry then any
good will; Now one of the greatest Knights of Spain made addresses to her at
the same time, and although he was a person of great honor and worth, yet
could he not obtain any kindness from her, yet was she very free of her favors
to me who deserved them not, in regard I did not really affect her: The Knight
became jealous of me, and having his spies abroad, took me one night as I as
discoursing with her at her Window; he presently fell upon me, and though in
himself a very stout man, and well attended; yet it was his misfortune to fall
dead on the place; His death so dismayed his attendants, that they forsook the
body, and left Alistor and my self masters of the field. Now he being, as I
told you, a person of quality, and one whose death the King resented: I was
forced for the better escaping the hands of Justice, and such enquiries as I
knew would be laid out, to disguise my self as your Ladyship now sees. I had
not been above two days in this City, before it was my chance to pass by this
house, at which time you were then standing in a Window, where you appeared to
be such as you really are, a most incomparable Creature: From that moment I
found my self a slave, and my liberty quite lost, in so much that I could not
live out of your presence. Whereupon I had recourse unto all those inventions
which love suggested unto me to ease my passions, and at last found means to be
admitted as a servant into the house, for which happiness I should be ever
thankful; and that although peradventure by the rigor of the Law I might never
be permitted to enjoy so great an honor, yet I should ever think my self
dignified, by having been servant to so fair a Mistress. Without this device I
had never come near you, but had dyed without hope of help; for my quality
would have kept you on your Guard; the ceremonious part of woing would have
created a thousand obstructions to my undoing, and which was more, my life had
been endangered, for that probably Justice might have found me out and seized
on me, at least forced me from that City: That then my life's remedy would have
been worse then death, for I must then have quitted the sight of your self,
which is the worst of deaths. My only design was to wait on you, until such
time as my friends might have appeased his Majesty's anger, that then I might
have acquainted you with my name and extraction, but seeing Heaven has
prevented me, and discovered me unto you, I have likewise taken the boldness to
let you know the truth of my love, and do beseech and conjure you to accept of
my heart, my honor, and whatever wealth I have in the world.

You may easily persuade your selves I wanted no sighs to set off my discourse:
for the truth is, I was very much in love: Rozelle heard me with such effective
demonstrations of passion that it was not without some regret I deceived her as
I did. Sir, said she, if your passion be but as true as you have lively
represented it, I may then repute my self the happiest person living of my
condition, when I find my self courted by a person of your quality: and to let
you see how much I am inclined to please you, I shall take upon me to let you
know, the obtaining of your desires shall be only limited by the time in which
you intend to demand me of my Mother and Uncle, unto whom my Father has give
full power to do as he sees fit in such affairs, and therewithal roses
appeared in her cheeks, which with their Vermillian tincture infinitely
increased her beauty, and added new fuel to my flames.

When I saw Rozelle at the point I so much desired, I entreated her to acquaint
her Mother with my condition and quality, that no longer time might be lost,
and that then I would manage the rest as I saw occasion. In the midst of our
discourse in came her Mother; Rozelle as impatient as my self, presently went
to wait upon her, and made her an ample recital of what had passed, who
overjoyed with the relation of me, forthwith sought for her brother in Law, to
let him know my discovery, and to consider what excuses they should make to me,
for not having treated me according to my degree. The Brother in Law was of
opinion, that at night when I was retired to my Chamber, they should come and
proffer their service to me, and beg my excuse of their ignorance. They did so,
and so from that very minute, from a Servant I was declared a Master, and
lodged in a very fair rich Chamber. These Ceremonies thus passed, I beseeched
them not to discourse any thing of me unto their friends and kindred, or indeed
to call me by my own name.

I passed in this manner about a month after my Metamorphosis from a Servant to
a Knight, during which time I received diverse honors from Rozelles Mother and
Uncle, and from her self many civil favors. Her own converse and the respect I
bore unto her, made me perfectly civil; insomuch that I never attempted or
requested any thing from her, which was not modest and lawful, to the end I
might not infringe the Laws of Hospitality; which deportment of mine did much
confirm both them and her in their opinions of my personated Nobility. But in
fine, fearing lest some ill Spirit might rise to destroy the structure of my
good fortune which I had raised to such a height, I one day pretended to have
received a Letter from a friend of mine at the Court, wherein I was informed,
that it had pleased his Majesty to grant me his free pardon to return home, and
that I was of necessity to go unto Vailladolid, where the Court then was, to
give thanks unto the King. At this News all the family seemed to rejoice,
especially poor Rozelle, so much were they interested in my affairs. Then I
began to look wisely about me, and carried my self very gravely, I told them I
could not better acknowledge the kindnesses and obligations I had received from
them, then by contracting an alliance with them, and to pay the respects I owed
them, by marrying their daughter Rozelle. I had so sooner declared that my
intention, but the Uncle and Mother suspecting lest it might be but a copy of
my countenance, presently took me at my word, without asking any advice of
their friends or kindred, or farther enquiry into my quality or estate, so that
they presently got a License from the Bishop, and we were married without
asking of our Banes. Thus did I satisfy my passion, and settled my fortune, for
which I was proffered five thousand pounds certain, besides what might come by
succession from her Father and Mother, whose only child she was.

When I saw my self in possession of so hand some a woman, and so good a
fortune, I resolved to turn wise in relation to the management of my estate,
and honest, in relation to the obligations I owed unto Rozelle. In this design
I consulted with Alistor, as also how we might retire from Seville, and carry
my wife with us, for we concluded it absolutely expedient to take her off from
her Mother, lest time might make a discovery of us, and so she might make
friends to force both her daughter and fortune out of my hands. After sundry
debates it was concluded that Alistor should go before unto Vaillandolid, with
such money as we had left, and that he should hire a house, and furnish it the
best he could.

This was put in execution, and when I had received notice of it, I endeavored
to persuade Rozelles Mother and Uncle, that it was convenient for me to carry
my wife unto Vailladolid to bring her acquainted with my friends, especially
the Duke of -- my Brother, that her beauty might plead my excuse, for having
married one beneath their quality.

Both Uncle and Mother thought it very reasonable, whereupon we concluded
together that Rozelles five thousand pounds should be paid in unto some
Merchant who should return it unto Vailladolid, which was accordingly effected.
And for the better carrying on of my disguise, I desired the Uncle would be
pleased to take care of the Bills, for that he intended to go along with us,
partly to accompany his Niece, and partly to understand my estate and
condition. It was not long ere Rozelle took leave of her Mother, unto whom I
promised to bring her daughter back within two months, at least to come and
wait on her to her daughters house and estate.

We took our leaves and came to Vailladolid, we alighted at the house Alistor
had hired for me, which to say the truth, was well provided with furniture and
the like: The same night I professed an excess of love and kind ness unto
Rozele, and in fine, I made her acquainted with the whole naked truth, and what
means I had used to obtain her: At first she was much astonished at it, but the
affection she bore me, was such, and I had gotten such an ascendant over her,
that she showed not any the least discontent at it, but resolutely taught me
how I might get the rest of her Portion which was still in her Unckles hands.

You must not by any means, said she, let my Uncle smell out your deceit before
you have made sure of the Bills which are in his custody; but go to him betimes
in the morning, before he be stirring, and and then tell him your Brother and
you have bin at words concerning your Marriage, which he mistrusteth you have
made up, more out of passion then reason; and that he upbraideth you with my
meanness and poverty; and that you hope to satisfy him of the contrary: First
by showing him the Bills of exchange; and then by carrying me to him, by which
means he may be persuaded it was not only my Beauty or perfections which
engaged you but also my portion and fortune: I am confident he will not refuse
you, because the pretense is very fair and specious; however be sure you and
Alistor have your Swords by your sides, wherewith to force him, if need be,
which may easily be done, seeing he is in your own power; The next thing you
do, is to go to the Merchant upon whom the Bills are charged, and get him
presently to accept them.

I admired at the subtilty and quickness of her wit; I kissed her over and
over, a thousand times, and at last went to execute what she had advised, in
which I succeeded very happily: Her Uncle did not scruple the Bills, the
Merchant accepted them, and paid us five hundred pound upon content. I gave
Rozele an account of it, who seemed overjoyed; her Uncle all this while knew
not one syllable of what had passed; and when he pressed me to bring him unto
the Earl my Brother, I told him he was a humor some man, and one that I must
sooth up, to work out my own ends, and that in a day or two I doubted not of
finding him in a good mood. Thus I put him off from day to day, until at last
he received news from my Mother in Law, that his Brother was cast away coming
from the Indies, and that his presence would be necessary at home, to settle
affairs in order.

When he had received this sad news for him, though joyful for me, I could not
for my life stop him one day longer, but away he would for Seville; In fine, he
took leave of us, as ignorant of my affairs as ever.

At his arrival at Seville, he found my Mother in Law very sick, what for the
loss of her Husband, and absence of her Daughter, in so much that she followed
her Husband in a few days, making me sensible of the truth of the Spanish
Proverb, Dulce es la muerte de suegra; A Mother in Laws death is as sweet as
Hartichocks and Pease; for she left me in Rozeles right, the Inheritance, and
Goods of her house, which amounted unto one hundred thousand Crowns.

Having thus fixed and settled my fortune by Alistors help and conduct, it was
but reasonable to make him some acknowledgment and reward, for the services he
had done me; whereupon I gave him a thousand pounds, wherewith he rested very
well contented, and so went off from me.

Thus Gentle Reader you have seen the issue of my adventures; but for as much
as no one can be called happy before his death, I know not whether amidst so
many good fortunes, some disaster may not intervean, which may force me to eat
sower meat for my sweet sauce, and so compel me to end my last Act like my
first.

Every thing is in the hand of Providence, we cannot foresee what shall be
after us; yet for the present I think I may safely say, there are few men in
the world, who for happiness may compare with my self. I wish the Heavens long
to continue it in the company of my dear Rozele.

FINIS.
THE PROVIDENT KNIGHT, OR, SIR PARSIMONIOVS THRIFT.

BY Don Francisco de Quevedo A Spanish Cavalier.

LONDON. Printed for H. Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Golden- Anchor in the New-Exchange, 1657.

The daily exercise to be observed by the Knights of this Order, for the
keeping of their money, when any one shall ask of them by way of Gift, which
word is of more terror to them then death it self.
FIrst of all, He shall at his uprising in the morning, make the sign of the
Cross upon his Purse; in the next place upon his Person, that he may repel all
such evil spirits as might form any petitionary actions to his prejudice.

In the second place, He shall devoutly pronounce these words: I do steadfastly
resolve and vow, neither to give, lend, or promise any thing whatever, either
in thought word or deed: Then he shall recommend himself unto his Angel
Guardian, as the Patron of his Order.

This done, he shall go hear mass, as being thereunto obliged, though it be a
working day; for as much as all days are unto him to be kept as Holy Days, and
that he may not think any a working day, but that whereon he is obliged,
constrained or forced to give.

At night whilst he is putting off his clothes to go to bed, he shall give
thanks unto God, for having given him the grace to take off his own clothes,
and that another does it not for him; By this means he shall sleep soundly,
unless the Lice or Fleas chance to awake him.

When any one comes to visit him, of what Quality soever he be, after the first
complements passed, he shall take some occasion to use these or the like words
by way of prevention: Me thinks the whole world is going down the wind, for
there are few men now adays, who have so much as ten pound in ready money by
them. Next he shall proffer his service and assistance, for those precautionary
words will do strange feats, in striking dumb the most brazen Borrowers.

In case it should so fall out that our Knight be prevented, and the question
put to him before he could use the precedent Antidote, he shall then forthwith
reply, Alas Sir, I was just coming unto you to have begged the like favor of
you, for that I have a small affair in hand, which else will utterly undo me.

If he be in any company where some one or other may peradventure commend his
Ring, Sword, Watch, or any thing else of his, upon design to extract a proffer
of it, Sir, our Knights must presently reply, I shall hereafter have a greater
esteem for it then ever, seeing it has deserved your commendation.

Moreover he ought to be like the Trumpet, which sounds the charge only never
the Give fire.

He ought to have that Term of hawking, Hold well, always imprinted in his
memory.

In case he understand not the Latin tongue, but has a desire to learn it, he
may be permitted to decline the word Accipio, but not Dono.

The use of any Proverb, but Safe bind, safe find, is utterly forbidden him.

As also the use of any of these words Free-gift, White-gift, or any of the
like termination, in regard of the last syllable, which ought to be had in
great detestation by all of this Order.

Nor may our Knights so much as offer to lend any thing more then his ear, or
attention, and not that neither, but unto pleasant sounds.

Lastly he ought to remember, how many have miscarried for want of the
retentive faculty: That a demand is like a blow on the mouth or the Stomach,
for it takes away the speech. With these observations, he may live contentedly
until he die.

Letters of Sir Parsimonious Thrift.
Unto a Curtisan, who demanded money of him to pay for her Lodgings.
PHil: Our Souls were not conversing together when you sent me your last daggle
tail'd Messenger, else you would not have taken a better time then you did: for
I was then looking over my accounts, particularly how things stood between you
and me, when I find I have laid out more then ever I received of you: And just
as I was thus reprehending my own prodigality, in came your Emissary with a new
request of an hundred pounds to pay your house-rent forsooth. I no sooner read
that your horrible complement, but I had like to have fallen backwards; A
hundred pounds Phil? what is become of thy Judgment? Or do thou not know,
unto whom thou writest? Sure thou take me for some Atabalipa. The very
reading of such another Letter, were enough to make an end of me. No, no,
hereafter I Will turn over a new leaf, I Will satisfy my sanguine complexion, and
yet withdraw my self from those deadly perplexities, into which thou drivest
me; Yes, I Will hereafter court an Indian, who knows no other Lodging but the
fields, nor other house but a Cave. You shall see me reduce my words into
action ere the end of this May, the longest time I have allotted unto my self,
lest the terms of your letter and house might terminate my days before the
Term.

To another who refused to play with him because he had no more money.
A Lice, I am verily persuaded you knew the depth of my stock, when I first
became acquainted with you, for you have just proportioned your favors to the
number of my pieces; At the same time that my money was spent your kindnesses
vanished: I never yet saw an account better cast up, for I have not received
one bare six penny kindness, more then my money came to: Hang me if thou art not
a severe Gamestress, to deal thus with me; At least seeing my money is gone,
deal with me upon Pawns, for with good husbandry, which I intend hereafter to
follow, I am confident my Cloak, Doublet and Breeches, may support me for some
longer time: Prithee therefore keep touch with me at play, until I am quite
naked, and then I shall retire my self, glorying in my greatest misery, and
shall manifest to all the world the excess of my charity in your behalf,
whilst I uncloath my self to cover you.

Another Letter on the same subject.
HOw Joan, what Casuist is it that has read thee this severe Lecture? What
mortification has since yesterday betide thee? In good earnest, as often as I
read over the Letter I received from you this morning, I cannot tell whether or
no I do not dream, or whether I am in my own senses: You tell me it is a holy
season, and that your neighbors grumble that your Mother and Aunt do bait you
day and night; Your Sister falls out with you upon my score; and at last you
remonstrate unto me, that I could not imagine our pleasures would always last:
Then you descend, beseeching me to forbear coming more unto you, and tell me,
it is but reasonable to dedicate some part of our lives unto God. Prithee Joan
what is the meaning of all this? Is the Devil turned Friar? to what end do
thou treat me with such a Dialect, after thou have sucked out the last drop of
my blood, eaten me to the very bones, and consumed the quintessence of my
Purse: Ah wicked Girl that thou art; whilst I had wherewithal to support the
excess of your debauches, then you could never tell me the season was holy, or
that the neighbors took notice of you: Then not a word of that accursed Mother
of yours: Oh how complying was that damned Aunt of thine, and that Devil thy
Sister, as long as my money lasted: Ah God knows how I have supplied their
necessities? I have often thought upon it, when I saw my self between you four,
I verily conceited my self to be between two Armies ready to give battle, or in
a Clock Cage, whilst the Alarm was ringing, for I could hear nothing on one
side, but Give on, give on, give on, give on; and on the the other side nothing
but Give me, give me, give me: But a present I thank my necessity; for she it
is that delivers me from all those terrors: and who of Bawds and Whores, that
you were, has made you turn Penitents; so that when I regard my empty Purse, I
am sometimes intending to send you the strings of it for a Discipline: Really I
cannot forbear laughing, when I reflect on those words of yours: That we ought
to dedicate the small remainder of our lives unto God; whereas I prithee to
whom can thou more lawfully devote them unto Lucifer. As for that your
request of my not coming to you any more, I give you my word you shall find me
very exact in obeying it, for I am not so uncivil as not to observe your
directions in that particular as command.

I shall conclude with giving you a little good advice, in case you be truly
sensible of the remorse of your conscience, and that you really intend to be a
convert: You must then think of making me some restitution of the unjust gain
you have made of me; By this means you may probably win me to follow your
example, and to repent my passed life: As for the rest, we shall sue each other
in Purgatory, in case you take your Jorney that way; for if you should go to
Hell, as most likely you must, I do here declare unto you, That I then surcease
my suit, for that it were madness in me to prosecute the Law against you, in a
Court where your Mother, Sister and Aunt, are all great Officers.

A pleasant denial to an importunate Lady of Pleasure.
Florence,
AFter a due consideration of what Answer I should give you in return of those
many things you desire me, I have found no style more proper then the
Laconique, or indeed more fit then the usual answer we make unto poor Beggars,
God keep you, I have not at present any thing for you. I was at first much
surprised at the novelty of this encounter, I knew indeed there was a kind of
Friars Mendicants abroad in the world, but I never yet heard of any such order
of Nuns. I pray therefore cease giving your self the trouble of making any more
such requests unto me, which will assuredly work no other effect then that of
making me shun your company, there being nothing in the world of more power to
keep me chaste then when I am constrained to part with my money; And so God
keep you my friend, I have not at this time any thing to bestow upon you.

He thought he had gotten a Mistress who would not have asked any thing of him,
but he is deceived in Tobee.
MEssalina, I had written unto a friend of mine the story of my good fortune in
this City; and coming to speak of you, I told him I had a Mistress so beautiful
and complete, that she never asked any thing of me: But I now find my self
mistaken, for your late Letter contains not a word which is not a demand; did
you but know what an affliction it is unto me, I am confident you would have
altered your theme, for to tell you the truth, there is so perfect an union
between my money and me, that it is impossible to separate us, without
destroying me, much less, would it be a means to preserve me. Nor is there any
Hell to me like that of parting with my money: You may then fix somewhere else,
for you are not like to finger any of my coin; moreover I would have you know,
that I have hitherto sinned only by accident, that in future, I intend my
continence shall pay the interest of my Treasury.

He promises to live honest that he may save his money.
I Have found you sometimes so pleasantly disposed, that you have said, I need
not be troubled when you demand any thing of me, for that you do it with a far
greater regret in regard you thereby become obliged; the Borrower being the
Lenders slave. For my part, I do not understand the power of your Arguments,
rather my reason tells me quite contrary. For I evidently see that in our
Commerce, take it to all intents and purposes, I spend much more then you, and
that you only take and receive. Where you say you treat me like a friend, and
that you do not press me, I pray know I am no more of your opinion in this
particular then in the former, for instead of a friend I find you a Pyrate, and
that you press me so nearly, that you leave me only a part of my self, and that
very dry too: Whence it appears your Avarice and Lust are both alike insatiable.

Let every one therefore shift for himself. Do you fancy that you asked not any
thing of me, and I Will do the like. The best way I know for us both to keep the
Commandments, is for me to keep my money in my purse: I shall therefore
endeavor so to do, with hopes to bring you into a way of Salvation, and
therein shall testify unto you, that I love my neighbor as my self.

He abuses one who would have had him promise to marry her.
FLora, You have in one single word made me clearly see, that both my honor
and estate are upon the rack, and ready to expire, for your late demand that I
would marry you, is like the extreme Unction to a dying man. Prithee deal
ingenuously with me, thou pretty Ape, and tell me what so great moderation or
patience did thou ever see in me, that thou should covet me to be thy
husband? Questionless you are mistaken in my Phisiognomy; I assure my self, I
have the countenance of a Batchelour, and the experience of a widower; withal I
am so given to change, that two brace of women are hardly enough to serve my
turn above a week. But to return to your discourse, I conceive by the nature of
your request, you were thereunto carried rather out of revenge, then any desire
of my race; and for Cods sake tell me, what have I ever committed, which could
entice thee to design so great a mischief against me? No, no, Flora you must
look out else where to serve your turn. I am not yet so weary of my life as to
abandon my self to so severe and rigorous a penance, If I should at any time
feel the remorse of my conscience, I shall then wed my body unto a Hermits
weed: For to prevent that, which usually befalls those who marry women, I have
made a vow never to have any one to succeed me, and I protest to you, I resolve
to persist in this resolution, until such time, as there shall be some
Committee established for the redemption of ill married people, as there is
already for the delivery of Christian slaves from Algeon.

Unto a Lady of Pleasure, who had demanded money of him to bestow in charitable
uses upon the holy week.
GIlian, Alms are acts of charity, when bestowed out of ones own money, but
when they are given out of another's goods, they are rather an act of cruelty
then compassion, nor is God well pleased with them. Dear child I had much
rather testify my affection to thee by mouth then by my purse. I must needs
confess it is a holy season, but the request you make me is sinful, and I must
needs acknowledge my self to be a miserable sinner. Do but consider then, how
all these things can hold together: To my apprehension they seem inconsistent.
So God keep you.

Unto one who desired him to hire a chamber for her to see a Bull-bayting.
J Strange Silvia, that you should send unto me to provide you a Chamber to see
a Bull-baiting, for is there any combat more worth your seeing then that of us
two, your self asking and me denying? What could you expect to carry home, but
a diziness in your head, and what could I expect but to be angry at my self,
for having laid out my money to make you sick. No, no, Silvia, I love you
better then so: I would have you laugh at such mocqueries, regard them not, but
as so many Pagan feasts, where nothing besides beasts were sacrificed:
Possibly some man or other may miscarry there, would that be a sight worthy
your beholding? for shame, hereafter learn to avoid all such public
May-games, which for the most part are full of noise and confusion. Suppose you
were there, why but one hour after your diversion would be nothing, and which
is worse, I should have somewhat the less money left in my Purse.

To one that rayl'd on him on company.
FAustina, you would have received greater content, had you had me under a
Coverlet the other day, when you brought me upon the Stage, as I have been told
you did. For I heard you jeered at my retentive faculties, but this is to
inform you, that at the very same time, we were employed in the self same
thing, for I was just then railing upon you. So now, we may cry quits. I am
told you found a thousand faults with my person, that my body is none of the
best made, that my feet stunk insupportably, and that my nose did little
better; and then you fell to compare me to things of your own imagination,
sometimes this and sometimes that. I am not angry at the liberty you take to
abuse me, nor shall you ever provoke my choler, provided you do not finger my
money.

He desires a Curtisan's charity.
LAmia, You have acquired so great a reputation of being charitablie inclined
to relieve the necessities of such as are in want, that I have from thence
taken the boldness to beseech you to exercise that virtue in my behalf. I am a
poor shame-fac'd Lover, one who dare not discover my infirmity, but unto such
well disposed persons as your self. Unto you then I have presumed to make my
addresses, for easing of my pain. In case you have a mind to do me any good
office, I prithee Lamia let it be done in the night, at least in such a place,
where none but your self may know my indigencies, for that is the only true way
of exercising Charity indeed.

To one which begged of him a Collation.
AFrania, you have sent unto me, desiring me to provide a Collation for you
this afternoon, that you may enjoy your self with some other Ladies, whom you
intend to visit; as also that I would not speak unto any one of it: For answer
I assure you I shall be so exact and punctual in obeying that last part of your
Injunction, that the very Cook himself, the Confectioner, no nor the Fruiterer
shall ever know a word of it. Why prithee Afrania, it is not enough that you
eat me out in the Dinners and Suppers, but you must also devour me in
Collations, and fiddle faddles? Hereafter learn and deny your self those
superfluous Mummets, and fast for the expiation of your sins. It is now a full
year, two months, three days, and one hour and half, that you have eat upon my
account, not only you, but two of your assosciates, your Brother and your
little Page; I Am sure you have made me as dry as March-dust: therefore I
prithee in future forbear that little flesh which is left me, that the worms may
find some gleanings upon my bones, after I am laid in the Churchyard, else I
shall have nothing to pay for my Lodging there.

A Refusal upon another Request.
POppea, if my refusal of sending you the Stuff you have so often desired, had
only served to make me admire the power of your Genius, you ought to have
rested well satisfied; for I must needs confess, though it be still one and the
same thing you request of me; cannot but be ravished to think, that in eight
days time you have sent me above thirty Letters, all of different style and
expression: really you are bound to give God thanks for those excellent parts
he has bestowed upon you. But notwithstanding all these commendations of mine,
of which I shall and must be very liberal in your behalf; yet give me leave to
tell you, that had you laid out in stuff all the money which it cost you in
Paper, Ink and Wax, Silk to seal your Letters, and small pence for your
Porters, you had eased me of a grand trouble, and had not so unprofitably
thrown away those flowers of your flourishing soul: However, I still forbear to
send it unto you, in regard it would now seem rather extorted then given: I
beseech you therefore rest contented with my acknowledgments of the
perfections, and with the praise which I shall ever pay unto your worth.

A Curtisans complaint against our Thrifty Knight.
IN fine my good Knight, you have discovered your self; and I perceive your
stuff was marred in the making: In fine I say, you have let me see of what
condition you are, and evidently confirmed unto me that you are the most fickle
of all men: Had I when you first haunted me, believed my friends, you had not
now had the trouble of hearing my complaints against your treachery. However, I
shall not want either courage or occasions of revenging my self; I am told you
have met with a good fortune, and because I know her, I cannot but admire at
your great judgment: I advise you therefore to knock out of her as many as you
can: I assure you I shall do the like, in hopes of making some as good as your
self.

The Answer.
HOwever Poppea, my Loom and Shuttle are still left me, though you have so near
shaved me, that I must confess I have hardly a thread left to begin upon; but
what remedy? The Dice are cast, and sometimes it is not amiss to sit down a
looser for fear of a greater blow: I must needs acknowledge the Title of
Changling you are pleased to bestow upon me, does well, but it might more
properly have been assumed by your self; for that you have made my best goods
change their Master, by transporting them into your own Lodging, and that with
such ease as if they had only gone from me to their own true Center. I am
equally sorry with you, that you did not believe your Mother and Aunt, at the
first time of our acquaintance; I wish you had, for thereby we might both of us
have been great gainers, but especially my self: for their sake hereafter,
thus, if I chance to make love unto any one, it shall be my first inquiry what
relations my Mistress has, for indeed I had much rather she were a kin to the
French disease then such a Mother and Aunt: The first is now a days easily
cured, but the second mortals, so cankerous they are, that indeed they eat the
very strings of ones Purse: The fear of that is the thing which has made your
house odious and abominable unto me, in so much, that if you would any more see
me, you must expel those two Harpies from you; conjure, away those two Devils
which have gotten such absolute possession of you: Nor indeed would I wed a
whole Tribe to enjoy only one Mistress: Besides, I pray remember, never any
Pilot split twice upon one and the Rock; nor will I ever make choice of another
Mistress, but one who shall give you more cause of envy then contempt.

In Answer to a Curtisan that desired some New fashioned Dressing of him.
LYcasta, When as I verily believed we were the mutual objects of each others
affections; in that instant I began to perceive were Rivals and Compettors in
affection, as to my Purse; but I dare assure you, you can never out go me in
that particular: my passion for my Purse being not to be compared, especially
when I consider it to be the only friend that never fail'^ ^e.

Whilst I reflect on the many good Offices my Purse has done me, me thinks
there is not any object on the earth which can more captivate me then it; in so
much that I verily believe, were I to die in the service of it, I should
encounter it with a good will: You would ever persuade me, that I was the only
thing in the world you best loved; but if you would have me really believe it,
you must surcease the mentioning of your new A la mode trifles, and forbear
naming such toys unto me, else you will make me conclude you are a child and in
love with every Rattle: In case you cannot take up your self, nor contain your
longing; Prithee do not take such pains to dissemble it; but tell me the naked
truth, and instead of calling me in your Letters, My Life, my Joy, my Heart,
and my Eyes, express me by those things you most affect: call me thy Twenty
shillings piece, thy Jacobus, thy half Crown, and thy Angel, And because I see
you are not perfectly acquainted with my humor; I must needs let you know,
that I am most affected with those flatteries which cost me least; and that the
best cheap are always my best beloved: Every thing which causes expense is
death to me, nor can I look upon a Beggar without horror. Let us therefore
leave off naming the word money, as if there were no such thing; but let us
make love like Shepherds: But in case you cannot leave of writing in such a
style as may be pleasing unto me, yet let me obtain this favor from you; that
you will forbear to write in guilt Paper, or in golden Characters.

LAis, Though your Letter contain a thousand impertinent demands* such as
cannot sort with my humor; yet I have found good divertion in it: it has not
indeed made me a jot more liberal then I was, but has at least made a more
contemplative man then I was: I am infinitely pleased with the diversity of
those things you desire of me; nor can I forbear admiring at those sundry
rarities of the Creator, who has bestowed such variety on nature: I pray do
as I do, imitate me, content your self with the contemplation of them, and do
not regard the possession, for indeed the value of the most precious things
consists more in opinion and fancy then any thing else. Those toies of which
you writ unto me, are so many, that I profess I am puzzel'd to carry them in
my memory; more by half then I can be to keep my money in my Purse.

FINIS.

