AN ADVICE Against LIBERTINISM; Showing the great Danger thereof, and exhorting
all to Zeal of the TRUTH.

Written by Edward Reynell Esquire

Ye have been called unto Liberty, only use not Liberty for an occasion to the
flesh, Gal. 5.13. LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper, at the Sun in Fleet Street,
over against Saint Dunstons Church, 1659.

AN ADVICE Against LIBERTINISM.
IT is not the least of miseries (in these erroneous and licentious times) to
see the thoughts and studies of men taken up for the most part in needless
questions (tening only to strife and contention) and not to that unum
necessarium, viz. the knowledge of Christ, and the cementing of his seamless
coat, which was never so much (and is still more then other) divided, through
dissenting (I might say distracted) opinions; the most part also bending (like
reeds) with every wind of giddiness and self-interest; a Religious stedfastness
to sound and fixed principles, being rara avis in these times of change and
backsliding.

And with how much tenderness and grief of heart, must it needs be resented, to
see Christ persecuted in the name of Christ; his Word, Ordinances, and
Ministers to be so much reviled, and wounded in the house of his seeming
friends, and that our own swords should thus devour our Prophets! Jer. 2.30.
And truly great reason have all those who have found God under a constant and
painful Ministry, to be sad thereat, seeing they thus prophecy in sackcloth,
under a general unflexibleness, and the great contempt and scorn of their
calling.

A sad principle is taken up amongst us, that we must have liberty of
conscience, to attend on what Teachers or Ordinance we please, under which,
some take liberty for their lusts, to attend on none. O how soon having once
(with Hymeneus and Alexander) made shipwreck of faith, and the means to attain
it, shall we make shipwreck of a good conscience with it!

We need not with that famous Orator, Marcus Antonius, who to move compassion
with the people, brought Caesar's Robes all bloody amongst them, much endeavor
to manifest the truth hereof; and what further may we expect, from such as thus
go headlong on, with a prejudicate opinion, and (resolving to admit neither
debate nor gainsaying) rashly adventure the precipice of their own fancy and
endless Chimera's, so often as the tide of novelties and giddiness, shall ebb
and flow in their unsettled thoughts? obstinacy also being like dead flesh,
which soon makes the green wound of an error fester into the sore of an Heresy.

Never was there such a general defection of Religion, as now it seems most
pretended, and held forth; such general vitiousness, growth of Schisms,
falseness in profession; yea such indifferency therein, without any true
warmth, or holy fire of zeal and godliness.

If any new doctrine be but commenced, the Author thereof must be thought
Religious; And so backward are we to follow the Sun of Righteousness, as that
(if in a dark night) an Ignis fatuus do but precede us, or the mists of error
and ignorance come athwart us; how do their glaring flames amaze our eyes; as
if those false lights were designed on purpose to be our paths; whereas their
Rays lead us only into into Rivers and precipices!

And does not almost every hours experience show, how apt we are to embrace
their discourses, whose doctrine creeps, and corrodes like a Cancer, and has
justly driven themselves from the communion of the Church? who steal into the
affections of the ignorant with small, humble, and modest beginnings, catch
with flattery, bind gently, and at last kill privily; their outside of
devotion (though oftentimes outshinning a sincere Christian) being but an ill
bait to entice us into the nets of holiness and good discipline.

Since the more we appear for God, the worse we are, if we be not that indeed
which we appear to be: There is more danger of the Wolf in the Lambs skin,
then in his own; when once we begin to nauseate at old Truths, and (like flies
about a candle) to play about new lights, its a thousand to one but we singe
our wings, if we burn not our selves. Those that observe the story of the
Eastern Churches; do allege this as the great provocation of Gods wrath to
bring upon them the blasphemous doctrine of Mahomet, because they rejected the
wholesome Truths of the Gospel. But what need we go further to prove the sad
experience hereof, then Germany? and God grant it appear not amongst our
selves, the same flames of evil Doctrine having unhappily broken out amongst
us, by those who (as if they had been the spaun of those Gnostics in the
Apostles time) account no sin of power enough to defile them, because they were
(...), by nature spiritual. Some there are, who leading silly women captive,
serve their ends upon the impotency of the Sex, mixing scandal with their
heresy. Others there are, who having surprised their will, and possessed their
understanding with fair pretenses of their false doctrine (our nature being too
apt to believe what we have a mind to) presently conclude it Orthodox,
because spreading; like icterical eyes, transmitting the species to the soul
with colors of their own making; and we find the most pleasing doctrine to be
ever the most taking; it being the weakness of the Organ, which thus makes us
blear-eyed, and carries us headlong into the Precipice of our corrupt humors;
wherein every man is so subject to hug his own opinion, to hold his hand
between the Sun and his face, and yet stand staring upon every meteor, and
inflamed Comet.

And are there not some who (having their zeal kindled at the wrong end, and
like nothing so well as that which goes cross to the grain of Authority) when
they are looked on, will seem to act virtue, with much pompousness, and outward
bravery, but when the Theater is empty, will put off their upper garment, and
retire into their primitive vileness? Are there not some (sad Christians)
benighted in the dark interest of coveteousness, and ambition, which too often
heighren and serve up an external zeal, by the wooden pins of worldly espects,
and make no more account of Religion, then the profit or convenience it brings
with it?

Thus any thing seems lawful enough to some men, that serves the ends of their
ambition; who yet are scrupulous enough in cases of conscience, when nothing of
interest does intervene; so sadly do evil men in these days, make Religion the
servant of interest; their designs being therefore the fouler, by how much the
more they need to put on a fair outside.

But herein (it being bad sinning in a Religious habit) we ought not to frame
our devotions to their pattern, how specious so ever they may seem to be,
according to the model of their own fancies; these being but the colors of
Religion, with which the world is too often deceived, by those who cover their
Religion with a remote design, least it should appear unhandsome in its own
dress.

Our understandings being once clouded with bodily pleasures thicken and become
wholly unable for things divine. And we may rest assured, that those whose
designs under pretext of Religion, seek nothing but the advancement of their
Temporal affairs, and whose goodly humane Policy (admitting Religion according
to the times, and their own fancies) makes use of God as a mask for their
wickedness, will at last prove no other then a stroke of Thunder, which leaves
nothing on earth behind it but noise and stench.

Were it not madness then to pass through a garden of fair flowers, and to take
their poison, and leave their honey? Surely Manna it self turns into worms, and
the wine of Angels into vinegar and lees, when it is received into impure
vessels; healthful medicines (if abused) by the incapacities of a healthless
body, often increase the distemperature, from indisposition, to a sharp
disease; and shall we then call that the spirit of prophesying, which is the
spirit of lying; and those things to be Revelations, which are nothing but mere
dreams, and the fond productions of Hypocondriacal devotion?

Yea how many absurd fancies coming in the likeness of visions, and under
pretense of raptures do we meet with, even from those (the Sun it self
producing serpents when it reflects on the mud of Nilus) who seem to have been
long softened under the continual droppings of the word? though at last, all
ends in pride or some dangerous remptation; self-conceit having also been not
the least rise of such fond and unheard of productions. It being a sure rule,
that whatsoever heights of piety any one pretends to, it proceeds from the
devil, unless the greater the pretense be, the greater be the humility of the
man, it being no Paradox to him that said, Satan had more a do to win the
simple then the subtle; the worldly wise being sooner enraged then won by the
Ministry of the word, which crosses the contentments of the world; neither is
pride the least stratagem of hell, to keep the people from profitableness under
the Ministry of the word, though one of the mighty methods of Satan, to
persuade them to charge the cause anywhere, then (where they ought) on their
own heart.

And may we not have just cause, to question and suspect the variety of those
dispensations, groundlesly (through too much confidence appropriated by
distempered fancies) since shaking off those excellent patterns of truth and
sincerity in Religion, and deviating from those paths which God has graciously
chalkt out unto us in his Word and Ministry, for his Saints to walk in, there
being no other course (whatsoever they mean by Gods revealing himself) I mean
not what he can extraordinarily do, but in his usual way) then by those saving
Truths, so much now opposed, and under reproach, and the dispensers thereof
accounted a burden fit to be ejected.

Surely a constant Travelers pace over-takes, and out-goes many violent men,
whose hot and ill-grounded zeal, is quickly tired; these times affording too
many ignorant. Artists, whose zeal has been too blind to go right, yet too
active to stand still; and however the wrinkles of their spreading errors, were
far better confessed then painted, had much rather shelter themselves under the
branible of divison, then the Olive of peace, whose swarthiness we need not
light a candle to discover. Those that forsake the good old way, to walk in the
paths of their own crooked farcies, seldom meet (at leastwise with good)
company. And may not God leave such as clash with his Word and Ordinances, to
loose themselves in the dark corners of their own dolusions; yea take from them
the true light, they thrust from themselves, in forsaking the fountain of
living waters, and hewing out broken cisterns to themselves? may he not suffer
those who scorn to strike the sails of their own wills and interest to his
sacred truth, and refuse to eat of the plain food of his word, to be choked
with the bones of their own inventions?

And oh with what eye of patience can we behold the verities and maxims of God,
which the Prophets foretold us, the Apostles denounced, the Confessors
professed, and so many thousands of Martyrs have maintained, in the midst of
their flames, their racks, and tortures, to be now adays made the sport of
giddy spirits, and the aim, and reproach of profane Lips, who void of wit or
shame thus invade holy things!

Surely if our opinion so often deceive us, as that we discern little or
nothing a right; if all the perfections of this life have some imperfections
mixed with them, yea no knowledge of ours is void of darkness and ignorance
(the humble abasement of our selves, being only the securest way to heaven)
how ought we to beware of those, who thus brave it in the shops, when there is
little in the warehouse, holding out gaudy fairings, the better to color
inward falsities, and suborn the truth; the Sun whereof being once set in our
land, an irrecoverable midnight of spiritual darkness, must needs succeed? If
we loose our estates, we may recover them; if we loose our friends, God can
raise us up others; if we loose our lives, we may exchange them for a better;
but if we once make shipwreck of the faith, we are lost for ever

And may it not be feared that the distempered fancies, and the precipitate
headlong discourses, now on foot (to the infamous reproach of this age, being
so full of errors and factious spirits, instead of sound and Orthodox truths,
as might much rather have invited silence then our late contentions) and the
too much mingling of humane interests with Religion (all being but like the
Winters Sun, which shines clear, but warms not) will at last rend the seamless
coat of the Church, and deface the Image which Christ has stamped upon it;
making Christian Religion another thing then what he designed it to be; when it
is so far from making us live good lives, that it self is made a pretense to
all manner of impiety, and a stratagem to serve the ends of covetousness,
ambition, and revenge.

And O how great is the vanity of those, who have thus forsaken God, to serve
their own ends! and the more, seeing they pretend to be Saints, before they
have put off the sinner, and (with Simon Magus, and the Pharisees) appear the
fouler for being cleansed. Too often is the crime aggravated by the incivility
of the circumstance; and (as Abafuerus said of Haman, Will he ravish the Queen
in my own house?) the place of Gods worship, made the receptacle of buyers and
sellers, there being not a few now a days, who thus kiss a danger, under a
design of virtue, and for their own advantage, hug an opportunity of sin under
pretense of piety.

Yea, how sad it is to see those who pretend themselves to be the only friends
of the Church, so violently to affect the rich and pompous Revenews, and
Prelacies, which they seem eagerly to oppose, and not only (like those
Ecclesiastics in Saint Bernards time, who pursued their own preferment, not
the peoples welfare, and (like usurping Conquerors) grow revengfully jealous,
through covetuousness, polluting themselves with the puddles of this world, but
(like those vipers who eat out the womb of their Mother) bring beasts into the
Temple, and as well expose the Temple it self to sale, as make the holy Rites
thereunto belonging, venal, and destructive.

God indeed (who loves those dearest whom he corrects) may for a time suffer
his sword to be abused, and the wicked to cover their pernicious designs, under
the cloak of Religion and the mask of hypocrisy. But surely, such as make but
a Politic Robe of Religion, and take the liberty to embrace that which best
becomes their occasions, will at last appear (however they take upon them to
sit in the chair of Divinity, and how great a noise soever they make, as the
sons of thunder) not to have been educated in the Schools of the Prophets.

Its vain for him to seek to fence himself without, whose foe is within him; or
to make the pretense of piety the pander to his own profaneness. Its well known,
that the mind too often covers passion under a cloak of several colors. The
weeping of an heir, is but laughing under a disguise; and the greatest number
of our actions but veiled over with dissimulation, which an all-seeing
providence will at last, no doubt, as well discover, as punish; since he that
thus leaps from Religion to hypocrisy, and thereby offends others to defend
himself, serves not God, but makes God serve his own turn; neither is
sacrilege, which has of late found so fine a dress, and seems to bear the
greatest splendour amongst many sins, the way to keep our purposes from canker,
or our stomachs from windiness; since it usually makes a fair estate to
evaporate, and turn to nothing; no one knows which way; only experience tells
us, that vice often times gets money and a curse withal; it being also Gods
intent to teach us, that as the good have something else to hope for, so the
wicked somewhat else to fear, then the good or bad fortune of this world.

It is not denied, but that some who have been fatted up with the Altar, have
many times been enemies of the Altar: But what? If some one abuse Mysteries,
must we overthrow Churches? Must Ordinances, Ministers, Maintenance, and all be
eradicated? What if some evil spirits grow superstitious, must we fall into the
other extreme of Libertinism? Must innocence be forsaken for the guilties sake?
If some particulars introduce exorbitant devotions, let them be blamed,
condemned, and rejected, none will undertake to defend or justify them.

But surely as they are bad clouds which thus obscure the Sun which raised
them, and have as the Apostle says [if ever] begotten them to the faith, so
are they spirits of a very poor inferior order, that thus quit their station
upon discontents, being but the Apes of those melancholy Schismatics, who
(having burnt off their own Fingers, in setting the world on fire) are now fallen
out with it because they cannot rule it.

And truly, great care must be taken, least we prostitute our souls to these
false Gods of straw and dung, and for a tuneable cadence of a few smooth words,
we lose all the harmonies of faith and a good conscience; since from the
opinion of their own abilities, they cry down the houses of Gods worship, and
the maintenance thereof, the better to make way to their own purposes, yea take
upon them to censure all Ecclefiastical Persons as needless, if not
Antichristian; not seeing that the contempt of Religion always began by the
contempt of the Ministry.

And it is to be feared, that some who of late have built their own houses at
the expense of Gods house, will in time find the Rafters and Beams of such
Edifices, to serve as instruments of punishment to those that have raised them;
loath I am (I confess) to judge uncharitably of those, who in seeming thus to
avoid superstition, have created devotions to themselves, which incline
thereunto; yet much fear that such, as by this way think to touch heaven with
their finger, have already one foot in the vale of darkness.

Neither would I willingly soil the purity of my pen with the exorbitancies of
those, who neglecting pious presidents, and the essential maxims of faith,
adhere to the silly inventions of their own spirit, and as speedily run into
those follies which hasten unto the height of insolency and destruction.

For, Great God! what a stroke of Thunder is this to reformed Churches? what
astonishment in all orders, what a wound in the heart of Religion, to see thy
Laborers cast out of thy vineyard, their maintenance questioned [or at least
repiningly afforded] and the places of thy worship wholly extirpated? Alas!
that ever men should so carry on their own interests, with such violence of
passion, to the height of their pretentions, as to hold Religion, and the
beauty thereof in so great contempt, without the least seeming touch of sorrow
or repentance!

And no less reason have they who have of late rent the Church into so many
Schisms, by fraughting its ship (like that of Jonah) with a miscelany of all
Nations, and making it to contain, as many Religions, as once Babel did
languages, to cry out with Nero (that lively Image of cruelty) when he was
required to sign the death of a criminal, offender; O would to God I could
never have written! And oh that I could say unto those as once Peter did to the
people, I wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did also your Rulers.

But alas, how soon have some forgotten their first love toward the
Ambassadors of God, by whom [if ever] they were begotten in the Lord! If any
thing go amiss with the people, Aaron must be stoned. How sadly does Ismael's,
as well as Esau's persecution ( oris and plagae, that of the tongue as well as
the hand) appear amongst them! The devil seemed something merciful to our
Savior, he would not have him starve but to turn stones into bread, while some
of late, less charitable, would have the faithful and Orthodox Ministers of
the Church of God to live upon stones, instead of bread; but it is no wonder
that they who once made the Lords day a delight unto them, and saw beauty in
the feet of those who brought the glad tidings of peace, and flock't like Doves
to the holes of the windows (having since questioned whether it be the Lords
Ordinance, or man's, and endeavored as much as in them lay, to make the ways of
Sion to mourn, and to stop the passengers thereof) should account their
Ministers a charge and burden in their places.

However let not those of the holy calling, be troubled who stand idle in the
Market place, because no man has hired them, seeing their sufferings can no
way be counted their fault, it being as dangerous a persecution of Religion to
withdraw the fuel from it, as to cast water on it. And how much were it to be
wished that the two-edged sword of those who give out, as if heaven and not
they, had intended the partition, did not cut more for their own preferment and
advantage, than for Gods glory, though like greedy gamesters (having all in
their hand) they lose all at last, by stealing a needless card, it being no
easy matter to reduce divine things to our own balance, so as they suffer no
impeachment.

Religion and Sacrifice had their beginning from the worlds infancy, and have
by an indivisible tie, been evermore linked together. God who gives all to us,
will have us give all to him, though especially he require our actions, our
affections, and our selves in the duties of his service. And sure where we
cannot give the whole Tree, with such perfection, as we would, yet at least let
us argue our willingness by giving part of the fruit to his glory.

But how soon will those, who have once lost their understanding and
conscience, find a beaten path to infidelity! How soon will they cut and mangle
things relating to the furtherance and honor of Gods truths, and the Economy
of Religion! It having been an old maxim (if not dotage) amongst obsequious
spirits (having no zeal for faith, nor courage against impiety) to approve all
Religions, and follow none. And certainly, he that shall go about to define
this false liborty of belief, and manners now adays crept in among us, shall
find it nothing else, but a mere dependence on fancy and passion: It is (says
one) a strange Monster, whereof it seems Job ( Job 40.) made description, under
the figure of Behemoth. For as this creature seems composed of all sorts of
beasts, so is Libertinisme a sin framed out of all manner of sins, to annihilate
the most sincere part of Christianity. It draws along with it, a great train of
vices, and corruptions, which tend directly to the utter desolation of Kingdoms
and Empires. And as for those hideous punishments observed in all Ages to have
befaln those Cities, Provinces, and Commonwealths, which have bred, or favored
it, such as have run over the Histories of Antiquity, shall find experiences
enough.

Neither can we possibly believe that devotion to be good, which is so
extremely subject to novelties, singularities, and pride, which proceeds from a
foolish confidence of our own judgment. It being well known to all, that the
most fatal plague in Religion, and devotion, is the desire to seek direction
from our own strength, and opinion; men that are easily enflamed in matters of
Religion, fail not as speedily to raise sedition. Most strange! that we should
thus miserably lose our selves in the ignis fatuus of our own fancies, and that
(though we cannor reform a silly fly in the work of nature) we will yet frame
a new work of Religion, which derives its accomplishment only from God.

And what is this but to make a Roman Pantheon of Religion, where there are a
thousand Divinities, without the least glimmer, or knowledge of the true God?
And is it not a pitiful thing to see some in our times, professing Religion, to
take the same liberty to themselves? or is it not a thing most unhansome, to
see an infamous fellow, to make himself the censurer of Divinity, and corrector
of the Scripture? does it become them to talk of the Bible, and the holy
Mysteries thereof [too sadly oftentimes wrested by that blasphemous breath,
which holds forth nothing so much as ignorance, scoffing, and sycophancy, from
which we ought to shut our ears, if we cannot stop their mouths?]

It is observed of the Bat, that he imployes the Christalline humor of his eyes
to enlarge his wings, though very useless, and to no purpose; so how many are
there now a days, who consume the light they have received from God to create
wings of pride, novelty, and vanity, which serve them to fly in the night of
ignorance?

And O the sad opinions of our Times! which (wandering from the Rays of
wholesome Doctrine) prove but the Chymeraes of piety, Specter of madness, and
flames which lead poor souls into the Abyss of darkness! What alas! may we
(with Doctrinae prurientibus auribus natae. Tertul. de Praescript.
Tertullian) conclude such illusions, and Phantasmes, but as the doctrines of
Satan, grown up to please the itch of incredulous ears? since they more tend to
dazel our sight, than to direct our judgment, or inflame our desires.

There are many things (I confess) unknown, wherein God will exercise our
faith, but not satisfy our curiosity, and we still ought to endeavor a clearer
discovery of his will. Nothing in all Ages has been so hidden as Truth. The
Philosophers (those great lamps of nature) contended much in the dissection and
defense thereof, but much dismembered it in the ill handling thereof, leaving it
in cloudy Caverns, all covered with shades and darkness, and in stead of a
solid body retained naught in their hands but a Phantasme. But though blinded
man, infected with the immortal disease of incredulity, has Giantlike
persecuted it through contradiction and vanity of spirit, God alone through his
infinite goodness, has been the discoverer thereof.

And sure it were but fondness to think, that in the declining Age of the
world, the way to heaven were yet to seek, since the eternal wisdom has taken
lips of flesh to reveal the secrets thereof unto us; how furiously soever his
divine Oracles have been assaulted on all hands, by Jews, Gentiles, Mahumetans,
Heretics, to which we may add the Libertines of our Times, of whom we may
justly doubt, least their secure ambition prove no other then Archimedes his
Engine, whereon the higher any mounted, the lower they descended.

Yea good reason have we to doubt (since they that will never fall, must ever
fear) least that pride, which perpetually exalts them, will (through
giddiness) at last, precipitate them into the Abyss of those fantasies, which
they have merely borrowed from their shallow inventions, and which they too
often entitle (through the sottish apprehensions of then mind) with the name of
visions and revelations, which may be refuted with as much ease as they are
invented, seeing that they carry with them but the bare and feeble pretext of
Religion, neglecting the effects.

Neither is it credible that Truth should be so long hidden, to be discovered
to such kind of men as seek to sow such dangerous maxims in our mind; creatures
of little Authority, evil manners, of a conversation insolent, or covert, and
without that sanctity, miracles, and reason, they so much plead for. And
surely, we stand not in need of such kind of curiosity, to seek after Jesus
Christ, of to search for the Gospel. The Apostle Saint Paul expressly telling
us, That if an Angel from heaven should preach any other unto us, we ought to
change nothing of our belief, which so many millions of Martyrs have sealed
with their blood; which the best part of mankind has professed, and the wisest
heads of the world illustrated in their writings.

Our Faith is not grounded upon wit, discourse, or natural judgment, but on
the submission and duty we owe to the Truths and Ordinances of God; from which,
whosoever wandereth shall find nothing but an Ocean of disturbances, and the
shipwreck of his Faith, which he ought not to abandon to a Caitive spirit,
which has nothing specious in it but illusion.

There is but one Redeemer, to whom we all owe our services and adorations.
Jesus has nothing to do with Belial, nor the temple of God with the Synagogue
of Satan. And however lies may for a time, seem to accord together, yet true
Religion is ever sound in it self; and to approve any other (though seemingly
never so reasonable) is but to thrust thorns into the feet, and straws into the
eyes; neither will it seem any strange thing, that those who seek their
contentments, and the pleasing of their fancies, in the contempt of God and his
Ordinances, should at last make up but a bad reckoning, pricking their fingers
whilst they are gathering of Roses, and meeting with wormwood in the midst of
Honey.

And yet (though God be never so great as when he appears little to humane
understanding) how sadly do we find haughtiness and arrogance to have puffed up
many (through their small smattering of gifts) with the opinion of their own
capacity? They think themselves only to pronounce oracles, and judge all other
men to consist of superstitions and ideotisme. The Fathers are entertained like
Grooms in their Stables. Points of Logic, profoundnesse in the Scriptures,
reading of Councels, with the knowledge of things natural, are no way thought
worthy their better thoughts.

I deny not, but as that which is given us by the favor of Heaven, comes very
readily, and is never lost; so that which comes to us by Art, oftentimes begins
very late and quickly ends [the love of God being a science not studied, where
the infusion of his holy spirit is more eloquent then all tongues, and more
learned then all pens] yet does it not hence follow, that all humane learning
is to be rejected. Though Saint Paul desired to know nothing but Jesus Christ,
yet did he not contemn all other knowledge and humane learning in Arts and
Sciences, wherein himself was so accomplished, being the great Doctor of the
Gentiles, and could speak tongues more than they all, he only disliked it so
far as it stood in opposition against, or in competition with the knowledge of
Christ.

And it would be of great moment, to the greatest interest of these men's souls,
if they would but make so much use of their natural Logic, as to detect those
fallacies which are put upon their reasons, by their passionate desires, either
of profit, or pleasure or worldly ambition.

Some there are indeed (though the fewest amongst them) who seem to have arived
to some perfection in humane Sciences; but alas! How do they vex the world with
their tatle! neither will their spirit admit any other path, but Precipices:
and if a capable man sound these swelling Rodomantaes, oh what empty chambers
will appear in their brains! what darkness! what confusion! All their learning
is but like gilded gates pestered with spiders, which too usually slights the
syllogismes of the Schools, and has recourse to the arguments of tyrants,
which are arms and violence.

But (since the life of opposites is in comparing them) I do not wonder that
learning (as well as the professors thereof) are such great rubs in their way;
seeing their ignorance must needs appear thereby to be the more palpable; and
their desire is to enter into the fold like Wolves in a Sheeps skin. They tell
the sheep they are much affected to their conversation, but that the dogs must
be taken away, which do nothing but deafen their ears with barking.

They would willingly make you believe, the mire of their ignorance to be
sweet, because they delight to tumble in it; or that the Spider or Toad are no
poison, because some things eat them, and miscarry not, though the beam in
their eye is not the less because their eye does not see it; nor is their
ignorance the less, their punishment, because they are affected with it. But
seeing it is thus too often the imperfection of our nature, not to think our
lips foul after our putrid and rotten discourse (though they are defiled) as we
ought to desire God to set a watch before the door of our own lips, least we
should offend with our tongue; so should we very cautelous, and with Ulysses,
bind our selves to the mast, and stop our ears with wax least we should be
deceived with the voice of these Sirens, not beholding their claws.

It is reported of Democritus, that he voluntarily made himself blind, by
looking steadfastly on the beams of the Sun, to free himself from the
importunity of the love of women, who might perchance have shut up two gates
against love, to open a thousand to his fond imagination. ( Tertul. Apologet.)
And the like we read of Origin, that he deprived himself of the distinction of
Sex, to rebate the stings of sensuality, which bred him much mischief. Surely
no less reason have we not only to fear the fire, but avoid the smoke of those
incendiaries, which (like Sampsons Foxes) have of late added such flames
toward the divisions of Church and State.

Yea, how necessary is it for us to come out from amongst those creeping
Serpents, which steal into the hearts of those they destroy? and which (like
certain rocks hidden under the waves) surprise Sailors, and cause grievous
ship-wracks. Ah! how many have been deceived by their impostures? How many
having once made shipwreck of their Reason, have thereunto added the
shipwreck of their Faith? the swelling presumption of their imaginary
abilities, creating a barrenness of judgment, discretion, humility, and
consequently of all Christian virtues.

In all which respects, they that will but a little observe their inconstancy,
having no other bounds but their own interest, and like weather-cocks, turning
their faces which way soever the wind blows; he that observes that pride which
puffs them up, that ambition which precipitateth them, and how often
impudence makes them unsupportable, shall find them people whose humors consist
much of of air and water, pliant and supple to all manner of Doctrines, and
attended with variety of petty phantasmes, imperfect in shape, and not a little
transporting their judgment which too often also (through the sharpness of
their Passions) discovers it self either notably weak, or much benumbed; their
whole life appearing nothing else, but the ebb and flood of a continual
Euripus, replenished with shadows, giddiness, and illusions.

I shall not be so uncharitable, as some have been (who with much more
discretion might have covered the stains of their mother the Church, then with
such malignity of spirit to divulge them) to impute the disorders of
particulars to the general body; it being neither fit, nor reasonable for the
sake of some blasted members, to blame sound parts, neither for the fickleness
of some, to censure the Actions of many more pious, whom by duty we are obliged
to tender with no less prudence then chariness.

But I shall pass them by (as Bees over Hemlock) with advice only to all such
as have thus far taken Scorpions in stead of good fish, and embraced Hyaena's
through mistake of friends, seriously to consider, that as there is nothing
more sincere than Religion, and one that lives in the true Rules and duties
thereof; so when corruption falls thereinto, nothing proves more dangerous and
hurtful. And as Domestic Arms are much more to be feared than outward
Hostility; so who sees not, but that being now in the haven, surprised with a
grievous storm of Sects, and Errors amongst our selves, it must not only
snatch from us our comfort, but (like ill managed weapons) turn against our own
breast, to the rending out of our own entrails; yea, even to the very
subversion of our souls! since our divisions are so much the more dangerous
beyond common wars, as the Spirit is above the Body.

He that endeavoreth to divide Religion, has none at all. He that admits
but one leak, drowns a ship, and he that resolves to believe but a part, and
not the whole, believes nothing, since all comes from the same Authority, and
must be equally received. There is but one word (says Tertullian, Tert. de
Praescript. cont. Haeres.) to determine all sort of disputations with such men.
Do but ask them, whither they will renounce their Baptism and Christianity; if
so, let them wear the Turbant, and go amongst the heathen. But if they make
profession of one same Christ, and one same Religion, why do they belie their
profession?

But surely Art will not, it is only Grace, and the gift of God, which can
charm such Basilisks, being creatures amongst all others, hard to be enchanted.
It is only a divine light and guidance, which must direct those who thus lose
their faith in their Reason, and bury their heaert in their brains, who have
recourse to their own fancies, more than to the divine oracles of that written
word inspired from heaven, who think the Ministers thereof Antichristian, or at
least wise (since differing with them) to be too straitlaced in their opinions,
and making the way to heaven narrower than God ever meant it; who (to be
eminent amongst men) leave the beaten tract, neglecting the good old way, and
to guide their steps by the dim lanthorns (as they call them) of the Ancient,
tread in the new paths of their own inventions; who think to pretend Religion,
is to do any thing; to seem holy, is to be what we will, there being no face so
foul, which that mask cannot cleanly color; who, because they think themselves
more holy, more wise, better gifted, more enlightened than their neighbors,
think they may justly overlook them with contempt and censure, and not only
in public meetings, bur in ordinary conversation, avoid the contagion of such
common breath. And however the zeal of some scrupulous Preachers (as they say)
is pleased to make the worst of their slips, yet have they certain favorable
circumstances, if not wholly to excuse them, yet sufficiently to rebate the edge
of divine severity.

Let us take then the balance in our hand, and judge if it be not worse then a
barbarous ingratitude, thus to worship our own fancies; to steal the silver and
gold of God, and make idols to Baal; to light our lamp at his Altar, and
afterward to make pillage of his Temple, which assuredly they do, when they
not only pride themselves in their shame, but abuse all the gifts of heaven in
ambitious impiety.

It was good advice which one gave to a soul desirous of advancement; namely,
to remember three things.

First, To addict it self much to the presence of God.

The second, To take the holy Scripture for the rule of our actions.

And the third, to hold firm footing in constancy.

Would those who pretend themselves the most refined spirits of the times
(whose mouths and hearts notwithstanding resemble Cyclopes Caverns, rather then
the Temples of Peace and Truth) would those (I say) who make the smoothness) of
their tongue an Engine to credit their designs, and with Absalom cover their
Rebellion with a fit of devotion to pay their vows, but seriously consider
those few advertisements, they would not so often personate the Saint to play
the devil; neither make their good words so often to become their sins.

Would they who (being no way washed from their own leprosy) puddle the sacred
springs of wholesome doctrine, and like Sorcerers, endeavor to cast mists on
the fairest morning, but bethink themselves, if Nadab and Abihu for putting
false fire into their Incensories when they came to the Altar of the Synagogue,
were devoured as unfortunate Victims, with the proper coals of their own
Sacrifice; what will become of them who adore Christ to crucisie him in his
Truths, and who thus irreverently presume to approach the Altar of the eternal
Testament? will not their sacrifice prove their punishment, since they have
made a sin of their propitiation? And as prosperous victories ill disciplined,
bring with them more damage then defeatments do; will not those divine
Mysteries (which were formerly beheld clouded in darkness, but are now more
apparently observed in a clear sky) occasion their greater ruin, who under so
glorious a Sunshine thus turn pretty into scoffs, and retain nothing of it but
a Phantasme, to serve their own ends, and to lacquay in their vile affections?

Would those who seem to breath nothing but Stoicisme and spiritual-mindedness,
who bear a vicious mind in a fair ornament of body, and cover a leaden weapon
in an Ivory sheath, but seriously consider, that to be godly is to be honest,
and to be pious is to be just (godliness and honesty, being divine in
conjunction, but (divided from one another) are most abominable things) would
they I say with their Janus faces, think they can worship God, so long as they
hate, and prove false to their neighbor, whom they may plunder in love, and
persecute their body to save their souls? Who observes not that those men who
thus stray from the Rules of heavenly wisdom, precipitate themselves into
devious enormitie, and caliginous observations? such spirits being willing to
be found anywhere than where they may observe Christian duties. Devotion,
Temperance, Christian Charity, and other virtues, are not now accounted of in
the souls of such dissolute Liberties; as if the bare reputation of being
devout, might draw upon it some suspicion of weakness: yea, how many now adays
are troubled, that nature has not made them impudent enough to shake off the
sting of a good conscience, as if hell were no other then in picture with them?

Nor could it otherwise be that so many uncollected spirits now a days [as if
they would frame the whole work of Religion to their own humor] should make it
their gloty to act all against the hair, to oppose the most sound opinions, and
to give the lie even to heaven it self; yea as if they were so many Archimedes,
who seek for a place out of the world to set foot in, of purpose to turn the
world topsie turvey; it would not be that so many hideous monsters of heresies,
of impiety and Atheism, should so uncontrolably throw forth Blasphemies against
Religion,

And does not Religion, and the glory of God herein suffer diminution? does not
our Nation labor under general convulsions? Has it not been wasted through
unheard of lacerations? Is it not (I say) through the terrible and monstrous
spreadings of Atheism, and self-willed opinions under which the Church of God
now laboreth, and the oppressive sighs of a mourning people are almoost tired
out with tedious disappointments?

Surely, he that sees the Church of God [once glorious, and triumphing] to be
now so full of rubbish and desormity; he that sees her now complaining, bedewed
with tears, sitting in the dust, and almost drowned in cares and sorrows, must
needs cry out with the Prophet ( Lam. 1.1.) How does the City sit solitary,
that was full of people! how is she become as a widow! she that was great among
the Nations, and Princess among the Provinces, how is she become tributary?

All that is just, prudent, and moderate, now tastes too much of common; other
paths must be found to heaven, new ways must be cut out from God under the
mould of our own Fancy, to make him known unto us; every one thinking that
opinion most probable which he has taken upon byasse of his own understanding.

And hence is it that so often we court a fancy or body of smoke, thinking to
entertain a Truth having much of affectation, but least of effect, since we tie
our selves to a rotten branch, in stead of adhering to the body of the Tree.
Hence is it that we see so many in the seemings of affected Piety, who so well
act all countenances, as if with such merchandise Paradise were to be
purchased, being yet in heart like those pearls which in stead of a solid body
have nothing but the husk.

And is it not from this that so many take devotion as a slight pastime? others
but as a slight complement, that some bend that way for complacency of humors;
others for vainglory, yea, too many are thereto transported for some slender
cloak of liberty, and certain accommodations of their proper interest,
expressing an unseemly devotion of Apish tricks, which consist in a certain
light, and childish imitation of countenances and gestures without any solidity
in the interior?

Oprodigy! now adays to see so many, who are only bold to do ill, but in
undertakings made for God and his truth, have hearts of wax, and souls
trembling like leaves under the breath of winds! As there is almost nothing so
pitiful as a Prince disarmed (who serves only as a But to reproaches, and a
sport to insolency) so what Rock would not be mollified among so many direful
objects? what eye office would not melt among so many spectacles of sadness, to
behold God disroabed of his Honor, his Truths, his Ordinances, by those who
being drowned in the inundation of impleties, follow him by a muddy search,
rather then by a clear acquist?

Is not this to betray Religion, which of it self, is fair and glorious? And do
we not hereby give occasion to exorbitant souls, to justify their sins by our
evil deportments, who think that by depainting vice with a coal in another,
they make themselves as white as snow? what need we thus go about to entertain
illgrounded fantasies? and as sorceresses darken the glorious eye of the day
with their charms to cloud our faith by renouncing the light of truth, by
embracing the dusky vapors of our own inventions?

Are not the Truths of God hitherto held forth unto us sufficient? Why then [by
disentombing those Heresies, which were long since enterred] do we draw on us
the Character of Infidels, which will at last serve us to no other purpose but
to reproach us in the eternity of our pains with the exorbitance of our infamy!

They who adulterate metals, and poison the sources of lively fountains, do
less hurt then those who use their own interest for Text, their ignorance for
gloss, and their passion for commentary. Neither do those who desire to
establish false things, gain ought else upon the credulity of humane spirits,
but to make Truth to be the more doubted. For as ill habites are easily made to
slide into the hearts of children, by imitation of parents, or corruption of
evil company; so error illaqueates some men, and opinion sets the complexion
upon the procedures of the most.

And what is this but to oppose the shadow to the light, and a lie to the
truth? Nay, do we not herein set up Reason as Judge, and resolve our Faith into
Reason? [an error of too many in these days.] Do we not give vice the color
of virtue, and keep truth in Iron chains? yea, which is worse, imitate the
sorcerers who employ the Bible to fortify their enchantments?

Experience has of late too sadly told us, that there is nothing which so much
tempts Curiosity, as Religion from whence it comes, that (as Jonah's ship)
every one seems to call upon his own God; that the figure so much encroacheth
upon the body, and that (like men smitten with blindness) we are led into
Samaria, in stead of going to Dothan, 2 King. 6.19.

But where we see any thus pretend to have new instincts toward discoveries,
above and beyond Scripture, let us with the Apostle ( Col. 2.18, 19.) make it a
mark of seducers, to intrude into things they have not seen; and however in
the esteem of some they are as eminent as Apostles, or an Angel of God, yet if
they once throw aside this glass, introducing new and strange Doctrines (though
under great humility and shows of love) if they go about to cause divisions, if
they forsake Ordinances, vilify Ministers, and the old way of holy walking
with God, we are bound not to receive, but to avoid them, least we be deceived
(as Adam was) and lose that knowledge of God which once we had.

Alas! why should we thus betray the glory of God? why do we thus batter his
inheritance? Are not our continued divisions the cause that the ways to Sion
do mourn, that her Priests sigh, and she is afflicted, that all her beauty is
departed? her princes are become like Hearts that find no pasture, and are gone
without strength before the pursuer, Lament. 1.4.6. Have not our breaches been
the inrode of so many licentious enormities? Is it not from the fruitful mother
of dissentions, that so many impieties and the Authors thereof have increast
amongst us, and though not acted by command, yet tolerated by connivance?

What is it ^he that has so much disobliged the desires, and frustrated the
expectations of all men? How comes it that their minds are dejected, and their
virtues disheartened? whence comes it that the Magistracy is so vilipended, the
Ministry contemned, and all things seem perverted? was it not by the too
furious marchings of those Jehu's, who at first made way to their ambitious
expectations by all designs [either violent or fradulent] and whose best
lustures have since proved but a foil to Religion, that piety languisheth,
Religion faints, that charity is accounted scandalous and superstitious; that
blasphemy assumes the uncontroled liberty of venting, and that the beauty of
Churches is so disgraced and sullied by sacrilegious hands?

Faelices nimium bona si sua norint! How happy had we been, had we learned
rather to live than to dispute? had the waters of strife, and the floods of
contention been dried up, how soon had that Dove with silver wings appeared
amongst us? Had that charity which is only infused into us by the spirit of
God, but suffocated those super-seminated Tares of contentions, how soon would
it have cut off the occasions of those inhumane strivings? neither would that
black spirit of the Abyss have drawn men even from the Altar, to run to the
sword, which they indifferently thrust into the bosom of the nearest Relations;
after which followed so many cries and lamentations, with such images of death
still flying before our eyes, as were able to wound the heart with compassion,
yea to move the most unnatural rage.

Hence it is, that the godly evaporate into sighs, and the convulsed world
seems to mourn, with the sad sense and apprehension of approaching judgment.
And surely he that now revels it in greatness, he that sits idle amidst the
complaints and mourning of the Church, must needs be infuscated with the sooty
vapors of an insensible heart. Yea, hard are those ears which bow not to the
sad relation of our long bleeding miseries; and hirder those eyes which can
behold them without the moist testimonies of sorrow. The Land grieveth for many
horrid sins; and may we not justly feat, least Providence [so often provoked by
our renewed trespasses] will cast us out as a prey to our enemies, or that the
Sun of righteousness may go down in our days?

It were to enter into a vast Labyrinth of discourses and reasons to represent
at this time those various blasts of pernicious doctrine, exagitated by
factious whirlewinds, since we may behold on the stage of the Church such a
horrible sphere of Monsters, and Tempests, bloody Cornets, and Arms of fire [as
the mali genii of seducing spirits] cherishing so formidable a growth, to abate
our hopes, and undermine our happiness.

The highest superspection and vigilance being therefore now more then ever
requisite to preserve that truth which God has espoused to himself, and which
we find the devil in all Ages to have raised instruments to disparage,
discountenance and oppose, yea (if possbly) to overthrow, in the rooting out
of the Ministry, and Professors thereof, as being a spiritual Engine to batter
down his Kingdom.

Neither do the present contrivances of those (who I fear have long deceived
the world with a laborious Hypocrisy, since under the veil of Religion are
concealed such flagitious and dangerous Tenants) seem to happen by humane
designment, but as Cockatrise eggs, long since hatching by that old serpent,
whose kingdom drawing to an end, and having but a short time to reign, there is
hopes these spirits and Emissaries (who resemble the wooden Dove of Archytas
the Philosopher, which flew by engines, whilst they had their operation, and
soared in the air, but so soon as they ceased, it trailed the wing on the
earth) will not long infest the air with their fulliginous breath.

And that God [who draws light out of the bosom of darkness, and oftentimes
suffers not things violent to be long lastin:] will (after we have profited
by the experience of our evils) disperse those amazing tumults, and prevent the
growth of that Atheism which everywhere abounds, and threatens ruin to his
ways, as if some hidden poison had envaded the land.

All humane affairs are then only seated in the best station of felicity, when
they rejoice in concord, piety, and unity of Religion, it being an ill kind of
solace for one man to compute his happiness by the increase of another grief.
And most miserable are they of all men, who cannot be happy but by the miseries
of another. To what purpose is it to hold flowers to the nostrils, when the
body is parched and wasted with a violent fever?

Heat (in the opinion of some) does more hurt then the Northwind; and stony
spirits are not always the most efficacious. And who sees not that our
Protestant dissentions have ever been the cause of our adversaries rejoycings?

As the sweetest influences are those which cause the sweetest effects in total
nature; and not sparkling Flames, but invisible heats usually melt hard metal;
so who sees not that silence and peace (which are the two mansions of a good
conscience) are of much more worth, then all the questions which enkindle
divisions? the best doctrine being that which best knows how to cement up
concord.

But it has been our unhappiness of late that in the great vicissitude of
things, evil minds have too often intervened, which vitiated the Councels,
retarded the endeavors, and diverted the intentions of such who had a righter
aim toward the advancement of the truth, then such as were hurried into arms
by a blind violence of spirit [not so much for love of justice as greediness of
revenge] and under the vail of Religion, labored to hide flagitious and
damnable excessus.

[Caesari. in Dialog.] Caesarius (a Geeek Author) says, that Millstones having
no corn to grind, strike fire one on another. And has not the want of
employment, with particular reflections on gain, profit, and preferment,
interposed dissentions not only among the nearest friends, but often times
among the Religious?

Against the unnaturalness whereof, we find an eminent example in the
magnanimity of David, who could scarce be induced to a just resistance of his
son Absalom, though forcing his way unto his Fathers Throne through blood and
rapine, until Joab had dissipated that languidnesse of his gentle mind. And
so detestable an undertaking was it held in those who were brethren by the
bonds of Nature and Religion, to sorfeit all civil respects to the rage of war,
as that (if we take a review of the old Testament) we shall find though there
were many and bitter discords, many tumults, many wars, yet they were ever
against those who had collapsed into foul and apparent idolatry, and the
worship of the Gentiles.

Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 3.8. (in whose heart God had locked up the Maxims of the
best Policy in the world) invires us to be all of one mind, to love as
brethren, to be pitiful and courteous. And we find our Savior in the Prophet
Isaiah ( Isa. 11.1.) to be called a Rod, and a Branch, to correct some, and to
comfort others, but is never termed a sword to kill and destroy. Oh that the
thoughts hereof would cut off all further occasions of inhumane strivings! did
our Savior after he had triumphed over death salute his disciples with the
sweet and amiable name of peace? Did the Apostles afterward beautify the
entrance of their Epistles with it? Is it with this that the Angels rejoice,
and just men are delighted? And is it this only which transmits comfort to the
weak, ease to the troubled, upon which all wishes are bent, in which all people
are blessed? and must it not needs be an object full of bitter anguish to see a
Nation worried to ruin by fraternal discords, which Christ has espoused by a
particular election to himself? What does it advantage disconsolate man, to be
freed from the expectations of a greedy enemy, by being rifled and impoverished
by those of his own Nation?

If a watchful eye abides in heaven ever active, never weary, but perpetually
contemplates the deeds of men, and equally dispenses to everyone his
deservings [and who sees not that Gods eye is as quicksighted in the discerning
of hearts, as his hand is weighty in the chastisements of crimes?] surely it is
to feared that the Iron hand of provoked justice will fall heavy on contentious
souls, who pursued others into disorder; since where Christ is banished, and
love finds no habitation, where (as in the war Constantius raised against
Magnentius) the Cross is opposed [in Arms] against the Cross, where
Christians (forgetful of their covenant, forgetful of their name, and unmindful
of their Relations) thus rage, one against another, there is either no
Government, or such as borders upon ruin.

It is observed in History for many Ages, that the wounds from heaven have on
all sides fallen on those who have sought to cast the Apple of discord into the
house of God; the wind blown from their mouth has returned on their heads,
since it is fit iniquity should first kill it self with its own poison;
discords may for a time (indeed) increase with a prodigious fertility, and
those thrones which are established upon wickedness, and cemented with blood,
may for a time subsist with wickedness (God having appointed rods of his fury
for our chastisement) but have they not at last been tortured themselves with
those pains and furies which they raised against others? Had it not been better
they had put their hand; on Thorns then on the Pearls of a Diadem?

God sometimes (indeed) permits darkness to execute its power upon the light,
and the impious to persecute the just (who every day drown a part of their life
in their Tears) to render them the more glorious by their sufferings; but that
at last he takes their cause in hand, and overwhelms all humane policy in a
crudity of undigested designs, let a Julian witness, whose greatest design
against Christian Religion, being the destroying of Learning, and the
subsistence of the Ministry, was blasted from heaven in the midst of his
blasphemy.

And though men of the same temper, may not meet with the like end, whom God
oftentimes makes to die slowly by some strange malady, and more lingering
strokes, rendering them the spectators of their own dishonor, and their own
funerals [as we see in Herod, Tiberius, and others] yet how suddenly have we
seen many great ones of the world (luxuriating in their Glories, and made
wanton by felicity) dismantled of them both? how often does the Cypress
disappoint the Laurel, and an inconcocted success of fortune obstruct all the
glories of the conqueror, to whom nothing was once thought wanting but
immortality?

How many Conquerours have we seen to stand over the ruins of the oppressed
(being themselves wasted by the expense of blood and strength) who have been
often nearer their Tombs, then their Triumphs, their Funerals, then their
Palms? And (when contemplating the principal object of their delight) have they
sound any thing to entertain their curiosity, but a forced and unpleasant
laughter?

So hard is it to row in the stream of the world, where God conducts not the
vessel, whose just anger always follows sinners at the heels, only waits
until the offering be fat to sacrifice it. When God intends to abandon man for
his demerits, and to sacrifice him to his Justice, he leaves him to himself,
and to the wishes of his own heart; he permits him to satiate ambition or
revenge; to entangle himself under some great design under the pretense of
honor and Justice, and (although he be vicious) gives him successes, and
incomparable prosperities, that puff up his heart, and make him presume upon
his own conduct; he takes from him the true taste of divine things, and (if he
have any faithful Counselors) slatterers, and enchanters possess their place.
If any evil affright him, or any scourge from heaven overwhelm him, he is made
believe it is but a natural thing, until at last he be put upon the Pinnacle of
his highest dignities, and the most magnificent negotiations, which precipitate
him into Atheism, and a reprobate sense, which is the last step that one makes
to enter into hell.

I should not have so much digressed on this subject, but that some hidden
poison seems of late to have infected many, and engaged them in blind and
unexpected dissentions concerning that great question of propriety [so much
controverted throughout the world] the which (as Archesilaus has long sythence
held forth) is a business so perplexed, as never to be determined, being the
confusion of things and fortunes, necessarily engendring continually jars and
endless disagreements; and that a cruel preparation of mind to revenge, an
implacable disposition, a barbarous lust to rebel, a secret speculation of
Lordly Dominion, and other such causes have too plainly appeared in those who
consider not that it is more easy to raise troubles, then to moderate them.

Neither (indeed) are any way acquainted with the conversation of those, who at
the Nativity of our blessed Savior sang Anthems of Peace, which is the
greatest and most excellent gift of the divine indulgence, and from which
flows the opulency of Kingdoms, the accumulation of all temporal blessings,
and the most active vigor of all functions in the body Politic. Whereas on the
contrary, where concord is dissipated, and the Alarms of war besiege men's ears
(whose ingresse is troublesome, the progress doubtful, and the egresse for the
most part deplorable) there presently insueth a convulsion, and direful decay
of all the members; and audacity (finding it self disengaged from the penalties
of the Laws) runs headlong into all variety of mischief.

And hence is it, that the streats are often times not only covered with dead
bodies, and the little children sighing out their last breath upon the bleeding
carcasses of deceasing Parents, that strangers possess the heritages, and
enrich themselves with the spoils of the ruined and oppressed, but that the
Temples have been handled as the object of all reproaches, and those vessels of
glory which served for the Ministry of the Lord, have been taken away by
impiated hands; that the most sacred things are violenced, and the most
profane licenced, the nocent and innocent are involved in the expectation of a
sad and promiscuous Catastrophe.

Surely as he would be too much in love with life, to be willing to spare, and
keep it in the loss of the true Religion, so must he deeds be sorry that ever
he entered into the world, when he considers the time, to which God had reserved
his Age, to see the disasters and desolation of a place or people abandoned to
the fury of Rapinous hands, and the profanation of the impious, to see
ravenous Harpys [fatted with humane ruines] to rush into those well feathered
Nests which they built not; to see whole Families loaded with injuries, and the
props of buildings to tremble with loud blasphemies, yea to behold such fatal
Comets which shall portend nothing but fire and sword to Church and State.

What an Edict do we find published by an Apostle invested with Thunder, and
lightning? 1 Cor. 6.6. And were he sent again into the world by Providence,
what would he imagine, who then wanted patience to see a controversy [about a
field perhaps, or a house] if he should now behold those that claim the title
of the faithful, to oppose not a house or City one against another, but even
strive to precipitate whole Provinces, yea a Nation into Rapes, disorders, and
privileged Plunders? He that would not suffer one brother to go to law with
another, but rather to suffer wrong and sustain fraud, would he have
countenanced such inhumane spectacles, with a Declatation of allowance, as now
appear visible in the face of this Age?

And if our Savior enjoined a removal of all scandals from his Kingdom,
dooming the Authors thereof to have a Millstone hanged about their Necks, and
their bodies cast into the Sea, what will become of those who through their own
ambitious ends [as if God were bound to define all things according to their
sense, and will] fall into division among themselves, withdraw from each other,
and censure one another? Woe, and alas! will brethren forgetful of their
Covenant, forgetful of their Name, and unmindfull of their Relations, thus
rage, contemn, yea destroy those which they ought not to hate!

Will not the people, seeing so many Religions held forth (as they think) and
so many several ways and minds, think it is as good be of none, as adventure
among so many? What just occasion of offense will hereby be given to the
ignorant, to the profane, and such as are yet unsettled in their judgment,
when (either through pride, or petulancy they shall see men change their
opinions which a while ago they seemed to be so zealous for? does not this make
them think that the rest may be as uncertain as those?

Surely, its an extreme rage and furious despair which thus expects nothing but
the height of evils for its Remedy; and how great a scandal the Lives of such
Professors will at last throw upon the Church of God, I wish the sad experience
of the times may not too plainly manifest; many (no doubt) having been kept off
from the practice, and approving of a godly life, through the unhappy
differences among our selves.

But that which is the soul of misfortune, is the great contempt of that high
Calling, for which the Apostle thought none sufficient. It is not denied but
that God can make his Oracles speak without a voice [and Oh what a great thing
is nothing in the hands of God, who can teach without a School, and in a moment
change ignorants into Doctors and Pesants into Prophets!] But what? shall we
neglect the ordinary means appointed in his word to lead us to him? What can we
expect from a Physician that discourses of war, or a bare Scholar treating of
the secret designs of Princes? No more may we look for from those late
Chaplains of Satan's ordering, who pretend good to do mischief, and act his part
in the attire of an Angel.

The spirit also is promised to lead us into all truth, but not by fanatic
Enthusiasmas. The spirit of God speaks to us in and by [but not besides, or
beyond] the Scripture; to hold therefore extraordinary Revelations [whereby
things were formerly made known to the Prophets] or to pretend to immediate
inspirations without the word, is a delusion as monstrous as detestable, and
ought to be rejected as an instrument of Satan, 2 Thessalonians. 2.2. and as the usual
pretenses of Impostors, against whose fanatical conceits, God has sufficiently
forewarned us, 1 John 4.1, Galathians 1.8.

The Scripture being written for our learning, we are commanded there to
search, as the Conduit of Life and power of God unto salvation. Of whom we are
not taught to enquite at the Oracles of our lusts and Fantasies, nor to be led
by opinions of our own framing. And surely the punishment of the
Mongrel-blasphemer, Levit. 24. should make all conscionable men afraid how they
adventure this way, to make bold with Gods sacred Name, least perchance (like
the sons of Sceva) they meet with some mad devils to whip them from their
presumptious folly.

And yet [to the sad reproach of a sinful Nation, may it be spoken] none are
now adays more cried up, then such as were never brought up in the Schools of
the Prophets, nor lawfully ordained to the Ministry, which is now so commonly
slandered by our [Jesuited] Sectaries, telling the people that their Priests
have deluded them, that they have falsified the word [which, alas! they
themselves have too foully wrested] yea some of them have been pleased to call
the greatest cheat could be put upon Christians.

But let the manifest punishment from heaven upon Vzziah serve (among many
other instances which might be produced) as an example of terror; to such
secular Powers, as will incroah upon Ministry, and break the barriers that
Providence has established, for the differencing of the spiritual and temporal
authority. Neither let the privilege of Times (though the bars of impudence
seem broken down) be made a color to excuse any from Sacrilegious boldness,
who mingle mysteriously divine reasons with their own humane Fancies, which as
Queen, and Governess ought to be chief Ruler, and not suffragant, in so sacred
and holy a Subject.

Besides, is it not an unseemly thing to see the sacred volume of our
Belief-mysteries, tossed up and down, and played withal in every shop, or
kitching? and that those divine Oracles which (heretofore) have been accounted
Mysteries, should be thus abused, by such as go about sowing of schism, setting
of Errors, and spreading of faction. Surely, so serious and venerable a study,
should not thus tumultuarily be discussed, Gods word being a History
religiously to be adored, awfully feared, and not fabulously reported.

The Jews and Mahometans, and almost all Nations, are with reverence wedded
unto the bare language wherein their Religion had originally been conceived;
all change and translation having been directly forbidden. And one of our
Grecian Historians, does (not without appearance of reason) accuse his Age, for
so much as the secrets of Christrain Religion were so far dispensed in
public, as that every man might at his pleasure dispute of it, and at random
vent his opinion of the same.

And certainly it should be a great shame to us, who by the unspeakable mercy
of God enjoy the pure, and sacred Mysteries of piety, to suffer the same to be
profaned by an erratical and circumforaneous motion, in the mouths of ignorant
and popular people, seeing the very Gentiles interdicted Socrates, Plato, and
the wisest among them, to meddle, enquire, or speak of things committed to the
Priests of Delphos; yea did flatly inhibite among themselves the use of the
Name of their god in all their vulgar and familiar discourses.

It was not long since accouned a great fault for Ministers to intermeddle with
lay-Offices; yet how many of Jeroboams Priests have we now started up among us
who continue in the civil Calling, yet think themselves; able to charge that of
the Ministry, not considering that there are no sins, which God does punish
more rigorously, nor speedily, then those which are committed, against devotion
and piety.

How suddenly did that King find a Leprosy rise from the high Priests? Yea
how was Ely the chief Priest buried in the ruins of his own house, for the
sacrilege of his children, without any consideration of those long servies
which he had performed at the Tabernacle! We find our Savior also not to take
up the scourge against naughty Judges, Usurers, etc. but drives out the buyers
and sellers of the Temple, Joh. 2. as if to commit a sin against Gods Altar,
the remedy would grow desperate; and should therefore warn us, as to keep our
selves from Simonies, from Plunders, and irrevetence in Churches, so from
abusing the Ordinances, and worship of God, without a warrantable Call; seeing
he can have no excuse, who makes his Judge his witness.

He that thus builds without God, does but demolish; and whosoever thinks this
way to make any great increase, shall find nothing but sterility. And may not
the voice of God hence cry aloud unto us in his Temple, Can my soul participate
of your counsels, or my glory come into your company, since whilst you erect
Altars to me, you offer your vows to your own lusts? you not sacrifice, but
sin, you bend your knees but not your hearts; Deceive not the world, neither
make false boastings in my worship, except you manacle your own passions, and
tame your deceitful minds.

We have of late (indeed) gladly beheld the devout multitude crouding the
Churches to pour fourth their wishes. How often have we seen the Religious
prostrate in the Sanctuary, imploring the aid of heaven by frequent sighs, and
importuning divine providence with unwearied prayers? But alas! may not God say
unto us [when we are even partaking of his sacred mysteries] how has the blood
of many miserable men been shed, for whom I have shed my blood? whilst you cry
to me, do not thousands, of Orphans and widows cry to behold the dead
carcasses of their husbands and parents? you seem to kiss my head, but kick at
my members; you flatter me with your Fastings, but persecute me with Arms. Your
swords reak with the blood of one another; you present your selves suppliants
before me, but raise contentions abroad. You have the voice of Jacob, but the
hands of Esau; yea, whilst you smell of incense, it is by your means that
whole Towns are turned into smoke.

And I wish it may never be laid to the charge of any of their last account,
who should have composed the Nation when it was disunited with discords, and
endeavored to reconcile the irregular tumults of the Church, that they have
abandoned themselves to the infamous Councils of Machiavel, and their own
self-interests; this being not that wisdom which (to use the words of the
Apostle) descends from above, but is carnal, sensual and devilish.

Sythence from hence proceeds the dulling of that two-edged sword, which
divides between the bones, and the marrow, and by the power whereof
blasphemies, sacriledges, heresies, and impieties would have vanished, and all
have been scattered; Laws would not have been silent among swords, the honor
and worship of God so much contemned, the hypocrites have the uncontrolled
liberty of speaking, poor misled and seduced souls would not have been made
believe they sin in not traducing the Ministry and their Calling, as a humane
invention, merely introduced to uphold carnal interest, nor Wolves so
dangerously have infected the Tents of the shepherds.

Is not this to be wise without God? And does it not hence also happen that in
stead of profiting in the School of Christ, and in the Doctrine of so good a
Master, we are bold only for the world, and timorous in the affairs of God? If
a falsehood be to be averred, if a revenge be to be put forward [even to the
effusion of blood] If lawful Powers be to be resisted; if laws both divine and
humane be to be spoken against, there wants neither boldness nor confidence;
but (though all men are naturally stirred up with the resentment of a Divinity)
yet emulation does so often mingle it self with Religion, as that some seek
their own glory in lifting up that of the Divinity, and (contray to the saying
of the eternal wisdom it self) accord the devil of proper interest with the
Maxims of Jesus, by serving two Masters.

And does it not proceed from the false and scandalous lives of such
professors, that the minds of pious people are offended, that the sad harmony
of our enemies jubilations is? See how they disagree and destroy one another!
and the scoffing tongues of the notoriously wicked are sharpened against our
Religion; that we are made gazing stocks to others, and are become formidable
to our selves; whereas, would we but make God to march in the head of our
affairs, who is the sourse of all good successes, how soon would Religion
deface the spots which so easily slide into our lives!

Surely either the Religion we profess accuses our errors, or else we the
Professors accuse our Religion. Where Christ is banished, Love finds no
habitation; and needs must there be a heap of gross impieties, where there is
an oblivion of the greatest mercies; needs must our Errors turn to heresies,
when they are practiced by design, and obstinacy, and overtake us not by
surprise, but possess us with a resolute opinion against the decisions of the
Church. Are not these spots in our Feasts, seeming rather to be the actings of
men exiled from God, and lawless in the world, and of such as (through the
beat of a mistaken zeal) think to meet Jesus among the engagements and pursuit
of worldly interests, who is only to be found in the Temple, in his
Ordinances, and the communion of his Saints?

Here only is the Sanctuary of rest, where wearied souls may lay their heads;
here shall we be sure to meet with comfortable embraces, and from his mouth
(whose Laws are established upon foundations stronger then the Pillars of
heaven, and earth) shall we receive the excellent Promises, and clearest
Revelations of eternity. And when men have once left this Truth [their only
quiet home] they will take up their lodging [all errors being near of kin]
under any root or opinion which has the least shadow of probability; such an
ignorant zeal being too blind to go right, and too active to stand still, and
like rasae tabulae or unsealed wax, ready to take any impression.

And however some may possibly pretend holiness toward God, for the setting up
of their Ensings as signs in the midst of Gods Sanctuary, and for the breaking
down at once the carved work thereof with axes and hammers, Psalm. 74.4, 6. and
at last root up all that they may take the Houses of God into their own
possession, and like brutish doegs, fall upon Gods Priests, that they may have
the greatest share in the plundering of their means; yet surely, this their
pretended goodness seems but as the morning cloud, and as the early dew will
pass a-away, Hos. 6.4. seeing the staves of Beauty are hereby broken in
pieces, and the entire bands of Christian Truth, Order, and Peace, quite cut
asunder, even to the making shipwreck of faith and a good conscience, and the
extreme hazard of our immortal souls.

O let us not thus be flattered into a security of our excesses, since the
whole head is sick, the whole heart is heavy, and nothing is safe, nothing is
pleasant among such calamities, where the worst of evils is the rejoicing, and
where the eyes of Truth have been of late put out by the dust and rubbish which
has been made through the fall of so great and ancient a Fabric!

And who ere they be that strive against the peaceable wishes of the Church, by
railing at, reviling, and undermining the pillars thereof, by reproaching their
persons, decrying their office, by abating and exclaiming against their
maintenance, by supporting and countenancing Errors and heresies, before their
wholesomer Doctrine; and whereby to ruin them and their Religion (by making a
wide gap for blasphemy, Atheism and profaneness) let them also take heed,
least some grievous hand fall upon them from heaven; and that (meeting with
unhappy events in all their undertakings) their life becomes not troublesome,
and their death not doubtful.

If we consult with history, how various are the examples on either hand, we
shall not only find a busy Achitophel paid the just wages of his Traitorous
Counsels with an infamous halter; We shall not only find Alexander (who
thrust his soldiers into Battles beyond the progress of the Sun, and the
limits of the Sea) to perish by poison from his own Domestics; neither
Hannibal alone (who so long weaved the inextricable web of war) to shorten the
date of his contempts with voluntary poison; but surely all those who thus
think to please themselves in an ill-rectified devotion and formal profession,
will prove no other than barren Trees, which make a great noise, and never
bear Fruit. And how sad will their account be, who thus prick their fingers
whilst they are gathering of Roses? How sad will it be with us, when we shall
[for thus betraying the most holy things] curse the womb that bare us, and the
breasts that gave us suck; the Church that Christened us, and the Minister that
Catechized us; and when we shall beshrew the day that ever we heard a good
Sermon? Alas that our misery should be heightened from our means of being once
happy! That we should bewail our very knowledge, and repent us even of our
Grace!

O how will they then blush, when that ( Jer. 23.24.) God (who fills heaven and
earth) shall have a Candle in every man's bosom [even their own consciences] who
strive to make their sins look virtuously, by making them well-favoured, who
embrace schism under the notion of Truth, and too often take complexion for
Religion? will it not be easier for the Gentiles which know not God, than such
as thus worship him? O strange delusion to take the greatest vice for the
greatest virtue! all the outside of our godliness this way rendering us but
the worse before God!

Heresy [the key of Atheism] may for a time (indeed) make arrows of any wood,
to hit the marks of their interest, and like a fawning servant, be ever ready
to observe his Masters will in such ill offices wherein his own advantage
concurreth: Though all at last will be consumed like Abortives in their birth,
and no otherwise stead them than as Woods and Forests shelter Thieves, only to
cover their crimes.

Since he that this way thinks to pacify Divine Majesty, insenseth it; He that
with Saul offers up the golden mountains of impiety and injustice, does but
offer to God the Sacrifices of disobedience, which defile rather then adorn the
Altats of God, seeing they only garnish the ambition of man. But as peaceable
dispositions sometimes surfeit of rest, because the natural inclination to
change, makes felicity it self to become tedious; so troublesome heads always
account quietness their greatest enemy, no way considering that our approach
to God ought to be a fixed, a purposed and settled Action, to which our heart
should be ever so solemnly adjoined; neither ought he to be commixed with any
of our Actions but with an awful reverence, and attention full of horror and
respect.

And though there are many Endyminions to be found who embrace the Moon, whose
hearts are ever and anon wheeling about in endless Labyrinths, surchaged with
changeable fancies, and whose spirits are perpetually attended with
turbulencies, and gnawn with the itch of novelty; yet let all our ends and
endeavors be recollected in God as beams in the Sun.

It is the nature of Quicksilver to tremble up and down, and never leaves
until it has found gold wherewith to mingle; so the heart of man boundeth and
leapeth here and there in all its troubles and disturbances, there being
nothing but ebbs and floods, until such time as it is united to its Creator
(the Temple of all repose.) And let all such know who seem to catch the world
with a hook, who rejoice in their own crime as if it were a virtue, and make
Sacrifices with the instruments of mischief, who judge of happiness by the
multitude of Preys, and acknowledge no other God but their good fortune, that
however they think to prosper in their own imaginations, and worldly affairs,
being yet inwardly disunited from the eternal wisdom of God, they are no other
than Icarusses who seek to counterfeit Birds with waxen wings; the least ray
proceeding from the throne of heaven, being able to burn them, and make their
height serve to no other use than to render their fall the more remarkable; or
like the golden precipices of Heliogabalus which were not devised but to make
his ruin the more memorable.

It is said, the very seathers of the Eagle are so imperious that they will not
mix with the Plumage of other Birds, without consuming them; and shall we think
to mingle God, who is an incomprehensible wisdom, a riches inexhaustible, and a
purity infinite, with our feeble pretension, which have frenzy for beginnins,
misery for inheritance, and impurity for ornament?

If we are not to appropriate to our selves sacred Gold nor Silver, neither to
transfer to profane uses what has been dedicated to God (as we find
expressed both in Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws) how do we offend God (who has
granted us a Spirit of Gold, yea (I may say) a heart of Gold, when he washed
and regenerated us by the spirit of Baptism) when we therewith mingle the weak
fancies of our own brain! And how far are we from rendering to God what is due
to him, when we make use of our heart as a vessel of abomination, fraughting
it with the Chimeraes of our fond imaginations, and planting nothing therein,
but the petty interests of our own glory, and ambitious humors, as an Altar
whereon we daily present the best part of our sacrifice!

We find that the worst of Tyrants, Mezentius could find no greater cruelty on
earth then to tie a dead body to a living; and shall we fasten thoughts of our
dead and languishing minds with God who is nothing but life and truth? Surely,
its high time for us to leave the giddy fancies of the world, to behold
Beauties and lights of divine glory, unless we mean to Register our defects in
the Calander of eternity. Shall we prescribe limits to the Almighty? shall we
thus lay continual siege unto his power by our own weak reasons [no better then
dreams, or vanity?] or shall we subject the Idea's of him who has made both us
and our knowledge, to the vain and weak appearances of our understanding?

Quid juvat hoc?
Ocurvae in terris animae and calestium inanes!
What do we herein less, than amuse the curiosity of our mind, by seeking to
feed it with gnawing the raw bones of our own inventions?

Let us no longer then make war against heaven, nor detract from Gods glory,
by preferring our own Fancies to his prejudice. Religion (like the Universe,
all the members whereof mutually love and embrace) is united and collected
within it self; how ought we then to take heed of dis-joynting it through
Schism, and the disordinate love of our own wild and wavering conceits, which
carry with them so much of infidelity, of contempt of God, yea of down right
Atheism! Yea which ordinarily makes our best seeming performances, the more
detestable by insinuating with such subtilties, and pretexts of holiness, as if
it were most devout, this being not only a simple Tyranny, but a sacrilege, and
(through its exorbitance) descends to the worst of deformities!

Surely, if through our weakness we once corrupt and adulterate the essence of
Truth, Oh into what a point of presumptuous insolency will not our blindness
carry us? How shall we sooth our selves into some illumination, which will
really prove but an egregious dotage? and thereby so involve our selves in a
mist, and grope in the dark, as if Truth were gotten into some dungeon, which
our shallow apprehensions could not fathom.

Its but vain to implore Gods power in a bad cause. Man ought to have an
unpolluted soul, and absolutely free from all vicious passions (at least wise)
in that moment he addresseth himself unto him; otherwise we our selves present
him the rods to whip us withal; and in stead of redressing our fault, we
redouble the same, by presenting him with such, affections as are fraught with
sin and irreverence, to whom only we should sue for grace and forgiveness.

If we pretend good, to do mischief, and act the devils part in the attire of
an Angel, what do we other then foster the crime and the Judge in one and the
same Mansion?

And what is this but to lend nothing to devotion, but what might flatter our
Passions, and even make that Religion to shroud and foster our vices, which it
was ordained to root out? Surely he that thus calls God for his assistance,
while he is engulphed in sin, does but like the Thief which called Justice
for his aid, or those that produce Divine Providence in witness of a lie.

Let us no longer dare then to burn incense upon that Altar, to which we have
no lawful call; for which we find a good Prince [otherwise] to carry the
spots of his too much forwardness to his grave. Our heart being ruled, and our
soul commanded by faith, reason wills that we draw all other parts to the
service of God, according to their best power and faculty. Our sins, though
naturally tending downward as to their center, do (through the too much
preferring of our own inventions in Gods worship, before his holy
prescriptions) mount upwards by their cry; nothing but our sighs and prayers
being left us (as the best countersounds) to drown their noise, that God may
not hear them; and the pleading merits of our Savior, with the loved language
of his blood, being the best way to silence the loudness of their cry, and
divert the Judgment (otherwise) inevitably attending them.

FINIS.

