The RESOLUTIONS of the Private Soldiery of Col. Scroops Regiment of Horse
(now quartering at and near unto Salisbury) concerning their present Expedition
for the Service of IRELAND.
Wherein they Declare their Integrity and Faithfulness to the Solemn Engagement
of the Army made at New Market, and Triploe Heaths, June 5. 1647. and to that
end have chosen Agitators for their Respective Troops; Agreeing and Resolving
not to disband or divide, or suffer themselves to be disbanded or divided, till
the Freedoms of England be first settled, and the Rights of the Soldiery
obtained, according to the many Declarations and Remonstrances of the
Parliament and Army.

Directed and Presented to the Consideration of all the Soldiery of the
Nation, both of Field and Garrison.

THE Consideration of the great Preparations that are made for Ireland; And
understanding that we are by Lot assigned for that Service, has put us upon
serious Meditations for to find out such good Grounds and Principles as might
carry us on in that Service, which causes us in the First place to Consider of
the Ground of our Engagement in England, which was against all Tyranny and
Enslaving of the People of the Nation, whereof we are a Part: and to preserve
them from Destruction and Destructive Laws; as also the Restoring them to
their just Rights and Freedo^s: in the prosecution of which Engagement, many of
our dear Fellow Soldiers have lost their Lives; and many amongst us have
received many Wounds, and all of us have adventured our Lives, and undergone
much hardship; and it has pleased the Lord to bless us with* Victory, and
qu^stionless to this end, that we might perform the same: And upon this
Account, the Parliament and Officers of the Army have promised often unto the
People and Soldiery, That after the Victory, the People should have Freedom,
Peace, and Happiness Settled in the Nation, and that the Soldiery should have
Satisfaction; which has been often published both in Declarations and
Remonstrances in the name of the General and General Council of the Army, and
we Private Soldiers willingly assented thereunto; and to that end we have
endeavored to uphold your power, and to ^eat down all that did oppose you
herein* And thus for our parts we have kept close to our Engagement that you
might perform the same; but as yet we do n^^^e them performed neither to the
People nor to us as Soldiers; and yet you would have us to Engage to give you
^ower over an other Land before we have fulfilled our Engagement at Home in our
own Native Country. We have waited with long Patience, expecting that when you
had Power in your own hands, you would have been faithf^l to the Nation and to
us; but we find, the longer we wait, the more unreasonable your Desires are
toward us: We Appeal to any Rational men* whether th^s be just and equal, to
carry us into another Land before you have made good your Engagement at Home;
and that upon such slight terms, as if a man should owe a Servant Twenty
pounds, and then tell him he will give him Five pounds of the same, upon
Condition, that he will do another Service for him (which is greater) in
another place, and surnish himself for that Service with the money which he
receives. For who is at the greatest Charge in the setting forth of the
Service? Is nor the Two months pay we are to have as our Advance, a part of
that which is due unto us for the Service we have already done? and the Horses
we are to serve upon, are they not those which we have bought or must buy with
our own money? Have we left our Trades and Callings, spent the prime of our
Youth, exposed our Selves to so many Dangers, and many of us spent our Estates
to buy us Horse and Arms, and now to be thus dealt withal! and not only so,
but to be made a Reproach to the People, and to be accounted the falsest of men
by reason of your not fulfilling your Promises made to the People and us in
your Remonstrances and Declarations, and now to engage us to go out of the Land
before we see them fulfilled.

We thought also you would have bin so reasonable, as to consider our condition
by your own; For we know you cannot be ignorant of the dearth of Provision,
both for Man and Horse: Can any of you Quarter himself and horse one night in
an Inn, under four or five shillings? Your own Consciences will tell you that
you cannot: How then can we find our selves Horse, and Arms, and Provision both
for Man and Horse, at two shillings a day, but that we must of necessity
oppress the People where we come? And this is the way to make us a Reproach,
and to cause the People generally to hate us: We therefore entreat you to
consider of these things, and to be more reasonable in your Actings toward us,
which will be for your Honor and our Happiness.

Further, We desire that what has bin here declared, might not be understood,
as if it were our Desires to hinder or retard the Service of Ireland; For when
we shall see the Freedom and Liberty established in the Nation, for which we
did engage, and which has bin so often Promised in your several Remonstrances
and Declarations; As also such satisfaction for our selves as shall be
reasonable, we shall to the utmost of our Abilities engage our selves in the
Service of that Land, as we have done in this.

In the mean time, we are resolved (according to our Engagement) not to go out
of the Land, nor suffer our selves to be divided or disbanded, upon any
pretense whatsoever.

In these Lines lies the substance of our Desires and Resolutions, which we
humbly Present to your serious Considerations.

Subscribed by the whole Regiment, and Published by the Appointment of their
Agitators. Salisbury this First of May 1649.

