THE MEANS and METHOD OF HEALING IN THE CHVRCH. Set forth in a Sermon.

PREACHED Before the Right Honorable the House of Peers in Westminster Abbey,
April 30. 1660. being a Day of Solemn Humiliation to seek God for his Blessing
on the Counsels of the PARLIAMENT.

By EDWARD REYNOLDS, D. D. and Dean of Christ-Church.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Ratcliffe, for George Thomason at the Rose and Crown
in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

Nobilissimis, Honoratissimis, Amplissimis, DOMINIS, IN SUPERIORI DOMO
PARLIAMENTORUM Ardua Regni Negotia tractantibus, Concionem hanc coram ipsis
habitam, ipsorumque jussu PVBLICI JVRIS Factam, IN Summi Honoris humillimique
obsequii TESTIMONIVM, Dat, Dicat, Consecrat.

E. R.

2 CRON. 7. 13, 14. If I shut up Heaven that there be no Rain, or if I command
the Locusts to devour the Land, or if I send Pestilence among my people:

If my people, which are called by my Name, shall humble themselves, and pray,
and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways, then will I hear from
heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their Land.


THE words are a Gracious Promise made by the Lord unto Solomon after he had
dedicated the Temple by fasting and prayer; for though there be no mention of
Fasting, yet if we consult the time, we shall find that it was in the seventh
month, 2 Chronicles. 5. 3. and that the solemnity continued from the 8. to the 23.
day of that month, 2 Chronicles. 7* 9, 10. and the 10. day was by a Statute for
ever appointed to be a day wherein to afflict their souls, Levit. 16. 29.

The parts are three. 1. A Supposition of Judgments, verse. 13. where, by the
enumeration of Three, any others may Synechdochically be understood.

2. A Direction unto Duties: wherein are two things to be taken notice of. 1.
The Quality of the persons who are to perform them, My people called by my
Name. 2. A Specification of the Duties, which are these four, Humiliation,
Supplication, Reconciliation, Conversion.

3. A Gracious Promise of Mercy, wherein are very remarkable four signal
Returns of Grace in conformity to their Duties. 1. They Humble themselves under
Gods Holy hand, and he humbles himself to look down from Heaven. 2. They pray,
and God hears their prayer. 3. They seek the favor and the face of God, and
God forgives their sin, and is reconciled unto them. 4. They Turn from their
wicked ways, and God Heals those evils which those wicked ways had brought
upon the Land; no duty undertaken in vain, but a suitable and correspondent
Mercy promised to encourage them thereunto.

It may here not impertinently be asked, why these three Judgments of shutting
up Heaven, sending Locusts and Pestilence, are rather mentioned than any other,
since doubtless the Promise does extend it self further? I take the reason to
be, 1. Because these are irresistible, no Counsel, no Policy, no Strength can
prevent them. 2. Because they are inflicted by God alone, no second causes
immixed in them, if I shut up Heaven, if I command the Locusts, if I send
Pestilence.

1. If an Enemy come, Counsel may hinder, strength may vanquish, Treasure may
bribe, and divert him. Our own Polices and Provisions may seem to contribute
toward our help. But against an Army of Locusts, no Policy, Wisdom, Srength,
Embassy can prevail. No power of man can open or shut the Clouds, No Gates or
Bars can keep out a Famine, or a Pestilence from a place.

2. If an Enemy come, we are apt to ascribe that to the malice of men, to look
outward to second causes, and not inward to our own sins, or upward to the
Justice of God, though it be certain, that there is no humane Hostility without
a divine Commission. Men are Gods Rod, and Sword, and Staff, Psalm. 17. 13.
Isa. 10. 5, 6. Ezekiel* 21. 3, 5, 11. He by his secret and holy Providence edgeth
the spirits of men against one another, (as he sent an evil spirit between the
men of Shechem and Abimelech) Judge. 9. 23. And stirs up Adversaries against
those that provoke him, as he did against Solomon, 1 Reg. 11. 14, 23 And when
he pleases to return in Mercy, He rebukes the sword, and breaks the bow,
and cutteth the spear in sunder, Psalm 46. 9. Isa. 54. 17. These things I say
are certain. But we are too apt to bite the stone that hurts us, and not mind
the hand that threw it. Whereas when wrath is from Heaven only, we are forced
to see God, we have no second causes to ascribe it unto.

So the meaning is; If* I send Judgments immediately from my self, such as no
humane Wisdom can prevent, or Power remove, if then the people shall bethink
themselves, and return, and seek my face, they shall find that when Wisdom,
Policy, Treasures, Walls, Armor, Munition are nothing worth, Prayer and
Repentance shall avail for healing.

So here is a double Combat between God and Man. 1. Man provokes God with sin,
and God overcomes sin with Judgment.

2. Man wrestleth with Prayer and Humiliation, and God yields in Mercy and
Compassion.

I begin with the first General, the supposition of Judgments, and from
thencemake two observations.

I. Judgments light not on a people casually, or by chance, but by the
overruling and disposing Power and Justice of the Command and Commission of
God. It has not an earthly original; It grows not out of the dust, Job 5. 6,
7. but it comes from Heaven, and is sent from God to signify something of his
mind unto us.

1. Sometimes indeed by way of Dominion and absolute Power, He destroys the
perfect and the wicked, he laugheth at the trial of the innocent, Job 9. 22,
23. Sometimes as a Preparation unto intended Mercy, as men plow the ground
which they mean to enrich with precious seed, and carve the stone which they
mean to put in the top of the building. Joseph's Iron chain made way to his
golden chain, and David's troubles seasoned him for his Crown. As men put forth
longest into wind and sun that great Timber which must bear the greatest burden
and stress of the building. No such School to learn in as the School of
Affliction. But most usually in a way of Justice, Because thy sins were
increased, I have done these things unto thee, Jer. 30. 15. Thou have done
right, we have done wickedly, Neh. 9. 33. I have not done without cause all
that I have done, Ezekiel. 14. 23. Personal chastisements may be for trial and
exercise of faith and patience, but general and public Judgments are ever in
wrath and displeasure.

Such have been the dealings of God in this Nation; The cup of Affliction has
been given to All orders of men; we have seen Princes on Scaffolds, and in
banishment; Parliaments broken in pieces by their servants, Peers and Patriots
divested of their Honors, and secluded from their Trust; Dishonours poured
upon the City, Poverty on the Country, Blood on the Land, Scorn on Ministers,
Threats on Universities, Consternation on Soldiers, there is not any order or
degree of men, which have not been shaken with these Earthquakes. O how deep
is our stupidity, if we do not all of us analyze and resolve our sufferings
into their proper principles, ours sins and Gods Displeasure? If we have only
howled under them, and see not Gods Providence in them, ordering the sins of
men unto our Humiliation? If we know them only naturally by their smart to the
flesh, and not spiritually by their influence on the Conscience? If we censure
others, and absolve our selves; If our sufferings harden and enrage us in
animosities against men, but do not meeken and melt us under the holy trials of
God?

Let us therefore labor to find out our sins by our Sufferings, the cloud of
wrath rising out of the sea of lust. Let us search and try our ways, and since
we are living men, not complain of the punishment of our sins, be not as
Adamants, Rocks, Oaks, which blows, waves, winds, break not, move not, bend
not. Make use of our sufferings to review our sins, and to know our Duty, what
we should happily have done, and did not in the day of our prosperity, before God
laid us aside, what the Controversy was which God had against us in our
Sufferings, what the Duties are which he requires of us in our restitution.
The Prophets staff did no good to the dead child till he came himself.
Judgments do nothing, till God follow them with his Craces. Chastisements
never mend us till they Teach us. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O
Lord, and teach him out of thy Law, Psalm 94. 12. Till we see his name, and
hear his voice in them, Mic. 6. 9. Till we take notice of his Justice preparing
the whale that has s. vallowed us, Jon 1. 17. Bidding S^imei curse, 2 Samuel 16.
10. Giving a charge to the Assyrian, Isa. 10. 6. This will make us dumb, when
we consider that it is God that does it, Psalm 39. 9.

And now that the Cup has gone round, and God has by his Righteous providence
prevented our revenge, and done that by the strange vicissitudes of his justice
in a wise and holy manner, which if he had left us to do in our own, cases
would possibly have been done with folly and fury: Let us conclude that the
Lord having judged us all himself, we should make it our work not so much to
look back with revengefull, as to look forward with Healing and closing
Resolutions. We have been like wanton children which fall out in a family, now
our father has whipped us round, that should make us return to our fraternal
agreements again.

2. The Lord has variety of Judgments whereby to reduce froward and stubborn
sinners, can punish them in the Heavens over them, in the Earth under them, in
their bowels within them, can beset them upward, downward, outward, inward, and
make a Net, and Chain, and Hedge of afflictions to shut them in, And to fence
up their way that they cannot pass, Job 3. 23. Job 19. 8. When he will plead,
he will take away all Refuge, and make every Region, toward which we look,
minister Despair. They shall look upward, and they shall look unto the earth,
and behold Trouble, and Darkness, and Dimness of Anguish, Isa. 8. 21, 22. If
they look without, behold a Sword; if within, behold Famine and Pestilence,
Levit. 26, 25. Jer. 21. 4. 6 Ezekiel. 7. 15. Evil, which they shall not be able to
escape, or go forth of, Jer. 11. 11. When men multiply sins, the Lord usually
multiplyeth Judgments, till he either bend by Repentance, or break by
Destruction. When Cleanness of teeth, Blasting and Mildew, Pestilence and
Sword, the Judgments of Sodom and Gomorah, did not prevail with Israel to
return, then he threathneth final wrath, Therefore Thus will I do unto thee,
Amos 4. 6. -- 12. Which Thus, in the Prophet Amos, seems to me, to be the
same with Lo Ammi, in the Prophet Hosea, an utter rejection of them from being
the Lords people, Hos. 1. 9. Four times after one another does the Lord
threaten to punish his people seven times more for their sins, if they walk
contrary unto him, Levit. 26. 18, 21, 24, 28. Philosophers use to reckon but
eight steps to the highest, and most intense degree of a quality, but the wrath
of God is represented by eight and twenty degrees unto us.

1. The Method of God in these various Judgments usually is. 1. He begins at
the outward man, exercising a people many times with change of Rods, which is
ever a sign of Anger in the Father, and of stubbornness in the Son.

2. He proceeds to the soul by smiteing that, revealing his wrath, subducting
his peace, implanting his terrors, causing guilt and fear to gripe and seize on
the conscience, called Breaking of bones, Psalm. 51. 8. drinking up of spirits,
Job. 6. 4. A wounded spirit, Prove. 18. 14. If the Lord should give a secure
sinner, who now happily thinks himself alive, and safe, upon the mistaken
apprehensions of Mercy, a full view of the filthiness, and sense of the
Heaviness of any one atrocious sin whereof he stands guilty, it would make him
a terror to himself, willing to exchange his burden for the weight of a Rock
or Mountain. O my broken bones, says one, Psalm 51. 8. O my withered heart,
says another, Psalm 102. 3, 4. O the distracting terrors of God, says a
third, Psalm 88. 15. O the intoxicating Arrows of the Almighty, says a fourth,
Job 6. 4. Thus the Lord can make a man a Magor Missabib, a very fury and fiend
unto himself, by arming his own conscience against him. And if the Sergeant be
so formidable, what a fearful thing is it to fall into the hands of the Living
God? Against whose wrath all the Honors of the world, all the Wealth and
greatness, which a thousand Kingdoms could heap upon a man, could be no more a
protection, than a robe of beaten gold, could be to one that is cast into a
furnace of fire. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, let us be persuaded
to be beware of provoking his wrath by any presumptuous sin.

3. Toward obdurate sinners, the Lord many times deals in a more fearful
manner, sealing them up under hardness of heart, a spirit of slumber, a
Reprobate sense, a seared conscience, to be led blindfold by Satan till
destruction unawares overtake them. So it is said of the old world, that
notwithstanding the preaching of Noah, who by preparing an Ark condemned the
world, they yet knew not till the flood came, and took them all away, Mat. 24.
39. Because I have purged thee, says the Lord, and thou wast not purged, thou
shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, Ezekiel. 24. 13. Ephraim is
joined to Idols, let him alone, Hos. 4. 17. Let him that is filthy be filthy
still, Rev. 22. 11.

Now since the Lord has such variety of Judgments, that we can never out-sin
his wrath, Let us be deeply humbled for our pride, who have Pharaoh-like put
God to so many changes of Rods, and variety of Judgments, as we in this Nation
have felt. Let us yield betime unto him, for he will overcome when he judges.
Let us take heed of flattering our selves when one rod is worn out* or laid a
side, as if the bitterness of death were past, God can make every Creature
about us, every faculty within us, a Rod and a Scourge against us.

And therefore having received such deliverances as we lately have done, let us
make holy Ezra's conclusion, Should we again break thy Commandments? Ezra 9.
13, 14 Should we not take heed of sinning any more, lest a worse thing come
unto us? Joh. 5. 14. Should we not consider for what it is that God restored us
to our stations, namely, that we should in our places study how to honor him,
to be zealous for his Truth, and Pure Religion, tender of the Liberties,
Properties, and equal Rights of all the people in the Land, to restore all
oppressed Innocents, to loose the bonds of violence, and to settle these so
long shaking and discomposed Nations upon the firm foundations of Truth, Peace
and Righteousness again? Thus much for the first General. The supposition of
Judgments, various, and such as come immediately from God, and admit of no
possible prevention by humane wisdom, or removal by humane power.

II. We proceed to the Direction unto Duties, wherein comes first to be
considered the Quality of the persons who are to perform them, My people that
are called by my name. All men are his Creatures, only a select and peculiar
inheritance, that bear his name, enjoy his Peace, Promises and Protection, and
are in Covenant with him, are called His People. I entered into Covenant with
thee, and thou becamest mine, says the Lord, Ezekiel. 16. 8. This people have I
formed for my self, Isa. 43. 21. The Lord has set apart him that is godly for
himself, Psalm 4. 3. They are the people of his holiness, Isa. 63. 18. A
people for his name, taken out from among others, Acts 15. 14. To be called by
his Name, notes to be his adopted Children, as Joseph's children were made the
children of Jacob, Genesis 48. 5, 16.

We are Gods people two ways. 1. By visible profession or Sacramental
separation from the world, as the whole Nation of the Jews are called his
people. A peculiar Treasure unto him above all people, Exodus 19. 5. A Nation,
nigh unto him, Deuteronomy. 4. 7. His people even then when they rebelled against him,
Isa. 1. 3, 4. 2. By Spiritual Sanctification, and internal Dispositions. Thine
they were, and thou gave them me, and they have kept thy word, John 17. 6.
Jews inwardly by the Circumcision of the heart, Romans 2. 29. The Israel of God,
Gal. 6. 16. The Children of the Promise, Romans 9. 8. The Remnant according to
the Election of Grace, Romans 11. 5. The Circumcision which worship God in the
spirit, Phil. 3. 3.

These are His people by a Price of Redemption, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. By a peculiar
Designation unto his service, Tit. 2. 14. By an Intimate Relation of Love and
Dearness, Ezekiel. 16. 8. By an high Valuation of them as Treasures, Jewels,
vessels of Honor, Mal. 3. 17. 1 Pet. 2. 9. 2 Timothy 2. 20. By Destination to a
more glorious end, Ephesians. 4. 30.

The Duty extends to both. The whole body of a visible Church are in Judgments
to humble themselves, and as to temporal deliverances the Lord does respect the
Humiliations of the worser Members of the Church, as we see in the cases of
Ahab and Rehoboam, 1 Reg. 21. 28, 29. 2 Chronicles. 12. 6, 7. But to do this so
effectually as to attain all the annexed promises, is the work of the Israel of
God by spiritual Sanctification.

Now from this Qualification we gather these two useful Observations.

I. The sins of Gods own people, who are in Covenant with him, may provoke and
procure Judgments; their Pride, and Security, Worldly Love, Conformity to the
Corruptions of the times, Coldness and Formality in Duty, Uneven and
Unfaithful walking, acting by divided Interests from the rest of the Lords
people, may provoke God severely to punish a land, and we may justly fear has
done so amongst us. A good man, though a Son may yet be silius sub ira, under
paternal displeasure. If Moses and Aaron do not by believing glorify God, they
must both die in the Wilderness, Number. 20. 12. If David grow proud of victories,
and number the people, God will send a plague which shall lessen their number
and his pride, 2 Samuel 24. 15. If Solomon turn from God to Women, and to Idols,
though he be a Son, he shall be chastized with the rods of men, 2 Samuel 7. 14.
If Asa grieve the Prophet, and oppress the people, he shall be vexed with Wars
and Diseases, 2 Chronicles. 19. 9, 12. If Jehoshaphat help the ungodly, his life
shall be endangered, and his ships broken, 2 Chronicles. 19. 20. God will have
Judgment begin at his own house, 1 Peter, 4. 17.

Their sins have some Aggravations in them which other men's have not; these are
committed against special light and more glorious convictions, as those of
Solomon, After God had appeared unto him twice, 1 Reg. 11. 9. Against special
Love, and experiences of divine favor, 2 Samuel 12. 7. -- 9. Against special
Relations, the Honor of a Father, a Lord, an Husband, Isa. 1. 2. Against
special Grace, and Assistance of the Holy Spirit, Ephesians, 4. 30. Against special
Covenants and Engagements, after a vouching God for theirs, Psalm 78. 34.
Against special Deliverances from greatest dangers, Ezra 9. 13, 14. Against
special Hopes, and more special Promises which should have! persuaded them unto
Holiness, 2 Cor. 7. 1. 1 John. 3. 3. Against special Peace and glorious
Comforts, as David sinned against the joy of Gods salvation, Psalm 51. 12.
Peter denied Christ after he had seen his Transfiguration.

And this may teach the holiest of men; 1. To take heed of playing the Wantons
with the Grace of God: Though God be a tender, yet he may be an Angry Father:
And who knows the Power of his Anger? Psalm 90. 11. 2. To be more careful to
stand in the breach against public Judgments, having by their sins
contributed to the bringing of them upon the Land.

2. It is not our doing of Duty, but Gods being in Covenant with us, which is
the ground of his Mercy to us. Property does stir up Compassion, Though they
have provoked me, yet I will spare them, because they are mine, Malachy 3. 17.
Whence we learn;

1. In what manner to go to God, and to plead with him, not in confidence of
our Duty, but of our Relation to him as His, Thou art our Father, we are thine,
Isa. 63. 16, -- 19. The Church in Affliction seldom uses any other Argument,
Why does thy wrath wax hot against thy people? Exodus 32. 11. Art not thou our
God? 2 Chronicles. 20. 7. We are called by thy name, leave us not, Jer. 14. 9. Spare
thy people, O Lord, give not thine Heritage to reproach, Joel 2. 17. And the
Lord when there is no motive else, is marvellously wrought on by this Argument,
Is Ephraim my dear son? Is he a pleasant child? for since I spoke against him,
I do earnestly remember him still, therefore my bowels are troubled for him, I
will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord, Jer. 31. 20. In Confession we
must say, Thus and Thus have we done. Josh. 7. 20. In Petition we must say,
Thus and Thus have thou promised. We may argue much better from Relations then
Performances. Lord, We are thy Children; when we deserved wrath thou did
Adopt us; though we deserve it still, do not reject us. When thou did Adopt
us, thou did adopt enemies: If thou should reject us, thou should reject
Children. Our unworthiness could not prevent thy Mercy, let it not remove it.

2. In what manner to do Duty. None can do Duty aright, but as one of His, and
in Covenant with him. In Christ by faith both our Persons, and our Services are
accepted, Ephe. 1. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 5. The Altar sanctifies the Gift, and he is
our Altar. Mat. 23. 19. Heb. 13. 10. Joh. 15. 4, 5.
Out of him we can do nothing. Duties are not done aright, but in the virtue of
the Covenant of Grace. Jehu did a work materially good, but carnal policy
turned it into sin, Hos. 1. 4. To pray, and yet hold Isa. 1. 15.
fast cruelty; To Fast, and to take pleasure Isa. 58. 1.
in Wickedness; To bring Offerings and Amos. 5. 21.
Flocks to Gods house, and still delight in violence and oppression; If any
thing be to mock God, and provoke wrath, certainly this is, to make Religion,
like Samuels Mantle, a Cloak for the Devil.

3. In what manner to escape Judgments, and secure Mercy. Be His people, and
you are sure to be spared, Mal. 3. 17. Ezekiel. 9. 4. He has an Ark for Noah, a
Zoar for Lot, a Basket for Paul, a Gath for David, Chambers and hiding places
for his people, until Calamity be over-past, Isa. 26. 20. Psalm 57. 2. Zeph.
2. 3. When Jesus was near his own suffering, and in the midst of dangers
himself, he took care of his poor Disciples. Let these go, Joh. 18. 8. The less
protection they find amongst men, the more they shall have from him.

Since therefore the Lord is tender of the Interests of his people, and takes
special care of Hearing, Forgiving, and Healing them, Let it be your care,
Right Honorable, likewise to take them into your protection: they who hurt
them, hew at the bough whereon they stand, dig under the Foundation which holds
them up.

This for the Qualifications of the persons of whom these duties are required;
The Duties themselves required for the removal of Judgments, follow.

1. If they shall humble themselves, and be cast down under my holy hand in the
sense of my displeasure. But that is not enough, Ahab did so, 1 Reg. 21. 27.
who for ought we read, did not pray unto God.

2. If they shall pray, and cry for help, as Ninivie did, Jonah 3. 8. But that
is not enough neither. Hypocrites in distress will say, Arise and save us, Jer.
2. 27. They will spread forth their hands, and make many prayers, Isa. 1. 15.
and cry in the ears of the Lord with a loud voice, Ezekiel. 8. 18. And enquire
early after him, Psalm 78. 34.

3. If they shall seek my face, be grieved more for my Displeasure than my Rod,
Pray first for Mercy, and then for Healing, as David, Psalm 6. 2. It was
Christ's Method first to forgive, and then to heal, Mat. 9. 2, 6. And it must be
ours in praying for it. But neither is this enough, Pharaoh can be contented to
have his sin forgiven, though he will not let it go, Exodus 10. 17.

4. If they shall turn from their evil ways, and so lift up holy hands unto
God, First wash their hands in innocence, and then compass the Lords Altar,
Psalm 26. 6. Put iniquity far away from their hands, and then stretch them
forth toward God, Job 11. 13, 14. Lift up pure hands, 1 Timothy 2. 8. Put away
the evil of their doings, and then come and reason together with the Lord,
Isaiah 1. 16, 17, 18.

1. Then, If they shall Humble themselves. A duty called for by Prophets and
Apostles, Mic. 6. 8. Jam. 4. 10. 1 Pet. 5. 6. specially respected by God, as we
find in the case of Josiah, 2 Reg. 22. 19. And gracious Promises made
thereunto, Leviticus 26. 41. 42.

It emptieth the heart of Self-Confidence, is the Root of that fundamental Duty
of Self-Denial.

It fits for approach to God, because the more humble, the more welcome: the
more we tremble at his Threatenings, the more we shall supplicate for his Grace,
Isa. 66. 2. Job 9. 15.

It disposes to a Confession of sin, as we see in the poor Prodigal and
Publican, Luke 15. 17, 18, 19. Luke 18. 13.

It prepares the heart for the entertainment of Mercy, though the proclamation
be made, and the Court of Mercy be open to all, Rev. 17. 22. yet while men love
sin, they forsake Mercy, Jon. 2. 8. But when the soul is humbled, it opens to
God, and his Grace. Weary souls are glad to be satiated, Jer. 31. 25.

It makes way to the forsaking of sin; the more a soul is humbled for it, the
more it is fearful of it, and watchful against it.

Humiliation is twofold. 1. A Passive, when God breaks the heart by the Hammer
of the Word, as it is called, Jer. 23. 29. or by some sore Affliction. 2.
Active, when the soul humbles it self under sin and wrath; When a man-afflicts
his own soul, Levit. 16. 29. Again, This is twofold: 1. Legal, proceeding from
a spirit of Bondage, when the heart roars on a rack, or melts in a furnace, is
filled with Consternation and Anguish under the weight of sin and wrath: which
was the case of Pharaoh, Ahab, Belshazzar, Felix, the Jailer, the Murderers of
Christ. 2. Evangelical, When the soul is not only broken and battered with the
Horror and dread of wrath (this it may be, and remain hard, as every piece of a
broken flint is hard still.) But when it is kindly melted and softened with
apprehensions of Gods Goodness and free Grace. A compounded Duty made up of
Love and Sorrow, the Humiliation of Hezekiah, Jer. 26. 19. and of Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27.

This is a perpetual Duty; As long as sin remains, there must be a sense of it,
and sorrow for it. But in some times and cases it is specially to be renewed;
As in time of extraordinary sins and provocations, of public Dangers and
Distresses, of great Enterprises attempted, or Successes and Blessings desired:
which was the case of Exra, 8. 21.

The great sins, the sad Divisions, the dis-joynted affections, the contrary
Interests, the doleful Errors and Distempers in the Church, the miserable
Fluctuations and Discomposures which have been in the State, the horrid
violations of Order and Justice, the woeful Stains which have been upon the
Land, by the irregular and Prodigious effusion of the blood of Princes, Peers
and Prophets, the Affronts and Dissipations which have been put upon
Parliaments, the Contempts which have been poured outon Ministers, and At
tempts against their Maintenance; The great difficulties which lie before the
noble Houses at this time, in their endeavors of Healing and settling the Land,
and putting the broken bones and dislocated joints into due order again; the
allaying of animosities, the moderating of Extremities, the reconciling of
differences, the satisfying of Interests, the Preservation of pure Religion,
and the great concernments of Christ and his people; the restoring of collapsed
Honor to the Nations, and of just Rights to all orders therein; (which have
been so many years obstructed) the reviving of Trade, the easing of Pressures,
the reducing of these woefully tossed and naufragated Kingdoms unto Calmness and
Serenity again, do call aloud for these Duties in the Text, that so the Lord
may be pleased to hear, forgive, and heal us himself; and shine upon the
Counsels, and bless the whole undertakings of his servants that they may be
Instruments of Healing us likewise.

For your better performance hereof, I shall propose two Expedients.

I. To take a view of God in himself, and in his Relations unto you, and
dealings with you.

II. To take a view of your selves in the glass of his pure and holy Law.

1. Set the Lord before you as David did, Psalm 16. 8. Consider what a God he
is with whom we have to do. Consider him,

1. In himself. His searching Eye, Humble your selves in his sight, Jam. 4. 10.
His mighty Hand, Humble your selves under his Hand, 1 Pet. 5. 6. His Eye can
search us, we cannot hide from him; his Hand can reach us, we cannot escape
him. Every Attribute of God may serve to humble us.

His Majesty and Glory, dreadful to the Angels, Isa. 6. 2. Cujus
participatione justi ejus comparatione nec justi. He is a great God, and
therefore greatly to be feared, Psalm 89. 6, 7.

His Holiness, wherein he is glorious, Exodus 15. 11. So Holy that he cannot be
served, Josh. 24. 19. Of purer eyes than to behold iniquity.

His Jealousy and Justice: A God to whom vengeance belongs, who will not be
mocked or provoked, Nahum 1. 2.

His Mercy and Goodness which should lead us to Repentance, and melt the heart
into a filial fear of him, Hosea 3. 5. Romans 2. 4.

His Omniscience, who searches and tries the heart and the reins, has all
things naked and open before him. If we know enough by our selves, to humble
and abase us, how should we reverence the eye of God who knows all things?

Such considerations greatly humbled the holiest of men. Moses is afraid to
look upon God, Exodus 3. 6. Job abhors himself, Job 42. 5. Elijah hides his face
in a mantle, 1 Reg. 19, 13. Isaiah cries out, I am undone, Isa. 6. 5. Ezra
cannot stand before God, Ezra 9. 15. Peter bids Christ depart from him, because
he is a sinful man, Luke 5. 8.

2. In his Relations to us: He our Maker, we the Clay; He our King, we Vassals;
He our Judge, we Malefactors; He our Father, we undutifull sons; He our Master,
we unprofitable servants. All Arguments unto Humiliation.

3. In his Dealing with us. Our Humiliation melts him all into Mercy, when
Israel confessed, submitted, prayed, reformed, the soul of the Lord was grieved
for their misery, Judge. 10. 15, 16. When Ephraim smote on his thigh, the Lords
bowels were troubled for him, Jer. 31. 19, 20. But our stubborness will seal
and shut up his compassions against us, Levit. 26. 21. Consider him;

1. In his Judgments and various Providence: By which we should learn
Righteousness, Isa. 26. 9. The Lords Cup has passed through all Orders of men,
Princes, Peers, Gentry, Ministers, People, Soldiers themselves; We have felt
his Judgments in our Houses, our Honors, our Names, our Estates, by Wars on
Land, by Dangers on Sea, by Divisions in Church, by Confusions in State, by
more Evils and Sorrows then can be well enumerated. And should we not turn unto
the Lord that smites? Isa. 9. 13. Should we be like Ahaz, the worse for our
sufferings? 2 Chronicles. 28. 22. Be set on fire, and not know it; be burnt, and not
lay it to heart? Isa. 42. 25.

2. In his Mercies which have shined upon us through all our clouds. We have no
reason to complain, for we are living men. He has remembered Mercy in the midst
of wrath, Quenched the flame of War, frustrated the Attempts of those who would
have kindled it again, rebuked the rage of the sea, the beast of the reeds, as
the Psalmist speaks, put a stop to the Career of those who had in hope and
design swallowed up our Churches, our Universities, our Ministry, our Jordan
into their dead sea. Continued his Gospel, and the means of Grace in plenty and
liberty amongst us, (blessed be his name for ever, never may this blessing be
removed from us) restored our Parliaments (the great Bulwarks under God of our
Religion, Liberties, Properties, Interests, all our Endearments) toward their
Ancient Honor and Splendour again. And this Goodness of God calls for our
Humiliation, I will accept you, and gather you out of the Countries, and then
you shall remember your ways, and loath your selves, Ezekiel. 20. -- 41, 43. With
an Hard and a Soft, Stone and Mortar, we build a Wall; with an hard and an
soft, an Hammer and a Pillow, we break a flint; with an hard and a soft, the
Seal and the Wax, we make an impression. Hard Judgments and soft Mercies,
should build us up in Holiness, break our stubborn hearts, and make impressions
upon them.

II. Take a view of your selves, of your own Hearts and Lives; we are apt to
forget our selves, Iam. 1. 23. To mistake our selves, Prove. 14. 12. Rev. 3. 17.
And therefore we are bid to search and try our selves, 2 Cor. 13. 5. as a means
to silence our complaints against God, Lam. 3. 39, 40. When the Prodigal son
once came to himself, and took a surveigh of his own condition, he was quickly
brought to acknowledge his unworthiness, Luke 15. 17, 18. This is a Duty of
singular use and benefit. It enlarges the heart in godly sorrow for sin past,
upon the discoveries which this Scrutiny makes. When we remember our doings,
we shall loath our selves, Ezekiel. 6. 9. It works caution and circumspection
for the time to come; We shall take heed of breaking the Commandments, having
provoked the Lord so much already, Ezra 9. 14. It will cause us to magnify
divine Mercy, as Paul did, when he called to mind, that he had been a
Persecutor and Blasphemer, 1 Timothy 1. 13, 15. If any one should do us the
thousanth part of the wrong which we have done God, could we humble our selves
to feed, to cloth, to enrich, to adopt such a person unto our own family, and
provide an ample inheritance for him? It would make us rely only on free
grace, and not on any strength of our own, when we consider how much God
requires, and how little we perform. I will go in the strength of the Lord, I
will make mention of thy Righteousness, of thine only, Psalm. 71. 16. Ashur
shall not save us, we will not ride upon Horses, nor say to the work of our
hands, ye are our Gods, for in thee the Father less finds Mercy, Hos. 14. 3.
Isa. 17. 7, 8. It will make us exceeding meek and patient in Afflictions. It is
nothing but ignorance of our selves, which makes us swell and fret against God.
If we be living men, we have no reason to complain, for we suffer less than our
iniquity deserves, Lam. 3. 39, 40. Job 11. 6. Psalm. 103, 10. Ezra 9. 13.

And that we may have the better and fuller view of our selves, of our hearts
and lives, let us look upon the holy Law of God. It is exceeding broad, and
reaches to the smallest corruption, Psalm 119. 96. Exceeding spiritual, and
searches the inmost corners of the soul, Romans 7. 14. Exceeding pure, and
cannot away with the least pollution, Psalm 119. 140. Exceeding perfect, and
will not dispense with any defect, Psalm 19. 7. Exceeding right and strait, and
cannot endure any guil of spirit, Psalm 19. 8 9. Upon the exceeding great and
precious promises of the Gospel, which are the Portion and Dowry of the Church
here below, Upon the Holy Spirit of Love and Grace, which seals Believers
unto the day of Redemption. Upon the free Love whereby we were elected, Upon
the precious blood whereby we were redeemed, Upon the glorious Inheritance
whereunto we are reserved, Upon the gracious Image after which we are renewed.

This holy Law we have violated, these precious Promises we have undervalued,
this blessed Spirit we have grieved, this Grace we have abused, this Image
defiled, this free Love, this inestimable blood, this glorious Inheritance we
have deprized, and miserably neglected ^ad disesteemed. What remains, but that
we cry out all with the Leaper in the Law, Unclean, Unclean. Lastly, Let us
take off our sins; if we be not Rocks and Adamants, that will humble us. We
were made to converse with God, and sin has shut him out of all our thoughts.
We use to lament sad Alterations, when a Garden of Eden is made a Wilderness,
Cities turned into ruinous heaps, they that wear Scarlet, embracing Dung-hils.
How should we bewail the sad change which Sin has wrought in our Nature and
Lives? That a Creature stamped with the impress of the divine Image, made for
high and honorable Employments, should so far degenerate, as to be a child of
Darkness, a vassal of Hell, a vessel of lust. That a Soul made of a kind of
Angelical substance, should sink it self into the balance, with sordid
pleasures, with perishing profits, with noisome lusts, should barter, and sell
away its self, and its salvation, for wind; for shame, for vanity, for
rottenness, and change its glory for that which does not profit. That a tongue
which was made to glorify God, and to be our Glory, made for prayers, and
praises, and gracious Communication, should belch out Blasphemy and
Profaneness, Oaths and Curses, Ribaldrie and Reviling, and all kind of rotten
speeches, like an open Sepulcher. That an heart which was made for heavenly
meditations, and for intimate communion and converse with God, should now
entertain none but hellish affections, and be a sink and charnel house of
impure Lusts.

If we should here descend to a more particular disquisition, and consider, The
uncleanness of our Original from fallen- Adam, by whom we have been sold as
Bondmen under sin, Romans 7. 14. For none can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? Job 14. 4. Job. 25 4. The uncleanness of our Nature and Constitution,
by nature Children of wrath, No good thing dwelling in us. As contrary to the
holy Will of God, as Darkness to light; as full of Evil, as the Sea of water;
Set on fire hy a hell of corruption, James 3.6. Exactly contrary to the Law of
God, as appears by comparing the strict demands of the one, Genesis 3. 10. with
the through depravation of the other, Genesis 6. 5. The uncleanness of our
Thoughts, and secret Affections which arise continually, as sparkles out of a
stirred furnace: Vain thoughts, which tend to no good, Jer. 4. 14. Wicked
impure Thoughts, very gall and bitterness, Acts 8. 22, 23. The uncleanness of
our words, not only idle words, Mat. 12. 36. but rotten and unsavory, Ephesians. 4.
29. The uncleanness of our Actions, that immense Colluvies of Impieties against
God, Unrighteousness against men, Intemperance against our selves, Heinous in
Quality, Measureless in Quantity, Sands for number, Mountains for weight,
attended with multitudes of doleful aggravations; The uncleanness of our
services, and Iniquity of our holy things; Such considerations as these
sanctified by Evangelical Grace, would much conduce to our Humiliation, and
work in us these three fruits and evidences thereof.

1. A Godly sorrow, so called by the Apostle, because it sets the soul
Godward. Cain, Judas, Felix sorrowed, but they ran from God. But Godly sorrow
carries the soul closer unto God. As a ship in a tempest ventures not to any
shore, but gets further into the Sea; so the soul when it is humbled by God,
betakes not it self unto any carnal shore, but still runs closer into him.

2. A Justifying of God, ascribing to him the glory of his Righteousness, if he
should condemn us; and of his Mercy, that he does absolve us, Psalm 51. 4.
Daniel 9. 7, 8, 9.

3. A self-judging and subscribing to our Condemnation, saying Amen unto the
curse, Deuteronomy. 27. 15. If I judge my self, God can reverse my Judgment, as the
Superior Judicatory can the Act of the Inferior: But if I stay till God judge
me, all the world Aug. in P^^. 31
cannot null or avoid his. As St. Austin says of the poor Publican, Ipse sibi
judex erat, ut Deus liberaret; ipse accusabat, ut ille defenderet. He judged
and accused himself, that God might deliver and defend him. Ber. in Can. S^r.
55.
Bonum Judicium, says Bernard, quod me illo districto divinoque judicio
subducit and abscondit: Volo vultui irae judicatus praesentari non judicandus.
This is a good Judgment indeed which withdraws and hides me from the severe
Judgment of God. I tremble to fall into the hands of the living God, Let me be
presented before his wrath as judged already, not as to be judged by him.

II. The next Duty is Prayer, without which Humiliation is but a sinking under
God, not a seeking unto him. The very Heathen betook themselves unto this
Sanctuary in times of trouble, ut pacem Dei Bris. de. Fo^m. l. 1. p. 81.
exposcerent* by this mighty Engine God has been moved to hold his hand, to
repent of purposed, to revoke denounced Judgments; Vincit invincibilem, Ligat
Omnipotentem.

1. By this we honor God in acknowledging him the fountain of all our Good,
the Inflicter of all Evil, the Avenger* of all sin, that we have to do with
him in all our sufferings, Creatures but the Rod, he the Father that holds it:
that no other means can do us good, except he sanctify them, that his
displeasure none can remove: as a Diamond is cut only by a Diamond, so God is
pacified only by himself: The sting of the Scorpion cured by the powder of the
Scorpion; the Anger of God by the favor of God.

2. By this we ease our selves, Prayer lightneth affliction where it does not
remove it. Nature is strengthened to bear the pain, Conscience is strengthened to
withstand the Temptation and snare of it. The heart is meekned to accept the
punishment of sin, as Wool or Mud deads the force of a Bullet, so the heart
meekned by prayer, does obtund the edge of an Affliction, that it cannot get so
deep into the heart to hurt it.

III. In Prayer we must seek the face of God; His Favor to comfort us, and his
Counsel to direct us.

1. In Judgments and Difficulties we should more seek Gods Favor than our own
deliverance; the Recovery of his Love, than the Removal of his Rod. Others
griefs press Nature, his displeasure wounds the spirit. In other griefs, Gods
favor upholds the soul, Psa. 23. 4. and 94. 17, 19. But when Gods favor is
withdrawn, the soul has nothing else left to lean to, nothing can comfort when
God frowns. Armor can protect against a sword or a Bullet, but not against
fire. When God is angry, no refuge but unto God.

2. In Difficulties we must likewise seek Gods face as David did, 2 Samuel 21. 1.
not lean on our own understanding, nor sacrifice to our Net, but have our eyes
upon him, who is the father of lights, who when he will, makes wise the
simple; and when he will, infatuateth the Counsel of the wise, and makes it
brutish.

IV. After all these preparatory Duties, that which is the substantial duty,
and the end of all the rest, must follow, Turning from our wicked ways: not
from sin to sin, that is, mutatio in aliud only, not in melius: not from sin to
secular interest, that is not a Conversion from sin to God, but to the world:
Not from sin to the Mere dictates of Nature and right Reason; that is not a
Conversion from sin to God, but from sin to our selves; A Philosophical, not a
spiritual Conversion: Not from sin only to the natural Conscience, to gratify
and prevent the terrors of that; that is a servile, not a filial Conversion.
But from sin to God, not fainedly and hypocritically, Jer. 3. 10. with a
divided heart, but sincerely in our thoughts from the love and allowance of all
sin, in our ways from the practice willingly of any sin; but especially from
those sins which have most prevailed* against us and wherewith we have most
dishonored God, as Isaiah* 17. 7, 8. 30. 22. Hoseah 14. 3.

These are the Duties here prescribed in order to the answering of Solomon's
Prayer. The Answer follows exactly commensurate to these Duties in four
gracious Promises.

1. A Promise of gracious Condescension intimated in the word From Heaven,
though he dwell on high, he will humble himself to revive the spirit of
contrite and humble sinners, Psa. 113. 5, 6. Isa. 57. 15. He will come down to
work deliverance for them, Exodus 3. 8.

2. Promise of gracious audience, I will hear. It is a^ doleful* Affliction to
Gods servants^, when he is angry with their Prayers, and shuts them out, Psalm
80. 4. Lam. 3. 8. And on the other side, this is one of the most radiant and
glorious Comforts of Gods people, that in all difficulties they have a Throne
of Grace to betake them to, with a promise, You shall pray, and I will hearken,
as a man does to what he delights in: For the prayer of the Righteous is his
delight, Jer. 29. 12. 13. Prove. 15. 8.

3. A gracious promise of forgiveness, to serene his countenance, and lift up
the light thereof upon them* for even when we do his Will, and when we are His
People, we want pardoning Mercy. There is need of pardon not only for the
ungodly unto their Justification, but also for his own people and Children into
a Restitution to paternal favor, the sense and fruition whereof they may
forfeit by their sins. And this is Gods method in hearing prayers, to forgive
sin before he cures pain, Mat. 9. 2. For indeed when sin is pardoned, the
sickness is cured at the root, for sin is the sting of every Affliction, as
well as of death.

4. A Promise of Healing, Healing of the Land, the Humiliations and Prayers of
Gods peculiar people are beneficial to the whole Land; The innocent shall
deliver the Island, Job 22. 30. A Joseph in Egypt, an Eliah in Israel is the
Chariots and Horsemen thereof. An Humbled, praying, converting people, shall
certainly be an Healed people: And if ever we hope to be healed to purpose,
this must be our Method to it.

Now touching these Promises there is this worthy our observation.

1. That when God comes down to deliver, and looks from heaven, he does it by
no other way, then by the Incarnation of his Son, the efficacy of his Spirit,
the operation of his Providence, or the Ministry of Angels.

2. When he hears Prayers, It is only by the Intercession and mediation of
Christ.

3. When he forgives sins, It is only by the Merits and Righteousness of Christ.

4. But when he heals a land, he often uses in that work the Ministry of men.
Magistrates are Healers and Repairers, Isa. 3. 7: Ministerrs are Healers of the
sick, Ezekiel. 34. 4.

And therefore I shall here in all humility implore of you, Right Honorable,
who are Instruments for Healing in the Lords hand unto these long and woefully
sick Nations, that you would with all your vigor call together all the graces
of God, all the abilities of nature in you unto this most necessary work. You
have the Lords promise to be with you in i^* if you set about it in his way.
And his way to heal a land, is, 1. When the people thereof are His people,
called by his name. 2. When they are an Humbled, penitent, praying, reforming
people.

Your greatest care therefore must be, 1. That the people of the Land be Gods
people, that his Name be owned, his Truths, Worship, Interests preserved pure
and inviolate amongst us. It is to those that fear Gods name that the promise
of Healing is made, Mal. 4. 2. 2. In as much as even the sins of such may
provoke the Lord, your zeal for God, and love to the Nation should appear, in
awakening them and all others to remember from whence they are fallen; many of
them through Pride, Wantonness, Interests and carnal designs, from wholesome
Truths, from holy Ordinances; from the love of a faithful Ministry, from
brotherly love, from Christian* Communion, to many errors and vain Janglings,
to contempt of Magistracy, to affronting Authority, to violating public Order
and Peace, to such an excess of Licentiousness under the pretense of Freedom,
that Religion scarce ever was more endangered under the straights of
Persecution, than under the lasciviousness and wantonness of an abused liberty.
Though therefore there ought to be all tenderness to preserve for Gods people
the Liberty wherewith the Lord has made them free, God forbid any restraint or
abridgement should be upon that; yet since the same Lord has commanded that we
must not use our Liberty as a cloak of maliciousness; It is necessary that
great prudence be used to prevent the exorbitances of wanton minds, who make
use of Liberty to the dishonor and assaulting of public Authority, to the
kindling of Flames, animating the discontented peopleunto Insurrections,
enervating the Peace and concord of the people of the Land, by dis-joynting
them in that which is the main bond of Unity, the Truths of Religion: wherein
when they are once universally broken, who sees not how wide a door is opened
for Rome or Munster, not only to enter in, butto be welcomed amongst us.

The Way therefore unto Healing, is to endeavor to bring us all home to be
Gods people, and as his people to be compacted within our selves, to lay aside
all dividing distinguishing, invidious Titles, and with fraternal affections to
coalesce, as far as may be in Judgment, however thoroughly in affection, and so
to keep our Difforing Opinions to our selves, as that the Consciences of our
brethren may not be grieved, nor the peace of the Church of Christ endangered
thereby.

I conclude all, with beseeching you, that since the Lord has taken it as one
of his Titles to be called The Lord that heals us, Exodus 15. 26. that without
him, the Builder works, the Watchman keeps, the Statesman counsels, the
Physician heals all in vain, you would ever by prayer and attendance upon God
for Counsel, so seek his face, and guidance in this weighty work, that when it
is finished, and the Head-stone of our settlement laid, we may say, It was the
Lords doing, and marvelous in our eyes; and may with shoutings cry, Grace,
Grace unto it.

FINNIS.

