Sions Praises, Opened in a SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common* Council of LONDON: On the Day of Solemn
Thanksgiving UNTO GOD For his long and gracious Preservation of that great
City, from Pestilence, Fire, and other Dangers.

By EDWARD REYNOLDS. D. D.

LONDON, Printed by Tho Newcomb for George Thomason, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the Rose and Crown in Paul's Church yard, 1657.

To the Right Honorable Sir Robert Titchbourne, Knight, Lord Mayor of LONDON,
The Aldermen and Common Council of that great and famous CITY.
Right Honorable,
INstead of a Dedication, I must make an Apology, that this short Sermon has
been so long in the second birth of it from the Press; for besides my various
diversions, and indisposedness, by reason of infirmities, to spend much time
together, in revising, transcribing, and maturing short notes for a public
view; I had at the same time another service of the like nature upon me, which
having been before begun, I could not, till finished, conveniently attend this.
It pleases the Lord still so to continue those mercies to this City, for the
thankful recounting whereof, he put it into your hearts to appoint this
service, that as the Duty was very seasonable when it was performed; so I hope
the publication (though too long after) may not be altogether improper, to mind
us all of the Lords great goodness, in continuing those comforts unto us, and
of our duty daily to resume and revive the memory of them. If this weak
endeavor of mine to quicken you and my self unto that great work of praising
God, be through his blessing, of any use to engage your hearts thereunto, and
to provoke you unto any of those expedients* which you were in this Sermon
minded of, I shall have abundant cause of glorifying God for so great a fruit
of so small a service, and for your professed subjection unto the Gospel of
Christ. Which is the earnest desire of

Your Honors Most humble Servant in the work ED. REYNOLDS.

Sions Praises.
PSALM. 147. 12, 13, 14, 15. Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem: praise thy God, O
Zion. For he has strengthened the bars of thy gates: he has blessed thy
children within thee. He makes peace in thy borders: and fills thee with the
finest of the wheat He sends forth his commandment upon earth: his word
runs very swiftly.
GOD is All-sufficient unto himself, and stands not in need of any of his
creatures, to add any excellency unto him, any more then the Sun does of the
light of a candle. That which is wholly of him, can contribute nothing at all
unto him. He has all perfection Infinitely; all the perfections of the
Creatures (without the finite bounds and limits wherein they enjoy them)
Eminently, in himself. Psalm. 16 2. Psalm 50 12 Job 22 2. R^m. 11 35.
Our goodness extends not unto him. It he be hungry he will not tell us; for
the world is his and the fullness thereof; can a man be profitable unto God, as
he that is wise is profitable to himself? Who has first given to him, and it
shall be recompensed to him agaim?

Yet though the Lord be thus wholly self sufficient, and do not receive any
thing from the creatures, yet he is pleased graciously to communicate himself
unto them in several prints and degrees of goodness, as the Sun sheddeth light
upon those bodies, from whence it receives no retribution at all

But of all Creatures he has chosen his Church Deuteronomy 4 7. Isa 43 11.
to be nearest unto him, and to participate most of him; that is, a society of
men which he has ^ Pet, 2. 9.
formed for himself to be a- chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy
Nation, a peculiar People. As the Sun manifests its light unto us in the
Moon, more then in any other of the Stars; so the Lord, his Goodness and Wisdom
in the Church more then in any other Creatures.

And now, as the Moon receiving light from the Sun does not swallow it up, and
bury it, but reflecteth it, and as it were, reports and publishes it abroad
unto the world: So the Lord having showed mercies unto the Church, requires
that they be not buried in oblivion, but that the glory and praise of them be
acknowledged unto him. Great Luminaries have certain Beams as pipes and
channels, through which their light is derived and diffused upon others.
Thanksgiving is the Beam of an illightned soul, whereby it makes report of
those mercies, which from the Father of light has been shed abroad upon it.
Every thing naturally returns to its original. All Rivers run into the Sea,
unto the place from whence they come, thither they return to go, Eccles. 1. 7.
A straight line drawn into length, the further it goes is still the weaker; but
in a circle, returning to its first point and original, it recovers strength;
so the Creature, the further it goes from God, is still the weaker, till it
return back unto him again. And the best way of returning unto him is by
praising of him; for praises are the language of Heaven, where it is that men
are pefectly taken home to God.

Yet, as we said, nothing is hereby added unto him, but only his own glory
acknowledged and adored by the Church, as when the Sun shines on a Diamond, the
luster thereof is not increased but reported. And as we esteem those stones
most precious, which do most exquisitely admit and reflect the splendour of that
light which shines upon them; so they are the Lords bests Jewels (as he calls
them, Mal. 3* 17.) which can most notably set forth the glory of his name as he
who can with greatest eloquence commend the virtues of an excellent person, is
the best Orator, though his Oration does not put excellency into the person,
but only represent and set it forth unto others.

Not therefore for any advantage or accession unto himself (who cannot be a
gainer by his creatures) but only for our benefit and comfort, is the Lord
pleased to require praises of his people, as the window admits the light of
the Sun* not for the benefit of the Sun, but of the house into which it shines.

And as God requires this duty at all times of his people, so most then, when
he does greatest things for them; and this was the condition of the Church at
this time, which Interpreters refer to the State thereof after its return out
of Babylon; and therefore in the Syriack and Greek versions, we find the names
of the Prophets Haggai and Zachary prefixed, as leading to the times whereunto
the mercies here mentioned did relate.

The whole Psalm is an invitation unto praising of God. Arguments thereunto are
drawn

First, From Gods general goodness to the world, verse. 4, 8, 9, 16, 17, 8.

Secondly, From his special Mercy to his Church. 1. In restoring it out of a
sad and broken condition, ver. 2, 3. 2. In confirming it in an happy and
prosperous estate, both temporal, in regard of strength, peace, and plenty,
verse. 12, 13, 14. and spiritual, in regard of his Word, Statutes and Judgments
made known unto them, ver. 19, 20. Lastly, These mercies are all commended by
the manner of bestowing them, powerfully and swiftly. He does it by a word of
command, and by a word of speed, He sends forth his commandment up on Earth,
his word runs very swiftly.

The former part of this happy estate together with the manner of bestowing it,
is in these words, from which we must by no means exclude the consideration of
the latter. And what can be wanting to a Nation which is strengthened with
walls, blessed with multitudes, has peace in the border, plenty in the field,
and which is all in all, God in the Sanctuary, God the bar of the gate, the
Father of the Children, the Crown of the peace, the staff of the plenty, a gate
restored, a City blessed, a border quieted, a field crowned, a sanctuary
beautified with the oracles of God, what can be wanting to such a people, but a
mouth filled, an heart enlarged* a spirit exalted in the praises of the Lord?
Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem, praise thy God, O Sion, etc.

In the words we have three General Parts.

1. A Duty required, and that with an ingemination, praise, praise.

2. The subject of whom required, Jerusalem, Sion.

3. Arguments enforcing it, drawn from consideration, 1. Of Gods Relation unto
them, as The Lord, that had authority over them, as Thy God, that was in
covenant with them. 2. Of the Benefits wrought for them, wherein is
considerable, 1. The substance of them, ver. 13, 14. 2. The manner how
performed, by a powerful and a speedy efficacy, v. 15.

In the substance of the Benefits, we have a great Climax and gradation of
mercy.

First, Jerusalem and Sion, which erewhile lay ruinous and desolate, have now
walls, and those walls gates, and those gates bars, and those bars strengthened
and made fast by the hand of God; By all which we understand both the material
walls and gates newly built by Nehemiah, maugre the opposition of Sanballat and
Tobiah, Nehem. 2. 8, 9. 6. 1. 7. 1. and also the policy and government, which
is said to be administered in the gates, Deuteronomy. 21. 19. Amos 5. 15. for the
strength, the walls, the gates of a Kingdom stands in the righteous
administration of judgment, whereby the throne is established, Prove. 16* 12.

Secondly, Not only strength in the walls, but blessing in the City within
them, namely, multitudes of Inhabitants, according to that promise, I will sow
the house of Israel and of Judah with the seed of man, and with the seed of
beast, Jer. 31. 27 There shall yet old men and old women dwell in the streets
of Jerusalem, and every man with his staff in his hand for very age. And the
streets of the City shall be full of Boys and Girls playing in the streets
thereof, Zach. 8. 4, 5. The safety, tranquillity, and peace should be so great,
as that it should extend to all sorts of men, even those who were most subject
to fear and danger, old men, old women, Boys and Girls.

Thirdly, Because potent enemies might break the strongest gates, though they
were of brass and iron, as the Lord promises Cyrus, Is. 45. 1, 2. and being
broken in, might easily diminish the multitudes there, till they be left as a
tree bereft of branches on the top of a mountain, till a man be more precious
then the golden wedge of Ophir, Isa. 13. 12. 24. 6. 30. 17. there is further
added, Peace in the borders, violence shall no more be' heard in thy Land, Isa.
60. 18*

Fourthly, Because Famine may do as much harm within, as an enemy in the
borders; the sword without may make them eat their children within, Deuteronomy. 28.
53 -- 55* therefore plenty is joined unto peace, he fills thee with the
finest of the wheat; the vine shall give her fruit, and the ground shall give
her increase, and the heaven shall give her dew, and the remnant of this people
shall possess all these things, Zach. 8. 12.

Fifthly, Because these inferior blessings without God, can neither defend nor
comfort a people, therefore he is pleased to give himself unto them, to be
their portion; he is Thy God, O Sion; he is pleased to own it as his name, The
portion of Jacob, Jer. 10. 16.

Lastly, Least they should be discouraged by any present difficulties. which
might seem to render these mercies very improbable unto them, he strengthens
their faith by this assurance, that he can with a word of his mouth give being
to every one of these promises, and can send forth his commandment as a winged
executioner of his will, He sends forth his commandment on earth, his word
runs very swiftly.

The main Doctrine of the Text, and work of the day, is the Tribute of Praise
which we owe unto God for these great mercies. It is the glory due unto his
name, Psalm. 96. 8. for according to his name, so is his praise, Psalm. 48. 10.

And it is due to him in the Text upon a double Title.

1. As he is the Lord, for his absolute greatness in himself.

2. As he is Thy God, for his relative goodness to his Church and People.

In the first respect it implies an adoring of his excellencies; praise him for
his excellent greatness, Psalm. 150. ^. an extolling of his great name, an
acknowledging of his absolute sovereignty over us* and surpassing dignity above
us, and accordingly abasing our selves in his presence. I have heard of thee by
the hearing of the ear; but now mine eye sees thee, therefore I abhor my self,
Job 42. 5. Woe is me. I am undone for I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell
amongst a people of unclean lips; for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of
Hosts, Isa. 6. 5. This is that which our Savior makes the principal, and
first petition in prayer, Sanctified be thy Name; that is, be thou thy self, in
all the ways whereby thou make thy self known, glorified by us. To Sanctify,
is to separate and single out unto some peculiar and appropriated honor. So
Israel is said to be a people holy to the Lord, separated as a peculiar people
from all others, to know and to serve him. Ye shall be holy, I have severed you
from other people, that ye should be mine, Lev. 20. This people have I formed
for my self, they shall shall show forth my praise, Isa. 43. 21. (...) and
(...) are opposed to one another; that which is common is unclean; that which
is holy is separated and reserved unto special use, Act. 10. 14, 15.

To sanctify then the Lord, and to make him our fear (as he is called the fear
of Isaac, Genesis 31. 42.) is to acknowledge his infinite, peerless, surpassing,
and unparalled excellencies and pre*heminence, and to serve him with a
peculiar and incommunicated worship, to exalt his glorious name above all
Blessing, and above all Praise, as being Lord Alone, Nehem. 9. 5, 6. as being
God above All, 1 Chronicles. ^9. 11. Higher then the highest, Eccles. 5. 8. there
being none holy besides him, 1 Samuel 2. 2. He is God alone; among the gods there
is none like him, Psalm. 68. 8, 10. He is exalted far above all gods, Psalm. 97.
9. Who is a God like unto our God? Mic. 7. 18. Exodus 15. 11. Who shall not fear
thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art holy, Rev. 15. 4.

In the next respect it implies, 1. A Rejoicing in him as our only Good.
Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous, for praise is comely for the upright,
Psalm. 33. 1. So the Prophet concludes his Tryumphal song, Although the Figtree
shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines, the labor of the Olive
shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from
the fold, and there shall be no herd in the Stalls; yet I will rejoice in the
Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation, Hab. 3. 17, 18.

2. A preferring him in our estimation infinitely above All, as our sovereign
and principal end, living, dying, thinking, speaking, working, walking so as
that he may be glorified in us and by us, Romans 14. 7, 8.

3. An acknowledging unto him his free and rich grace, in all those manifold
mercies, and precious promises, wherewith he has blessed us in his beloved,
who are less then the least of all the goodness and truth which he has showed
unto us. For it is of the Lords mercies alone that we are (...). Phil. de
Sacrif. Abel and Cain. vid. Bernard. In Can^ sermon. 13.
not consumed. An humble sense of our own misdeservings, and utter unworthiness
is essential unto this duty of praising God. The Pharisees thanksgiving had a
contradiction in it, God I thank thee, that I am not as other men, or as this
Publican: Pride and praise are inconsistent; whosoever arrogates to himself,
derrogates from God; not unto us, not unto us, but unto thy name, we cannot
give glory to God, till we disown it our selves, Psalm. 115. 1. when the Apostle
begins and concludes with thanksgiving, he does not only recounts Gods mercy,
but his own unworthiness, I was a Blasphemer, a Persecuter injurious; ignorant,
unbeleeving, the chief of sinners; I thank Christ Jesus our Lord; unto the King
eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and glory, 1 Timothy
1. 12 -- 17.

4. Invocation of his name, and dependence upon his grace, as the only
fountain of all our comforts. Sing, shout, publish ye, praise ye, and say, Lord
save thy people, Jer. 31 7. As prayer makes way for praises, when our petitions
are answered; call upon me in the day of trouble, I will hear thee, and thou
shall glorify me, Psalm. 50, 15. So praises for mercies past do encourage and
enlarge the heart to wait upon God for the supply of our present wants. He has
delivered, he does deliver, therefore we may trust that he will yet deliver, 2
Cor. 1. 10.

Lastly, Obedience to his commands, when the (...)* Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 7.
sense of his sovereign Authority over us, as the Lord, and of his special
grace unto us, as our God, does engage our hearts to glorify him in an holy
conversation; for herein is God honored, when his servants do bring forth much
fruit, Joh. 15. 8 Hereby we put to silence the ignorance of foolish men, and by
our good works do cause enemies themselves to glorify God, as being ashamed to
accuse their good conversation, 1 Pet. 2. 12, 15. 3. 15, 16. Justin Martyr
professed that the constancy Apolog. 1.
of the Christian Martyrs was the means whereby he was converted to Christ.

We see the Duty, and the Title upon which it is due; The Lord, for his
Excellencies in himself; Thy God, for his Goodness unto thee. Let us next
consider the Subject, from whom it is due, Jerusalem and Sion. God made all
things for himself, and will have the glory due unto his name from all his
creatures Prove. 16. 4. all things are of him, and therefore all things are to
him, Romans 11. 36. But there are three different ways whereby this glory comes
unto him from his creatures.

1. Per modum providentiae, in a way of general (...); etc. Chrysostom. in Psalm.
148.
Providence, when the motions, order, influences, beauty, glorious contexture,
and admirable cooperation and concurrence of all creatures, unto some
excellent (...)* or consummate issue, do show forth the wisdom, power, and
goodness of that supreme Moderator, who leads such variety of agents unto one
end, as the Artificer tempereth many colors unto the setting forth of one
beautiful Table: And thus Heaven, Earth, Sea, Snow, Ice, Hail, Birds, Beasts,
are said to glorify and to praise the Lord, Psalm. 19. 1, 2. Psalm. 148. 3. 10.

2. Per modum Justitiae, in a way of judgment and severity, when the Lord by
the power of his Justice does fetch glory out of wicked Angels and men, and
does compulsorily drive them unto those ends which they never intended, as the
Smith by his Furnace and Hammer worketh-iron into those shapes, unto which it
could never have reduced it self; And thus they, whose whole study it is to
dishonor God, when they fly out of the order of his Precepts, do fall under
the order of his Providence, and are made by their perdition to bring glory
unto him. For this purpose, says the Lord unto Pharaoh, have I raised thee up,
that I might show my power in thee, and that my name might be declared
throughout all the earth, Romans 9. 17. And so the strong enemies of God, who had
been a terror unto his people, are said to * glorisie him, when they are
reduced to heaps and ruin, never to be built again, Isa. 25. 2, 3. The Lord in
the thing wherein they dealt proudly showing himself to be above them, Exodus
18. 11.

3. Per modum Obedientiae, in a way of obedience, when a creature does
voluntarily, actively, intentionally set it self to bring glory unto God; and
knowing the end unto which God has ordained it to work, Ephesians. 2. 10. does
accordingly apply it self to conform unto the will of God therein; and thus
none can indeed praise God, but Jerusalem and Sion; his name is nowhere so
great as in Israel, Psalm. 76. 1. whether we respect his own manifestations of
himself in his word and gracious covenant (which he has magnified above all
his name, Psalm. 138. 2. and which he has showed unto his Church, and not unto
others, Psalm. 148. 19, 20.) or his peoples cheerful adoration of him, and trust
in him according to the tenor of that word; and thus they who are called by
Gods name, are in special manner said to be created for his glory, Isa. 43. 7.

God has done most for them, taken them nearest unto himself, Deuteronomy 4. 7. set
them a part, and fitted them for his own use, Psalm. 43. 2 Timothy 2. 2^. most
notably revealed himself, and the secrets of his love unto them, Matthew. 11. 25.
Psalm. 25. 14. Joh. 14. 21. They are most able to praise him, because they have
his special and peculiar favor, called the favor of his people, Psalm. 106. 4.
He is their own, and property enlarges praise. Praise is the language of
Heaven, best becomes those who have been partakers of a (...) etc. Basil. in
Psalm. 23
heavenly calling, Heb. 3. 1. Excellent speech is not comely in the mouth of
fools, Pro. 17. 7. but praise is comely for the upright, Psalm. 33. 1. None can
praise God in the pit, the living, the living, he shall praise thee, Isa. 38.
19. No wicked man, how specious or plausible soever his professions may be, is
either so awed by the greatness, or affected with the goodness of God, as to
sanctify the Lord in his heart, or to glorify him in his life; his words are
fair, his conscience is foul; his pretenses are gaudy and flourishing, but his
affections are crooked and perverse; as if a Cook should poison his Lords
dinner, and in the mean time should garnish the dishes with painted or gilded
vanities. If we cannot call God our God, if we have not by faith and hope an
interest in his Covenant and special Mercies, if we be not by his love, shed
abroad into our hearts, conformed to his will and ways; flatter him
peradventure we may, but glorify him we cannot; he that orders his
conversation aright, is the man that offers praise, and glorifieth God, Psalm.
50. 23.

There is one special thing more to be noted concerning this duty, and that is
the ingemination, Praise, Praise. It teaches us (...), Plutar. Apophth.


First, The natural Sluggishness and indisposition which is in us unto this
Duty. Want will make us importunate to obtain good things, but when our wants
are supplied, how few are there who think of returning praises unto God? All
the ten Leapers were clamorous for mercy, but there was but one of them, and he
a stranger that returned glory to God, Luke 17. 12, 13, 18. We are in this case
like Fishermens Weels, wide at that end which lets in Mercies, but narrow there
where we should let out our praises. Our Mercies are like Gideons dew on the
ground, very copious; our praises like his dew on the fleece, very narrow and
contracted. Mercies run into us, as Jordan into the dead Sea, where they are
all buried in oblivion. The Lord had saved Israel from sore bondage in Egypt,
multipled his judgments on their enemies, and his merces unto them, had wrought
wonders for them, and terrible things which they looked not for; and yet all
these mercies, multitudes of mercies, wonders, manifold wonders (which of all
things make the deepest impression upon memory) were all forgotten, and that
quickly, neither did they say where is the Lord that brought us out of Egypt?
Psalm 78. 11. ^2, 43. Psalm. 106. 13, 21, 22 Jer. 2. 6.

Secondly, The ardent zeal of the Psalmist to have God receive his due. The
duller men's hearts are, the more importunity should Gods Messengers use to draw
them unto duty. When the Iron is blunt, we must put to the more strength,
Eccles. ^0. 10. Hence those frequent iterations in Scripture to awaken men out
of their dullness ^ Samuel, Samuel; Saul, Saul; O Earth, Earth, Earth, hear the
word of the Lord, Jer. 22. 29. precept upon precept, precept upon precept, line
upon line, line upon line, here a little there a little, Isa. 28. 13. It is
called whetting of the Law, with stroke upon stroke, often and earnest
inculcating of it, Deuteronomy. 6. 7. fastening of nails, with blow upon blow, Eccles.
12. 11. One threatening will not awaken stubborn sinners; we have seven upon
seven, Levit. 26. 18, 21, 24, 28. One curse will not startle the heart of a
proud Pharisee; they must have woe upon woe, Matthew. 23. 13 -- 29. When the
Psalmist has recounted various mercies, he does rather wish and persuade, then
expect a return of praise, and that with a quadruple Ingemination, O that men
would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the
children of men, Psalm. 107. 8, 15, 21, 31.

Thirdly, the great necessity of this Duty; when the Lord calls often for one
thing, we must needs conclude that it is unum necessarium, one very necessary
thing. The Hebrew expression of a superlative is by doubling the word, good,
good, that is exceeding good; Holy, holy, holy, that is, most exceeding holy;
thou shall follow Justice, Justice, that is, thou shall be most just; so here,
praise, praise, seems to note a more then ordinary excellency and necessity in
this Duty.

Fourthly, The manner and measure how this Duty is to be performed, Again,
again; with redoubled Affections. There is no Affection more copious and
multiplying then that of joy; Phil. 4. 4. It enlarges and expandeth the heart,
it breaks out into serenity of countenance, into fluency of expressions, into
active and vigorous gestures, as David's* into leaping and dancing before the
Ark. If we look into all the Scripture we shall seldom find so frequent and
emphatical ingeminations, as in this of praising God. Who is like unto thee O
Lord amongst the gods? who is like thee? Glorious in holiness, fearful in
praises, doing wonders? Exodus 15. 11. Awake, awake Deborah, awake, awake, utter
a song, arise Barak, etc. Judge. 5. 12. Bless the Lord, O my soul, all that is
within me bless his holy name; Bless the Lord, O my soul, bless the Lord ye his
Angels, bless the Lord ye his hosts, bless the Lord all his works* bless the
Lord O my soul, Psalm. 103. 1, 2, 20, 21, 22. In the last Psalm, containing but
six verses, we are called upon thirteen times to praise the Lord, Jewels are
made of diverse precious stones couched together: praise is a Jewel, a comely, a
beautifying thing, Psalm. 33. 1. and we find one of these Jewels are made up of
no fewer then six and twenty ingeminations, Psalm. 136. praise him for his
greatness, he is the Lord; and again, praise him for his goodness, he is thy
God. If a man show me a precious and stately thing, I shall be thankful out of
curiosity, as for a favor; but if he show it, and then give it, I shall be a
thousand times thankful, as for a rare bounty. Great, and Good, and Mine;
nothing will move thankfulness, if excellency and property will not: The
Greatness of his power mine to keep me, the greatness of his Wisdom mine to
counsel me, the greatness of his Grace mine to sanctify me, the greatness of
his Glory mine to save me; who should be thankful, if not they who want
nothing? And who can be said to want any thing who have God for their God? The
Lord, says David, is my shepherd, I shall not want, Psalm. 23. 1.

Of this excellent Doctrine I shall make these two Uses, and then speak a
little to the present occasion, and so conclude.

First, We should learn from hence to bewail our long and great unthankfulness
under as many and wonderful mercies, as scarce any Nation under heaven is able
to parallel. Unthinkfulness is not setting so high a price as we ought upon a
good Land, quiet Habitations, fair Estates, peaceable Borders flourishing
Fields, abundance of Men, Cattle, Wealth, Trade, Strength, and all other good
things. Unthankfulness for that which the Apostle calls the riches of the
world, and the salvation of the Gentiles, Romans 11. 11, 12. for the Oracles of
God, the Ark of his presence, the glorious light of his Gospel, and powerful
means of grace and salvation, in abundance of which I know not whether any
Countries on the earth can outvy and surpass this of ours. Unthankfulness
(which is worse) in abusing mercies, waxing fat by them, and then kicking
against the Author of them, filling our selves in our pastures, and then
forgetting God, making them rather the fuel of our lusts against him, then the
arguments of our love unto him; turning peace into security, and plenty into
excess, and grace into lasciviousness, and pardoning mercy into presumption of
sinning, multitudes making little other use of the Gospel then that which the
Gospel does abominate, to continue in sin that grace may abound; to drink
poison the more freely, because they have an Antidote by them. Nay, which is
yet more prodigious, not using nor improving mercies when we were in danger to
lose them, when war and desolation should have taught us to value them* to
weep, and bleed, and languish, and have gray hairs upon us, to be set on fire
rou d H^s. 7 9, 10, Isa. ^2 25. Exodus 8 15. Ez a 9. 8. Jer 47. 6. 1 Samuel 15. 32.
about, and even then to lay nothing to heart, nor to return to the Lord, nor
seek him for all that; to cement our souls and our lusts together with mortar
tempered with our own blood and tears, to be wanton and dally with mercies,
when they were ready to depart from us; and now when there is respite, and the
Lord has given us a little reviving, and put the sword into the Scabbard, to
become thereupon like Agag proud and delicate, because the bitterness of death
seems to be past; to abuse outward and inward Liberty, not only with sensual
excess and luxury, but with prodigies of wild and wanton errors, with a civil
War of Doctrines, as before of Blood; this is an aggravation of unthankfulness,
then which I know not whether there can be an higher given. The not using a
mercy, is to be unthankful for it; how much more sad account must men give of
abused mercies? of requiting the goodness of the Lord with forsaking of him,
the culture and Husbandry, the rain and dew which he has bebestowed upon them
with thorns and briars? Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Luke 13. 7 Heb. 6. 7. As the greater heat
of the Sun does more speedily ripen fruit, so do great mercies hasten the
maturity of sin, and make them as the rod of an Almond tree, which blossometh
before other trees, Jer. i. 11. or as a Basket of summer fruit, which is
quickly ripe, Amos 8. 1. It is a swineish thing at the same time to feed on
blessings, and to trample them under foot, to live upon them, and yet to defile
and despise them.

Secondly, We should be exhorted unto the careful practice of this excellent
Duty. I shall not go out of the Text for Motives hereunto.

1. He has strengthened the Bars of our Gates, we are not by the power or
machinations of Enemies devoured or dissolved, we have yet the face of a potent
Nation, notwithstanding the devices of any to dissipate our Laws, or to reduce
us to confusion.

2. He has blessed our Children within us, though the sword have devoured
thousands, and might justly have swallowed the blood of many more, should the
Lord have dealt with us according to our provocations, yet our streets, our
fields, our Cities, our Churches are still full, old men with their staves,
little children playing in the streets, with as much security as before.

3. He has given peace in our Borders. When Ephraim was against Manasse* and
Manasse against Ephraim, no man spared his brother, when the Land did eat the
flesh of its own arms, when the strength of battle was poured out in every
corner, as if the Lord would have consumed us all at once, then was he pleased
to try us once again with the keeping of so rich a Jewel as peace. And when
thereafter he raised up against us new Enemies and troubles by Sea, whereby
trade was obstructed, treasure exhausted, Protestant Religion in danger to be
weakened, and unhappy hostilities like to have continued amongst neighbor
Nations, which had been before confederate and in amity, this evil likewise
the Lord put a stop unto, and made the Sea, which wrought and was tempestuous,
quiet and calm again, and thus has confirmed peace in our borders, and abated
the hopes which the enemies of the Reformed Religion had entertained upon those
unhappy differences.

4. He has fed us with the fat and marrow of the wheat, crowned the year with
his goodness, the fields and the pastures sing; he has sent a plentiful rain,
and refreshed the earth, the fields and the clouds, and the Sun have been
confederate and at an agreement, to empty the blessings, wherewith God has
filled them, into our bosoms, according to those gracious promises, Hos. 2. 21.
22. Zach. 8 12.

5. He suffers us yet to call him our God, he is still in the midst of us, we
have yet the custody of his oracles and liberty of his worship; he has not yet
given us a bill of Divorce, nor cast us out of his sight, as our sins have
deserved. What great reason have we to ingeminate praises, when the Lord is
pleased to multiply mercies? Who would ever mistrust such a God who can so
powerfully and so suddenly help? Who would ever provoke such a God who can as
easily and as speedily destroy? Who would trust in bars and gates, in Castles
and Armies, in Ships and Navies, and leave him out who is the strength of them
all? Who would not trust in him who is a God near, and a God a far off, a God
in the Gate, in the City, in the field, in the border, on the land, on the sea,
whose way is in the sauctuary, and his path in the great waters? Who would not
fear thee, O King of Nations, and glorify thy name? for unto thee it does
appertain, who alone art glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing
wonders.

I shall conclude all with a few words unto you, the Officers and
Representatives of this great City, into whose hearts the Lord has put so woe
thy and pious a resolution as to appoint this day, in the which to recount his
mercies, and to speak good of his name. And albeit your selves who are best
acquainted with the state of the City, and Gods dealings therewith, can more
abundantly present to your own thoughts, variety of particulars of divine
goodness then I who am but a stranger can, yet give me leave to be your
Remembrancer in these few.

1. Be pleased to look back on those bloody Marian days, when the streets of
this City were defiled with the blood of Martyrs, when the blessed members of
Christ were drawn from Cole houses and Prisons to Stakes and flames, and
consider the indefatigable and crafty endeavors, which have been from time to
time by that party used (and no doubt they are as unwearied now as ever, though
happily they are under new shapes and disguises) to reduce us back again. And
consider the purity of Evangelical Doctrine and Worship, and the great liberty
you now enjoy therein (The Lord pardon, pity, and rebuke those, who either
through ignorance o profaneness, do pray the wantons with such a benefit, and
abuse it, to the rending and causing of breaches in the Church of Christ.)

2. Look on the sore plagues which have heretofore reigned in this place,
emptying the City of all that could fly, and sending Armies of those that
remained weekly to the grave. The City is probably now much more populous, many
thousands of houses being since that time newly erected, and few either of the
old or new without Inhabitants; yet for these many years this raging disease
has been banished from this place, when probably it might have been a double
Judgment unto you, and you have that blessing which the Lord promised
Jerusalem, Zach. 8. 5. made good unto you, The streets of the City full of Boys
and Girls playing in those streets, where, in the days of pestilence, grass
grew for emptiness and desolation.

3. Look on the late bloody Wars, when the Lord poured out on the Nation the
strength of battle, and set it on fire round about, Ephraim Manasse, and
Manasse Ephraim, when the people were as the fuel if the fire; you here heard
not the prancing of the horses, nor the rarling of the wheels, you saw not the
glittering of the swords, nor the displaying of the Banners, you were not
witnesses of the confusions which other places saw and felt. Your houses were
not shaken with the roaring of the Canon, nor your wives made Widows, or your
children Orphans by the edge of the sword: Your City was then like the top of
the hill at Rephidim where Aaron and Hur held up the hands of Moses; no hands
lifted up here to fight but only to pray; no siege here, but that about the
Throne of Grace, ut ad Deum quasi manu Tertul. Apol.
facta, precationibus ambiamus orantes; no waring or wrestling here but that of
Jacob with the Angel. This City was as it were the Chapel, the Oratory of the
Nation.

4. Look back on the late heavy blows by fire in this City; that sad and sudden
blast by Gunpowder on Tower hill, whereby diverse persons perished; those
dangerous fires afterward in other places, unto which the Lord could have
given a commission to have spread and diffused it self into an universal
conflagration; the merciful rebuke which was upon the fire then, and the safety
you have since enjoyed from such dangers. And truly when I consider how many
Trades there are in this City which deal in combustible matters, Powder, Flax,
Hemp, Pitch, Tar, Turpentine, Hops, Tallow, Paper, Oil, and many other like,
the casualties and carelessness which may be in many amongst so great a
multitude, by knocking of Links, by misplacing of Candles, by falling down or
sparkling of fire, by blowing out of Tobacco, and many other miscarriages not
easily ennumerable, it is an evident demonstration of Gods watching over such a
City, and being himself a wall of fire about it, and giving his Ministers, who
are a flame of fire, a special charge over it, that other fires do not break
out in it.

5. Consider the goodness of God to this City, in giving it zealous and
faithful Magistrates, who make it their business to be vigilant over the good
of this place, who lay next their hearts the prosperity thereof, to encourage
virtue, to punish and suppress wickedness, to preserve peace, to prevent
profaneness, to look to the health and good order of the place.

6. Consider the goodness of God unto you in a learned and a faithful Ministry,
what endeavors some have used to cry them down, and to leave this Nation as
sheep without shepherds; the copious and abundant light of the Gospel which
shines on this place, this City being filled with the knowledge of the Lord as
the waters cover the Sea. If any City in the world may at this day be called as
Jerusalem once was, a City of Truth, a holy Mountain, in regard I mean of the
doctrine of truth and holiness preached therein, then certainly this may.
Insomuch that Forraigners, Hungarians, (Germans, Batavians, others learn our
lan guage, and come over to this City, that they may hear your Preachers, and
read your English Divines.

In one word, look unto the concurrence with all Countries at home, all foreign
Nations abroad do join in, to send variety of blessings and comforts unto this
City. As the beams of the sun are united in a Burning-glass, so variety of
blessings meets from a wide circumference in such a center as this. The Sea
sends you in Fish, and the Air Foul, the Fields Corn, and the Pastures Cattle.
Some Countries adorn you with Silks and Jewels; some warm you with Furs and
Cottens; some heal you with Drugs and Balsoms; others comfort and refresh you
with Wines and Spices; some send in Materials to build your houses, others send
you in furniture for your ships; read Ezekiel. 27. and that will show you the
benefits of a Celebre Emporium:

And when you have viewed these mercies, look on the many and prodigious sins
whereby the Lord is provoked in this place to withdraw these mercies from it.
Sins made much the more atrocious by the mercies and light against which they
are committed, Joh. 15. 22. Amos. 3. 2.

Now then, as the Lord has put into your hearts to consecrate this day unto
his praise, and to stir up one another to speak good of his name, be pleased to
set your selves seriously about it. Consider it is not the work of the lips
alone (though it consist much in uttering the loving kindness, and in singing
aloud of the goodness of the Lord.) Remember what David that great Artist in
Divine praises did, Ps. 103. 1. He calls upon his soul, and upon all that was
within to bless Gods holy name. Our Minds should bless him by meditation on
his goodness, and admiration of his mercy; our Heads should study and contrive
what to do to bring honor unto the name of so great a God; our Hearts, Wills
and Affections should resolve, to take the cup of salvation, to call upon his
name, to love the Lord because he has heard our supplication, Psalm. 116. 1. to
fear the Lord and his goodness* Hos. 3. 5. considering how great things he has
done for us, 1 Samuel 12. 24. Our Mouths should make report what he has done for
our souls, for our families, for our Cities, for our people. Our Hands should
praise the Lord by rendering back out of his own blessings (for of his own only
do we give him, 1 Chronicles. 29. 14.). Some homage and acknowledgment that we hold
all from him. We read of the Lords offering, Exodus 35. 21. and of the Lords
tribute, Number. 31. 28. Lev. 5. 15. The ancients called them (...), things
belonging unto the Lord. It is true, our goodness extends not unto him, a man
cannot be profitable unto God; yet we must obey him, though we cannot do him
good. First therefore let us give our selves unto him, and by a solemn covenant
become the Lords people, 2 Chronicles. 23. 16. 2 Cor. 8 5. resolving as a purchased
people to live to him, and not unto our selves, Romans 14. 7, 8. and when we have
given our selves to God, we shall more readily give him what ever else he
requires; for every thing else will follow a man's self. Let us therefore
labor for large hearts toward God, to be rich in good works, ready to
distribute, willing to communicate. No riches are durable, but those that are
consecrated unto God, Isa. 23. 18* Manna in the house had worms, Manna in the
Tabernacle endured. Rust se s^th on met^al that lies still; keep it in motion
and it never rusteth; there is a scattering, Solomon says, which tends to
increase, Prove. 11. 24. He has dispersed, says the Psalmist, he has given t^
the poor, his righteousness endures for ever, his horn shall be exalted with
honor, Psalm. 112. 9. Men will buy great honor at a dear rate, Act. 22. 28.
Here Alms deeds, which use not to be very great sums exalt a man unto honor.
Riches take wings, righteousness only endures. Our glory will not go after
us, we shall carry nothing of our wealth with us, Psalm. 49. 17. but our works
will follow us into another world, Rev. 14. 13, when you trade into other
Nations, you cannot transport their money and treasure, but if you turn them
into other commodities, them you may transport to another Country: so our
silver and gold we cannot carry to heaven with us, but turn them into good
works, and they will follow you as far as heaven. In trading I suppose you
esteem it a very fair return if you get one in five, bu^ in sowing you part
with one, and happily reap ten in the Harvest; and to be sure when the sowing is
on earth, and the reaping in heaven, we shall have a better return then Isaac
had, who reaped an hundred fold, Genesis 26. 12. As Sanctuary measure was double
to other measures, so Sanctuary returns are double, centuple to other returns.

Ask then your souls the question, What shall I render unto the Lord, what
shall I do for so good a God? I have my life, my comforts, my soul, my heaven
from him, what shall I do for his name? Remember you have the truth of God, a
precious depositum which Solomon bids us buy and not sell, Prove. 23. 23.
Countenance it, propagate it as you are able. Hypocrites will be at great
charges for a false way to heaven* thousands of Rams* rivers of oil, Mic. 6. 7,
8. Be you ready with heart and hand to further the truth. You have it, many
places want it; there are places where two, three, four town* belong to one
Parish, where the maintenance of the Gospel is not twenty pounds a year; many a
soul may go to hell in such places for want of the Gospel. Many happily of you
are risen to great estates, who may remember such famished Congregations in the
Countries where you were born. O then if you have seen and tasted how good the
Lord is to your souls, endeavor to snatch others out of the fire that they may
taste of Gods goodness too* Happily it may lie in your way and power to stir up
superiors to take some course in so necessary a work as this. Show your selves
valiant for the truth, study what may be done to preserve it, and to remove
that deluge of errors which would plunder you of it; remember David* Josiah,
Nehemiah what they did for the House of God and the Offices thereof. You have
the Messengers and ambassadors of Christ, remember what Hezekiah did, He spoke
comfortably to those that taught the good knowledge of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 30.
22. Remember what your selves in this City have been famous for, in this
business of encouraging your faithful Ministers, and as the Lord speaking of
the distress of Jerusalem, which should have no parallel to liken it unto, said
Ariel shall be as Ariel, Isa. 29. 2. so let London, in this particular be as
London, continue to love, to countenance, to esteem beautiful the feet of those
that bring glad tidings of peace. Show your honor to the Lord, by your love to
his Officers; it will be so much the more your crown and comfort, by how much
the more they are reproached by others.

Lastly, You have the poor Members of Christ amongst you. He indeed who was
once poor, and was ministered unto himself, Luk 8. 3. is now in glory; but he is
cold, and hungry, and naked, and sick, and suffers in many of his members
still, Col. 1. 24. Help them with your bounty as Christians, help them with
your orders and Authority as Magistrates; where you can do neither, help them
with your prayers, with your comforts, as fellow members; Rejoice with them
that rejoice, and weep with them that weep; remember, none of us lives to
himself, none of us dies to himself, we are the Lords workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, which he has ordained that we should walk in
them. Let it therefore be our chief care and study to live to the praise of his
glorious grace, and to show forth the virtues of him thot has called us out of
darkness into has mavelous light. The more glory we bring unto our Lord on
earth, the more glory does he provide for us in heaven.

FINIS.

