THERIACA ANDROMACHI SENIORIS Diuinum Inuentum.

lion symbolizing Mark PAX TIBI MARCE EVANGELIST^^^^^

cloud scene of Saints, angels and Christ THERIACA FIN ALLA SPECIARIA DEL
PARADISO IN RIAITO

SOLI DEO GLORIA ET HONOR

SOPRA LA RIVA DEL VIN IN VENETIA



lion symbolizing Mark PAX TIBI MARCE EVANGELIST^^^^^

The abouesaid antidote is Composed in Venice with all diligence and care by
Anthony Raffaeli Apothecary at the sign of the Paradise at Riu'alta upon the
wine bancK in the presence and before the most Illustrious Magistrates of the
old Justice, and the most excellent College of Doctors and of the
Apothecaryes, and other deputys for the same, the faculties, and rare virtues
of which are as follovveth for the good of all people.

THe Teacle amongst all the other prerogatives has virtue to preserve from the
plague, and from all other Contagions aKeings Keeping the body cheerful and in
health.

It is good against the passions of the heart, or heart AKeing, removing thence
Melancholy, Consumeing the putrefied humors of the body, expelling every
unwholesome superfluity of the Same, Keeping it wholsome, and strengthenes it
admirably.

It cures the very plague, and other pestilential diseases.

It is good against all biteingr of of all sorts of venomous creatures.
Especialy of the scorpions and madd dogs, and other sorts both of the land or
water taKen at the mouth and applied to the vvound on the outside.

It preserues from poisons Taking before or when there is suspicion, and
Especially after the poison is discovered in which case the sicK person must
Indeauor to vomitt offten Taking the said treacle inwardly.

It helps very much those that from, an inuuard, and Unknown disease consume
avay as if they vere poisoned.

It is a singular remedy against al agues, preventing, the trembleing Rigor,
and colds chat continue long, Taking this treaKle, three, or four times before
the fites begin.

It cures the quartane ague given in the universal state of the fit, but not
in the begnining the matter, and cause being raus.

It preserve from pestilent and malignant Agues, and cures them.

It expells the vvinde from the Stomach, stops spitting of blood, taKenby the
persons grieved inwardly.

It expells fleagme from the Stomach, it s' good against the pain in the
entrals griping of the gutts or pain in the sides, occasioned from ulcers, the
stone, it cures the dropsy, and the, ^^ffique, in the beginning of the fitts.

It strenghns the eye sighnt, ad is e^^^^lent good for all internal disseases
of the head faling Sickness, appoplexy Palsy, stopps the flux, and Rhevvmes
prouoKeing sleepp.

It is good against the pains in the ^^est, covvghes, and Cattars.

It co^forts admirably the heart, preuents the burning, and quacKeing thereof.

It cures all indispositions of the stomach, as exstreame hunger, or loathenes
and strengthens the Vital pars.

It Kills all sorts of vermin, or worms, expells them out of the body, and
hinder their ingendring.

It cures the leprosy used often by the patient.

It prouoaKes, vvomanes flovvres, and the stopped flux of the emoroides, and
what is wonderful it equally restraines the over much flux of the same,
conforting nature, vveaKeness by both indispositions.

It prouoKes the after birth, and it helps to bring forth dead children it has
many other, rare virtues, that for, breuity saKe do not write, it being, a
most rare, and Real medecin, and well Known by all the world, it agrees to
ages above seven years and to all Complexsions, and may beguien at, or in any
scasson.

THE DOSE.
TO the young, and those of strong Complexsions the weight of turo, or 3.
scruples a lone, or in wine, or aqua mulsa, or other liquor.

The aged people one drame, and the same weight to be given, for poisons and
the plague.

LA THERIACA adunque tra l'altre sue prerogative ha virtu di
preseruaregl'huomini dalla a Peste, e da ogn'astro male Contagioso
conseruandoli sani, and allegri.

G^oua all passioni dell'animo, rimouendo la Malinconia, consoma^do gl'humori
putridi del corpo, discacciando^gni inutile superfluita, con mantenerlo sano,
fortifica mirabilmente.

Cura l'isteffa Peste, e gl'altri mali contagiosi, pero e ottimo preseruatiuo,
e curati^o di quella, e di simili.

Valle all morsicature di tutti gl'animali velenosi, and in particolare degli
Scorpioni, e del Can rabbioso, e de gl'altri animali, tanto di Terra, che di
Mare, pigliata per bocca, and applicata di fuora sopra debt morsicature.

Pres^rua da^l Veleni, presa auanti quando si ha sospetto, e si cura q^a^do
fossero stati diuorati, nel qual caso deue cercare l'infermo di vomitare,
reiterando piu volte il pigliar per bocca della sopradetta Triaca.

Gio^a sommamente a quelli, che da causa interna, and occulta*si vanno
consumando, come se fossero auuelenati.

Eremedio singolare a tutte le febri leuandone il tremore, rigore, o freddo,
che durano longamente, pigliandone tree o quattro volte auanti l'accesso.

Sana anco la Quartana data nello stato universal del male, e non nel
principio, essendo la materia cruda.

Preserua dalle febri, Pestilenti, e malign, e la cura.

Risolue la ventosita dello stomaco. Gioua alli dolori delle viscere, e delle
reni cagionati da Vlcere, o dalla Pietra.

Guarisced ^dropisia, e la Tisica nel principio del male.

Toglie dal petto la Marcia, e ferma glisputi del sangue, tolta spesso per
bocca da gl'Infermi.

Augumenta la vista, and conuiene a tutti li ma li interni del Capo, come al
mal caducho, Apoplesia, Paralisia fermando ^^^flussioni,, and i Catarri, con
eccitareil sonno.

Conferisce eccellentemente all passioni del petto, all toss, and a i
catarri.

Conforta mirabilmente il cuore, togliendo^e la pal pitatione.

Sana tutte l'Indispositioni di stomaco Come la tropa fame, innapetenza, nausea
ca^cia^done la collera, e la putrefazione, aiutando la concozione, con
^^scaldare, e fortificare le parti vitali.

Ammazza tutte le sort de vermi, cacciandoli fuora del corpo, e n'impedisce la
generatione.

Cura la Lebra vsata spesso da pazienti.

Prouoca i Mestrui all Done, and il sopresso flusso dell'Emoroide. E quello,
ch'edi Marauiglia, restringe egualmente i souerchi flussi Emoroidali, che
Mestrui, confortando la natura debelitata da ambedue indispositioni, che
robusta abbraccia il medicamento.

Prouoca le secondine, retenute, e manda fuori del Corpo delle Done le
Creature morte.

Ha molte altre virtu, che per breuita si tralasciano, essendo medicamento
reale, Canonico, e notissimo a tutto il Mondo.

Conferisce a tutte l'eta da set anni sopra tutte le complessioni, e si da
securamente in ogni tempo.

LA DOSE SARA'.
ALli giouani, e quelli di virile eta al peso due o tree scropoli sola, o con
vino, o con acqua mulsa, o altro liquore.

Alli vecchi 1* dra^ma, and il medesimo peso si dara ne Veleni, nella Peste, e
per preseruatiuo vno scropolo, haue^do se^pre riguardo alla qualita della
persona.

IN VENETIA, M. DC. XCVII. Presso Domenico Milocho. Con Licenza de' Superiori.


