THE RESOLVED APPRENTICES, OR A Reply of the well-affected Apprentices of the
City of London, Inhabiting in the Ward of Bridge within, UNTO A late Printed
Paper, entitled, The Thankeful Acknowledgment and Congratulation of diverse
well-affected Apprentices within the Ward of Cripple Gate, without; Unto
Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn, Mr. William Walwin, Mr. Thomas Prince, and Mr.
Richard Overton.
FOrasmuch as we have seen a late Paper, entitled, The thankful
Acknowledgment, etc. unto Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn, etc. The tendency
whereof is to applaud and justify the said persons in fomenting Jelousies,
Divisions and Discontents in the City, Country and Army, and thereby
obstructing the desirable and long looked for Relief of Ireland, and the happy
Settlement of this Commonwealth, stifling thereby those tender buds of Joy and
Gladness which did begin to spring within us; all which Proceedings of the said
persons do render them so far from a Consimilitude with Moses and Aaron, to
whom the Contrivers of the said Paper does most proudly and arrogantly compare
them; In leading us, poor Israelites, out of our bondage and slavery of Egypt
into a Canaan of Liberty, (according to their flattering language:) As that it
more fitly represents the said Mr Lilburn, Mr Walwyn, Mr Prince, and Mr
Overton, like Korah, Dathan, Abiram, and On, Numb. 16. 1. who took unto them
what party they could procure among the families of Israel, (as these do among
the Regiments of the Army, and elsewhere) and gathered themselves together
against Moses and Aaron, their experienced, successful and valiant Leaders, (as
these do against the faithful and approved Governors of the Nation, and
prosperous chief Commanders and Officers) telling them that they took too much
upon them, seeing all the Congregation are holy every one of them: (As these
tell their present Governors and Commanders, that they take too much upon them
to Lord it over them, for they are the freeborn People of England every one of
them;) Adding moreover, Wherefore then do you lift up your selves above the
Congregation of the Lord? (As these in their high Language charge their
faithful Leaders to do all, in order to lift up themselves over the free People
of England, and to keep them down in Tyranny and Slavery,) And therefore
forasmuch as the said Paper pretends in the name of diverse well-affected
Apprentices of Cripple gate Ward without, to congratulate the said Mr Lilburn,
etc. encouraging and praying them to go on in their present Proceedings: We
cannot but conceive it a false, scandalous and moft injurious Aspersion,
staining the honor and repute of the well-affected Apprentices of the said
Ward; a Jesuitical, Wicked and Malignant Insinuation, on purpose to increase
Division, make Tumults, and raise up Parties, according to the well-known
Custom of the disaffected Party, that so the Harvest of Peace, Freedom and
Liberty of this Nation, which was sown in Tears, watered in Blood, and now
looks white, and ready for the Sickle, may be trodden under the feet of that
very Party that is ready to reap it, and burnt up by the fire brands, scattered
abroad by these crafty Foxes: increasing the Burdens, Oppressions and Miseries
of the People, by precipitating them into a third most fierce, fiery, and
bloody War, more dangerous and destructive then the former have been, to the
intolerable inslaving and impoverishing of the poor Country, by hindering that
Party designed for Ireland in that happy Expedition, and continuing them still
upon free quarter, and raifing up and engaging a fresh Party without any the
least color of Authority whatsoever, to the unsufferable vexation and ruin of
the poor Country. And lastly, Forasmuch as the well-affected Apprentices of the
City of London are exhorted and excited, according to that pretended Pattern,
specified in the said Paper, To choose cordial and active young men in their
respective Wards, to be Agitators for them, to procure parties for the carrying
on of that Work, viz. To do after their pretended Example. These are therefore
to satisfy all such to whom this Paper shall come, That we do renounce and
abhor the Contents of the said Paper, and do look on it as scandalous and
reproachful unto all well-affected Apprentices; and though we have had
honorable thoughts of some of those persons to whom the said Paper was
directed, for their former forwardness and zeal for the Interest of England,
yet we do in our Souls and Consciences conceive and judge their present
Proceedings, the unhappy fruits of Jesuitical and Malignant tamperings with
them, and shall use the best skill and abillities we have for the hindering
their turbulent Proceedings. And although we cannot but be sensible of the
manifold pressures and sorrows of the People, as well as these pretenders to
Common Interest, and do heartily wish and desire the Parliaments speedy care
and endeavor to perform their Engagements to the People, and take hold of all
opportunities to that end; yet (considering the multitude of business,
wherewith they are encumbered in securing the Commonwealth by Sea and Land,
etc.) we are resolved with our lives, and all that is dear and precious unto
us, to assist the Parliament in their just Proceedings, and their hopeful
progress in the speedy Relief of Ireland, and prudent Settlement of the
Commonwealth of England upon Principles of Righteousness, Freedom and Safety,
which is according to the Tenure of their late Engagements in the several
Expresses and Declaration.

We have now discharged our Consciences, in vindicating the honor and
reputation of our fellow Apprentices of Cripplegate Ward without, and do
desire (if it appears meet) that both they and the well-affected Apprentices of
all other Wards of this City would echo us in a joint and unanimous
Declaration of their steadfast Resolutions, faithfully and constantly to adhere
unto the Parliament and Army in their just prosecution of the public
Interest, and engage themselves with us in the presence of Heaven and Earth, to
strengthen their hands in that just and righteous Cause of freeing this Nation
from Tyranny and Slavery, wherein they have advanced and, through Gods mercy
with them, prospered against all the Powers and Policies engaged against. We
have sent these our Resolutions unto Mr Lilburn, Mr Walwyn, Mr Prince, Mr
Overton, this 17 of May, 1649. and do likewise commend the same unto the
serious Consideration of our well-affected fellow Apprentices, hoping that as
in the beginning of these Wars our Predecessors (young men of the same quality
with our present condition) were honored to be Instruments of propagating this
Work, so God would make us also instrumental for the finishing thereof, which
is the desires and prayers of

Your affectionate fellow Apprentices of Bridge Ward within.
Dated the 17 of May, 1649. the first year of Englands hopeful Restoration,
through the blessing of God, to its primitive Liberty.

