The great and grievous Oppression of the SUBJECT; Exhibited in a REMONSTRANCE
to the PARLIAMENT: Wherein is more particularly set forth, The unjust Dealings
of the Two CORPORATIONS OF HULL AND HEADON In the County of YORK.

By ROBERT RAIKES Gent.

London, Printed for the Author. 1659.

For the Right Honorable The Supreme Authority of the Nation, the Commons
assembled in Parliament,
The humble Petition of Robert Raikes of Headon, Gent.
Humbly shows unto your Honors,
THat your Petitioner having been at all times, and in all changes a constant
adherer to this present Parliament and Commonwealth, and by reason thereof has
suffered and sustained great loss and damage in his Estate, partly by reason of
his goods the Soldiers under the Lord Fairfax took, used and burned of your
petitioners, both at Selby and Hull; but more especially by the violent and
injust dealing of diverse Malignants and Presbyterians in the town of Hull, and
the base carriage and continual injust and illegal vexations of the Cavaliers
and the drunken Aldermen of the town of Headon, these of Headon having from
time to time sought and laid wait for the life of your petitioner, and many
times not only driven his goods, but lamed and spoiled his goods so driven, and
in the nightime broken his fences, stolen his goods both cows and mare off
his ground, and being so stolen have laid actions on them, and forced
extraordinary and extrajudicial compositions. (...) ^anting any Replevin for
the goods so surreptiously stolen and take ^^y, threatening those that came to
meat the goods, seizing and imprisoning of their persons, and milking the cows
and spoiling them, and countenancing the persons that so did: Being a Town
guilty of supposed murder, and of much bloodshed, rapine, spoil, and perverting
of Justice; the Magistrates drunken, idle and vicious persons, and all the
Corporation for the most part little better, being a nest of Cavaliers,
Tinkers, drunken and malignant men, as your Petitioner doubts not to make
apparent to all the world, they having been along-customed to much mischief,
and likely they are to commit more, threatening your Petitioner they will make
the town of Headon too hot for him; having besides lying in wait to kill him,
assaulted him in his own house, wounded and beat him down in his own courtyard
with halberts, dragged him out of his own house-porch and all along to prison,
refusing Bail proffered by better men then any the drunken Aldermen his
prosecutors, to the great hazard of his life, as may more plainly and sully
appear in a Discourse called The transcendent vilany of Headon; as also by the
malicious Malignants and Presbyterians of Hull, who have by their clandestine
dealing, and after by open force and combination, without and against all law
and equity and good conscience, put your Petitioner out of a certain
House-lease granted unto him formerly under the Hospital common seal and the
Masters hand, witnessed by the Mayor and six Aldermen, to his damage in his
trade and calling to the value of Three thousand pounds, even to his utter
undoing.

May it therefore please your Honors to refer your Petitioner to some
Committee, who may order the Justices and others whom they think fit in the
Country; to take the Grievances aforesaid into examination, that upon enquiry
the honorable House may be certified in the truth of the premises, and
thereupon order relief to your Petitioner as they shall see cause; and your
Petitioner doubts not but to make apparent his wrongs aforesaid, and that the
Commonwealth will receive profit by examining the Charters of the town of Hull,
upon which your Petitioners Lease is grounded, and so much land concealed given
for the maintenance of their Block-houses, now a daily and great charge to the
Commonwealth: But also a great deal of honor to your selves, and security to
the Country, in binding to the Peace and Good-behaviour such idle and evil
disposed persons who shall appear guilty of such crimes, and also in restoring
the oppressed Inhabitants into the freedom of the rest of the Country, to be
governed by the Justices, and free from the vilanous extortions and oppressions
of those vicious and idle drunken lewd people, the Major and Aldermen of
Headon, who neither know how to do right, or able to satisfy for the wrongs
and injustice they daily commit. And your Petitioner, as formerly, shall be
ever ready to serve you and the Commonwealth with his life and estate, and
shall ever pray for the continuance of your health, and your increase of honor,
etc.

A List of the Aldermen of HEADON, As well the Drunken Aldermen, as the other,
from the first to the last of their Officers.
IMprimis, Mr. Lister eldest Alderman, an old illiterate fellow, a Cooper,
lives by mending old Tubs and Butter-firkins; in his youth a kind of Professor,
but in his age in his last Majoralty led by the drunken sort, and did for
sixpence in Ale put a Soldiers wife by violence out of her Jointure-house,
against all law, equity and good conscience; for which they gave him and his
Officers two quarts of Ale more, in all ten pennyworth of Ale. A poor simple
old man, his land and dwelling house worth 4 l. or 5 l. per annum: In whose
time of Majoralty many oppressions and false imprisonmentss happened.

2. Item, Mr. Burstal, one of the drunken sort, and a pitiful old illiterate
fellow, saving that he is qualified for one of their Aldermen, being vicious
and given to drink; has Bastards going in town that he owns, and is more
careful of then of some of his best children; committed many absurdities in his
Majoralty by raising and mispending of Assessments, false imprisonment of good
people, and all other the scurvy tricks of the Town, to the great oppression of
the people, scandal of religion, and raising of suits and troubles: A man at
first worth 16 l. per annum, but gave away to his sons; now worth 5 l. per ann.
or thereabouts.

3. Item, Richard Southwick, formerly a Spademan laborer, now a Chandler, one
of the drunken Aldermen, a man given to much lewdness and baseness, a common
drunkard and a sottish fellow, will be drunk twice or oftener in a day, and
taste it roundly in a corner: One who committed many absurdities in his
Majoraly, by raising and mispending of taxes, and false imprisonment of men.
Worth at first 10 l. per ann. now worth 6 l. per ann. or under. A pitiful,
vicious, and illiterate fellow to make an Alderman of.

4. Item, Thomas Burton, another of the drunken sort, an illiterate fellow;
when his brother died, left shoo-making, and malted; had 12, or 14 l. per ann.
but by his unjust and absurd dealing in his Majoralty, and his vicious and lewd
living, sold some land, weakened his stock, and now not able to live but by his
scandalous keeping of Mr. S. a Boarder. One who will not work at his trade, but
idly given; committed many businesses in his Majoralty, for which he stood
before the Judge at York-Assizes: It Is almost impossible to mention all his
absurdities and vilanies.

5. Item, Robert Ambler, another of the drunken sort of Aldermen; first a
Spademan, but after the death of his Uncle, an Alderman and Tanner, worth 14 l.
per ann. or thereabouts; but by his evil and injust dealing in his Majoralties
weakened his estate, sold some land, ran into debt by his evil husbandry in
drinking and other vicious courses: In his first Majoralty committed many
vilanies, had like to have murdered one Thomas Smeadley in his bed, and had
made an end of him, had not the Troopers rescued him from death: In his second
Majoralty committed many absurdities by false imprisonment, and raising of
taxes and mispending of them with much lewdness; A common drunkard, and one
that is viciously given; had a contest with a Dutch D^ctor about the curing the
heat of his codpiece, to the great scandal of Religion, and the Corporations
discredit.

6. Item, one Robert Blansherd another of the drunken Aldermen, a Joiner, a
common drunkard, and an illiterate fellow, and a Cavalier against Hull, made
(though unskilfully) those wooden Fireworks did occasion so much death at
Cortingham when Hull was besieged, both of Kings party and other good people:
One who had drunk himself deep in debt, but by begging for the fire has gotten
into some stock, and is 100 l. better then he was; which in regard of his lewd
and vicious living will not last long. One that had a hand in the death of Mr
Ethrington, and many other cheats and false dealing, being not able to satisfy
for the wrongs by him done: His estate worth 12 s. per ann. besides his house.

7. Item, Richard Barns once a Blacksmith, but by getting two widows turned a
Baker; the richest man among them, but simple and illiterate, as all the rest
are, and led by those of the drunken sort by reason of his simplicity, in the
time of his Majoralty, into much lewdness, oppression and vilany, about the
driving of cattle, false imprisonment of men, and receiving of a stolen Mare,
stolen by Thomas Newson and some others by the counsel of Samuel Bains the
Town Clerk, and the said Barns with the advice of the drunken Aldermen, with
many other absurdities too long to recite.

8. Item, Nathaniel Norris now Major, a great Prosessor, but very Hypocrite;
for he joineth with all the rest in their vilanies and drunken courses, and
caused a false action to be laid on a stolen Mare, and falsely imprisoned and
caused to be apprehdended a servant for meating her masters cattle which he had
caused unjustly to be driven and impounded, and after laid false actions of the
said cattle on purpose to get extrajudicial and extraordinary compositions for
fees for the Town Clerk, and to spend among the drunken Aldermen, refusing Bail
for the goods impounded. One that has not a foot of land in all the town, and
did give up shop at Hull, sold his corn and stock off the ground to make
himself Major of Headon; A drunken consort as can be proved, is much in debt,
and but little to pay with of his own goods.

9. Item, Henry Stringer another of the Aldermen, a Shoemaker, a very pitiful
simple fellow and illiterate, and very poor, and led altogether by the drunken
sort to all mischief and vilany, worth 40 s per ann. and his house.

Item, Samuel Bayns Town Clerk, a lewd and vicious person, formerly tried for
his life at Oxford for murder (as is reported) a common quarreller and common
drunkard, a keeper of an unlawful Tipling-house unlicensed and irregular, and
therein many quarrels, bloodshed and suits are raised by him to the great
disturbance of Town and Country; for he holds there the meeting of Cavaliers
and Papists, to hatch their continual plots against the Commonwealth and the
good people thereof; as also there in his Tipling-house aforesaid is hatched
and contrived all the vilany of the drunken malignant Aldermen his confederates
and associates in mischief; there also he contriveth all his false practices to
pervert the Law, and lying in wait for blood and murder, falsifying and forging
of Records, to the great vexation of Town and Country; being also a common
cheater and a cozener, and a great defrauder of men's estates that have to deal
with him, having broken and compounded twice.

Item, Thomas Robinson Butcher, for his knavery made Sergeant at Mace, and one
of the Attorneys of the Court; a common drunkard, one that keeps a common and
unlicensed Tippling house where much vilany is hatched and contrived; a common
Barrettor and betrayer of men's causes, taking upon him as an Attorney, being
but an illiterate fellow; A common cheater, and one that often has laid wait
for blood, both against Mr. George Etherington and Mr. Raikes; and one that
has his Agents abroad to steal men's goods off their grounds, and drive their
cattle; and then with the advice of the drunken Aldermen and the lewd
Town Clerk, extort great compositions, and will suffer none of the relations of
those that come to meat and relieve the cattle, so to do, but viol ntly
assaulteth and beats them, and carries them prisoners to the Major, who
allows all their evil dealing and countenanceth them therein, to the great
spoil of men's goods and cattle, so that no man can say his goods are his own,
if they may so be suffered to take them: And in that Town and Country there is
no remedy; for the Country-Justices do not meddle therewith, or are suffered so
to do, by reason of the Charter the said Town does plead, and thereby thinks
they may pervert justice as they themselves list.

Item, Richard Newton another of the Sergeants at Mace, a Tanner, and an
illiterate fellow, a Dingthrist and a common drunkard, a cheater and cozener at
his Alehouse-bargains and gaming at cards; made only an Officer for his
knavery, false-swearing, and perverting of justice; being an Attorney also of
the Court, but so illiterate both he and the other Robinson, that neither of
them can write their own name, at leastwise neither of the said Attorneys
Robinson and Newton can write a Declaration, or indite any Plea of themselves,
being more versed in knavish dealing and pilfering and driving men's goods off
their grounds, and receiving such goods so pilfered off other men's grounds,
Fence-breakers and Night-walkers to prey and feed their horses of other men's
grounds, then in any honest wi^e to discharge the place and office of Attorney
as they ought to do; by reason whereof all Suits in that Court depending are
carried as the knavish Town Clerk will, and he will accept of no Declarations
or Pleas but what he makes, nor will make none according to the Instructions
given, though never so legal, but on purpose to pervert justice and overthrow
the right of those he hates, or help those that will give him most for hire;
takes double or treble fees, a Suit formerly being tried for six or seven
shillings, he has now brought up to twenty four shillings, besides bribes or
gratuities he takes, so well known to the Country, none will so much as expect
any justice from such vile persons. The said Newton and Robinson being also
Night-walkers, and putting their own and the drunken Aldermens horses, (the
greatest oppression that can be, and indeed intolerable and insufferable, that
so many base, idle, drunken fellows, so idly and basely given, should be
suffered to oppress the Inhabitants by eating up their grounds every year as
they do) they putting forty or fifty horses on their lanes (they call banks)
which are insufficient for ten horse; and when the banks are bare, nay even at
every Fare, they being so accustomed have every year, and do this year also
enter the neighboring grounds to the said banks, all their Township consisting
but of ninescore acres, and half of them being and belonging to Foreiners, for
so they call all them not within their base jurisdiction, and that will not
allow of their base dealings as above-written, they continually eat and oppress
the strangers grounds, and no remedy therefore, being a general practice and
done in the night by base beggarly Night-walkers set on by the persons above,
who never yet gave any remedy for so general and great a grievance, the
Justices in the Country having no power to right such Grievances in their
Corporation.

Item, their other Officers, two Constables chosen for their knavery, well
versed, and if not, must learn all the vilany aforesaid, if they mean to be
Churchwardens, and so Bailiffs, and at last drunken Aldermen, etc.

Item, The Pinder one Foster, a notorious Pilferer, Nightwalker, and one
reported to be a notorious Thief and insufferable Vilain; keeps both Horse and
Cow, buys little or no Hay; and if any, at years end sells more then he buys,
and steals other men's Hay in the night. All the other Officers being but slaves
and bloodhounds to serve the base lust and commands of their Major and drunken
Aldermen; nay it is reported, all the Burgesses do swear at their making free
to do whatsoever the Major shall command them; by which much vilany is executed
as above, and more, which I leave to your Honors to see remedied.

The several Misdemeanors which the Drunken Aldermen practice in the
Corporation of Headon, both by Commission, and toleration and connivence.
IMprimis, They tolerate the Town clerk, who is a wicked lewd fellow in all his
wickedness, being a man formerly tried for murder at Oxford; A common drunkard
and common quarreller, and a raiser of seditions and fomenter of quarrels and
suits, a lier in wait for blood, a felonious stealer of men's goods off their
ground, and a receiver, counselor, and abetter of those that so steal men's
goods off their grounds, a Night-walker, and perverter of justice; and borne
out in all these by the lewdnesses of the drunken Aldermen aforesaid, to the
great disturbance of the public peace.

Item, A keeper of unlicensed Tipling-houses, selling Ale contrary to the
Statute, and a common Cheater. In all which he is upholden by the drunken
Aldermen aforesaid.

Item, That after he had come from his Trial at Oxford, and from practicing his
bloody tricks as a cutthroat Cavalier, keeping at Headon a common
Tipling-house unlicensed, and as a Cheater had compounded twice to cozen men
and make them take less then their due for their own, yet could not he forbear,
but must needs continue his cozening and quarrelling, cheating and seditious
practices in his lewd Tipling-house, cozening Robert Swack and others by
raising and stirring up Suits when by him enticed to drink, raising diverse
quarrels, and among the rest, among the Tinkers of the Country, he set together
by the ears and made parties among them being drinking with him, and so ordered
their quarrels, that those of the Cavalier-party should get the better and
escape, and those of the Parliaments party that had been their Soldiers, being
lamed and beaten by his wicked contriving, to be falsely imprisoned, and after
long Imprisonment to be let go without any charge against them, besides many
other quarrels he has raised, and much bloodshed caused by lying in wait for
the life of Mr. George Etherington, by breaking his stable-door and seizing his
horse, prosecuting the said Mr. Ethrington even to death when his goods were
gone: And as greatly suspected to have occasioned the death of the said Mr.
Etherington by laying violent hands on him at Paul, Newton's garth, and Headon,
whose death and murder would be inquired into.

Nor did his murderous intentions rest there, but at the same time he also laid
wait for the life of Mr. Robert Raikes; and for many days together on purpose
to take the life of the said Robert Raikes, encouraged his Cutthroats he had
hired, and that by the drunken Aldermens aid, advice and connivence; by whose
wicked practices after much lying in wait, the said Cutthroats assaulted the
said Robert Raikes in his own house, knocked him down with Black bills and other
unlawful weapons, beat and wounded him, and having so beat and wounded him in
his own house, dragged him therefrom by the heels all along the streets to
prison, the same day Mr. Etherington was buried; the neighbors crying out of
their murder and vilanous cruelty, bidding them take heed of committing one
murder after another, and bade them first clear themselves of one murder before
they committed another upon the body of the said Robert Raikes; the death of
Mr. Etherington being fresh in every ones memory, and supposed by their cruelty
to be made away, which caused suits and many troubles.

Yet did not their cruelty so rest, but the drunken Aldermen being all combined
to countenance such vilany, after long and false imprisonment, when they could
prove nothing just and legal against the said Robert Raikes at the Sessions,
yet out of mere malice they tied him to his good abearing without showing any
cause why, and yet would not suffer him to live in quiet, but hired lewd and
vicious persons to intercept him, and without cause carried him to prison, and
scandalizing him with lies and untruths, but never proved any thing against him
to this day, but on purpose to lame, beat and take the life away of the said
Robert Raikes, and to pervert the course of Law and Justice, and that by the
whole Court of Aldermen in their drunken Sessions. Nor did their malice so
cease, but the drunken Aldermen and Towns-Clerk caused the Fences of the said
Robert Raikes to be broken down; and their lewd Underlings whom they keep to
swear for them in all their vilany, eat up the ground of the said Robert Raikes
to his great damage; and the Fences which the Town and their Tenants, being
Town-Officers, should make up and repair, neither the drunken Aldermen nor
their lewd Officers would or could be persuaded to repair, but on the contrary
made a great deep ditch or pit just at the lane where he should have carried
his goods out and in, on purpose to destroy and lame and kill those beasts of
Mr. Raikes which they had designed to destroy in the said pit, and should come
upon his ground, and carried their own goods hrough Mr. Raikes and other men's
ground, by reason the pit they had made to destroy men's goods at the entry of
their own, having so spoiled his goods about seventeen head of beasts one time
and other. They laid and contrived three false Actions, and arrested the said
Robert Raikes; which was contrived by the Town Clerk and Paget, two
Cavalier-knaves: Paget declared for Twenty four shillings for fees, and the
Town Clerk swore falsely the said Robert Raikes owed so much within a little for
fees, and promised to pay him, etc. being altogether false: For the said Robert
Raikes never employed Paget, or ever was owing him any thing for fees, but
employed one Smailes to reverse an Outlawry, and gave him money to discharge it
and over: But who did it is not known; for Smailes is upon the Record, and had
the money, though he did it knavishly, falsely, and contrary to his Attorneys
oath, as by Smailes Note of charges may appear: For, for Paget, he never was
employed nor trusted so much then, or allowed to practice, nor never did or
could prove any such fees due he sued for.

The other two Actions were for slandering the Town Clerk for swearing so
falsely: But that he swore falsely, is apparent by Record, no Fees proved or due.
And the last was a false Action for a supposed Debt the Town Clerk challenged
falsely, it being paid before, and never was a quarter so much, as by his hand
may appear; but he did it on purpose to cheat the said Mr. Raikes of a parcel
of Cushions he bought of him, and never paid for. Neither did they keep their
Courts order, by reason they were all employed about begging for the Fire, and
abusing the Justices to make them a Certificate according to the false oaths
and informations by them exhibited; by means whereof they got a large Patent,
and by it and their begging got two times more then all their losses were by
fire, but spent a great part of it as their drunken meetings, as they do of all
their Estreats and Forfeitures at the Sessions, and all other the Towns stock,
that was not long since worth above Fifteen hundred pounds; besides their daily
Re^^s and Forfeitures, whereof few are brought to account, but almost all idly
spent as can be easily proved. And as that was, which by a vile and illegal way
they extorted from Robert Raikes, sending for him by a Sergeant, who is also
Attorney of the Court, and under pretense of friendship by the new Major, who
promised he might safely come and gow* The said Robert Raikes went along to
know their pleasure, which the new Major told him, the Court had fined him
Twenty shillings for contempts for not appearing to the Actions. He replied, He
had desired to see their Declarations, but there were none in Court; and if any
were then, he desired to see them; but none appeared till fourteen days after.
Then they said, He should have fee'd his Attorney and answered Court-days: He
replied, They were so busy about their Certificate, there was no legal Court
kept: They said there was; But it was proved that their Court was neither
legally kept, the doors being locked, none could come in, nor any Attorney to
fee there. But they said, If the Attorney was not there, his Wife was, and
would have received Fee, having let the Major and Clerk in at a backdoor. So
because none could get in to see the Sergeant or Jailors wife for an Attorney,
they threatened the said Mr. Raikes, unless he would pay them Twenty shillings
for that Contempt before Declarations, they would drive his goods, or imprison
him. Which the said Mr. Raikes, knowing them to be Knaves that sought his life,
fearing they would use him as formerly, or as Mr. George Etherington, he became
bound to pay them, and was forced so to do: But that would not so content them
neither, but the Town Clerk came violently upon the ground and chased his cows
and cattle; which having been often used to be evil-intreated by those lewd
people, knew them and run from them into the far close, so many as were
formerly abused by them and knew their usage; so that there was but one cow
left which was not acquainted with their cruelty, and that the Town Clerk stole
off the ground, belonging to one Thomas Newsom, who was owing Mr. Raikes ten
shillings for her grass.

Upon what strange composition the poor man had his Cow again, is uncertain:
But the Town Clerk and drunken Aldermen, and the knavish Officers counseled
the man to steal a Mare from off the ground of Mr. Raikes, that cost six
pounds; And having been counselors and abettors to the man and his associates
in the stealing the Mare, they the said Town Clerk, drunken Aldermen and
Officers were the receivers of the Mare so stolen, knowing her to be so
stolen: And the better to palliate the Felony, they caused an Action to be
laid at the suit of Thomas Newsom, who with his associates had stolen the Mare
by their council and abetting. The said Raikes being at Hull, he sent word and
desired to have his goods so stolen secured, and the Felony enquired after:
But by such base people could not get justice; Pilfering and such dealing being
publicly countenanced by the drunken Aldermen and their associates. So that
the said Robert Raikes can keep neither Cow, nor Horse, nor Swine, for their
pilfering; having had One hundred pounds worth of goods spoiled by their
illegal dealings, and ten or twelve Swine worried by the Dogs of the drunken
Aldermen, who keep them contrary to Law to wreck their malice upon their
neighbors, to do them hurt. And for their Highways, they cause their Juries to
swear even what they list, sometime one way, sometime another way, as guided by
the drunken Aldermen; and very few of the Burgesses but are guilty of rash and
false swearing, even concerning the Highways, and the keeping their Fare; and
are in all such contrary swearing promised to be holden harmless by the drunken
Aldermen and their associates, and they led altogether by the Cavaliers to do
mischief to those of the Parliaments party: The said Town clerk having always
councels, plottings and contrivings of hurt, treason and mischief, in the
Tipling-house of the said Town Clerk, by all the Papists and Cavaliers in the
Country; which though the Aldermen know, and Mr. Barns was often complaining
of, yet he never remedied, nor any other of the drunken Aldermen; by reason
whereof the good peaceable people live in great fear and danger of their lives
by reason of the misdemeanors aforesaid.

FINIS.

