Deaths Advantage; Opened in a SERMON PREACHED The last Summer at Northampton,
AT THE FUNERAL OF Peter Whalley Esquire Then Mayor of the said Town.

And now upon the earnest desires of his Friends published by Edward Reynolds,
D.D.

LONDON Printed by Tho Newcomb for George Thomason, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the Rose and Crown in Paul's Church yard, 1657.

To the Honorable John Crew Esquire;
SIR,
HAving been prevailed with by the earnest desires of those who were nearly
related unto that worthy Gentleman, at whose Funeral this Sermon was preached,
to let it, (after it had been it self so long buried) something unseasonably
revive and go abroad into the world; I have taken the boldness to prefix so
honorable a name as yours before it, upon a double account; one relating unto
the deceased Gentleman, the other unto my self. For the former, if we may take
the character of a wise and worthy man by the affection which he bears, and
choice which he makes of eminent Examples, whose prudence and piety to foll^w,
I may truly, and therefore without flattery to you or him pronounce this dear
Friend now with God, a very wise, and a very good man, having been frequently
an ear-witness of the singular Honor he did bear to your person (in mentioning
of whose zeal and care to promote the glory of God, the truth of the Gospel,
the interest of Religion, and good of your Country, he did greatly delight to
expatiate) and whom he did propose to himself as a special pattern for his
imitation. For mine own part, as I have the same reasons which moved him, to
bear an honorable and high esteem toward your person, and the gifts and graces
of God bestowed upon you; so you have by your abundant favors to me, and
particularly your earnest and sollicitous endeavors to have preserved my
Station in the University, when changes in the State caused changes there, laid
so great a debt upon me, as I have no way to discharge, but only by putting
you over to the best Play Master, and in my prayers commending you unto him, who
does not forget your labor of love. To his gracious Protection I commend you,
and all the branches and interests of your Family, and remain,

Your humble and most obliged Servant, ED. REYNOLDS.

THE Gain of Death.
PHIL. 1.21. For to me to live is Christ, and to dye is Gain.


THE Apostle having saluted these Philippians, and testified his sincere love
unto them, and hearty prayers for them in the first eleven Verses; does in the
next place endeavor to comfort them against any offense or trouble which they
might sustain by occasion of his sufferings for the Gospel, verse. 12, 13.
assuring them that they tended to the defense thereof; many being thereby
provoked, and by the example of his courage and comfort animated to speak the
Word without fear, verse. 14. And although some indeed had evil and envious
intentions to reproach his Apostleship, and to add affliction to his bonds, yet
Christ being preached, he did rejoice notwithstanding his own sufferings, as
knowing that by the benefit of their prayers, and by the supplies of the Spirit
of Christ, his own salvation, and the glory of the Lord should thereby be
promoted, verse. 15-20. And if the Lord may be thus magnifiea, and himself
saved, if his life may tend to the honor of Christ, and his death to his own
advantage, he is most indifferent and contented to yield to Gods holy will
either way; for, says he, to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. If I
live, my work, my conversation, my ministry will be wholly to serve and
glorify him; and if I dye, my death will not only be glorious unto him, but
gainful unto me, I shall be ever with the Lord, which is best of all. The
Apostle therefore is at a stand, in a strait betwixt two, which to choose: On
the one side Christ will be magnified in the edification of his Church; on the
other side he will be magnified by the salvation of his servant; the one will
be fruitful to the Philippians; and the other gainful to himself. He is wholly
therefore indifferent whether he live or dye, because Christ will be both ways
an advantage unto him, and he shall be both ways serviceable to the glory of
Christ.

We see the coherence, connection and scope of these words. Some versions, as
ours, make them two distinct Propositions, To me to live is Christ, To me to
dye is gain. Some others make them but one proposition, thus, In life and in
death, or whether I live or dye, Christ is to me gain.

In the words there are two parts considerable. First, The Propositions
themselves. Secondly, The specification of the Subject to whom they belong.

The Propositions are, according to both readings, these three. First, To live
is Chrst. Secondly, To Dye is Gain. Thirdly, Christ is both in life and in
death gain. The specification of the Subject of these Propositions, to whom
they belong, To Me, a Believer, who am willing and desirous that Christ may be
magnified in my body, whether it by my life or by my death, as being much more
tender and sollicitous of his honor, then of mine own particular safety.

First then, To live is Christ, or Christ is life unto us. It is true, many men
live, who are without Christ in the world, an animal or a natural life to
themselves, to other men, to carnal, to secular, to sinful purposes; but being
alienated from the life of God, we may say of them as the Apostle does of
sensual and delicate Widows, that they are dead whilst they live. Our true life
is founded in the life of Christ; Because I live you shall live also, J^h.
4.19. He that has the Son has life, he that has not the Son has not life. 1 John 5.12.

Now Christ is our life in every way of causality. First, Vid Fr: Gomar: To. 1.
p. 288.
He is the Author and efficient of our life, whether we speak of life natural;
In him was life, and the life was the light of men; he lights every man that
comes into the World, Joh. 14.2. By him all things consist, Col. 1.17. In him
we live and move, and have our being, Act. 17.28. He formed us in the belly,
his hands made us and fashioned us round about, Job 10.8. Jer. 1.5. Psalm. 139
15, 16. In every work of continued Creation the Son works as well as the
Father. My Father works hitherto, says he and I work, Ioh. 5.17. Or whether
we speak of life spiritual, the life of Grace; I live, says the Apostle, yet
not I, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2.20. In him is the primitive seat of life
and grace, from whom it is diffused upon his body For as the Head and the
Members are animated by one soul, so Christ and his Church by one spirit. we
being joined unto the Lord are one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. Vid. Aug. de Genesis ad
lit. l. 4 c. 12. and lib. 5 c. 20.
Or lastly, whether we speak of Life eternal, the life of Glory, this our life
is hid with Christ in God, and when Christ who is our life shall appear, we
shall also appear with him in glory, Col. 3.3, 4: Of these two especially the
Life of Grace and the Life of Glory, Christ is the efficient cause, per modum
pretii, as a Meritorious Procurer of it, laying down no less a price then his
own life to purchase ours; For we are bought with a price, 1 Cor 6.20. and by
virtue of that price we are quickened together with him, Gomar. to. 3. disp 15
and Parker de descens. lib. 3. sect. 49.
Ephesians. 2.5. 2. Per modum Principii by his Holy Spirit fashioning us to his
Life and likeness; for being a Second Adam, he is unto us a quickening Spirit,
1 Cor. 15.45. and having life in himself does derive it upon whom he will, Joh.
5.21 26. As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father, so he
that eats me shall live by me, Joh. 6.57.

Secondly, Christ is the matter of our Life: As meat is the matter on which
life feeds, Aug. Tract. 26 in Joan. Eusebius. cont. Marcel. cap. 12.
and by which it is preserved; so Christ is the spiritual Manna, the bread
which came down from Heaven, of which they who eat shall live, Joh. 6.51. The
Sacrifices after they were offered for expiations, were many times eaten for
the comfort and reviving of those that offer^d them. Christ therefore, who was
our Passover, having offered himself as a propitiation, to take away our sin by
the Sacrifice of himself, was thereupon pleased to institute his Last Supper,
and therein to set forth himself as that spiritual food whereby the life of
Grace in his people is nourished and preserved.

Thirdly, Christ is the very form of spiritual life in a Believer, in which
respect he is said to live in us, and to be formed and fashioned in us, as the
child is shaped in the womb of the Mother, Gal. 4.19. and this both as forma
essentialis, the very soul that actuateth a believer, he is a quickening
Spirit. If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the Spirit is
life because of righteousness, Romans 8.10. and as forma exemplaris, the Idea,
model and pattern of our life, for he has given us an example that we should
follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21.

Fourthly, Qui esse vult sibi and non tibi nihil esse incipit inter omnia.
Bern. in contr. Sermon. 20.
Christ is the end and scope at which our whole life is to aim and to be
directed; it must be wholly consecrated unto him; nothing in all our
concernments must be so dear unto us as Christ; whether we live we must live to
him, or whether we dye we must dye to him; because for this end he both died
and rose again, that he might be the Lord both of the dead and of the livings,
Romans 14.7, 8, 9. therefore as by bringing forth much fruit we do glorify the
Father, Job. 15.8. so also do we thereby honor the Son, out of whose fullness
we receive grace for grace; for he that honors not the Son, honors not
the Father, Joh. 5.23. This seems here principally intended, To me to live is
Christ: My life, time, studies, employments are wholly taken up in the things
of Christ, that he may have honor and service by me. Wicked men live to
themselves, to them to live is lust and vanity; they follow their own wills,
they walk in the imagination of their own hearts; they rule themselves by no
counsel but their own carnal and corrupt wisdom, as it is said of Jeroboham,
that he set up a worship which he had devised of his own heart, 1 Reg. 12.33.
and the the people professed to Jeremy that they would do whatsoever should go
forth out of their own mouth, Jer. 44.17. They direct all they do to
themselves, looking after only their own gain, ease pleasure, credit,
advantage; fasting, eating, drinking to themselves, and assembling themselves
for corn and wine, Zach. 7.6. Hos. 7.14. They withdraw themselves from that
subjection, and subordination wherein God has placed them, and do in effect
say as Pharaoh, Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice! Ex. 5.2. Now ^is
is a very strange folly, because our salvation and the glory of Christ are
twisted together, as the coherence of the 19. and 20. verses of this Chapter
does demonstrate. When we neglect his glory, we forfeit our own salvation; and
when we seek our own salvation, he esteems himself glorified thereby. As when
a great stone does fall from an Arch, the little ones that were bound and knit
in by it do fall for company; so when men do neglect the great end of living to
the honor of Christ, they do greatly endanger all their own subordinate ends
thereby.

What is it then for Christ to be our life, or for a man truly to say, To me to
live is Christ? It is First, In our hearts to acknowledge him for our Lord,
unto whom we owe our time, and strength, our fear, and honor, Isa. 8.11. Mal.
1.6. Secondly, in our lives, to do every service with good will, and in
singleness of heart as unto him, Ephesians. 6.5, 6, 7. to do it by a warrant from his
word, I will hear what God the Lord will say, Ps. 85.8 Proving what is the
good, and perfect, and acceptable will of God, Romans 12.2. and what it is which
Christ would have us to do, Act. 9.6. To set him always before us, and to do
every thing as in his presence, and with a desire to approve our hearts in well
doing unto him, Ps. 16.8. for as he behaved himself toward his Father, doing
always those things that pleased him, Joh. 8.25. 6.38. so are we to behave our
selves toward him, who as he has made us the Sons of his Father by Adoption,
Joh. 20.17. so is he himself our Father by Regeneration, and calls us in one
respect his Brethren, and in another his Children, Heb. 2.11, 12, 13. To do
every thing unto his glory, as vessels fitted for our Masters use, and prepared
unto every good work, 2 Timothy 2.21. To value our life not chiefly for it self,
but for the service which therein we are to do unto our Lord: I count not my
life, says the Apostle, dear unto my self, so that I may finish my course with
joy, and the Ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus, Act. 20.24. And
herein likewise we imitate his example, who in conformity to the command of his
Father did himself lay down his own life for his sheep, and became obedient
unto death, even the death of the cross, a servile, an ignominious, Vid. Lips.
de Cruce. cap. 12. Casaub. in Baron. exercit. 16 c. 77.
a cursed death, Joh. 10.11, 15, 18. Phil. 2.8. This it is for a man to say, To
me to live is Christ; my thoughts, studies, aims, purposes, employments, do all
fix and terminate upon him, how I may bring glory to his name, how I may
promote his interests and Kingdom; how I may live the rest of my time in the
flesh, not unto mine own lusts, but unto his will, unto whom my soul and
salvation was dearer then his own life. Since his blood was my price, his glory
must be my business. For he therefore died for All, that they which live,
should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them
and rose again, 1 Pet. 4.1, 2. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15.

We see how Christ is life; Let us next enquire to whom he is so. To me, says
the Apostle, to live is Christ. There is much of the life of Religion in
Pronowns and Adverbs, in persons and the manner of doing things. To those whom
the Father has given him, he is life; to those that believe he is precious, 1
Pet. 2.7. To others he is a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, and his
Gospel a savor of death unto death. He is not at all in their thoughts or cares
to please or glorify him. They are not at a point, so he may have honor,
whether it be by their life or death. But so they may have pleasure or profit,
so their carnal desires may be gratified, and their interests secured, let what
will become of his name or honor. Therefore let us make sure the Pronown here,
To me, that I am one who am willing Christ should be magnified by me any way,
whether by life or by death; otherwise we cannot say, To me to live is Christ.

Thus far all runs very smoothly unto Christian ears. To live is Christ, he our
Lord; therefore unto his service and honor must our whole life be consecrated
and devoted. No difficulty in all this.

The next Proposition seems more strange and paradoxal, that to Dye should be
Gain. Arrian. Epictet. l. 4. c. 10. Senec. ^onsol. ad Mart. and Polyb. and Ep.
24 30, 66. M. Antonin. l. 3. sect. 3. Plutarch. consol. ad Apollon.
Many Philosophers have spoken many kind and flartering words concerning
Death; That it is the end, solution, period, remedy of all our cares, sorrows,
labors, fears; a Debt, a Tribute, a Sleep, an Harbor, or Haven, a rest, a quiet
Repose after all our griefs and miseries: But none I think did ever go so far
as to make it Gain; and it may seem to be no other nor better gain, then that
which the Apostle speaks of, Act. 27.21. A gaining of loss; for what kind of
gain, would one think can there be found in that, the very formal being and
nature whereof does consist in nothing but loss?

1. There is in it the loss of all a man's Substance, His house knows him no
more, Job 7.10. His Lands, his Place, his Tenants, Rents, Revenues own him no
longer. If there were a judgment at Law given against a man, overthrowing his
whole estate, stripping him of his house over his head, the money in his purse,
the corn in his Barns, the Cattle in his fields, the clothes on his back,
leaving him as naked as the world at first found him, would any man call this
gain: Death is just such a judgment, leaves a man no more land then his grave,
no more clothes then his Shroud, no more house then his Coffin. No difference
but this; in the one Judgment possibly a stranger, in the other a Son, or a
Kinsman succeeds; but as to a man's self it is all one.

2. But when all these things are gone, happily friends may recruit a man again,
as they did Job, Chap. 42.11. Polyb. hist. l. 5. Fruitur diis iratis. Juv.
We read of the incredible bounty of Princes and States to the people of
Rhodes, after they had been sorely ruined by an earthquake, insomuch that their
calamity proved an advantage unto them. But in death there is a loss of
friends, as well as of Estate, Wife, Children, all part at the grave, and never
meet till the Resurrection.

3. Though means and friends be all lost, yet if a man could keep possession of
himself, it may be his head or his hand, his wit or his labor would repair his
losses again: But Death is the losing of a man's self, no hand left to work, no
head left to contrive; it tears a man assunder ^ro^n himself, and sends his
parts as far distant as either Heaven or Hell are from the Grave. Now after all
these losses, of Estate, of Friends, of Wisdom, of strength, of a man's very
self, what possible room is there left for Gain, when he that should enjoy it
is himself lost?

All this notwithstanding, God must be true, and every man a liar. Death is
Gain, and Gain we must find in it before we leave it.

First, Let us take it at the worst view which a Believer can have of it, as it
is an Enemy for so the Apostle calls it, 1 Cor. 15.26. And so it was esteemed
by Christ himself, who though in love to us, and in obedience to his father, he
submitted unto it, yet testified his natural desire to have declined it, when
with strong cries he prayed once and again, O my Father, if it be possible let
this cup pass from me. You may not without show of reason say, What Gain is to
be expected from an Enemy? Many times Friends themselves, when it comes to the
point of gain, to this question, Who will show us any good, are shie, and draw
in their friendship. Laban though Jacobs Father in law, grudged him the benefit
of that bargain which himself had before most willingly consented unto; Joab
was Absoloms friend, yet Absalom burnt up his corn.

Yet we may not deny, Vid. Plutarch. ^h. de capienda ab hostibus utiutate.
but that a man may have gain by an enemy, as poison unto some creatures
affords nourishment: ^^elephus had his Impostume opened by the dart of an
enemy, which was intended for his hurt. Those Roses they say are sweetest which
grow near unto Garlic; the neatness of an Enemy make a good man the better.
And therefore the wise Roman, when Carthage the Emulous City of Rome was
destroyed, said truly, Now our affairs are in more danger and hazard then ever
before. When Saul, David's Enemy, Eyed and persecuted him, this made him walk
more circumspectly, pray more, trust in God more; He kept his mouth with a
bridle while the wicked were before him, Psalm. 39.1. An hard knot in the wood
drives a man to the use of his wedges. A malicious Enemy that watches for our
halting, will make us look the better to our ways. And so death by the nearness
thereof, and by the frequent meditation thereupon, makes us more careful of our
great account, more sollicitous to make sure our peace with God, to wean our
hearts from worldly and perishing comforts, to lay up a good foundation for the
time to come, that we may obtain eternal life, to get a City which has
foundations, whose builder and maker is God.

But it may be said, all this Gain is from Death at a distance, while we are
out of its possession. Is there any Gain from such an enemy while we are under
his power? Yes, even here there may be gain; was not the fire an enemy to the
three Children? were not the Lions enemies to Daniel? yet they were rebuked;
When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes his enemies at peace with him,
Prove. 16.7. Laban pursued Jacob in great anger, Esau meets him, as we may
suppose, with hostile purposes; but the Lord by his powerful providence
overruled their hearts, that they could not hurt him. Saul, David's
Father-in-law, persecutes him; and Achish the King of Gath, from whence Goliath
came, whom David had not long before slain, and who could not but for that
reason be hated at that place, gives him entertainment: God can make Moab a
covert for his outcasts, as he was unto the Father and Mother of David, Isa.
16.4. 1 Samuel 22.3, 4. Though Death be an enemy, the Lord can weaken it, disarm
it, pull out the sting of it, and make us at peace with it.

But you will say, All this is rather harm suspended, then gain obtained. Is
there any more proper and gennine gain to be found in an Enemy, such an Enemy,
having us under his power and possession? surely yes. We find the Egyptians,
bitter Enemies to Israel, furnishing them with Jewels of silver, Jewels of gold
and Raiments, Exodus 3.21, 22. Was not the Whale that swallowed Jonah an enemy,
a very type of our enemy here, as our Savior tells us? Matthew. 12.39, 40. Yet
by it was Jonah carried safe to land, he regained life by that which devoured
him; he had been drowned in the Sea, if the fish had not found out the Shore
for him. Were not the waters of the Red Sea, and of Jordan enemies to those
that should go into the midst of them? yet through these did Israel gain
liberty out of bondage, victory over Pharaoh and his host, and possession of
Canaan their promised Rest.

Take it in the (...). Here men are absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6. as Jonah
is said to have fled from his presence, cast out into a Sea of cares, troubles,
fears and sorrows; Death as the Whale devours us, and lands us at a better
shore, leads us from the thraldom of Satan, from the temptation and sufferings,
and fiery Serpents which we meet with in the wilderness of this world, and
brings us into our Heavenly Rest. So then even under the notion of an enemy
here is gain from death. As a Lamprey is esteemed delicate meat when the sting
of the back is taken out; as the waters of Marah were made sweet by the tree
which was cast into it; so death, being by the cross of Christ purged of its
venom and bitterness, is become useful and gainful unto us.

Secondly, Let us view Death on the better side; for it is as a plaited
picture, on the one side it looks like a grim and angry enemy, as destructive
to nature; on the other side, it has a more calm and friendly aspect, as
reconciled unto us by Christ. It is as a Servant sent from a Father to call his
Son home; as a Nurse which takes the Child in her arms to carry it to the
Mother; it is a depositary entrusted with the custody of the body, and shall
give an exact account thereof unto Christ. He by his holy body has sanctified
the grave, and made it a bed to sleep in. We find Angels at either end of
Christ's grave, Joh. 20.12. They keep the Saints not only in their ways, but in
their graves. The Jailer who before did beat Paul, and scourge him, and thrust
him into the inner prison; being converted, treated him after another manner,
washed his stripes, brought him into his house, and set meat before him, Act
16.33, 34. Such a change there is in death; before, the spirit of bondage
represented it with a chain and scourge, it kept the soul down under the fear
and dread of it. But now, unto a believer by Christ, it is so far altered, that
it is become part of his dowry and portion, numbered up by the Apostle amongst
those good things which with Christ are graciously bestowed upon us, 1 Cor.
3.22.

We will consider the Gain we have by this Friend, first privatively, then
positively.

Privately, It freeth us from all other evil, and toilsom labors, which we
were, by the curse pronounced against Adam, subject unto. It is a kind of
Canaan, a Rest, a Sabbath unto believers; write says the Lord from heaven to
his Apostle, Blessed are they that dye in the Lord, for they rest from their
labors, Rev. 14.13. they enter into peace, they rest in their beds, Isa 57.2.

1. They rest from the toilsom captivity and tyranny of sin, a burden under
which they complain, as too heavy for them to bear; There is no rest in my
bones because of my sins; mine iniquities are grown over mine head; as an heavy
burden, they are too heavy for me, Psalm. 38.3.4, 6, 7, 8. the Apostle calls
it a weight, and an encompassing sin; (...), Vid. Pet^i Fabri Agonistic. l. 2.
c. 3. Methedius apud Epiphan. haeres. 64.
a fat and heavy body wholly indisposeth for an Athletick employment. This body
of lust being destroyed, they are made perfect. Heb 12.23. As Ivy which has
gotten its roots into ^ll the joints of a wall, can never he qu^^e killed, till
the wall it self be demolished; so sin and corruption being deeply seated in
the whole nature of man, is never quite slain and subdued till the whole frame
be taken down and dissolved.

2. Greg. Tholos. Syntagma juris, l. 31. cap. 20. Bestias Asiaticae pressurae.
Tertul. de resurrect. carnis, cap. 48.
They rest from the buffets and temptations of Satan; it was a sore conflict
for the Apostle to fight with Beasts at Ephesus, whether they were truly or
Metaphorically such, beastly men, 1 Cor. 15.32. but this combat was nothing to
the messenger of Satan, to the roarings of that Lion; how rampant and
outrageous he will be against the servants of God, when the Lord is pleased to
leng then his chain, and to give him liberty; what dismal fears, what hellish
impressions, what fiery darts, what black and horrid suggestions he will amaze
the souls of poor sinners withal, the examples and experiences of many of Gods
afflicted people can abundantly testify, insomuch that their soul chooses
strangling, as Job speaks, Job 7.15. Now being by death translated into
Abraham's bosom, they are far removed out of Satan's reach; he was thrown down
from heaven, and can never shoot up any darts, or come near any of Gods
servants there to affright or annoy them.

3. They rest from the cares, sorrows, snares, toils, temptations of the world;
the examples of sinners do not endanger them, the sight of their filthy
conversation does no longer afflict them, the fear of their cruelties and
persecutions does no more trouble them; there the wicked cease from troubling,
and there the weary be at rest; there the prisoners rest together, they hear
not the voice of the oppressor, Job 3.17, 18.

4. They rest from the difficulties of duty it self; those hard conflicts which
the heart has against corruption to keep it self close unto God; for though
the spirit be willing, yet the flesh is weak, Matthew. 26.41. and though to will
be present with us, yet how to perform the thing that is good we find not,
Romans 7.18, 19, 21.

Lastly, As they are delivered from these past evils, as brands snatched out of
the burning, so are they likewise taken away from evils to come, as Lot was
from the destruction of Sodom, when the Angel by a merciful violence laid hold
on him and brooght him forth, Genesis 19.16. Isa. 57.1.

Secondly, Positively, this gain by death appears in the many real good things
which we receive with it and by it.

1. It brings us home to our Country and inheritance; here in this life Gods
servants are Pilgrims, Strangers, Sojourners, amongst enemies, such as neither
know nor value them; we are called out of the world, and separated from it, not
numbered among the Nations, living by different and contrary Laws; and hence it
is that the world hates us, 1 Pet. 2.11. Ioh. 15.19. Numb. 23.9. 1 Ioh. 3.1.
Hence the Body is called a Tabernacle, 2 Cor. 5.1. Digest. de verborum
significat. l. 239. sect. 2. M. Anton. l. 2. sect. 17. Tertul. de resur c. 41.
Diodor Sic. 1. M. Anton. l. 3. sect. 11.
2 Pet. 1.13, 14. in allusion to the Tabernacles wherein the Patriarchs
sojourned as strangers, Heb. 11.9. unto which pilgrimage, and unfixed
condition, the Apostle there opposes a City which has foundations, verse. 10.
a sure house, an abiding Kingdom which cannot be shaken, Heb. 12.28. Here
indeed we are said to be in Christ, and Christ in us, Gal. 2.20. Ephesians. 3.17.
but there we shall be with Christ, and in his presence, which the Apostle tells
us is best of all, much better then our best condition here, Phil. 1.23. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. 2 Cor. 5.8. Here we are in the same family indeed (for the Church
in heaven, and the Church on earth is but one family, Ephesians. 3.15.) but we are
yet but in the lower rooms of the family, in the work house; death leads us to
the upper chamber, to the Banqueting House, to better company, where we shall
see, and know, and love, and possess Christ perfectly, and herein is the answer
of Christ's prayer, Joh. 17.24. Father, I will, that they also whom thou have
given me, be with me, where I am, that they may behold my glory.

2. It estates us in life; takes away one life to carry us to another and a
better. That life which we leave, is mortal and perishing; that which we go
unto is durable and abounding, Joh. 10.10. The ordinary Manna which Israel
gathered for their daily use, did presently corrupt and breed worms, Exodus
16.20. But that which was laid up before the Lord, the hidden manna in the
Tabernacle, did keep without putrefaction, verse. 33. So our life, which we have
here in the wilderness of this world, does presently vanish and corrupt, but
our life which is kept in the Tabernacle, our life which is hid with Christ in
God, Col. 3.4. that never runs into death. Natural life is like the river
Jordan, empties it self into the Dead Sea; but spiritual life is like the
waters of the Sanctuary, which being shallow at the first grow deeper and
deeper into a River which cannot be passed through; water continually springing
and running forward into everlasting life, Ezekiel. 47.4, 5. Joh. 4.14. 7.38. --
Haec brevis est, illa perennis aqua.

3. It makes us perfect in our spiritual part; Vid. Stuck. Antiq conviv. l. 2.
c. 26.
The spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23. it gives us our white and
triumphal robes, Rev. 6.11. 7.14. It fits us to be presented unto God without
spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.27. the bodies of the Saints when they were dead were
washed, Act. 9.37. both as a pledge of the resurrection, and also as an Emblem
and testimony of that cleanness and purity, wherein death did deliver their
souls up unto God.

4. It keeps our relics and remainders safe for a glorious resurrection, will
give a faithful and a just account of all that it has received, and will
restore in honor, what is received in dishonor, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43. It will say
to us as the keeper of the Prison to Paul, Act. 16.36. The Lord has sent to
let you go, now therefore depart, and go in peace.

We see the Paradox cleared, the difficulty removed; the gain demonstrated;
only we must remember it is not gain to all, it is (...). To Believers as
such, and therefore only to them. To wicked and impenitent sinners that die in
their sins, death is a King of terrors, Job 18 14. A Jailer, a tormentor, with
his keys, his shakels, his hot iron, his halter, his ax, his gibbet. He is
still a stinging and a fiery serpent, a trap-door unto hell. Death is never our
gain, but where Christ is our life; he to whom to live is is lust, and not
Christ; to dye is loss and not gain.

And now since Gain is one of the Diana's of the world, Vid. August. in Psalm.
48.
every one will say, who will show us any good? Psalm. 4.6. Our wisdom must be
to distinguish true gain from counterfeit, to make godliness our gain, 1 Timothy
6.6. for then death will be our Gain too. There is some Gain like Manna in the
house, perishing Gain, exposed to moth and rust. Matthew. 6.19. Gain proper to
one place or Country, like some farthing-tokens, which are current in one Town
or Shop, and signify nothing in another: Such is worldly wealth, current here,
but is not returnable or transportable into another world, (...), etc. De Nino
Phaenix Colophon apud Athenaeum. l. 12
when a man dies he carries nothing away, his glory shall not descend after
him, Ps. 49.17. But there are durable riches, Prove. 8.18. A treasure of good
works which will follow a man into another world, Rev. 14.13. this is the gain
we should look after, to lay up a foundation in store against the time to come,
that we may lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6.19.

Now since Death is gain, let us consider whether, and in what manner this Gain
may be desired. In answer whereunto we say, 1. That death is considerable two
ways: One way as it affects nature, the other as it relates to a
supernatural end. In the former respect as an evil, Nature abhors it, and
shrinks from it, and had much rather be clothed upon, that mortality might be
swallowed up of life. But as an unavoidable medium to a better condition, so it
may be desired; as sick and bitter physic is desirable, not per se, but in
order unto health; and dangerous chargeable voyages by Sea, are not in
themselves beneficial at all, but only as they are necessary to make rich
returns from remote Countries. Mercatura est amittere ut lucreris. It is good
husbandry to sell all for an invaluable pearl.

2. Death is not to be desired out of fretfulness, passion, weariness of life,
impatience of sufferings, as Job and Jonah desired it, Job 3.20-23. Jon. 4.3.
and in great anguish men are apt to do, Jer. 8 3. but in faith, and an humble
submission to the will of God, out of a weariness of the body of sin, and
pilgrimage in the valley of tears, suspiring after the presence of Christ, and
consummation of holiness, thus it may be desired. So Jacob waited for the
salvation of God, Genesis 49.18. So Simeon desired to depart in peace, Luke 2.29,
30. and so our Apostle here, I desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which
is far better, Phil. 1.23.

3. We may not for all this use any compendious way to be partakers of this
gain, we may not neglect our body, nor shipwreck our health, nor do any thing
to hasten death because we shall gain by it. He that makes haste even this way
to be rich, shall not be innocent, Prove. 28.20. When men grew weary of the long
and tedious compass in their Voyages to the East Indies, and would needs try a
more compendious way by the North-west passage, it ever proved unsuccessful;
our times are in Gods hands, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 31.15. and therefore
to his holy providence we must leave them. We have work to do, and therefore
must not be so greedy of our Sabbath day, our rest, as not to be willing and
contented with our working day, our labor. A composed frame of heart, like the
Apostles here, an holy indifferency of soul, either to stay and work, or to go
and rest, is the best temper of all.

I conclude all with but naming the last Proposition from the other reading,
Christ in life, in death is gain unto believers. If the Apostle live, he shall
serve Christ; if he dye he shall enjoy him; if he live, he shall glorify him
by his ministry, if he dye, he shall glorify him by his martyrdom. When Christ
is ours, every condition, life or death, prosperity or adversity is gainful to
us. It is hard to say whether it be better for a wicked man to live or dye,
being in both equally miserable; If he live, he increases his sin; if he die,
he enters upon his sorrow. But unto a godly man either condition is
comfortable and blessed; his life is fruitful, his death is peaceable; the
grace of Christ is manifested in his life, and the glory of Christ is manified
in his death. Let us be careful to secure the Pronown he^e, (...), To Me, that
we be such as Paul was, who rejoice in that Christ is preached, though we
should suffer by the means, who are not ashamed of the afflictions of the
Gospel, but are willing that Christ may be magnified in our body, whether by
life or by death, and then we may boldly conclude as our Apostle does, whether
I live or whether I die, Christ will in both conditions be advantage unto me.

COncerning this worthy Gentleman, who with one spring of his soul gave so
sudden a leap from Earth to Heaven; I confess I have been so surprised with
sorrow, that I thought it hardly possible for me to undertake this service, but
that I must have covered over my affections, and his Elogies, as the Painter
did Agamemnons grief for Iphigenia, with a vail of silence.

He was a copious subject, a man one of a thousand as Elihu speaks; which way
ever we take the view of him, we shall find him to be as Aristotle's character
is of his honest man, (...), a apiece man, that had in every capacity a
Basis of honesty and integrity to fix upon.

How tender and dear an Husband, how loving and careful a Father, how wise and
prudent a Disposer of his domestical affairs, your eyes and their sorrows can
abundantly testify.

Toward others abroad, I do not know a man fuller of love and faithfulness,
more ready, more active to lay out himself upon the good and interest of his
friend. There are some drags very wholesome, but very bitter; good in the
operation but unkind in the palate; and some friends are such, real in their
love, but morose in their expressions of it, that a man is almost afraid of
their very kindnesses. But this our dear friend was full of sweetness as of
fidelity. His love was not like a Pill, that must be wrapped in something else
before a man can swallow it, but the candor and sereness of his disposition
made his love as amiable as it was useful unto his friends; so that he well
deserved the character given to one of the Roman Emperors, Neminem unquam
dimisit tristem. He was indeed in his disposition made up of love and
sweetness, of a balsom nature, all for healing and helpfulness.

He was not a friend in pretense and complement, that can bow handsomely, and
promise emphatically, and speak plausibly, and forget all; but he was serious
and cordial in his affection. Some men's love is like some plants in the water,
which have broad leaves on the surface of the water, but scarce any root at
all; lik Lemons cold within and hot without; full expressions, empty
intentions, speak loud, and do little. Like Drums and Trumpets, and Ensigns in
a battle, which make a noise and a show, but act nothing: But this our dear
Brother was an active friend, his reality exceeded his expressions: His words
were the window of his heart, truly as Aristotle calls them, (...), the
notifiers of his affection.

And his fidelity to his friend was ever seconded with wisdom; as our Savior
says of John the Baptist, he was a burning and a shining Lamp, we may say in
this case of him, he had not only an ardent but a prudent love was not only
affectionate to intend good, but able to counsel and contrive it: Some friends
are like a vine, fruitful but weak; their love is sweet, but their strength
small; he as able by his wisdom to advise, as ready by his love to help and
tender.

Nor was this disposition of his narrow and contracted toward a few, but it
was diffusive. The mildness and moderation of his soul made him willing to do
good to all, and so far as would consist with integrity, to preserve every man
from peril. Some men's love is like some flowers, which open only toward the
Sun, which come out only in the hottest seasons, like the lodestone that
points only one way, and bend only toward them that do not need it: But his
love would grow in the shade as well as in the Sun; and though it were
specially directed to those of the household of faith, yet he had learned of the
Apostle to do good to all men, and to speak evil of none.

But it is not enough for a man to do good to others, though he could to all if
he remain an enemy to himself. Like Shel-fishes which breed pearls for others
to wear, but are sick of them themselves; lik a Mercury Statue, which shows the
way to others, but stands still it self; like a whetstone which sharpeneth the
knife, but is blunt it self. If thou be wise, says Solomon, be wise for thy
self. Many men are like Plutarchs Lamiae, which had eyes for abroad, but were
blind at home, like Bees that gather good honey, but are smothered themselves:
But our dear Brother had an eye inward was wise to the interests of his own
soul. Like the Cynamon tree, which lets not out all its sap into leaves and
fruit which will fall off, but keeps the principal of its fragrancy for the
bark which stays on, like a tree planted by the water side, which though it let
out much sap to the remoter boughs, yet is specially careful of the root, that
that be not left dry. And in truth, what profit would it be to a man, if he
could help and heal all the sick men of the world, and be incureably sick
himself? If he could get all the men on the earth, all the Angels in heaven to
be his friends, and have still God for his enemy? If he could save others, and
then lose his own soul? to be like the ship, Act. 27. broken to pieces it self,
though it helped others to the shore? Like those that built the Ark for Noah,
and were drowned themselves. Herein therefore he showed himself truly a wise
man, that he took care of his own soul: Some men are like Achitophel, very
careful to set their houses in order, but then cast away their souls: But our
dear Brother though he had by the variety of his employments, the cares of
Martha upon him, was yet specially mindful of Mary's unum necessarium, the care
of his own salvation.

And he did not take up his Religion with the times, that he might magis uti
Deo quam frui, make gain godliness; as the Samaritans who would be Jews when
the Jews prospered, and enemies to them when they suffered; but he was, as is
said of Mnason, Act. 21.16. an old Disciple, a Professor of Religion in the
worst times, when piety was nicknamed preciseness, and he that departed from
evil made himself a prey, Isa. 59.15. Temporibusque malis ausus es esse bonus,
did dare to be good in bad times. Religion sometimes is like oil, gets highest,
and the faeces and amurca are at the bottom, when the horn of the righteous is
exalted, Psalm. 75.10. Sometimes it is like gold in the Mine, lies deep and
depressed, like the sap of a tree in winter, fain to shrink under ground. There
are many Summer Christians, will be religious in the sun shine; our dear
Brother was a winter Christian, kept his religion in the storm: and as then he
was, so he continued a steady Christian, a ship well balanced with sound
knowledge, and rooted sincerity, and love of the truth; not carried about with
every wind of doctrine. It is said of Christ he is yesterday and to day the
same, Heb. 13.8. Christians should therein imitate him, and having tried all
things, hold last the good, and with purpose of heart cleave to God.

God has beautified several of his servants with several Graces; we read of
Jobs patience, Moses his meekness, Abraham's faith, Mary's love, David's
devotion, Solomon's wisdom, Apollo his eloquence; our dear Brother was eminent
in many likewise, in meekness and mildness of soul, he was a man of an amiable
and calm temper, yet sweetly quickened with zeal for Gods glory. He was a great
lover of an able Minister, and of the Ordinances of Christ so dispensed; an
eminent grace in these times, when poor Ministers and Ordinances (it is well
they go together, they are good company) suffer together from many whom we
cannot wonder at for being so much enemies to others, who are so little friends
to their own souls; he that undervalues his own life, may easily despise
another man's. But by the way, it were well if the despisers of Ordinances would
consider that little children who play the wantons with their meat, are likely
not long after to know what difference there is between a smarting rod, and a
wholesome dinner. We may have Ordinances taken away from us too soon, let not us
take them away from our selves.

We have viewed him in his private capacity as a Christian; if we consider him
in his public as a Magistrate, we shall find how great a loss the Town and
Country had of him in this regard, as his friends and the Church of God in the
other. Some men are like Vines, very good for fruit, but you cannot make a beam
or a pin of them to hang any vessels thereon, Ezekiel. 15.3. to such things
Magistrates are compared, Isa. 22.23, 24. But our Brother was like the Wallnut
tree, good both for fruit and for timber.

His fitness for Magistracy appeared in this, that being not an aged man, he
was twice called to the Majoralty of this Town, and once to serve for the same
more publicly. Tully derided Heraclid^s Temnites that he lived to old age, and
never attained those honors in his Country which others usually did arrive at;
it could not be said so of him, he was of so dexterous a spirit that one may
say of him as Livy did of Cato, Natum adid unum diceres quodcunque ageret.

And this is the more considerable, in that he was not originally brought up to
services of a public nature. It is noted for the honor of Alphenus Varus that
having been bred in a shop at a private trade, he proved so learned and eminent
a Lawyer, that he wrote collectanea juris, some of which are entered into the
pandect, and was afterward Consul of the City. And we read in humane stories
of Agathocles, Justinus, Primislaus, Pinctus, and others, who by their wisdom
and abilities were raised from Trades and Farms to great Governments.

Our dear Brothers public employments were not the fruits of his own ambition,
but of the free love of other men, who for his wisdom, fidelity, and fitness
called him thereunto. And truly, a very fit man he was for them; an able man,
fearing God, loving truth, hating covetousness, Exodus 18.21. He had a public
spirit very ready to en tertain and promote every thing which tended to the
general good.

Some men are like the Prophets Vine, Hos. 10.1. bring fruit only to
themselves and are empty to all the world besides: But he was one who could
deny himself, and his private interest, to serve the public, as natural bodies
will forsake their own proper motions to prevent a public breach upon the
universe. Pompey being dissuaded from an expedition hazardous to himself, but
useful to the public, returned this answer to his friends, Necesse est ut eam,
non ut vivam; It is necessary for me to go, it is not necessary for me to live.
And truly besides his Wisdom, Zeal for God, Dexterity to set forward good
works, he had one excellent Character for Magistracy, he was a man of a mild
and meek spirit. I call this an excellent temper for Magistracy. If it were not
so, the Lord would not have chosen Moses, the meekest man on earth, Numb. 12.3.
nor David who was as a weaned child, to be the Ruler of Israel, Psalm. 131.1,
2. Magistrates will meet with many things to provoke passion; difficulties in
business, multitudes of employment, cross sand mutinous distempers in
ill-disposed people, prophanations and dishonors done to the name of God (which
exceedingly stirred Moses himself, Exodus 32.19.) therefore they had need have
mild and composed spirits; patience is the effect of power, Numb. 14.17, ^8.

Thus he lived in his private capacity, a dear Husband, a tender Father, a
faithful friend, a sincere Christian: Thus he lived in his public capacity, a
wise, zealous, self-denying, publick-hearted, meek-spirited Magistrate.

And now as he said, oportet imperatorem stantem mori -- And another, Episcopum
concionantem, that it was honorable for a Commander to die in his Arms, and a
Bishop in his Pulpit: So the Lord ordered the death of our dear Brother with
this circumstance of honor in it, that he died a Magistrate in his Office;
Aaron was stripped of his Sacerdotal Ornaments on the mount, where he was
called to die, Number. 20.25, 26. And this our Brother did put off his Robe to put
on his Shroud; his Magistracy yielded to his mortality.

His death was sudden in it self, so was old Elies, a good man; but it is not
sudden to a Believer, whose holy life fits him or it; for sanctity is a better
preparation unto death then sickness. It is all one if a man come to heaven,
whether it be by a Journey or by a Rapture, as Paul was caught up thither, 2
Cor. 12.3, 4.

Well, he is with Christ, which is best of all, though we be without him; the
care of his friends must be by moderation of sorrow to testify their assured
hope of his happiness. And the care of the Town must be to testify their love
unto him, with choosing a wise, holy, faithful, zealous man to succeed him, who
may carry on those good works, which he had the happiness to begin, but not to
finish by reason of a greater happiness.

We leave him with our Apostles Motto upon him, To him to Live was Christ, and
therefore to Dye was Gain.

FINIS.

