Wonderful News, from the NORTH: Being a true and perfect Relation, of several
strange and Wonderful Apparitions seen in the Air, between Madely and Whitmore,
in the County Palatine of Chester.

Showing, how there appeared a dark Cloud over the Snn, and immediately after
two great Armies of men were seen in battle Array, with Drums, Trumpets, and
Canons ready mounted, who seemed to have a terrible and bloody fight.

Also, the coming in of certain Birds with wings like angels, after the Battle
was ended, with a description of their several colors, and what happened.

This Relation was taken by the Minister of Madely, and the truth thereof
verified by Mrs. Holt of Oakers Hill, who with her Maid, were eyewitnesses
hereof.

sun North

South

East

West

^m ^ia South

moon North



LONDON, Printed for George Horton. 1651.

Wonderful NEWS FROM the NORTH.
DEAR BROTHER,
MY true love and respects to you and your wife, hoping you are both in good
health, though I have not heard fro you a long time; which has made me to fear
either you are not well, or that you are removed forth of the City, or you have
taken something unkindely from me; that after the writing of so many Letters, I
could not hear from you, except my Letters miscarried; but I hope I have taken
such a course, that this will come to your hand, which if it do, I desire to
hear from you; and the rather, because of our aged mother, who takes it very
heavily. I intended to have been in London a Week within May, but upon further
consideration, I have procrastinated my journey until toward Midsummer, about
which time, if providence permit, I entend to be there.

I shall relate to you, a strange Apparition that was seen near to us, on
Wednesday the 11 of this instant, at a place called the Highway-house, between
Madely and Whitmore; The Woman to whom it appeared, was and is a Religious
Woman, and come of a godly Family, the manner thus: On the said day, the Woman
sitting in the door with a little Girl in her arms, she perceived the Sun to
shine exceeding red, and casting her eyes upwards, she beheld a dark body over
the sun, about the bigness of a half moon, and in a short space, the said body
divided into several parts, seeming numberless to her view, about the bigness
of small Pewter dishes, which came swiftly toward her, and immediately the
Court about the house seemed to be filled with armed Hands and Gantlets, with
swords; glittering and fighting (in their imagination) with another as great
an Army, and it seemed to their view to be in the air above them. At the sight
whereof, she was amazed, and being greatly astonished, ran into the house,
having lest behind her aanother little Girl playing forth of the doors, her
Maid and she presently betaking themselves to prayer, and after receiving some
encouragement, they opened the door, and the Maid boldly stepped forth, and took
in the child (to her suposition from amongst them) which had no harm: But the
numbers so increased on both parties, that the House became all darkened like
night: Then when she had got in her child, she went to prayer again, verily
supposing her end to be near at hard: After which her Maid and she looking
forth, beheld infinite of Horse legs and feet trampling, and great Canons and
Ordnance on the other side of the House reared up together, with their muzzels
upward, and Houlsters hanging on them; this continued some space and vanished.
Then she opened the door and went forth, and saw and beheld the likeness of one
man only, standing within the Court near to the more, and immediately there
arose a little ^loud or Vapon^ (as it were) forth of the moto, from whence
issued a Bird about the bigness of a Capon, with wings such as an Angel is
usually portraicted with, and a second and third followed and flew near to her
and her Maid, having faces almost like Owls, and something resembling a man,
and after they had hovered about a while, they vanished in a vapor or Cloud;
These birds were of able wish-red, or sanguine color, but the Men, Horse,
Swords, and Canons, all like fire.

I had almost forgot one passage, her Maid at first saw nothing, but after she
had uttered these words, Mistress it may be the Lord will not suffer me to behold
what you do, she immediately saw the same! Oh who would not fear and love thee
thou King of Saints, how unsear-chable are thy ways, to poorhoodwinckt mortals:
You may hear this from many, but you may justify what I write, to be the same
relation which was taken by our Minister, and other Gentlemen that went to be
informed of the truth hereof. The Gentlewoman who was a spectator of this
strange apparition, is one of Mr. Holts daughters of Oakers Hill. The Lord make
us wise to foresee what he entends by such his dealings, and enable us to
hide our selves with him, who is the supreme Commander of all Hosts, both in
Heaven and Earth: so prays

Your ever loving Brother, WI: RADMORE.
Ap. 29. 1651.

