THE DECLARATION AND PROTESTATION, OF The PARLIAMENT of SCOTLAND TO Their
Declared KING: TOUCHING, Their late Agreement, the settling of the Presbytery
Government, and the future preservation of that Kingdom.

WITH, The Resolution of the Emperor of Germany, the Queen of Sweden, and the
King of Denmark, concerning the said King.

ALSO, The Proceedings of the Scotch Ministers, to their respective
Congregations, concerning their King, and the advance of the English-Army.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. 1650.

The DECLARATION And PROTESTATION, Of the Parliament of Scotland, to their
declared KING.
SIR,
HAving so fair an opportunity for the communicating of Intelligence, I thought
my self obliged to salute you once more with the present transactions and
occurrences, now agitating and in dispute between the Parliement convened at
Edenborough, and their young titulary King; and to the end, that my lines may
not receive the ignominious brand of partiality, I shall insert the most
certain truths, and especially those which are of greatest concernment, and fit
for public view; a brief narrative whereof, I here present as follows.

The Parliament convened, having spent some time in debate of the Answer of
their young King with their Commissioners, for a reconciliation in love and
amity, and to come with them in a happy Agreement; and finding his
condescensions, not only satisfactory to the Kirk and State, but also, much
conducing, for the erecting of a stronger foundation, to uphold the several
Tenants and Principles of Presbytery, according to the solemn League and
Covenant; jointly resolved to express their great affections, and loyalty, unto
him, by way of Message, and Declaration, wherein they profess and declare, in
the presence of the Great God, who is the judge and searcher of all hearts,
That they rejoice at his peaceable Condescentions, his late promise, and great
splendour of the Gospel, and the liberty and propriety of the Subject, and also,
his hearkening to the wholesome advice of the Commissioners of that Kingdom;
desiring him not to stumble or make a stand, at some seeming obstacles, which
may arise from the reducing of the Marquess of Montross his Forces, etc. but
withal assuring him, That there is nothing in what they do, but shall be
suitable to his interest, for the best advantage; and that they aim at nothing
more, then the settling of the true reformed Religion, (without the intermixture
of Heresy or practice) the restoring of his Royal Person, to Honor and
Dignity, and the preservation of themselves, and those that shall adhere to
them, in peace and safety: all which they promise and protest to perform, with
the hazard of lives, fortunes, and estates. This Message was forthwith
dispatched, to their declared Sovereign, whom they daily expect at Edinburgh,
where great preparations are making, for the receiving him in Honor and
Triumph, his Palace being beautifully adorned, provision made for his
accommodation and accoutrement, and Officers elected and chosen for the
attending of his Person.

But yet not withstanding, the great progress herein made by the Parliament;
great are the murmurings of many sorts of people, who stick not to say, that
they are confident, an English block will be his Ransom: Others, that they
cannot approve of his coming in; (fearing that their Estates will lie liable to
the spoil of the English Soldiery,) and therefore are resolved to acquit
themselves thereof, and to adhear to the Parliament of England in heart, and so
soon as the fruits of their labors shall be once ripe, and brought to
maturity, then they protest to act in person; but these frolic expressions,
being too soon discovered, diverse of them were apprehended, and committed to
safe Custody; and amongst the rest, one Mr. Eusebius Sanders, (an Englishman)
who, when the Officers came to seize on his Person, told them, that he feared
not what they could do against him, and that they would find a sudden change
from England, to the parpetual dishonor, and breaking in sunder the yoke of
Scotland; but however, the Scots Ministers soar high in their Pulpits, stirring
up the people to a mutual Engagement, against the English Sectaries, (as they
are pleased to call them,) and openly praying, That that Sword, may never
prosper, that shall be drawn against them; to which (we hear) that many of the
English Covenanters say, Amen.

Here is a third Degree, or Sect, of People, which are very zealous for the
Parliament of England, who say, That their Cause is good, and that God owns
both Them, and It; and that whosoever makes War against them, shall utterly
fall, and be destroyed; and also, that all Christian Princes, and Potentates,
shall honor their Name, and desire to live in peace and unity with them;
touching which, something of note may be inserted, worth your observation, in
reference to foreign Princes, which is this;

That the King of Scots having formerly addressed himself by way of Embassage,
to the Kings of Denmark, France, Poland, the Emperor of Germany, and the Queen
of Sweden, for men and moneys, a positive answer is now returned, and the King
of Denmark declares;

That his present occasions are so great and dangerous, that he can no way
possible supply him either with men or moneys: the King of France also has
sent a Letter to him, intimating, that what he formerly promised, cannot now be
performed, by reason of the daily insurrections of his people, within his own
territories. Germany and Poland declare the like in part; but withal say, that
if he can procure moneys they will furnish him with men: Indeed, the Queen and
States of Sweden promise, that nothing shall be wanting in them, for
propagating his design, and that they earnestly desire his restoration; which
is but a complement, for (as yet) no men or money appears, which is the life or
sinew of Wars.

Many stickling spirits, are still active, notwithstanding the exemplary
judgment upon Colonel Vrrey, Colonel Spotsford, and others, who were lately
beheaded at Edenborough, for their hostile invasion; they died very penitently,
and seemed to rejoice that they were brought to so honorable an end, for
adhering to the King and his cause; but Colonel Graham (brother to the late
Marquess of Montross) desires not to taste the sweetness thereof; for no sooner
had he intelligence of the fatal blow given to his brother, but he immediately
hasted from the North of Scotland, and took shipping for Holland; from whence
he had landed some few forces, together with a French Marquess; but the
Monsieur wanting a Scotch headpiece, his body fell to the mercy of Lieutenant
General Lesley's forces; for Colonel Graham made him not privy to his escape,
but very cunningly (though treacherously) made sure of one. The said Marquess
is now brought prisoner to Edenborough, where being examined wherefore he
invaded that Kingdom in a hostile manner, he answered, the loyal affection
which he bore their King, invited him thither, and that he came to join with a
party in the Isles of Orkney, for the bringing home his said Majesty, to settle
him in peace and honor. But it is doubtful whether this answer will prove
satisfactory or not; however the Scots pretend fair.

The arrival of the News of the English Armies advance toward the Borders,
does not a little startle many of the great ones; yet they declare, that they
are resolved to stand firm to their principles, and resolve to put themselves
into a posture of defense, for the preservation of their Country; what the
effect of this will be few days will make manifest. Nevertheless, the report
of their coming with an Army of five and twenty thousand Horse and foot, and a
train of Artillery of forty pieces of Canon (great and small) gives a great
sound in the ears of many, which makes them very slow and dull, in appearing
too visible for the contrary party. Thus having impartially delivered with the
one hand, what I received with the other, I shall insist no further at present;
but conclude with this proverbiall phrase: That he who denies himself, and
seeks to prefer the things of God before the things of the world (in fighting
his battles) shall prosper; but he who ayms at self ends, more than the honor
of God, and the public good, shall surely fall: Now that our English Army may
only seek the glory of God, and their Countries preservation; is the hearty
desire of

Your true and Cordial friend, Will: Reynor.
Leith, June 8. 1650
FINIS.

