A Return to the Priests ABOUT BEVERLEY For Their ADVISEMENT.
I Having received a printed Book, which is full of untruths and lies, come out
of the generation of Liars and Serpents, and full of subtilty and treachery, to
deceive the simple with their Witchcraft and Sorcery: But God has discovered
your design, and he will gather his Sheep and Lambs from your mouths, and you
shall no more devour them: The Lord is come, and coming to teach his people by
his Spirit, and has poured forth his Spirit, and does pour it forth, that his
Sons and Daughters begin to prophecy, and do; which makes the Teachers of the
world to rage, who never heard a word from the Lord, but speak a divination of
their own brain, which the Lord is altogether against, who have lived in the
form of the letter, and not in the Power; men of corrupt minds, to resist the
truth, as Iannes and Iambres did, 2 Timothy 3.8. When the Children of Israel were
to come out of Egypt they resisted, as they did in the time of the Apostles who
had the form, but are reprobate concerning the faith: So it is now with the
worldly Teachers, who are made Ministers by the will of man, do resist the
Truth now as they did, having the Form, denying the Power; for the Power brings
out of darkness, out of Egypt, out of Pride and Oppression, and shakes the
Earth, and cleaves the Rocks, and throws down the Mountains, and makes the seed
to come forth, which is the mavelous Work of the Lord, which makes the
Heathen to rage and full of fury to see the wondrous Works of the Lord brought
forth.

The Title of the Book is, A faithful Discovery of a treacherous Design of
mystical Antichrist, displaying Christ's Banners, but attempting to lay waste
Scriptures, Churches, Christ, Faith, Hope, etc. and establish Paganism in
England; containing an Examination of many Doctrines of the People called
Quakers in Yorkshire, together with a Censure of their Way, and several Items
concerning the design of God, Satan, and Man: These things recommended to the
consideration of them who are in good earnest for Christ.

Friends, Your printed Papers are considered and weighed with them that love
Christ, and they are found false, and you to be Liars, uttering forth your
unfaithful D^scovery; for you are the mystical Antichrist which you speak of,
and your design is treacherous and found false, and weighed in the Balance and
found too light: And as touching laying waste Scriptures, it is your own
condition, take it to your shame, for the Scripture says, Thou shall not lie;
there you lay waste Scripture, and are blind, and cannot see, but are false
Accusers, and accuse men falsely, and found Liars, and the Scriptures are
fulfilled upon you: The Scriptures we own, are ours, and stand for, and own to
be fulfilled and fulfilling in us; but all you that make a Trade of the
Scriptures which were spoken forth freely, such are slanderers of Christ and
his Church, and lay waste Scriptures, and both establish Paganism in England,
and have established it, who know not God nor his Church, but have called a
Steeplehouse a Church, and sprinkling Infants their Baptism, which they baptize
into their Faith, into their Church, which there is no Scripture for. Now all
people, see if this be not laying waste Scripture, and establishing Popery,
which God never commanded, and to the establishing of this mystical Antichrist
which has long stood, but now God is coming to throw it down and unestablish
it. Are not those Antichrists who walk contrary to Christ's Commands, and term
themselves to be Ministers of Christ who walk out of his steps? Christ Jesus,
when he spoke to the multitude, and to his Disciples, he said, By their fruits
ye shall know them; They are called of men Masters, and have the chiefest
places in the Assemblies, lay heavy burdens upon the people, stand praying in
the Synagogues, devouring widows houses; But Christ forbids these things, and
bids his Disciples not to be so, but cried Woe against them; And such are
established in the Land now, who would dethrone Christ if they could; And you
are in that same generation which was ever against Christ, and as the Scribes
and Pharisees, who would have dethroned him, and never could own him in that
nature you dwell in who gave forth these printed Papers. And as touching Faith
and Hope, we do deny that which holds up such things as Christ does forbid,
which is no faith nor no hope but of the hypocrites which shall perish, and all
such hope was ever denied with the Elect and Faithful. And the worlds Church do
we deny, which is a house of stone; but faith which is the gift of God, we own,
which purifies the heart, which faith is but one, and who are of faith are of
Abraham; and this we witness to be fulfilled, and not denied: And Hope that
purifies the heart we own, but the hope of the hypocrites we deny, which says,
He must live in sin so long as he is here, and does not purify, that we deny.
The Church of God we own, which is the Pillar and Ground of Truth, which Christ
has purchased with his own blood, which is without spot or blemish: But as to
call a Steeplehouse, a house of stone, a Church, is blasphemy, and you that do
so lay waste Scripture; for the Church is in God, 1 These. 1.1. And Christ did
not come to redeem a Steeplehouse, nor to hold up such things, but to redeem
his people from such things that be carnal, which you Pagans now establish. And
as touching that we deny Christ, it is false, it is your own conditions; for
read Matthew. 23. and there you may see your own conditions, walking in their
steps which Christ forbids, Pharisee-like, and such are Antichrists, and there
you show your selves to be Antichrists in the mystery of iniquity, being called
of men Masters, when Christ forbids to call any man Master, or to be called of
men Master: But that Christ we own who cried, Woe unto them which were called of
men Masters, and had the chiefest places in the Assemblies, and the uppermost
rooms at Feasts, and greetings and salutations in the Markets, which the Lord
Jesus Christ cried Woe against, and taught his Disciples not to be so; But all
such as hold up these things which Christ forbids, we deny, which he did deny.
Praised be the Lord God, who has given us the light to see your abominations,
and led us from your snares, which causes you mischievous men to vent forth
your mischief against the Truth, and utter forth your folly; but as Solomon
says, so are fools known, who are at Beverley; but God Almighty be praised,
who has given us a sight to see your deceits, and to comprehend you who are
deceived and would deceive; but your formal ways are laid open, and your shame
and nakedness does appear, and to us it is very serviceable, that you have put
your folly in print, and do publish it abroad, who are not come yet so far as
Balaam, who the dumb Ass reproved; and the Angel of the Lord is coming to stop
your way, though for a while you may rage and lie; but I say the Lord will
rebuke that lying spirit, for a lying spirit the Lord does abhor, for it is an
abomination to him; it would make discord, but the Spirit of Truth does
discover it, and has found you out to be of your father the Devil, who was a
Liar from the beginning; and for shame blush, and never make a profession of
Christ, of Faith, or of Hope, who openly have showed your selves to be Liars
and Slanderers of the only people of God, who live in hope and faith, and in
the fear of God: but it is that the Scripture may be fulfilled; Liars, cursed
children, evil beasts, and slow bellies, who serve not the Lord Jesus Christ,
but their own bellies, such are they who cause the Truth to be evil spoken of,
who are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, glory in their shame, and mind earthly
things, as ye may see England at this present time is full of such Teachers and
Prophets, which walk contrary to all the Commands of Christ and his Apostles,
which go after the ways of Cain to envy, and run greedily after the error of
Balaam for gifts and rewards, who perished in the gainsaying of Corah: And
there is your portions and conditions of the English Church, held up by you the
English Teachers who gave forth this Book, who are made by the will of man; and
those who are come to the Church of God, which you call Quakers, deny such.
Moses did fear and quake, and the Apostle brought him as an Example to the
Hebrews, who were come to the general Assembly, and the Church of the first
born which is written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, whose voice shook
the Earth, whose voice now shakes the Earth, which makes you wonder and rage
you earthly minded men, who never heard the voice of God. Moses did tremble,
Habakkuk did tremble, Job did tremble, David did tremble and quake, and the Son
of man was to eat his bread with quaking, and Paul did tremble that their faith
might stand in the power of God, and not in the wisdom of words; and Daniel did
tremble, and his strength and breath was gone, and they who were with him did
quake. These Scriptures being fulfilled in the people of God now, such you
wonder at now, as they in the former ages who spoke forth the Scriptures were
wondered at; And here you lay waste Scriptures, and deny the fulfilling of the
Scriptures, making a scorn of them and a derision, who are come to tremble as
they did. Friends, you sit as Judges to censure of their way whom you call
Quakers, who are a people taught of God; you who are making bonds and snares to
limit the Power of the holy One; in your own snares you are taken, and God will
burst them asunder; for the Doctrine of Christ you know not, which is the
Doctrine of the Quakers which you scornfully nickname; but that Word they own,
else they should lay waste Scripture, as you do. But Moses, who did tremble,
fear and quake, did account it great riches to be reproached, and so do we with
you in the same generation, who witness quaking, as Moses did and Paul did; and
so it is you that lay waste Scriptures: and so you busy minded fellows are
censuring of the doctrine of the Quakers, showing your selves to be those busy
bodies who are spoken of in the Scripture, who have but a Censure, and no
infallible Judgment; and so those who have an infallible Judgment will cry out
against you to see your folly and slander.

Whereas concerning the Designs of God, Satan and Men, and the dominion of
Satan; There you are who gave forth these Papers, for Liars you are of them
which are of God: As you have uttered it forth shamefully, as in saying, they
lay waste Scripture, Christ, Church, Faith, Hope, and in your conclusion you
have but a Censure of the way and doctrine: Now all friends, who have a love to
Christ, may discern and see your censorious ways, and give Judgment upon you
who have no infalliable Judgment, neither have Faith, Church, Christ, nor Hope,
which the Saints do enjoy; but are without God in the world in their imitations
and likeness, blaspheming God and his Temple, and those tender Lambs and
harmless ones in Yorkshire, who have been imprisoned and persecuted to death,
who witness the fulfilling of the Scripture as they did who gave forth the
Scripture: but the true God you know nothing of, nor the men who are of God,
for you show your selves forth to be Liars of them who worship the true and
living God: And this is to the style of your Book, which is all false, and
comes out of a false mind and a false heart, whose throats are an open
sepulcher, drinking up iniquity as the Ox drinks up water, who are of them who
are the Deceivers of the Nation: But the witness of the Lord is gone out
against you, and you are taken, and to Judgment you must come, for the Judgment
of the great Whore is come, and you Liars must into the fire and lake that
burns eternally; you shall witness what I speak to be the Word of the Lord: And
here I charge you in the presence of the Lord to be no Ministers of the Gospel,
who are not able to give an infallbile Judgment, but only a Censure, which the
Apostles had.

Whereas you say, If in any age the Devil has transformed himself into an
Angel of light, or his Apostles and Ministers have transformed themselves into
the Apostles and Ministers of Christ, they have done so in this Apostatizing
age in which we live, yea they have been more cunning, subtle, and seemingly
spiritual in transforming themselves in this age, then ever they were in any
foregoing Generation; Satan is now acting his part upon the Stage with all
deceivableness of unrighteousness, and shall continue to act like unto himself,
and beyond his former actings, until the Angel cast him into the bottomless
pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him, that he may deceive the Nations
no more; for by how much he shall perceive his Kingdom nearer unto a period, by
so much more every day he and his factors will show themselves politickly
active, for the supporting and exalting his hellish and tottering Kingdom: And
as God has, does, and will enlighten his Saints and witnesses more toward the
end of Antichrists reign, and the beginning of the calling of the Jews to
Christ; so the Dragon that old Serpent has, does and will more and more fill
his Agents and Instruments with a Diabolical spirit of madness, and delusions.

This shall stand for your selves, who have but a censure of their ways, who
are called Quakers, and not an infallible Judgment as the Apostles had; and
it is true, Satan's Ministers you are, who have transformed your selves to be
like the Apostles and Ministers of Christ; but into their life you never came,
nor never shall, but destruction you must know first. Have you not had the form
long, and made a trade of the Apostles words, and Christ's words, and the
Prophets words, and would be like them, transforming your selves like unto the
Apostles; but walk in the steps of the Scribes and Phrisees, who were enemies
to Christ, which Jesus Christ cried woe against, Mat. 23. and 1 Timothy 3. who have
been they who have crept into houses, leading filly women captive, ever
learning, and never coming to the knowledge of the truth, some Twenty, some
Thirty, some Forty, some Fifty, and some Sixty years, and in the end never the
better: The time has been among you Shepherds and Watchmen, as Isaiah speaks
on, The Watchmen are blind, they are all ignorant, they are all dumb dogs,
cannot bark, lying down, loving to slumber, yea they are all greedy dogs which
can never have enough, and they are Shepherds which cannot understand, every
one looking for his gain from his Quarter. And here you are Shepherds of
England about Beverley; But God has raised up a light in his People, as was in
Isaiah, who cried against the false Shepherds then, which light does the same
against you now, you dumb dogs who have but the letter, and not the word of the
Lord, and do blaspheme the Light of God where it is made manifest and dwells,
which testifies against your deceits: And this is your Apostatizing age in
which you live. Whereas you say, they have been more cunning, it is your selves
who are so subtle and seemingly spiritual, in transforming your selves in this
age (whereas you say themselves, it is your selves) then ever they were in any
foregoing Generation, Satan is now acting his part upon the Stage: Are not you
them who pretend your selves to stand up for Christ, who hold up Baal, and run
after the error of Balaam, which all the Ministers of Christ spoke against,
which Generation you are of? Who are they that are got up into the chiefest
place in the Assemblies, and act as in a Stage Play, and have a glass to act
their hour, and make a trade of Christ's words, the Prophets words, and the
Apostles words, and acts in the chiefest places of the Assemblies, taking a
verse and raising motives, trials, uses, reasons and points from it, And then
say the people, he has handled his text well, and made good matter of it, and
give unto the people David's quakings, tremblings, weepings, prophecyings and
prayers, and these are turned into meeter, and given to the ignorant to sing, O
Lord I am not puffed in mind, I have no scornful eye: Here you are upon the Stage
teaching people lies, more subtle then in the foregoing generation; Satan
acting his part upon his Stage with all deceivableness of unrighteousness, and
shall continue to act beyond his former actings, so you may see who pretend and
have pretended to be the Ministers of Christ, have gone beyond all the false
Prophets in the former ages, for Balaam who loved the wages of unrighteousness,
durst not take it; but these take it, you take it, and so you go beyond Balaam,
he durst not take it to curse the people of God, but you take it which rail
upon the people of God; and if they will not give it, they sue men at the Law:
And is not Satan here acting his part upon the Stage, contrary to Christ Jesus
and his Ministers, who preach freely the Gospel, who was beat and halled forth
of your Synagogue?

And as you say, Until the Angel cast him into the bottomless and shut him up,
and set a Seal upon him, that he may deceive the Nations no more: This Prophecy
is upon your selves and the Angel is coming to fulfill it, and long have the
Nations, been deceived by him that rules you, which is the Devil, into the
bottomless pit he must go which you prophecy of, who are false Prophets, and
will be shut up, that he may deceive the Nations no more, for now your Kingdom
you are fearing, and you the Devils factors will show your selves publicly
active for the supporting of his hellish and tottering Kingdom, for by how much
he shall perceive his Kingdom nearer unto a period, he and his factors will
show themselves more politickly active, as you declare it; but all your actings
are discovered, and all your preachings are comprehended, and what they lead
to; for take away your gifts and rewards, and then you will not act your part
upon the Stage (as you call it.) And as God has, and does, and will enlighten
his Saints, as you say, and witness more and more toward the end of your
Antichristian Reign; God has enlightened his Saints, and does more and more
toward the end of your Antichrists reign; And see which light is their eye to
see you the Antichrist who has long reigned; and as God has, does and will
enlighten the Saints, and witness you more and more, you will all be found to
be the Antichrist, and blind Guides, who have long reigned upon the Earth, and
brought nothing to perfection; toward the end of Antichrists reign, little
children, boys and girls will cry out against you, and the Scripture shall be
fulfilled, Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings the Lord will ordain
strength, and perfect his praise: And such the Priests were against; and were
not the Priests against Christ, and did incense all the rude multitude against
him? and were not the Priests against Stephen when he was stoned to death? and
were not the Priests against Paul who was a Tent-maker, and many to the
Apostles fishermen? And so the Pharisees, then Enemies to Christ, stood up for
their own Kingdom, when they saw it begin to totter, and Christ come to reign.
The Pharisees and Priests had the form of Christ in words from the Prophets,
but not the power, Mat. 2. When he was come, they were the greatest Enemies to
him; So are you Antichrist now, who have got the form of the Apostles and
Christ, but not the power: Now your Kingdom is tottering, and the Lord Jesus
Christ is coming to reign, and be admired in his Saints; Happy day, happy day,
does the Reighteous cry, freedom from Antichrist, freedom from all Baals
Priests alone by Christ.

And as touching the Calling of the Jews to Christ; so the Dragon, that old
Serpent, has, and does, and will more and more fill his Agents and Instruments
with your diabolical spirit of madness and delusion: This shall stand for your
own portion, for your Agents and Instruments with your diabolical spirit of
madness and delusions you have showed forth against the Truth which is now
rising; so that old Dragon the old Serpent, has and does more and more fill
you who are his, and so you fill the ignorant, and would fill the Magistrate;
but God be thanked who has raised a light up in many of his, which sees your
abominations which you have committed: And the beginning of the calling of the
Jews to Christ, which makes you unrighteous ones to rage, who are called out of
your Kingdom: He is not a Jew who is one outward, which is in the flesh, but he
is a Jew who is one inward, that of the heart in the spirit, not in the letter,
whose praise is not of men, but of God: And the calling of these Jews to Christ
is daily; praised be the Lord God for ever, who is increasing his Kingdom,
which is not of this world. And whereas you say, That whenever God has drawn
near to any Country or City in the light of his Gospel to expel Popery and
Antichristian darkness, the Devil has in such Countries and Cities raised up a
sort of new and spiritual Antichrists: You are the Antichrists, belching forth
your wickedness, who have got the form, yet live out of the life of Christ: As
the Pharisees had the form of Moses, the form of the Prophets; so have you
Gospel, but have put the Books, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, for the Gospel,
which is the carnal letter, and a part of the declaration of the Gospel, which
Gospel is Jesus Christ the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world,
which is glad tidings to every troubled Soul: And hence it is, that whenever
God has drawn night to any Country or City in the light of his Gospel to expel
Popish and Antichristian darkness, which is your conditions; for you have had
Christ's words and a form, but walked out of his Command; but now the glorious
light of the Gospel shines, and you are all found to be Antichrists, having
nothing but the form, which is empty: For God has in this age drawn near unto
this Country, and his true light shines; and in Cities the light of his Gospel
is risen to dispel your Popish and Antichristian darkness, which has long
reigned, and laid close, and kept all poor people in darkness. The multitude of
proud and covetous Teachers that have been and are in this Nation, and the
multitude of Sermons, what good have they done all this while? A Constable in
his place may do more service in keeping in Civilness, then all your Teachers
in speaking once a week to the people on the first day: and then in the week
days, some in the world, some to fighting, and oaths, and drunkenness, and some
to their pleasures, and the Priests often with them in the Alehouses; so that
they do but observe that they call their Sunday, and come to the Idols Temple,
and give him his wages, all is well. O ye devilish proud Priests, who are
patterns of pride, which goes before destruction, God is coming to confound you
all, and set up his Gospel, which freely should go abroad, for he has suffered
you long to reign in Popish and Antichristian darkness; The Devil has usually
in such Countries and Cities raised up a sort of new and spiritual Antichrists:
And there you are in the mystery of iniquity and spiritual wickedness, not
having the life of Christ, which have the form of the Apostles; But now the
life of Christ and the Apostles is made manifest and risen, which sees your new
and spiritual Antichristian darkness which is got up since the Apostles; so it
is new, as in this age, but it is the old; and there you are the generation
which was ever against Christ, who are far worse then the gross and Popish
Antichristians, who live in the midst of the Antichristian Babylonish
Territories and Dominions, and are members of that Body, making War against the
Saints and against the Lamb; but the Lamb has got the Victory, praises,
praises be to our Lord God Almighty for ever: And thou Babylon are become a
habitation of Devils, and the Cage of unclean Birds; for the Popish
Antichristians have many Idols, and Images, and Crosses without them, and do
not believe the overcoming of their sin, but must have a Purgatory to be
cleansed in: So in Teachers near unto Beverley are full of Images, having your
Idol Temple without, which Stephen was stoned to death for witnessing against,
which believe you shall never overcome sin so long as you are upon Earth: Here
you differ nothing from the Papists, but must have a Purgatory, else where will
you be cleansed? seeing no unclean thing must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven:
And the light of the glorious Gospel is risen, and Christ is coming to overturn
all your Popish and Antichristian Doctrine, which has long reigned, but it
shall not long have dominion over the simple ones. And as you say, The Sun is
accompanied with diverse Caterpillars and venomous creatures; so many venomous
principles and practices have discovered themselves in the profession and lives
of some: This is your own condition; for as Caterpillars you go up and down
eating up the green, where it is springing, as it speaks in the Revelation: And
here in your paper of Advisement you have made manifest, and as venomous
creatures you are full of poison, Serpent-like, Mat. 23. And so many venomous
principles and practices have been discovered in your profession and lives,
which we cannot but testify and cry out against, which is contrary to the
Prophets and Apostles; the pride and oppression that is held up by the professed
Ministers of the world, who go after the error of Balaam, who bear rule by
their means, who seek for their gain from their quarter, who are up in the
chiefest places of the Assemblies, which Christ and the Prophets cried out
against: and now Christ is made manifest, and sends his servants to cry out
against you and your venomous principles and practices, and have discovered
your selves and your profession and lives; this all people in England who dwell
in the light will own what I speak, and witness against your practice. Whereas
you accuse, That Some in their profession discover themselves in their
practices and lives: All unrighteousness and ungodliness we do deny, and not
justify; But as the Summers Sun is coming, and the tender herbs are growing,
you go like Caterpillars and Locusts to eat them up; but the West wind is
arising which will drive you away, whose King over you comes out of the
bottomless pit, and must return thither again: And as you do accuse some of
their lives, had you mentioned the fact, there had been honesty in it; but all
who are in the Truth will judge you here to be Back-biters, venting forth your
malice; for no ungodliness do we justify, but deny; therefore does the world
hate us, because we testify against the world, and the works of the Devil.

And whereas you say, Where the Gospel has gloriously shined for the
enlivening and enlightening of others. True it is, you have had a glorious time
as you call it, in making a trade of the declaration of the Gospel in deceiving
of others, Instead of enlightening, you have kept in darkness, where the Gospel
has gloriously shined for the enlivening and enlightening of others, all your
Witchcraft, and Sorceries are discovered, for God is enlightening and has
enlightened his, with the glorious Gospel, which light was, before the letter
was, and the Lord is coming to make your Kingdom dark, who have set us Queens,
and seen no sorrow: Now your desolation is coming, therefore your folly and
madness you are venting forth. And as you say, Wherefore Solomon did apply his
hearts to know Wisdom, and the Wickedness of folly and madness; so Christians
are not to be discommended who do endeavor to know mistical error of the New
Antichristians which are risen up amongst us.

This wisdom is made manifest to the Church of God, whereas Solomon did apply
his heart to know Wisdom, we do witness Solomon's word, and the wickedness of
your folly, and madness to us is discovered, so such Christians are not to be
discommended who have put on Christ, and stand armed against your wills and
deceits, who do endeavor to know, and do know the mistical error of your new
Antichristian Religion, which is the old Antichrist, which is risen up amongst
us that they may avoid them. God has enlightened his Saints, so that the true
light shines in them, that your spirit is known to be the mistical spirit of
error, being in the way of Balaam you come to be denied with them whom God has
raised, and such you blaspheme who are the Temples of God, and so the Scripture
is fulfilled, The Beast shall blaspheme God and his Temple: And you who have
written your complaint abroad, and put it in print, and say, Some are risen up
amongst you, God has raised up a feed, those ways which you cannot destroy
with all your bestical power. And as you desire, That they may be furnished
with abilities to declare against them, and the pains and labors of such are
worthy commendations, who by their Tongues and Pens do endeavor to lay open the
Ridles and mysteries of Satan and his Instruments.

Here you deceivers have contradicted your selves instead of giving
commendations you give railing false Accusations upon them who are furnished
with abilities to declare against you, and the pains and labors of such who lay
open your Ridles and the mystery of Satan, which rules you and his Instruments
unto discovery, and has discovered you to be both in Babylon and confusion
that you may see it in papers, and shall see it more and more amongst you; Some
write, some speak, some print, according as they are furnished with the
abilities which God has given them, to testify against you who have long
deceived the Nation, and have been the Instruments of Satan standing up for his
Kingdom; but now the glorious light shines, by which you are discovered. And as
you say, Among whom these Brethren are to be justly and deservedly honored, who
have pithily, solidly and Christianly discovered some of the Serpentine errors,
and delusions, and mysteries of the Familists and Quakers. In this here you
Pharisees have justified your selves, and would be honored for your pithiness,
solidity and Christianity, as you call it; but your madness and folly, and
unjust dealing is discovered, and your Serpentine errors, and delusions, and
mysteries, which you accuse some of the Quakers of; take it home, and judge your
selves for there you shall find it, it is your own condition, portion and
condemnation: all who are in the Light witness it with me. And as you say,
These Brethren are to be justly honored: Brethren you are, but in the
generation of the Pharisees, which was ever against Christ, as you have showed
by your consulting together against his Spirit where it is, as the chief
Priests, Scribes and Pharisees did: but all the righteous blood which has been
shed, was by that generation wherein you live; but woe is upon you who put light
for darkness, darkness for l^ght, and evil for good; but woe is upon you and
upon all such who are covered, but not with the Spirit of the Lord, and stand
not in his Counsel, but follow after your own imaginations, therefore have you
uttered forth your lies.

And as you say, The blessing of him that dwelt in the Bush be upon the
endeavors of these brethren and prosper this small Book, which has much in it
for the battering of error, and the maintaining of truth according to
Scripture; which is the prayers of us who can subscribe our selves friends to
all Saints; whose names are these I find subscribed to this Advertisement;
Christopher Feaks, John Simpson, George Cokain, Lawrance Wise. Whereas you
speak, The blessing of him who dwelt in the Bush to be upon the endeavors of
these brethren, and prosper their small Book; Him ye know not, who is the
living God. Moses which saw him was a Quaker, and you scornfully deride such
who are brought into his condition now, and Judge with your dark minds and evil
thoughts them to be in error, so would ye do with Moses: So the curses, and
plag^, and vengeance of God will fall upon these Brethren (as you call (...))
who have uttered forth their lies and their errors; and that will come upon it,
in stead of prospering it, which you say has much in it for the beating down
of Error, and maintaining of Truth: In it you have set up the spirit of lying
and the spirit of Error, as in saying we deny Christ, and so in maintaining of
that which is contrary to Truth, which is a lying spirit. According to
Scriptures I have proved you, for as the Scripture says, Liars are without
God. And as you say, which is the prayers of us who can subscribe our selves
friends to all Saints: The prayers of you Liars are the prayers of the wicked,
which are an abomination to God: And whereas you mention Saints, They are
ashamed of your practices, of your lies, errors and blasphemies, nor cannot
subscribe to you, nor none of your friends: Friends the Saints may call you, as
Christ did Judas, and him that had not the wedding garment, who must go into
utter darkness, and thither you are to go who are false accusers and
slanderers; so the Scripture is fulfilled upon you who have wrested and
perverted them. And so much for your Advisement.

FINIS.

