FRANCE No Friend to ENGLAND. OR, The Resentments of the FRENCH upon the
Success of the ENGLISH.

As it is Expressed in a most Humble and Important REMONSTRANCE to the King of
France, upon the Surrendering of the Maritime Ports of Flanders into the hands
of the ENGLISH.

Wherein, Much of the Private Transactions between CARDINAL MAZARIN and the
late PROTECTOR OLIVER, are discovered.

Translated out of FRENCH.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1659.

A Most Humble and Important REMONSTRANCE To The KING OF FRANCE. Upon the
surrendering of the Maritime Ports of Flanders, into the hands of the English.
SIR.
WE bring unto Your Majesty the resentments of all France, or rather those of
all the Catholic parts of Europe, which cries for Justice upon the most
Christian of Kings, for one of the Insupportablest, and most outrageous
injuries, that happily the Church ever yet received since its nativity upon
earth. Is it possible that under the Reign of Lewis the 14. the Altars should
be overthrown upon the frontiers of France, which his glorious Predecessors,
has semented with their own proper blood in Palestine. Is it possible that the
victorious Arms should not be employed but for to abolish and exterminate the
Sacraments, which sanctifies them? Is it possible that that Sacrifice should
be crowned, wherein the blood of Henry the Great is Immolated to the fury of a
Parricide, by the inhumane banishment of the King of England, driven out of the
Kingdom by his orders; nay, that the shameful Sacrifice should be crowned by
the profanation of the blood of Jesus Christ it self.

Pardon, great Sir, the importunity of the subject, which constrains us to open
our mouths. Those pathetick motions of a most bitter sorrow, are only
encouraged by the Interest of your sacred Person, by the glory of your Crown,
and by the zeal which we owe to Religion. That so dilicate tenderness, we have
always had toward all that, which carries the sacred name of your Maj. can
hardly justify to posterity, the respectful silence we have kept hitherto
(contrary to all the Maxims, which in all times were received in France) upon
the oppression of your people, upon so much injustice done to the public and
the private, upon the infraction of all the ancient Laws of the Realm; and
indeed Sir, our moderation would have changed into prevarication and impiety,
if our tongues had not followed the motions of our heart, at the aspect of so
many eminent places, I mean those abominable Idols, which has almost
obfuscated the light of our Churches, since they raise them upon the ruins of
temples, which threatens us with the cruellest rebellion, that ever crushed a
Crown, and the most desperate Heresy, that ever yet attempted the dishonouring
of the Church, and Christianisme.

We doubt not, Sir, but if the providence of God, let this work fall into your
hands, they will employ all the false colors (to render it black and odious to
your Royal Judgment) wherewith, interested flattery serves it self in the
Courts of great Princes, for to disguise the most important verities. They
often condemn under the odious titles of Libells and Pamphlets the most
necessary Remonstrances, especially at such times, as they consecrate under the
specious pretexts of your Princes service, such actions as are most
disadvantagious to his State and Person; and those who formerly took the
liberty to represent to their Kings of the first race, the extreme prejudice
which their Sovereign Authority received by the misgovernment of the Stewards
of their Palaces, were most severely punished as Rebels, nay, at such times,
as those, who were upon the point of disthroning them, were recompensed as most
faithful and obedient subjects. Sir, be pleased to judge of this piece,
according to the nature of the matter its made of. If it be true, that it is a
collection only of detraction, and calumnies (as shall be represented to your
Maj.) then suppress it with all the rigor, that Sovereign Authority owes to
the chastisement of presumptuous licentiousness. But if on the contrary, it
does only purely and simply discourse of the mystery of iniquity, which they
keep occult from the eyes of your Maj. and if it be not only true in all its
parts, but also very important to the good of your service, and that of all
your Realm, received as an inspiration from heaven, which having a regard of
the purity of your intentions, sets before you the precepts of your duty, by
the groanings of your people, rather then by advertisement, which God often
sends to such Monarchs, as contemns his Law: We doubt not, Sir, but that
your Maj. studies it with all the care possibly you can, and that in the
frequent entertainments of piety, which are so usual to your Maj you do not
strongly attach your self to the Doctrine of the world, which teaches us, That
one is not more obliged to know what his Duty is, then he is to do, so much as
he knows of the same: This obligation is indispensible and common to all the
world; and certainly Princes ought to make greater reflection upon it then
others, being more exposed to the danger of being seduced by the fallacious
Sophistry of Casuists, and the artificious intrigues of their Ministers then
the common sort of men are.

All Christendom, which admireth the greatness of your Virtues, has not
doubted but that in respect of what past betwixt the Council of France and
Cromwell of late years, the good inclinations of your Majesty were often forced
by the pretended necessity of your State, and your fair twins of light often
troubled at the Traitorous artifice of your Ministers.

Sir, one cannot believe that your Majesty has been ever informed of the
miserable Estate of the Qu. of England your Aunt, who is least even in
mendicity, only to please the cruel Assassinate of her Royal Spouse. One could
not imagine, Sir, that the blood of the great Henry, which gives you your being,
could so unnaturally abandon his daughter and her little Infants even at the
indigencie of bread, which never fails the most miserable: who can ever
persuade himself that your royal Soul could ever have consented to the
alienation, or rather proscription of the King of England, your Cozen German
and your Ally? Is it any thing else, Sr, then the Phlebotomy of your own proper
blood which a fortunate Politician draws, as if it were from your veins, to
sacrifice it to the Pannick terror of an Usurper? How, Sir, what imagination
can figure such a thing as that the Monarch of France, Prince of the most
warlike and most generous Nation in the Universe, could consent to such
baseness, as to make the noblest Crown of the world stoop to the most
Capricious Idol that ever yet carried favor with fortune.

This false Protector of England takes a resolution to Consecrate his
detestable Tyranny, by the pre-eminence he would have given his fantastical
Government before the August Crown of the Lil^ies, and France fails not to obey
his orders punctually. Her Pavillion which has formerly triumphed over all the
Nations of the world, which made the Sarasens tremble, which brought terror
into all the Seas, which notwithstanding the rude captivity of Francis the
First, had never abated their courage before all the forces of Spain, yet this
so glorious a Pavillion humbles it self at the least signal of a Pyrate, which
commands the Bark of a Tyrant, the murderer of your Uncle.

This Tyrant is not contented with all those marks of honor, which from the
first foundation of our Monarchy was not granted to any other but him only; he
pretends to more solid ones, he usurps and encroaches upon new France; and, as
if he had not believed the advantages which he has upon your Crown to be
established enough by a conquest, which the weakness of your Minister renders
so easy to him, he strives to hold the honor of your Predecessors; he
detracts from their Glory, he abates their Trophies, by renouncing that so
Illustrious a right of so glorious a mark of their ancient Victories, of this
Inviolable custom which forced the English to leave their Cannons as an
eternal Monument of their defeat in the mouth of the River of Bourdeaux.

It is, Sir, as if your Minister were of intelligence with him, to avenge the
shame of the Bedfords and Talbots, he forces you even by the advice of your
Council to quit those famous prerogatives, which frames always necessary
reputation to great States, in those Treaties where you gain Nothing, where you
lose Much, where you hazard All; where all things are sealed up with the August
name of a Brother, which you give to a Soldier who has no other Throne but
the Scaffold, upon which he Massacred the Kindred of Henry the Great.

This conduct, Sir, cannot without difficulty find credit in after ages; ours
does your Majesty great injustice by its presence; neither is there that man
who does not resent with a great deal of regret, your Majesty being served by
such blind and unfaithful Ministers, and that you should be led by the false
optics of a feeble and ignorant Politician.

There is no body condemns your Majesty; and all the world knows, that those
temerities and abominations proceed from a mere stranger, contrary in all
points to the holy intentions of your Maj. being surprised by the same
artificers that has often deceived the most circumspect Princes that ever
were; being surprised, I say, by the same means, that made Solomon the wisest
of Kings confess, that flattery and backbiting were the inevitable destruction
of Princes; but adds immediately after, that God illuminates their hearts at
the very instant of their strongest temptations.

Behold, Sir, this is the moment, at which we ought more then ever, implore
heaven for that illumination of your heart, since the iniquity of your minister
is come to its height, and since the surrendering of the Sea Ports of Flanders
to the English, can furnish with sufficient matter the most dangerous and
pernicious temptations, that are capable to make trial of the piety of a most
Christian King. We doubt not, Sir, but your Maj. has shed tears of blood, when
these precious pledges were given Heresy under your name; neither do we doubt
but that to force your inclinations to an action of that nature, they were fain
to employ all the Authority of the body politic, and of a more subtle
cunningness, void of all sorts of religion. You have assuredly shak'd and
trembled both for the fear and anger, at the first proposition of so fatal a
blow given to the Holy Catholic faith; and when you have represented to your
self her Altar demolished, her Temples profaned, her mysteries violated,
without doubt the blood of S. Lewis bestirred it self within your entrails at
the sight of such spectacles, as would certainly have stricken horror into the
heart of the most obstinate Miscreant. But they overcame all the difficulties,
Sir, by those reasons by which they commonly give the reasons of the State, and
because they might have some pretext, not to discover the frailties and ruinous
foundation with which they propt them, they alledg such Maxims unto your Maj.
as have no kind of reason with that which passes to day in the world; and I am
sure they have not failed to employ all the colors that can cover and disguise
an action of this nature. But God, Sir, obliges your Majesty to mingle them
together, and weigh them in the scales of Reason, which can justly balance this
question; and I shall endeavor to expound it to your Maj. with all the candor
that the subject I treat of requires of me; and I hope to make it clearly
known to you that the Council of your Minister upon this point, is and was both
insupportable and insustentable by all divine and humane reasons. The most
licentious and abandoned Theology, nay, that is most inservient to the maxims
of Machiavel, can neither maintain nor justify the surrendering of the Ports of
Flanders into the hands of the English, but by the appearance only of a
necessity of State, whereby they endeavor to shuffle up this shameful action,
which is like to suppress utterly our holy Faith, even in one of the most
Catholic Countries in the world, and the most profound and artificialest
Politician that is, cannot defend a Resolution that does so powerfully
establish on this side the Sea the most redoubtable and most ancient enemy of
our Crown, unless it be by the false colors he might borrow from the imaginary
health of your State. There is not that Casuist so prostitute in the world, no
nor that Courtesan upon the earth so far lost, that can justify this action by
any other reasons, then by such as are drawn (at least according to their
discourse) from the preservation of your Kingdom: and of this point, Sir, which
can receive no difficulty, we conclude, That to judge wholsomly of the question
now in hand, we are only to consider. Whether it is necessary or no? which we
must sound to the bottom, and let your Maj. know. That the compliance they have
had upon this occasion with the English, was not only inutile to the good of
your service, but also most disadvantageous to your Crown, and that in all the
circumstances that can condemn an imprudent and blind Resolution.

We doubt not, Sir, but they represent unto your Maj. the great advantage you
receive by those succors England sende^h to your Army, and that to induce your
Maj. to follow those suggestions they would have inspired into your heart upon
this subject; they do also represent the English with their swords in their
hands, standing also upon the pretended patrimony of their fathers. They have
also made your Maj. apprehend the great danger of the Protectors combining with
the Spaniard, and they have certainly so insinuated into your mind as to render
this new a^iance very plausibly unto you: And all that couldmake the rupture
thereof seem offensive to your State. But we are fident, Sir, that they have
omitted more then half the considerations they should have made upon this
subject, and that they have acted after the manner of them who deceives the
sight by taking away one half of the day from the objects they would have
shown; and that your Minister keeps from your knowledge the most solid, and the
most important part of your interest.

We cannot deny, but that your Maj. had a great deal of Reason to wish the
falling out betwixt Spain and England, but we maintain you had none at all to
buy the Rupture at the price of a public Scandal, which eclipseth the glory of
your Reign by such unparalleled baseness, which obscureth the splendour of your
Renown, by such ties as makes you lose your ancient Allies, by such unnecessary
condescentions which makes the Protector of England Protector of the Hugonots
in France, by the unbridled licentiousness which made them build more then
forty Temples since the death of the late King your Father of Sacred Memory;
and by the giving up of those places which gives the entry in the nearest
places to your Capital City, to the ancientest and mortallest enemy of your
State.

Sir, If all the forces of the Empire and Spain were triumphing in the midst of
your Provinces, if our fields were covered with the multitude of their Legions;
if all Europe had conspired against the Lillies, we should never have looked
for any succor from England, and if we had, certainly we should have shed tears
of blood to be reduced to so great a straight, as to seek for consolation in
the infidelity of Rebels, who would never have granted us any, but to our
destruction. And we do firmly believe, Sir, that we shall never be brought to
such Extremities, as might make our interests depend from the good will of such
people as have principles so directly opposite to ours. The Divine Providence,
which so diffusively spreads its benediction upon the Piety and Valor of your
Majesty, has ordained far more auspiciously the events of your happy destiny,
still Victorious over the indiscreet follies of your Minister, shall more and
more mark your days with continual Victories.

But, Sir, Is this to answer those blessings of heaven? Is this to be sensible
of the glory of your Reign? Is this to know the advantages of your Victories,
to end them with the loss of your Conquests, with the surrendering of Mardike,
and those other preambles to the Siege of Dunkirke, which they forced out of
your hands even with terrible menances? You exhaust your Treasures, you ransom
your Subjects, you expose all your Nobility, all your Army is endangered every
day; they fight against the element, they combat with the Rigor of the season,
and all those strugglings more then humane, has no other motive, but the
surrendering of the Key of Flanders unto a Nation which in two hundred years
could not comfort themselves of the loss of that of France, in being deprived
of Callais.

Sir, whosoever would had seen that which is done to day upon the Frontire of
France drawn in a Table, he would certainly have considered it as a Capricious
fancy of a Painter, who would have taken pleasure to play with his own
imaginations; or rather of a description of a Masquerade, where those who enter
the Lists do only make their Swords glister for the divertisement of the
beholders. If one would have shown on the one part those vast fields of
Dunkirke covered with Battalions; and on the other part that little Territory
of Mardike covered only with fourteen or fifteen hundred men, which looks
upon the motions of the others with their hands hanging loose by their sides;
should not one have greater reason to believe that the later were Senators of
old Rome, who would for their own pleasure and recreation, cause an Army of
Gladiators, and slaves to fight before them; than to imagine that this great
multitude were composed of free bornemen, who with all their hearts sacrifices
their lives and fortunes for the conservation and glory of this handful of
people? We see the remnant of 4000 men flying up and down the banks or dunes of
Flanders only for the service of 2 or 3000. Goviats or Crackropes, which
England sent in this small number. We see them daily continue those sad
engines, and projects of this bloody spectacle wherewith they make account to
feed the greedy eyes of Cromwell toward the beginning of the next Campain; we
see that this false Prophet beholds from the top of the Tower of London all
those combats, where all the blood that is spilt whether Spanish or French, is
drawn as if it were in a sacrifice, which we our selves do offer to his
illusions. And which is more deplorable in these transactions, it seems we are
not contented to subject this age wherein we live, to the will of this tyrant,
but that we do also affect to enslave our posterity to the English servitude by
surrendering those places so famous and so considerable in the world.

Those places are so considerable, Sir, that France could not endure they
should remain in the power of Spain, whose Naval forces are well known to be
nothing dreadful to your Maj. and your Minister is pleased to deliver them unto
England which is already Mistress of all the Seas; and who does only consider
them as the first step or degree upon which they will hereafter mount up the
bastions of Callis; if the weakness of your Minister does not prevent them by
opening the gates by virtue of a treaty. But, Sir. We humbly supplicate unto
you, that you would be pleased not to receive this which we now offer unto your
Maj. as any spightful exaggeration carried on by the wings of malice: It being
evident, that there is not so long a way between Dunkirk and Callis, as there
is between London and Dunkirk. The Protector who makes the Pavillion of France
humble it self before him, (which neither the Henryes nor the Edwards could
ever have done) cannot behold with a good eye those places in the hands of the
French, which the aforesaid Kings of England had enjoyed in your Kingdom,
wherein he keeps by his Intelligence a party which those Kings had not.

And without doubt, Sir, he exasperates daily that Ulcer which knaweth
incessantly our own entrails within us; and the interest he assumes in the
sylliest creature, that belongs to those of the reformed R^l^gion, proves
pregnantly, that Mardike and Dunki^k are not the bounds he puts to his designs:
God grant. Sir, that when this Demon of ambition is once established in the
main Continent by your Maj. own forces, which gives him more advantages against
your self then he could have hoped for, in thirty years of open War against
your Crown, That after he has made parties of his own within your Kingdom,
through the connivance or at least the ignorance of your Minister, who does
even Idolatrize him; God grant, I say, Sir, that he does not convert all his
forces against France it self, which is without contradiction the object, which
is most natural and obvious to his desires. God grant, Sir, that those places
which we buy for him to day at the price of our blood, of our goods of our
Honor, and of our consciences, be not in a short time the Magazins and
Arsenals, that shall furnish out the ammunition destined to batter down ours.
God grant that those places be not the refuges of those Vessels, which may
hereafter block up our Havens. God grant that the influence Dunkirk has, does
not make it self sensible, even unto our residences.

Sir. The most infallible Maxim for to judge wholsomly of the actions of men,
is to examine their interests, which commonly are the Rules they prescribe to
their actions, and the delicatest Politician does not absolutely reject the
conjectures which might be drawn from their passions, being often mingled
together and running almost insensibly into those powers, which gives motion to
the most important affairs.

Those that are persuaded, that, as he had not fallen out with the Catholic
King, but through rage and choler, which made him arrest all his Ships, and
commit such insupportable Robberies upon the coast of Spain, are also of this
opinion, which has also great deal of likelihood, as well in respect of
Cromwell, as other Politics; it being very credible, that the Furies wherewith
he is agitated, does often occupy that place in his spirit, which was destiny'd
to the pure lights of reason.

Sir, After what manner soever we manage our Judgment upon this matter, it is
impossible for to divide it between the Protectors interests and his passions;
and at whatsoever time we consider both the one and the other, we find them in
a perfect harmony, to conspire against our greatness: neither can we think the
seeming union that is betwixt your Crown and England for the present, to be any
thing else, but a Captious Truce, which the Interest of the Protector has
violently extorted from his inclinations, hoping to be better able to follow
them, after that the inveiglement of your Minister shall have done forging, the
most dangerous arms that can be employed against your Crown and Kingdom.

It is in this Kingdom, Sir, where besides other States which have but
indirect alliances with the House of England, that he sees at every instant
the Manes or Ghost of Henry the great threatenings the Parricide of his Son in
Law; it is in this Kingdom that he beholds Reigning so gloriously that blood
which is confounded and mixed by many straight alliances with that which he had
so barbarously spilt upon the Scaffold of White Hall. It is in this Kingdom
that he sees already formed in the noble minds of the French, those lightnings
and tempests with which they shall hereafter chastise his criminal head, after
that the providence of God shall through the loss of your Minister, purify
their generous inclinations, so naturally devoted to Monarchy; the furies which
always agitateth Parricides, impoisoneth daily the ulcerated and cankerous
soul of this Tyrant, by the fear of the indignation which he cannot escape but
in appearance only, by the diffidence he has in your promises, which he sees
to be forced from your inclinations by the hatred of your blood which he has
so outragiously injured; he knows too well that a Minister, which is capable
to put into his hands that, which he durst not pretend unto with all the force
of his arms, is a Minister, which nature does not produce in all times, and in
all ages. He cannot expect to find in an alteration which might happen (God
knows when) in your Council, those faculties he has met with in a blind and
stupid Minister, whose ignorance he improveth so well that he would willingly
p^event those ordinary resolutions in France, which perhaps in time would
oppose the most rigorous and most subtle spirits; he would make use of that
imbecility to conquer our Country, which serves him now to deceive it; and all
these confiderations joined together will undoubtedly represent themselves to
his mind, and reduce him peradventure to his own natural Genius, which induced
him to make war upon us by the space of four years, with insuppor-table
Pyracies, without ever daigning to denounce any against us, as if he were
minded to add that disdain, (to which we daily expose our selves) to the other
damages which we sustain in the ruin of our commerce, that Genius which though
obliged by so solemn a Treaty, yet hinders him not upon all occasions,
fromtreating us rather like slaves then allies; that Genius which is so
fortified by a particular interest, always inseparable from such avaritions
souls as his, nay, by those rapines and outrageous Extortions which he can
commit every hour in the sight of our Ports, which are so near his and without
comparison, more commodious, more considerable and more profitable to him then
all the advantages he can derive from the far research of the Fleet of Spain,
which one may say to be as uncertain as their course is in the vast extension
of the Ocean. Those projects which came to nothing in the Indies, but to his
own confusion, does certainly, turn his restless and ambitious imaginations to
other parts nearer home, and which are more exposed to his Tyranny. He feeds
his soul with those Soaring Ideas of the ancient Brittans, which seems not to
him so impossible as their examples; and without doubt, when he considers that
the first of his Conquests costs him but so little pains he sooths up his
ambitious thoughts, which Ferries him over our Seas, and represents unto him
one time Guienne revolted under his Standarts. and another time he fancyeth
Normandy reduced under his Laws.

But we hope, Sir, that God Almighty will limit those vast designs by some
extraordinary effect of his mercy upon poor England, now Tyrannized and
oppressed; and that by a mighty stroke of his Justice, he will no longer suffer
this Tyrant to usurp the Lawful Inheritance of that August Prince who is Cousin
German to your Maj. and who does so perfectly answer, by his merits, the
Proximity of blood that is betwixt your Majesty's.

In that case, Sir, what advantage shall France find in the necessity they have
reduced the King of England to, in Allying himself so straightly with the King of
Spain? In that case, Sir, may not we with great deal of reason complain of the
little forecast of your Minister, who by a very peculiar address against your
Interest, should join the most redoubtable puissance of the Sea, with the
considerablest forces of the Land that is in the world? In that case, Sir,
should not we with great deal of judgment apprehend from a Lawful King justly
incensed that power which makes us now tremble, being in the hands of an
usurper whom we so often oblige, and so observantly respect? In that case, Sir,
the same policy which yields up Dunkirk to the Changeling power of a Tyrant,
raised only by the uncertain motions of a blind and capricious fortune, shall
not refuse Callais to the sovereign authority of a Lawful Monarch, when his
auspicious destiny shall consolidate both his Throne and Glory. Should we not
judge, Sir, that as the hand of God is not yet seen over the crimes of
Cromwell, so do they weaken the weight of these considerations, and according,
the ordinary maxim of your principal Minister, who is not accused of too much
providence, they give no other answer to this kind of reasoning, but that we
most conform our selves to the Times, and take new parties according to new
Conjunctures. But we must humbly beg of your Maj. to make a more serious
reflection upon this State, that this strait and inviolable Alliance has put
all Europe in; and we doubt not but without expecting any revolution in
England, or alteration in Cromwels party, you will easily find out the extreme
prejudice which this desperate peace has done to your Interests.

Can your Majesty persuade it self, that the States of the United Provinces
has not conceived an Extraordinary Jealousy at this near neighborhood of
the English? Or can your Majesty believe that this Republic, the wisest that
is in the Universe, does not extremely repine at the surrendering of those
Seaports of Flanders unto the only Nation of the world, which contend with
them for the Empire of the Seas? Has not your Maj. reason to apprehend, that
those faithful places which acknowledged with so much fidelity, valor and
wisdom the obligations they have owed unto your Crown, are not now touched to
the very quick, by the participation which you make of the most considerable
places of the low Countries, to such people as have scarce yet sheathed the
Swords, which but a little before they so injuriously drew against the
Hollanders? Can your Maj. doubt but those prudent and Sage Politics are well
informed, that the Imbargo of their Vessels, the interruption of their Commerce
so advantageous both to France and their State, the false complaints of their
Ambassador and Vice Admiral were only practices concerted betwixt your Minister
and Cromwell, for to reduce those brave defenders of their Liberties, to be
slaves to the fantastical-Capricio of England? Can your Maj. doubt but those
interests, so visible and sensible to the States of Holland, are not powerfully
animated by the recognizance which they owe by so many solemn Treaties to the
House of Orange; and that this recognizance does also wait upon the famous
Ghosts of the Williams, of the Fredericks, and of the Maurices, who all conjure
your Maj. by those inviolable ties they have had with your Crown, not to concur
to the destruction of that Royal House, which honored theirs with a Princess
of as great Virtue as Birth?

Can your Maj be ignorant of the difference there is betwixt England a
Republic, and England a Monarchy; that one may consider Great Britain under a
King, as a very considerable Country in Europe; but that it might be looked upon
under a Senate, which assumed such a form, as makes it self Formidable to all
the Earth? And that this Consideration makes, That no Prince in Christendom
will join with your Interest, so long as you contribute to the Establishment of
a Republic, which from the very first instant of its birth, embraces both the
one and the other Hemisphere, and, as it were, in a bravery defieth the
Universe.

We have reason to suspect, that Admiral Opdam had not with so much violence
molested the Coasts of Portugal, had not Holland been disturbed in her own
Frontier Neighborhood by the English. We have subject to fear that the
attempts under hand which Cromwell made upon the Zound, were the true and real
motives that made the States and Denmark join with Spain; we fear that your
Maj. loses all your most faithful and affectionate Allies, who confederate
themselves openly by reason of your Ministers compliance and submission to
their sworn Enemies and Heretics, who are preferred before the most Ancient,
the most Sacred, and the most Inviolable Alliances of you Crown. The Holy See
is manifestly injured by those actions, which make Heresy triumph in the midst
of her Churches; we put our selves in the sit condition to receive the just
marks of her Indignation upon a matter of so criminal a Nature, as is able to
pour thunder upon our heads; we provoke her every day more and more, by such
circumstances as are indeed very worthy the Patriarch of Franticks.

We lose all our reputation among the Catholic Party, we purchase none amongst
that of the Potestant, whose greatest body abhors the Protectors ridiculous
Illusions; and all the fruit of our prostitution is but to confound our selves
with the Independents, that is to say, The sworn enemies of all Crowns and
Religions.

Cast your eyes, great Prince, upon your true and solid Interest, and discern
with that fair light heaven has given your Majesty, that which is your real
service from the imaginary Interest, or rather, the ill understood Policy of
your favorite, who by a Monstrous Prodigy, which posterity shall hardly
believe of your Maj. has of that Princely pre-eminence (hitherto always
inviolable) Established upon the Frontiers of your Kingdom a Modern Attila, the
Paricide of Royalty; who is so blind as to permit a formidable party to form
it self in the middle of your State? Who in the midst of your Triumphs abandons
that which wisdom would not permit to foregoe, after the loss of four Battles,
and can give no color to this pernicious conduct, but the inconvenience of a
War, whose bad success could never be more dangerous then the remedy he has
applied; I mean, that cursed remedy, or rather that fatal poison with which he
has broke the Munster peace so glorious, and so advantageous to your Maj. has
spread so prodigally upon that ardent fuel which consumes all Europe, to the
end he might eternize the conflagration thereof.

Here it is, Sir, that we find our selves put on by the pure and holy motions
of truth, which opens our mouths, animates our tongues, and stirs up our hearts
to discover to your Maj. the grand mystery of iniquity; that mystery which is
drawn from the bottom of hell: this is the mystery whereof the cruel Demon of
War has made Cromwell depofitary, and another man too Sir, which the respect
we owe to our Maj. will hardly let us name; we would if we could possibly turn
it off from the heads of some of those that have the Honor to come near the
most Christian of Kings; but alas! Sir, despair has overcome the tenderness of
our desires, one may still suffer with patience that has some hopes left him,
and there is no affliction so great but might be qualified, if one had some
hopes, (though never so long to come) to see an end of them.

But, Sir, there can be no such hopes in our misfortune, Europe is now
condemned to all eternity to endure War and misery; the Seaports of Flanders
have consumed the fatal negotiation of Munster; and if it be just that the same
hand that broke the peace should perpetuate the War; how can Spain ever consent
to a treaty without Restitution of those places which were wont to supply
Bruxels, or how can Cromwell condescend to a Restitution, which might advance
the general peace, the greatest block in the way of his fortune: Who could ever
have believed that after 27. years of open War, France could be so unhappy as
to put the general peace into his hands, who of all men has the truest
interest to break it; we say the truest, Sir, to distinguish his from that of
others, who certainly have but an imaginary one in the rupture of it, (but on
whom to the great disturbance of the Christian world) imagination has as much
influence in this point as real truth.

It is in this place that we find our selves obliged to name more particularly
then we have hither to done my Ld Cardi. Mazarine, being constrained by our
subject to discover to your Maj the true motions that had engaged him to an
action, which one might very well call the sepulture or quick burying of the
general peace: Mr. the Cardinal Mazarin, who had not timely enough given him
the nourishment, that is necessary for a politician imagined in his infancy;
that the chief quality of an able man was never to do any good, and to that
this natural inelination of his own he adds some Lecture of Machiavel where he
learned this doctrine, that tumult and confusion are two things always
favorable to such authorities as do not subsist of themselves; besides all this
he got some kind of habitude of Cardinal Richlieu, who was naturally of an
unquiet spirit, and in all these different Schools, he acquired certain general
Maxims of Policy, and having neither well expounded them, nor understood them
according to their geniuine sense, he dresses himself so disorderly in an
apparel that was never made for him, and in this confusion frames an
extravagant Idea, which persuades him that to be a great Minister he must mar
all, never make peace, but turn the world upside down; his Essays would have
out-gone the Master piece of another, since 'twas no less then the rupture of
the great and glorious peace of Munster, which certainly would have been more
advantageous to your Maj. then 30. years of War crowned with continual
Victories; but as Card. Mazarin carried himself in this transaction, in a
manner that was very little disguised, and was very fair from all
dissimulation, he soon after perceived the indignation, and displeasure of the
people, who exclaimed against him with a great deal of rage and fury, for the
fault he committed in procuring a Treaty, whose good success was not indeed in
his power to obstruct, had he not by a public Declaration manifested his
aversion to the same, and this taught him since, that as an able Merchant will
not forget any measure necessary for the weighing of his ware; so does not he
omit any thing to further his designs of War, and suppress those that might
make for peace. Your Minister runs with so much precipitation to disturb the
public tranquillity, that his promptitude being joined with his natural
incapacity, does not permit him to consider what the event might be: He
remembers the late Card. Richlieu had opposed the Arms of Gustavus Adolphus,
by which puissant diversion the House of Austria being loaded with the spoils
of the Protestant and pust up with Till ye's Victories, threatened the designs
of the late King your Father. Cardinal Mazarine who never applies general
examples to particular conjunctures, derives his succor from the North, at
such times as Germany scarce yet breathing under the burden of her miseries
and sufferings; and forces this dread^u^ and warlike Nation to put on their
Harness, which is to be feared they will not put off again so soon as could be
wished for your services good.

What shall become of this grand State trick, Sir? the Reunion of the King of
Hungary, Poland, Denmark, the Elector of Saxony, and Brandenburgh, and the
States of Holland, together with the perpetual continuation of the Emperor in
the House of Austria, which one King of Swedeland puissantly armed upon their
frontiers, would have balanced for a long time, and the uniform consent of the
Germans (as it was to be supposed) at the combustion they would have made in
their Country; Charity teaches us not to ascr^be all this to the ill
intentions of Cardinal Mazarine, but leave something to be imputed to the
little light he has to discern the times.

But we cannot, unless we grant that if he had not foreseen the unhappy events
of his own enterprises, he comforts himself when he considers it has given
some advantage to the House of Austria, which does nothing please him, yet has
it in respect of the g^neral peace produced main obstructions which are
infimtely pleasing to him; we have the same thoughts of his conduct in Italy
where we plainly see he has animated Monsr de Modena, which discontents by
such unconscionable practices, as do now exhaust the purest blood and silver in
France.

What shall become of those samous projects, the possession of those places
where they raise as many sieges, as they lay before others; the aversion of all
neighboring Princes estranged from us by the jealousy they have of so unequal
a treaty made with the Duke of Modena, and exasperated by Monsr. de Mantua now
siding with your enemies: The loss of Gazal which brings so much advantage to
Spain, as they durst never pretend unto, if your Minister had not withal
possible care, endeavored to p^t the affairs of your Maj. (by a continual
confusion) in such a condition as is odious to all Italy; the acquisition of
Montfenr^t to the House of Austria which formerly raised all Christendom
against it, is notwithstanding now received as a mostipleasing news to all
Princes.

We believe that Monsr. the Cardinal had not altogether foreseen the fair
effects of his own policy; but we are persuaded the extreme sorrow he
conceived at the ill success of one of his designs, to wit, Monsr. de Modona's
triumph, is much mitigated by the satisfaction he finds in those obstacles
which his confusions, (though not answering the expectation of his project)
has occasioned to the General peace. And that which lets us see we are not
deceived in this point, is, that as soon as he perceived those ill successes
which frustrated his hope, diminish in some sort, the strength of those
obstacle; which his malice employed against there-union of the two Crowns; he
embraces with unspeakable eagerness his fatal means of their disunion,
forlever he precipitates with such impetuosity to the surrendering the Maritime
Ports of Flanders, that is to say, an action so manifestly prejudicial to your
Maj. service, that one can never suspect his ignorance to have any share in
this Treachery, but that we must impute it entirely to his malice, which would
have given this mortal wound to the common prace of Christendom.

One cannot, Sir, impute this shameful resolution to any other cause but to his
inveterate malice, which made us fight under the Banners of the Protector of
England, and which has now forced us to end that field which had cost us such
immense sums of money, only to make a chain that might enslave us to this
Tyrant.

It is now, Sir, more then 27 years, that I do not know what slight, and almost
frivilous interest, had made all the earth shake and tremble by such an
impetuous motion, as (if we had believed your Minister) all the men of the
world could not resist; and yet in the very first year of your unhappy Alliance
with England, they deliver to Cromwell (more likely as a Homage, then by virtue
of a Treaty) a Country far more considerable then all the places that had been
the occasion of the breach between the two Crowns. Thus we buy an Everlasting
War at a price at which one might have been ashamed to purchase the most
necessary peace.

France had formerly (even by the acknowledgment of your minister) preferred
the continuation of the miseries of all Europe, before it would have left the
fortifications of Nancy in the hands of the Duke of Lorrain; nay, we have
proffered to run the hazard of all immaginable revolutions (which are too
contingent to great enterprises) rather then leave one good place to a Petty
Prince, even worn out by the process of his own misfortunes. And we do now a
days abandon such Ports as are, without contradiction, more important to a
Commonwealth, which is far more redoubtable then the Duke of Lorraine; yet,
with this difference, that in the restitution of Nancy we might have found
peace with Spain; and in the surrendering of Dunkirk we have found War with all
Europe.

What disorder, Sir, or what confusion has not your Minister brought to all
the Nations of the world, by this fatal action? the hopes of Consolation, which
always accompanies and qualifies the greatest misfortunes, is now taken away
from us. His cruelty in revenging the detestation the French have of his
government, and conduct of your Person, is not satisfied with a misfortune,
which, together with other Nations, is common to them; but he endeavors to
stifle in us, as much as he can, the liberty of desiring, which despair it self
could never utterly extinguish in us. He disturbs the most sacred and
inviolable of our holy Vows, and by a monstrous Prodig^e, which Nature yet
could never parallel, we find our selves (even at this instant) in an
incapacity of discharging the most essential of all our obligations.

In how sad a condition, Sir, does a French Catholic find himself in the
Churches? and at the foot of the Altars must he implore the blessings of God
upon the Armies of Spain, declared enemies of your Majesty; or must he seek the
favors of heaven upon those of France, which a horrid and terrible blindness
imployes for the Establishing of Heresy. Which shall we behold more willingly,
the Cross of Burgundy displayed on the top of our Bastions, or that of England
(which does so criminally degenerate from it self) triumphing upon Catholic
Rampires? Which shall we fooner desire, Sir, the loss of our own Colors
consecrated to Almighty God in the Churches of Bruxells, or the Standarts of
Castile, dedicated to Divils in the Temples of London? What shall we wish for
the ruin of your Armies animated by our own proper blood, before the Towns of
Flanders, or the conquest of those places which is, without comparison, more
prejudicial then their conservation? We feel in our selves, Sir, we feel in our
hearts a Combat of Religion against the State, and of the State against it
self: Shall we run next Summer to the Siege of Dunkirk, then to that of Ostend,
so to Newport, and all this to follow our Natural inclinations to obey our
Prince? Or shall we stay at home, and implore the protection of God upon those
places, which serve as much, at least, in the hands of the Spaniard, that they
give the weakness of your Minister some means to satisfy Cromwells ambition
for a year; by some other way then the giving up of Call is and Bullin? shall
we in the Winter prepare branches of Laurel to Crown the sacred head of our
Prince the next spring or shall we draw into a solittude, to bewail a
misfortune that makes them wither as soon as they are gathered?

In how doleful Estate, Sir, and in how deplorable condition does poor France
find it self? at this very instant it seems she does delight to spoil her self
of all those glorious advantages, she had obtained over England in Ages past?
it does not suffice her now to efface the luster of her ancient Victories by
this servile and dependant War, which she make^ under those Standarts, which
she has formerly with so much glory rent to pieces, but she must yet for the
satisfaction of Cromwell, renounce the reputation she had acquired in the
negotiations, and Treaties, they reckon, Sir, 600. years between the Crown of
France, and that of England, since the unfortunate marriageof Alcenor of
Guienne and those who make up this number, mark very judiciously that the
English who were never-yet weary of contesting the glory of Arms with our
Nation, were forced to yerld to them at least in points of Wisdom and Policy.

But alas! Sir, this advantageous opinion which we could never cherish with two
much care in the hearts of all people, is now Ravished and buried in this last
fatal Treaty of London, now we make England amends for all the forrow we caused
her in former times, in defending our selves so wisely from all her subtleties,
and surprises; the sole negotiation of Cardinal Mazarin shall sufficiently
revenge her to posterity of all those advantages we have gained upon her in
more then 600 Treaties, and Cromwell's fierceness, Victorious over the
imbecility of your Minister shall hereafter quite extinguish the glory of our
ancient politicians: Open your eyes then Great King upon this fatal blindness,
upon this horrible illusion, which rather obscures then stops those glorious
exploits, which all Christendom exnects from your Royal Virtues.

Open your eyes, great Prince, upon the loss of your Allies, which they drive
ever with violence out of your interests, by the despair they are daily driven
to by the apprehensions they have that your Minister will never put an end to
the miseries of Europe. Open your eyes, great Prince, upon this mortal wound
they have given to the general peace, which is the only object of the groans
and tears of your people, which is assuredly the final end of your desires, and
shall be the work of your Piety and Wisdom, if God be Exorable to the Prayers
and wishes of all your most Faithful Subjects.

FINIS.

