THE Benefit OF AFFLICTIONS.

BY EDWARD REYNELL Esqu.

2 Timothy 2.12. If we suffer, we shall also reign with him.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper at the Sun in Fleet Street, 1660.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
THough this small Tract, seem not to invite an Epistle, yet [being fallen into
an Age, wherein Pride, Prejudice and Precipitancy have shut our Eares] I
thought fit to acquaint thee (Courteous Reader) that the many rash and
uncharitable Censures, so frequently vented from the mouths of many [vulgar
Justice, ever judging those criminous, whom they see calamitous] has
occasioned these ensuing Lines; as also, for the comfort of those, whom God
(through his afflicting hand) shall leave laboring under the Pangs of the
worlds Reproach and Contempt.

Nothing being [now adayes] more usual, with the Community of people [the
chiefest part of whose Innocence consists in finding fault with such as are
better then themselves] then to account those the greatest sinners, who are the
deepest Sufferers; not knowing that the soul of every Saint consists of sacred
Riddles and holy contradictions; and that God makes his chiefest Cordials out
of those poisonous Serpents that sting us: yea, often extracts his best
Antidotes, from what may seem to destroy us.

Which should serve to silence the malice, and clear up the sight of those
[whose best Objects seem evil, if beheld with blood-shotten eyes] that make the
present sufferings of many, the greatest Indications of their sins, and Gods
Justice attending them.

Neither is it any sufficient Argument, that because God punishes our Faults,
he hates our persons: it being formerly the gross mistake of those Heathens,
Athists, and Idolaters, with the Apostates, and Heretics of old, who fondly
mistook the meaning of those hot and sharp Persecutions, which often befell the
Primitive Christians, and Orthodox Professors of Christ crucified: concluding
that they most deserved the true Cross, who so much gloried in the Cross of
their Savior: no way considering that we have often times more cause to bless
God for our Crosses, then our Comsorts: seeing, as there is a Cross in the best
things to the wicked: so there is a A blessing hidden in the worst things to
the godly.

Bue we find it no new thing, to condemn the Generation of Gods people: the
Tenants of Religion, which is mystical and spiritual, being Paradoxes to to
carnal men. If the Rabble may have their Vote, St. Paul, who would not have
wanted his whippings to have missed his Comforts, shall be accounted mad, and
not fit to live, Act. 22.22. John Baptist shall be accused to have a Devil: The
Apostles to be full of new wine: Nay, Christ himself shall be thought, to be
besides himself, and worthy to be crucified.

And surely, if every one shall adventure, to read and interpret his own
meaning, according to his Fanatic, if not prejudicate and malicious
Conjectures, and the various Dispensations of Gods Providence: extorting the
utmost of our Belief, only to their own sense, and to flatter their own Party,
Opinion, Passion and Interest, how many should we have sacrificed to the Fury
of vulgar Zeal, there being none more hot, and censorious, than Persons
profligatae vitae, ac famae, of egregious Ignorance, and profligate Impudence,
and void of Conscience, as well as Modesty: who think it no sin, to take away
our Crutches, and beat us for going lame: to make us Sufferers, and then load
us with Reproach; being first injurious, and then censorious.

Besides, Prosperity and Success are the great Idols of the Time: and many seem
(with ease) to trample upon those gods, whose hands, they have cut off: not
wisely considering the Paradoxes of Gods Providence, and the depth of his
divine Judgments: whereby through the malice of men, and the fury of Satan,
for the Trials of our Graces, and the exercise of our Patience, he often lays
on great Afflictions, as well on his whole Church, as particular persons.

And may we still learn in all worldly mutations, as well to kiss, as
acknowledge that divine hand [thus guided by the most wise Counsel and
Providence of a merciful God, for our Good] and to make a wise Improvement of
all our Crosses, whereby to have Recourse to Virtue, to God, and our selves:
who because he would not have us perish here, sends us Afflictions in the
world, and by the world as exemplary Improvements in all our Sufferings: which,
without the Furnaces of Gods Afflictions, the worlds Persecution, and the
Devils Temptations would grow dull and rusty.

Farewell.
OUR first Encounters with Life, are Tears and Bonds; and the next Lesson we
are afterward to learn, is to take up our Cross, and follow him, whose whole
life, was a Life of suffering from the Cradle to the Grave, and from his Birth
to his Burial.

Deserts and Mountains were the Schools of the Prophets, and wild honey the
diet of Him, who (by the Testimony of the Son of God) was the greatest of those
that were born of women. They loved their Sackcloth, more then their Silks,
and the watching of their Body, was the Sleep of their Soul. Neither was there
any stop between them and heaven in the pouring out of their mournful
speeches, and wrestling Prays; and though no day arose without its Cloud, yet
did they no way value the blows and frowns of a stormy world, having once
attained the true Olympus, whose Air was so calm and clear.

It was well said of a School- Divine, That the Tears of the righteous, were
the smiles of their soul. When the Marble weeps, it washes away the Dust. In
our chiefest sorrow (which should be for sin) is healing; penitential Tears
being the oil of the Sanctuary: why then should we make it our study to shun
that sorrow, which will save us from destroying? As Pliny calls Sickness, the
Sum of Philosophy [if we could but perform that in our health, which we then
promise] So Afflictions are the best Remedy, to make us know our selves, when
we are in the full Career of worldly Pomp.

Stars never shine more glorious, then when they are near Dark Clouds: Without
Afflictions and Trials, God will not be familiar with us. Those Trees which are
not pruned, will first leave to bear, and then die. Yea, Nature it self, would
decay and perish, if not dressed, and purified by the same hand that first made
her. He that is not favored with Crosses and Visitations, is (by St. Paul)
accounted no Heir of the heavenly Jerusalem. Without Diseases, we know not the
benefit of a Physician; and God often uses to visit us with his corrections,
that he himself may become a Cordial. Before I was afflicted I went a stray
(says that Princely Prophet) And sure there is none of Gods Rods that we can
well want. The waters of Bethesda healed not until the Angel had stirred them;
and though worldly Tears be the waters of Marah, yet there is a Tree to sweeten
them.

Thus are we chatechiz'd for Eternity; it is that which all the Fathers so often
inculcate; it is that which all the Saints have found the benefit of. Gods house
of Correction was their School of Instruction. The justest man [then alive] was
fought against by his Terrors, Job 6.4. He that walked before him in truth, and
with a perfect heart, had his bones broken by the anger of the Almighty, Isa,
38.13. Yea, the man after Gods own heart, was so wasted with grief, as that,
His moisture was turned into the drought of summer, Psalm. 32.3, 4. Nay, his own
son [though without sin] must bleed upon the Cross, and those whom he has
chosen for himself, be tried in the Furnace of Affliction, Isa. 48.10.

The Dunghill of this world, will annoy thee, while thou dwell in this
house of clay. The just have not only an Egypt of sin to encounter with, but
Israel even in Canaan is not in rest. Nay, our Savior himself, first tasted
the bitter Gall of the unmercifull Cross, before he eat of the Honeycomb. It is
thus that our Sorrows must be turned into Sweets. The corn is not separated but
by threshing, nor men drawn nearer to heaven by worldly impediments so much as
by tribulation.

Acriora Orexim excitant embammata. Sharp Sauces beget good Appetites; and the
Thorns (at last prove Roses, in the same place, where innocence has sighed so
much.

But oh! how basely do we startle at every trouble? How do we endeavor to dry
up those Tears, before they have sufficiently cleansed our filthiness? whereas
Afflictions should not be resisted, but with great Pre-caution. What part
soever God has appointed us, we must be contented to act it faithfully. If it
be long, it is usually light; if grievous, it cannot last, Dies dolorem minuit,
time will wear it out; we can never loose our selves in the pure and innocent
Tracts of virtue. Grave nihil est homini, quod fert necessitas, that which is
necessary cannot be any way burthensom.

Besides, It is Gods Prerogative, and not thine, to choose thy condition;
whither to be sick or healthy; a mourner, or afflicted. Is it his pleasure to
to make thee the Drunkards Song, or a Reproach to Abjects; envy not those
Shimeis, which thus rail on thee, considering whose doing it is; bite not the
stone, but look unto him that throws it; keep close to thy Station, and thou
shall find no small comfort at last; patience will digest thy misery. Sure all
is not lost; after a little forbearance, we shall come out from these vapors
of Calumny, as the Sun out of a Cloud at noonday.

The Afflictions of man (I confess) are more moving then of any other creature,
for he only is a stranger here. All things else are at home: but Ardua
florifera Crux, The painful Cross shall at last be crowned with Palms and
Flowers. A joyful heart will (at last) prove the fruit of his innocence,
though grief and sorrow be the Bud and Prim-rose thereof; our Mansion is in
heaven, where our Savior is gone to prepare a place for us.

The Martyrs were wont to mitigate their pain, with the thought of home, and
immortality; every punishment (as Tiburtius faith) being poor, where a good
conscience keeps us company. When we shall be freed from this dark Lant-horn of
flesh and frailty, and when we shall be raised from death, we shall not grieve
so much, because the joys of this life were not real, as we shall rejoice,
because they were none at all.

That lump of misery (holy Job) whose spirit was nothing but patience, as his
body was naught but Sores, retained always his Affections in an equal
Resignation, Came I naked into of the world? so shall I go out, Job 1.21. There
is as much valor to be showed in a Bed as in an Army: But alas! though we
cannot avoid Evils, how are we afraid to bear them!

Indeed, we interpret out Afflictions amiss, and therefore are cast down; we
take every whipping to be an effect of Anger, when it is a sign of Love. God
makes us sick in our body, to cure some disease in our Soul. Can we attain to
Tabor, before we pass by Calvary? Shall we not first taste Gall with our
Savior, before we receive the sweet benefits of his blessed Resurrection? Ah!
is there any such precious thing to be gotten in the world, that we should
forsake Jesus in the wilderness of Temptation, and please our selves in the
vain and transitory hopes of our own unbridled Fancies? How do we know whither
in desiring to be delivered from Affliction, we do not ask of God to take away
a gift, which is necessary to our salvation? seeing that Malady, or Affliction,
which makes us distate worldly pleasures, gives us a disposition to taste the
joys of Heaven.

The brave and happy men of this world enjoy their wishes, but their Ship does
perish in the harbor, as it is sporting; whereas God [by his infinite
Providence] gives Tempests to his Elect, that he may work a miraculous Calm, by
his Almighty Power. And though the waters seem to reserve their choler, to vent
it only upon the Ship which carries just persons, yet is it always accompanied
with that happy and comfortable voice, It is I, be not afraid.

God takes off his own people from the ilness of their ways, By hedging them
up with Thorns, Hos. 2.6. But it is to bring them into a Bed of Roses, and by
the wormwood of this world to show the sweetness of himself. He is pleased to
draw the Instruments of his Power out of the Objects of our Infirmities: where
he comes, the Tempest cease; and they know Jesus very ill, who (with his
Disciples) in the Storms of Affliction, take him for an Illusion, and cry out
for fear of his presence, which should make them most rejoice.

Affliction opens the eyes of man, and makes him come to himself, that he may
the better return to God; and it is a great offense to break that glass, which
represents us to our selves, by a friendly correction. Why should I be afraid
to show my heart stark naked to him, whose Arrows no sooner pierce, but heal;
who tells us, Afflictions and Scourges in this life, are like to be our
portion. And shall we think to speed better then our Master? who at last
intends us a Crown, will turn our water into wine; and (according to Sampsons,
Ridle) Out of the Eater shall come meat, and out of the strong sweetness. David
had forty years Reign for seven years Banishment: and Joseph (though thirteen
years under a Cloud, through false imprisonment) reigned fourscore years a King
in Egypt. And surely Gods ends are no other, then to wean us from the world,
to draw us nearer to himself; to humble and to prove us, that he may do us good
at the later end, Deuteronomy. 8.16.

Oh Happy Afflictions to keep the heart pliable, and tender toward our God!
yea thrice happy is he who can say (with the Prophet) Remembering mine
Affliction, and my misery; the wormwood and the Gall; my soul has them still
in Remembrance, and is humbled in me. Lam. 3.19, 20. And hence is it that the
Apostle also bids us, Call to remembrance the former days in which after we
were illuminated, we endured a great fight of afflictions: partly whilst we
were made a gazing stock both by reproaches and afflictions, Hebrews 10.32, 33.

God is thus pleased to mind us of the frailty of our condition, since when we
are in Prosperity, we are ready to kick the heel, and forget him. Where did
Adam take his Fall, but in Paradise [the midst of the Trees of pleasure?] Where
is the poor Be more subject to be drowned, then in a Pot of honey? Neither are
we ever nearer a Surfeit, then in the midst of Delicacies.

We find Flowers to be ever sweetest after a Shower, yea to drop the sweetest
water, when fire is under them. The Gold loses its dross by refining, and the
Corn its Chafe by the Flail. Who then would not be willing to be under Gods
pruning knife, that he may bring forth more fruit? John 15.2. Who would not be
content to sit (with Job) on the Dunghill, bereaved of all his goods and
comforts, when they shall be redoubled; yea not only to receive manifold more
in this life, but everlasting life hereafter? Luke 18.30. Surely none (me
thinks) should repine to drink of Christ's Cup here, since at last it will be
sweetened with such good Ingredients.

It was the saying of one, that all the pleasures enjoyed by all men of the
world, were not worth one hours in Heaven; the thought whereof made that great
Marquess Galeaceus Caracciolus (though rich, and of much esteem in the world)
so strongly to with-stand those, who tempted him to return to his own Country.
Alas! (said he) let their riches perish with them, who esteem all the gold in
the world, worth one days society with Jesus Christ, and his holy Spirit!

Answerable whereunto is that sweet and heavenly language of the Apostle; I
account not (says he) the Afflictions of this life, worthy to be compared with
the glory which shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.18. Yea, He esteemed all things
but loss, for the excellency of Christ, for whom he had suffered the loss of
all things, accounting them but dung, that he might win Christ, Phil. 3.8. He
well knew, that comfort was not the standing dish of a Christian in this life;
nor Cordials to be fit, but for those that are fainting.

Raw flesh (says a Reverend Bishop) is noisome to the stomach, and yields no
good nourishment before it be sodden; so are we to God, before we are soked and
boiled in Afflictions. Christ died, and bled, and wept for our souls, and shall
not we suffer a little with him, since it is especially for our own advantage
at last? Which of the Saints of the world, was without Crosses and
Tribulations, and shall we think to escape that which no man could ever avoid?

The Disciple it seems made too much have back from the Sepulcher to find
Christ, Joh. 20.10, 11. but Mary standing there weeping, saw her Savior. And
certainly, he that sigheth not here with him, as a Pilgrim, shall never rejoice
with him hereafter as a Citizen. Was it not he (our Captain) who showed us the
way? He that could make Orators out of those that were speechless, had nor one
word to say against the Revilers. He which could command Frogs and Flies to
overthrow mighty Armies, would not have one Disciple to draw his Sword. He that
was without spot by his unparalled Sufferings, took away our stains, and
through his innocence anvanc'd the Standard of the Cross. He that was the
Fountain of Glory, descended to the lowest abasements. He that had life at
command, was ravished by the Object of his death, and transported by the Idea
of his Sufferings.

Shall we not then love that Cross, which he has cherished as his Spouse?
Surely, we shall never be worthy of him, until we bear, as well the Ensigns,
of his War, as the Ornaments of his peace.

Let our care be, that we suffer not for evil doing which is the way not to
carry the Cross of our Lord, but of the bad Thief. Neither-be thou troubled for
suffering for thy Innocence, which is greater honor, then to suffer for a
direct Offense. Christ was not the less the King of Heaven, for suffering
himself to be crowned with Thorns in this world; nor his Servants the worse,
for the Reproaches of his enemies, which he long since told them they must
expect.

The Viper would sooner light upon St. Paul, then the Barbarian; Neither do
Pirates use to set upon empty Ships, but pursue those which are richly laden.
Satan is quiet with those that he has got into his possession; his Temptations
are a sign that God loves, where he hates; and though he should winnow thee
with the Fan, and bruise thee with the Flail, yet thy faith shall not fail: but
at last be sure the Salt-sea of thy Tears shall become a flourishing Field, as
it did to Gods people of old. The Cloud which appeared to Ezekiel, carried with
it storms, and winds, but it was withal encompassed with a golden Circle; to
teach us, that Storms of Afflictions, are at last accompanied with brightness
and felicity; and the greatest losses with the best advantages.

Our Savior chose the places of delight for suffering of pains, and never
looked upon those dainty Sweets, but to draw out of them most bitter Sorrows.
Gardens indeed were made for Recreations, but our Savior there finds only
Desolation; The Plants whereof did groan, the Roses seemed flowers of death,
and the Springs belonging to them, fountains of Tears, sweat, and blood. Heaven
wore mourning on the Cross, all the Citizens of heaven wept over his Torments;
The Earth quaked, the stones rent themselves, Sepulchers opened, the dead
arise; only Jesusdies immovable upon his Thron of patience.

Who then alas! can choose, but be astonished at the tranquillity of his Spirit,
that amongst those great convulsions of the world, which accompanied him all
his life, and moved all about the Cross at his death: amongst such bloody
dolours, insolent cries, and unsufferable Blasphemies [bleeding, weeping, and
praying] he should show such a serenity of Spirit in the very gulf of
Afflictions, to which all the sufferings in the world, are but so many
Fleabitings.

This (indeed) was that bloody Sacrifice, which has been expected from all
Ages. And what soul is not ravished with admiration, and carried beyond it
self, to behold those spectacles of horror, that bottom of endless goodness
and mercy! Its a great way of Remedy, Similes aliorum respice casus, mitius
ista feres; to compare our condition with those, whose sufferings we find to be
greater.

And can we think on a deeper Pattern of griefs and sorrow? what though we
receive no comfort from the Creature, is it not enough that we have it from the
Creator? The infusion of the least piece of his Cross [I mean a true interest
in his merits and Passion] being able to make the bitterest afflictions of this
world to become sweet and pleasant. And can we think on that depth of gries and
sorrow his soul was in, when he cried out, My God! my God! why have thou
forsaken me? praying three times, when his soul was heavey unto the death, that
the cup might pass from him; and shall not we suffer a little for his sake?

Mingle then thy Sighs with the sufferings of thy Savior; and O what sweetness
shall thou find in Afflictions! Lay all thy sortows on him, who was not only
the greatest of Sufferers, but is the best of Physicians. Cast thy self at the
feet of his mercy, who commanded us to deny our selves, showing us the way of
taking up our Cross, and our Thorns shall then become Roses, in the same place
where thou have sighed so much: and out of their sharpness shall we compose a
Crown of Glory. Make thy calamities familiar with thee, whereby they will
become the less troublesome; avoid the effect, or disanull the cause, with a
mature Judgment, and arm thy self against all such violent incursions, as may
invade thy mind.

Thy Savior wrought out thy salvation in an Estate of Baseness, and ought
not thou [in thy way to glory] to be conformable to thy head, and pass through
an Estate of misety? we are chosen to a portion of Afflictions, as well as to
Grace and Glory; Whosoever will live godly in Jesus, must suffer persecution;
and therefore to frame a Religion that has no trouble with it, is to frame an
Idol.

Happy sure are they then, who improve all advantages to advance their chiefest
good; who labor to grow better by Crosses, as well as blessings, and learn to
make a sanctified use of every thing: which I confess it is no easy thing to
flesh and blood, seeing Religion is a Mystical and spiritual thing, and the
Tenants thereof seem Paradoxes to carnal men; as that a Christian is the only
free man, whilst other men are slaves; that he is the only rich man, though
never so poor in the world; that he is the only Beautiful man, though
(outwardly) never so deformed; that he is of great esteem, though never so much
reviled, reproacht and defamed; and that he only is the happiest man, who can
rejoice in the midst of his miseries.

And as Children deal with nuts, so should wise men with Afflictions, to break
the shell, and eat the Kernel. The Rod indeed has a voice, and we ought to
hear it; but where God strikes with his Rod, he supports with his Staff. The
Diamond (if intervening the Lodestone) hinders its action; so the sweetness of
Affliction (if sanctified by the Author thereof) shall work for good (as shall
all things else) to those that fear him. The Barren woman wishes for the hour
of Childbearing, which though painful, is but short, and afterward joyful.

And is it not very convenient that in this world the punishment should be
greater then the Reward, to let us know, that in the other, the Reward shall be
greater then our Sufferings. Never had we been happy, if we had not been
miserable; Periisses, nisi periisses; had we not been thus sick, we had died.
Infelicity brings us this happiness, to make the rest of our life the Sweeter,
and our expectation hereafter the greater.

Temptation and misery is that which only tries a Christian (as Seamen are) in
the Tempests of this world. Vulnus non penetrat animam, A wound hurts not the
soul. Neither is Affliction other then the Cross, and Hammer to beat Repentance
the nearer to our heart; it being Gods end [who is the Author of our distress,
and whose Almighty power (guided by a most wise Providence, tempered with a
fatherly love, intends nothing at last, but what may work for his glory, and
our good] thus to deal with us, lest we should take the place of our banishment
here for our Country, and the Earnest of our Inheritance for a full payment.

The world (indeed) brings us pleasures in golden Cups, and like the Strumpet
(the wise man mentions) whose lips drop honey, and whose words are sweeter then
oil, but her feet go down unto death, and many strong men have been slain by
her, Pro. 5.3, 5. Our great Adversary first brings us on the Pinnacle (with our
Savior) promising us, all that we can see, but all this while takes advantage
against us. But Gods dealing is otherwise, he first gives us Corrosives, before
he administer his Cordials; he first humbles before he exalts us: until at
last, he gives us occasion to say with that princely Prophet, Thou have turned
for me my mourning into dancing; thou have put off my Sackcloth, and girded me
with gladness, Psalm 30.11.

Let Patience then so far perfect it self, as to make us willing to look as
well upon our Sufferings as delights.

Use renders all things easy; and that which in the beginning seems full of
trouble and affrightment, becomes a pleasure in the end. Poison kills, and yet
how have some been nourished thereby? Holy Job having encountered with an Army
of furious Evils, and languishing upon a Dunghill (the very sink of corruption
and uncleanness) under grievous Ulcers and Diseases; and after the loss of all
his Children and substance, was not at all affrightted, but played with the
worms, and made that which his uncharitable friends esteemed for vengeance and
misery, to be his meditation and mirth. While he retained his Integrity, he
could not miss of joy: and though Corruption was his Father, the worms his
mother, and soars had throughout encompassed him, yet through this loathsome
Veil-shin'd the beautiful and healing hand of a merciful God.

Weak then was that saying of Democritus, It is good to learn what to suffer,
but not to suffer them. Evils indeed foreseen lose much of their Edge. But of
a more Heroic Temper seemed that Speech of Bion, It is a great evil not to be
able to bear Evils; a good man by his Conflicts being made a Spectacle to the
world, to men, and to Angels, and by an enduring patience and over-comming
sufferance, not only receives the glorious Olive Branch, but wearies the hands
of those that beat him.

One of the Philosophers being highly provoked to impatience; Ah! (said he) vex
me as much as thou can, thou shall never make me to give thee an ill word.
How wholesome then is that patience and innocent forbearance which prevents sin
and sorrow [the consequent of it] whereas it would prove but an ill course,
Clavum expellere clavo, to right one injury by offering another? Revenge never
conquers malice, which you must overcome with goodness.

The Heathen could say, that the Gods were well pleased to see good men
contending with Adversity. Art thou then contemned, rejected, despised of the
world? art thou forsaken of thy friends, and do thy kindred stand gazing on
thee afar off? yet comfort thy self, go on merrily: as it was said of Agar in
the wilderness, God sees thee, he takes notice of thee; and as he can relieve,
so he will (in time) vindicate thee. If thou can but find faith to believe
it, he will find means to effect it.

A Tyrant (as the Ancients held) was the best Sacrifice to Jupiter; and his
best Object was a contented mind. Our Sufferings are but toies, (says Seneca)
Behold (says he) a Spectacle worthy of God, a man patient, and contented with
his Estate.

The poor Sheep is patient as well when the Fleece is shorn, as when it grows
upon her back; and shall not we be patient, when we meet with Crosses, as well
as when we receive Blessings? Shall we not lay our mouth in the dust, and be
silent, when we meet with evil from that hand, which makes us to abound with
all good, when we enjoy all, and when we are stripped of all. If thou can not
now endure so little, how will thou be able to suffer Eternal Flames hereafter?
If a little suffering make thee impatient, what will hell fire do in another
world?

Assure thy self, thou shall not have two Paradises. It is impossible to enjoy
the delights and pleasures of the world, and to Reign with thy Savior in
heaven. Now are thy pains profitable, thy tears acceptable, and thy sighs and
groans audible; yea a thousand years of the sharpest penance here, far less
then one hours grief hereafter.

If then the divine Providence think it fit, to write bitter things against
thee; if he please to keep thee from putrefaction, by steeping thee in brinish
Tears of the Sea of this world, be not dismayed; for how should God wipe away
thy Tears in Heaven, if on earth thou shed them not? or how should heaven be
the place of our Rest, if that on earth we were not troubled?

He to whom in all our pressures, dangers, and Afflictions, we ought to have
recourse, and from whose hand rewards are to be expected, can turn our chains
of Iron into silver. When St. Paul wishes much happiness unto Felix, he
reserved his Bonds and Imprisonments to himself, Acts 26.28. Those golden
fetters he thought too worthy, or else a burden too heavy for Felix to undergo.

Whatsoever falls upon us from the hand of the Almighty, is a Diamond. Content
[which was Saint Paul's Elixir] turns the rudest metal into smooth and ductible
gold. Heaven does not always own and prosper its own quarrel; but makes our
enemies oftentimes to assail us hardly; seeking in our losses the revenge of
our sins, or increase of our patience; and many are the Ship-wracks where into
the wind of fortunate Success would other ways carry us.

Neither (since prosperous Victories (if ill managed) bring forth more damage
with them, then defeatments do) should we unavisedly question that Providence,
which watches over all our Designs: there being not more stars in the
firmament, then their are eyes over all our Actions. And if God seem sometimes
to sleep in the midst of our miseries, it is to the end to save us with more
wonder, and make more evident Tastimonies of his love, snrely Innocence is not
always a shelter; the virtuous often die with thirst, whilst others more
undeserving, surfeit with earthly blessings, and as well abusing the benefits,
as provoking the Justice of their Creator.

A day will come, which will put our condition into a better fortune: God only
for a time showing himself with the malice of the wicked, as we use to deal
with Serpents, from whom we take their venom, and crush their heads. He can
make the flesh of Vipers to assist in Cordials; he can make our weaknesses also
to be strength only for a time: he puts his marks upon us, lest we should
straggle from him.

The heats of Affliction are but the chafing of the Wax, to seal us to him.
These Spots are but the Letters wherein he writes his own Name, and conveyes
himself unto us. If he please to send us Sickness, let us esteem our spiritual
health before that of the body. It was St. John's wish, That Gaius might prosper
in health, even as his soul prospers. For if the soul be lean, the body is
amiss, and if the Soul wither, the verdure of the body is but an Illusion, and
the godliest man but a fearful Ghost.

Is this thy body then wearied with Afflictions? No matter, so thy soul be at
peaceful Rest. The Spouse said, I sleep, but my soul waketh. The Innocent is
no way able to lose his joy, neither the guilty able to receive any Comfort. If
thy course Robes trouble thee, remember the swaddling Cloths of thy Savior. If
thy Bed uneafie, yet it is not worse then his Manger. And yet [besides all
this] he suffered all the pains and forrows which we deserved.

Expect not then to be more gently treated, then the best and wisest of men,
then the Apostles and Saints, nay, then the Son of the Eternal God, the Heir of
both the worlds, and the Lord of men and Angels, who was also the King of
Sufferings. But all this being well considered, thou have great reason to sit
down, and warm thy self by thy own fire; and feed upon content at home, when
thy little misfortune troubles thee.

And this thou shall the more easily do: if thou survey all the States and
Families of the world, and if thou enlarge thy thoughts, by thinking, how that
in the most beauteous and splendid Fortune, so many cares and interruptions are
to be found: and that however Poverty and hardships fasten not on the
Favorites thereof, yet Sickness and innumerable Cares are still at their
heels: yea, the chief Prince or Protector of a Nation, sits often times upon a
Tribunal with great Ceremony and ostentation, and yet something in his Breast
causes him to sigh deeply.

But methinks, I hear thee say, is the Glory of heaven no perfecter in it self,
but that it needs a foil of Depression and Ingloriousness to set it forth in
this world? Is the joy of heaven no perfecter in it self, but that it needs the
sowerness of this life to give it a taste? No surely, this is the course which
those glorious souls which now inhabit Eternity, have taken. Tum maxim cum
novitas excitat pala Those things taste sweetest which are stained with most
cost and difficulty. Never is the corn more clean, then when it has past the
Flail; never is gold more approved, then when it comes from the Touchstone.

It is reported of Alexander the Physician, that he would have Lapis Lazuli
fifty times washed, before it were used; and it is the Will of the great
Physician of our souls, to have us often tried in the fire of Affliction; and
to taste that honey, which proceeds only from bitter herbs. That Cordial which
succeeds an unpleasant Potion, must needs be welcome to fainting a soul.

And as a help hereunto, we have the Example of Christ and his Apostles; of
Moses and all the wise men of all Ages of the world; who (well understanding
how to distinguish good from evil) did for a short time here, choose a sad and
melancholy way to Felicity, rather then the broad, pleasant, and easy way to
misery.

Neither may we expect all fair days here, without some clouds, and the taste
of the bitter waters of this world. Thou must sometimes sit mourning with the
Pelican; thy beauty must be strewed with Ashes, and spend some time in solitude
and darkness, in putting off all our gorgious Ornaments, and putting on
Sackcloth; in eating the bread of sorrow; in lying in the dust, in weeping, in
fasting, in kneeling and praying, in smiting the Breast, and in prostrating our
selves to the ground, to welcome those who have undertaken the profession of
Jesus Christ.

Where should thou expect to find thy Savior, but on the Cross; and in what
posture would thou rather have him to find thee then in sighing and groaning;
in lifting up of eyes and hands to heaven; in fervency of prayer [the devoutest
temper of the soul] and in an humble, penitent, contrite and broken heartedness?

After which gloomy Night of sorrow, the cheerful and refreshing daylight,
will be the more welcome. If Jesus be thy Physician, its no matter how long
thou art sick: no matter if thou can say (with Jacob) he is in thy
Afftiction, though thou see him not. What though our Bones are parched, and our
moisture consumed through our daily complaining, shall we (with Hagar) cry out
for water, when we are nearest the Fountain? or shall we fear drowning whilst
Christ is in the Ship, though he seem a sleep?

For though God be pleased thus to bring his Children on their knees, and to
wring from them the penitent Tears of confession, yet does he well know how to
withdraw his heavy yoke, and after the lowest Ebb of sorrow, to send us the
highest Spring of comfort.

The soul of every Saint consists of sacred Riddles and holy Contradictions;
sometimes ready to sink with grief; then again, lifted up with joy. Sometimes
(with Job) sitting in the dust, and complaining, Why he was made a mark to
shoot at, but presently is assured, That his Redeemer lives, and that he shall
again see God. Sometimes (with David) he sits on the housetop, like a sparrow,
mourning like a Dove, and chattering like a Crane. Then again, Singing and
making melody in his heart.

Oh happy Storm, which can thus bring us from the waters of Babylon into so
joyful a Calm! who would not for a time endure Hell to enjoy Heaven? Had
thou not been afflicted, thou had gone a stray. Ah how pleasantly would
thou have sung a Requiem to thy sick Soul? How securely miscarried with a fair
wind? and how sweetly have perished in thy sins, had not the breath of Gods
anger a little stopped thee? who crosses thee in thy expectation, whereby to
bind thee faster to himself, and respects thy good more then thy appetite.

Alas! This world is not strewn with Roses, neither have we any surer way to
reach to heaven, then by a crown of Thorns; or to receive the honor of the
day, then by enduring the heat thereof. It is a saying that Iamblichus cites
out of Pythagoras, That every good thing consists of substance and use, and not
of mere knowledge. Learned Aphorisms heal not the diseased, but bitter
medicines. A skillful Physician profits not the sick, unless he falls to
practice; nor is that soul saved, which can reason subtily, and discourse
elegantly, but does no good works. Those only that bring their Talents home
with increase, shall be made Rulers over Cities. And who more fit to receive a
Reward, then he that has run hardest for it?

Had we not been told by the words of Truth, that all things have the like
event here on earth, Eccles. 2.15. and that the best may suffer as well as the
worst [thoug Afflictions to the one, are trials, to the other punishments] we
had some cause to droop and hang down our heads: But since true piety [though
the best policy] is not always attended with Prosperity, we may safely
conclude, that no Magician or Sooth-sayer, no Astrologer or Enchanter, shall be
able to spell any such meaning [as to Gods displeasure] out of that
handwriting which seems to be directed against those, who (through the heavy
loads of Afflictions seem to be forsaken of God, as well as of man) Why are we
troubled? why are we cast down?

Did we not know that all the felicity of man in this world is a dream, (it
comes on we know not how; and when it vanishes, we cannot so much as discern,
whether it is gone; that whatsoever in this world we call fruition, is but
Face-acquaintance, and all temporal possessions, but a looking on) we might in
some case, have cause of sorrow: But since all things pass away in an
unperceived motion; and when we suppose our best enjoyments to be fast locked in
our Arms, they creep from us in a mist or smoke, (which steals out at the
Chimney-top, after it has fouled it within) why do we sigh, and groan, and
moan, and sink under the burden of what will one day lead us to an
incomparable weight of Glory? 2 Cor. 4.17, 18.

Were not Suffering of the first Statutes of the great Magna Charta in Heaven,
and will surely find us out, whether we be born in Purple, or under the Spiders
Web; inhabit we Palaces, or live in Cottages, we might (like that poor flower
(which shuts it self at the Suns absence) sit down, and weep under a cloud of
sorrow. But seeing the supreme and eternal Wisdom [which is the Master and
Deviser of this worldly Drama] assigns us our parts as well of suffering as
pleasure; Why should we murmr? Why do we repine?

May we consider further, that the life of man is a mavrelous Comody, wherein
the greatest part of our Actions are played under a Curtain. The rich man and
the poor meet in this world; the one abounding in Treasure; the other laden
with miseries and Ulcers; though their Ends are often as different, as their
lives are contrary, the one falling into a Gulf of fire, the other into an
Abyss of delights; which should keep us as from repining at the hand of a
merciful God, so from rash censuring of such as are in extremity: as if God
had forgotten them in a time, which he chooses purposely for the showing of
his special Mercy.

But here may thou ask me, Why then is man [the only Creature intended to
happiness] thus born to trouble, as the sparks fly upwards? Why through the
house of Tears he thus travels to the Mansion of joy? or why he alone [being
capable of Beatitude] is thus made subject to misery? I answer, Because he is
born for virtue, the readiest way to attain Eternity. He attributes nothing
that is good to any thing here below, but wholly refers it to God, from whom
(as from the fountain) all things proceed.

And though it may seem a Paradox (though true in Philosophy) That no man is
rich, but he that is poor, according to the common account; yet no wise man did
ever describe felicity without virtue; or true happiness, without being
attended with such Afflictions, as direct us in the ways of holiness; it being
no evil to be wretched, but to be vicious and impatient; neither may we think,
that virtue depends wholly on Prosperity and a god fortune.

Indeed to those who know not their Savior, nor meditate how far he has got
the victory, and taken away the sting of suffering (yea of death it self) as
their life cannot be pleasant, so their sufferings can no way be comfortable;
they are the most unwelcom Messengers that ever knocked at their doors: and not
only make a Belshazar to tremble, but a Saul to fall prostrate on the Earth, 1 Samuel 28.28. Yea, such black clouds of sorrow many times overtake us, as that
(with Jacob) we often rend our cloths, and will needs (with grief) go down into
our Graves.

But our only wise Physician well knows, that to find out either our
Distempers, or our Cures, and to discern all the sad omens of our Afflictions,
and all the prodigious causes of our troubles and miseries, we must search
deeper then the skin, and superficies of our maladies; the poisons of malignity
of our Nature, being not only deeply diffused, but reaching to the very heart,
and hidden in the most retired Cells of our Souls.

Alas! We have but one life, and we see a thousand instruments of death, ready
to take it away, and to let out our innocent souls; We have but a little
breath, and how quickly is it gone? O God, thy first breath breathed a soul
into me, and shall thy breath so soon blow it out again, through lodes of
troubles? I see thy hand upon me, but I dare not ask thee why it comes, or what
it intends? whether thou will bid me stay longer in this body, or bid me meet
thee this day in paradise: only makeme willing at all times [Jesus himself
having made the way, and gone before] to pay my homage, and drive on with
comfort (no way daunted with the storms of a wearisom life) toward those joys
which will at last lead me into unspeakable liberty.

Let me still bless thee for that Affliction which thus speaks nothing but
mercy. Let me hear thy voice thus calling unto me: I must correct thee, but I
will not hurt thee; my hand shall lie gently upon thee: with gracious respites
will I visit thee. If I send thee Crosses, I will give thee patience; if I
visit thee with Afflictions, I will give thee a willing submission, and a
readiness to kiss the Rod, and the hand that holds it, yea, a constant
dependence on that Arm, which makes thee smart.

O God! Let me ever thus feel thy Rod, rather then lose thy Affliction! the
plain sense of our suffering is, that thou may bring us to Repentance. It is
not to consume our pure gold, but to refine us from that dross, we have [as
men] contracted. It is but to open our eyes that we may the better return to
him who seems sometimes to withdraw his comforts. Though the Nurse be often
withdrawn, the better to win the Child's affection: and the Sun of
Righteousness not seen of us, though bright (behynd the clouds of Trials and
Temptations) yet at last how does our barrenness yield a plentiful Harvest?
And as the Sunshine of Gods countenance, does ripen our Graces, so does cloudy
weather advantage their growth in humility, mourning and self-denial.

And it is no small mercy from God, that in our journey to Canaan, we pass
through the wilderness of this worlds temptations, and in the way to Zion, we
pass through the valley of Baca: whilst we have Christ as a cloud and pillar to
direct us: God is not tied always to bring is to heaven by one and the same
road; neither is it any matter, if in stead of Jacobs Ladder, ye are
transported thither in Eliahs fiery Chaiot, it being the goodness of God to
give us patience, courage and constancy [which are our highest conformity to
Christ our Saviour] to attend his help, though in the last and darkest watch of
the night; his relief coming in the best time.

As Stars appear brighest at Noonday to those who (with Joseph) are in deep
pits: so divine Providence appears lightest to those who are necessitated to
make a cordial of the poison of the worlds contempts and reproaches. The Royal
Title over our Saviors head, was never more glorious, and deserved, then when
he was hanging upon the Cross; seeing on that [as a King on his Throne] he most
conquered both over his, and his Churches enemies. Neither were his sufferings
the least of his solemnities and glories; his Father being never better pleased
with him, then when he cried out, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

Neither is it any Argument, that because God punishes out faults, he hates
our persons; whose Rod and staff lifted up against us, is not to drive us from
him, but as a Shepherds Crook, to draw us nearer to him, Psalm 23. Though those
(indeed) that are strangers to the Cross of Christ, and understand not the
Afflictions of Christians to be as mysterious as their faith, suppose they must
needs be Murderers, on whose hands they see such Vipers hanging, Acts 28.4.
and no way considering, that God many times loves most, where he most rebukes;
and that they have often times most of his heart, from whom he most hides his
face [as to temporal prosperity and on whom his hand lies heaviest, as to
visible chastisements, Heb. 12.5.

He takes the safest course with his Children; that they may not be condemned
with the world, he makes the world to condemn them; that they may not love the
world, he makes the world to hate them; and that they may be crucified to the
world, he makes the world to be crucified to them.

And hence it is that they meet with crosses, and abuses, and wrongs in the
world, because God will not have them perish with the world.

In this way of Affliction it is, that God does chiefly manifest himself to our
soul; hereby the soul unites it self most to Christ; whereas in times of
Prosperity it scatters and loses it self in the Creature, there being an
uniting power in Afflictions to make the soul gather it self to God.

The bitterest things in religion are sweet. And as Gods children are
strengthened, and learn to stand by their falls; so (like tall Cedars) the more
they are blown, the deeper they are rooted; and after all outward storms and
inward declinings, this is the issue, They take root downward, and bring footh
fruit upwards.

And since there is nothing of God which can please the world, this should make
us to quiet our hearts in the midst of its unwelcome and tempestuous storms,
and to account it a greater favor from God, when the Michals of the world
scoff at us; for when they are offended at us, God is delighted with us; yea,
happy are those, who find themselves amended by those bitter potions which [in
bad times and by evil men] a good God administers to us for our health; and
whereby he intends better to improve us to his service; when (coming out of
this fiery Furnance) we shall shine more bright, then ever we did with the love
of Christ.

What if some men fancy to themselves a liberty, first to mock us, and after to
nail us to the Cross? What though they stick not (amidst our many Agonies) to
give us gall and vinegar to drink, to load us with cruel contempts, and
virulent speeches, and scandalous reproaches? What if our Enemies walk with
haughty looks, triumphant spirits, and threatening eyes, whilst we are full of
tears, sighs and sorrows? What if false witnesses arise, and lay to our charge
things that we never knew, rewarding us evil for good, and hatred for our good
will? What though we are put to pains in our profession, to troubles for a good
conscience, and to many hardships in the world? Yet, O let us labor for
contentment, because otherwise we can no way be made conformable unto Christ
our Savior.

Neither is it any matter if proud and merciless men mingle their scornful
smiles with our Tears. It is no matter if David's Abjects make mouths, and wag
their heads upon us; If the great Favorites of the world curse us, so long as
God pities us in all our troubles; who will not stay too long, lest we put
forth our hand unto wickedness. Neither suffer the rod of the wicked to remain
always on the lot of the righteous, Psalm. 125.3.

Jobs misery did not lessen his innocence: neither are the servants of the most
high God troubled, though they are judged here, so as they may not be condemed
with the world; they triumph in their sufferings, they dance in their dust;
yea, they account their ashes their beauty, and the waters of Marah to be their
wine and refreshing.

Affliction is part of Cods husbandry, and tends no less to the amendment of
our souls, then manuring does to the advantage of the earth? And may we still
humble our selves as well in submission to, as the acknowledgement of his
divine and afflicting hand. And, Oh, that we could hide and abhor our selves in
dust and ashes before his presence, who only can pity and repair us!

But miserable and unhappy are those who (after so much sharp eye salve) see
not their need of a Physician! for after the long applications of such rough
medicines which the world affords, not to own their distempers, were (indeed) a
contempt to the wisest and gentlest Physician; whose Judgments are merciful,
and whose severities only the fruits of his loving kindness, that he chooses
rather to punish us, then to destroy and forsake us.

A Christian is here in his Nonage, and no way fit to have all he has a title
to; yet why should he murmr, seeing so much is allotted him, as will give him
passage to heaven? if Poverty be good, he shall have it; if disgrace be good,
he shall meet with it; if Crosses be good, he shall have them; if misery be
good, it shall follow him; yet all tending toward his good. If he be in want,
he has contentment; if under suffering, he has patience; all things are his,
as well what he wants, as what he has.

It is the desire (indeed) of many men, to be in Canaan as soon as they are out
of Egypt: but God will lead us through the wilderness of Temptations and
Afflictions, until we come to Heaven. As the Spring follows the winter, so
will glory follow our Affliction, which is hid with Christ; and though now
clouded with the malice of wicked men, and our own infirmities, we shall (at
last) appear glorious in the eyes of God, and his Angels, if in a Christian
meekness, we submit to his Will.

The which should serve to comfort us whilst we remain in this unfortunate
region [this land of blackness] wherein the Inhabitants sit in the shadow of
death, and a thick darkness [for a time] obscures the glorious Sunshine of all
our comforts; and such calamities accompany some, as that [between fear of
death and torments of life] Vivere noluerit, mori nescierit; To live he would
not, to die he cannot. And surely he cannot be of flesh, who is unsensible of
what wrings so many true Tears from our eyes, and so many Icie sighs of grief
and sorrow from our heart.

The necessity also thereof should invite us to patience; all the Saints of God
having passed and profited thereby; and seeing by those Afflictions [which are
no less profitable then grievous and troublesome] we are humbled, purged and
instructed; and there is no life so holy, nor place so secret, wherein they may
be avoided, Oh grudge not then to sow in Tears, since thou shall reap in joy!
By flight thou can not overcome, but by patience thou will be stronger then
all thy enemies.

It is no great matter for a man to be devout and fervent, when he feels no
heaviness, but by Chastisements he is tried how much he has profited in Gods
School; whereas our Reward will be the greater, so our virtues will more openly
appear to the world, and by the sharpness of our Trial, our good deeds will be
the more esteemed.

Adversity discovers how much virtue each one has: It makes us not frail,
but shows us what we are. And God takes away the bladders of this world that we
may learn to swim without them. Such as he most loves, he uses to rebuke and
chasten, Rev. 3.19. Our comfort is, that all our Troubles are determined by the
wise Counsel and providence of God for our good, yea as blessings to us, and
shall increase our Crown of Glory. The deeper our die is in Affliction, the
better shall we wear our scarlet Robes in Heaven.

Lazarus was not bad enough for Christ to cure, whilst he was sick, who
intended to revive him from death, to make the glory of the Miracle the
greater. Neither are we fit Objects for our Savior to delight in, while we are
sick with the vanities of the world, until we are mortified with Afflictions
from above. Surely had there been any better, or more profitable way for the
health of man then suffering, Christ would have showed it by Word or Example:
who plainly exhorts all those that follow him, to the bearing of his Cross.

Oh happy Burden! which we shall [at last] put off with Eternal comfort!
strike on then thy merciful rod, O God! which thou sendest [not to procure our
sports, yet these thou prosperedst to thy servant Jacob, but] to work the
dicovery of our wounds, by the humble manifestation of our sins unto thee.

And Oh, that we could but make a wise improvement of our Crosses, whereby to
have recourse to virtue, to God, and our selves! In all worldly mutations, let
us acknowledge and kiss the divine hand; let us not fear to walk in that way
which lead to a Kingdom. If thou bear thy Cross unwillingly, thou increasest
thy load, and make for thy self a new burden. But if thou bear it willingly,
it will bear thee, and lead thee to thy desired end, to wit, where there shall
be an end of suffering [which here there shall not] and where there shall be an
everlasting reward laid up for those that fight the good fight of faith. If
that Farmer who gave Ataxerexes a dish of cold water, was rewarded with a
golden Goblet, how much more likely are they to receive a Crown, who have
denied themselves, taken up their Cross, and followed their Master? Be sure as
the glory is his, so shall the Reward be eternally thine.

Oh here, here will be a certain Harbor and recess from all the temptations of
the world, and from all the clamours and reproaches of our enemies! In this Ark
shall we cut through all the waves of this troublesome life, without detriment
or putrefaction; in this withdrawing Room (though too seldom frequented) shines
that happy star which will lead us to the King of life.

Here (by having recourse to the spring of life) may we sweetly bath and
refresh our wearied souls. Near this white, may we stand secure; and having
passed the rough and unpleasant Mountains of this world; having sat down under
its troubles, and spent our breath with much gasping and weariness, on this
Hill may we feed our eyes with the beautiful Prospect and freshness of these
eternally green and flowery Plains.

FINIS.
The meaning of the FRONTISPIECE.
SIck with a holy Love, the Soul Divine,
Spurning at Earth, Heaven only seeks to clime,
Whilst Mary [ full of Sighs and Tears] does weep
Large Streams, to wash her blessed Saviors feet:
And scorning her fond Lovers, leaves to sin,
Returns her Love Tokens, and follows him.
Behold one in a Wood, whose life is spent
In true Devotion and retirement.
Chaste Joseph shuns his Mistriss's Lures to sin,
Nor will betray the Trust reposed in him.
Beauty in one hand, shows Enticements fair,
The other points at Darts, Chains, Swords, Despair:
When treacherous Delilah had Sampson bound,
The House he forthwith levelled with the ground,
Laughing her friends to death; Ah life misspent!
Murdered with that, which seems our Merriment;
Next on a wretched Object, cast thine eyes,
Who with deep sighs, wring'd hands and mournful cries,
Bewailes Loves treacherous Engines. All which prove
The misery of him, that is tied to Love:
Those that reach Heaven, only being blessed,
Though of the worlds Enjoyments dispossessed.

