CELESTIAL AMITIES: OR, A SOUL Sighing for the Love of her SAVIOR.

BY Edward Reynell, Esquire

CANT. 7.10. I am my Beloveds, and his desire is toward me. CANT. 8.6. Set me
as a Seal upon thy heart, as a Seal upon thy Arm; for Love is strong as Death.
LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Abel Roper, and are to be Sold at his Shop at the
Sign of the Sun over against S. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street, 1660.

To the LADIES of our Times.
IT was the passage of an able Pen, That to describe a Holy State, without a
virtuous Lady, Full. Ho. State. page 300.
were to paint out a year without a Spring. And how might I seem guilty of the
like neglect, should I tre^t of Love, and not reflect on you (Ladies) who
account your selves (and indeed should be) the chief Ornaments thereof.

Some there are (I confess) who have an Itch to set down your Crimes, rather
then your Virtues. They say you are the Sirens of the Earth, which cause
shipwreck without water; and if you but step awry, they look on you [presently]
as a Star in Eclipse; they cry out, Omne malum fere ex Gynesio, Women are
usually the original of all mischief.

But the fairest Beauty is not without some Cloud. And I shall no way desire to
strike at your Vices, by slandering your Sex; it savouring rather of Passion
then Charity, to blame the General, for the defects of Particulars. Though too
many there are (indeed) who follow the steps of the first Woman, and abandon
themselves to Luxury, vanity, and dissolute Pleasures.

But what? though Dinah will be gadding abroad, and say it is to visit the
Daughters, though it be to entangle and to be taken by the men of the Land? Do
we not find three Mary's at the foot of the Cross humble and mortified? What
though Pride, the eldest Daughter of this fair Mother [Beauty] seldom begets
the best House-wives, yet how many Women are there, truly Divine, who shine in
their Houses like rising Stars, or the Sun in his Orb. And he that would equal
their worth, shall rather find insufficiency in his purpose, then want of merit
in the Object.

Solomon also gives us a large description of a virtuous Woman, Eccles. 6.
perpetually exercised on good works, traveling incessantly [like Bees] from
their Birth, and losing no time, but to give it unto God; Devotion being the
first Portion which he has granted them; whereas, were they never so well
composed, had they all the Beauties which a heart could desire, or the
imagination feign, it would be but like some cruel Creature, whom nature had
lodged in a painted house, or like a Case covered with precious Stones, to
preserve a Dunghill.

And for your encouragement in the ways of Holiness, how many eminent Patterns
could I lay before you, whom Histories have hardly scope enough to commend, and
who appear to the world like a blushing Morning, which rises the more fair
after a shower.

Oh what a wealthy Exchequer of true Beauties, what a spacious Storehouse of
heavenly minded Lovers, do we find in the sacred Scriptures? what a rich Mine
of costly Jewels may we there behold? Shall I show you the Humility of the
Mary's, the Faith of Sara, the upright and blameless walking in the
commandments of God of Elizabeth? Shall I present you with a Dorcas, fruitful
in good works; a Priscilla, heavenly in discourse; a Lidea, whose heart was
opened; a Bersheba, Lois, Eunice, careful to teach their Children in the fear
of the Lord.

What shall I tell you of the great Woman of Shunem, 2 King. 4.9.10. verse. 23.
Act. 16.13. Phil. 4.3.
who made preparation for the Prophet, and attended his Ministry? of such as
hearkened to Paul's Sermon, and were helpers to him? also of a Hanna, an Abigail,
a Judah, a Hester, and many others, which are there registered for our
imitation, and lie hid like Treasures of great value, in the veins of the Earth.

And (as if Innocence were never better lodged then at the sign of Labor,
Idleness being the source of embroiling the Spirits; do we not find the wisest
of men further describing a virtuous woman, by the Economy she holds forth in
the Government of her Family. And if we look upon other Histories, we shall
find Augustus Caesar [the Founder of Empires] not reputing the working with the
Needle, and such kind of employments, unworthy of his Daughters. And the Romans
much more preferring (as a Relick) the Distaff of Queen Tanaquilla, then the
Lance or Sword of Romulus.

You (Ladies) then that consume your precious Time, in Painting, Powdering,
Perfuming, and adorning your selves with such other Actings, as if Death and
Love had conspired to make their feast in one and the same place; you who
complain if the least beam pierce through a little hole of your Fan, or if a
Fly chance to light upon it. You (who if a Hair be but amiss) presently call a
Council for the reforming thereof. Oh consider! that such vanities conclude not
your happiness; But the perfections of your Sex end in wisdom, and the fear of
God, which is the first and last Ornament.

Remember also, how suddenly the Scene in the Masque will be altered; what then
will become of your Shops of vanity, those superfluous Ornaments, and that long
Inventory of Ladies Gallantry, which made the Gates of the City to lament and
mourn, Isai. 3.11. Isai. 3.18.21. and which (since that day) have been
increased amongst you by modern Fashion-mongers.

Time, and Age, will one day wither the Blossoms of your youth, as the Sun
davers the freshest Roses and Lillies. Spend some time then, more then for the
Body, Pride, and Earth. Let not your thoughts strike sail to Affection, nor
your hearts do homage to that which will ensnare and imprison you in the
Fetters of sin.

Do you know how speedily the Storms of an evil Conscience may trouble the
serenity of your delights, and the seeming tranquillity of your Affections? the
best of our Joys here, being but fires of straw, or flattering Sun-shines,
which are either suddenly washed away with a shower, or Eclipsed by a Tempest.

Labor then to supply your natural defects, with the virtues of your mind.
Read constant Lectures of your own mortality. Those Flowers are best, and
sweetest, which grow in the Garden, and not in the Wilderness. Adam, was never
more beautiful then when he was in his Innocence, and free from gaudiness: and
we find Solomon's Spouse, all glorious within, and needs no outward Ornaments to
make her amiable.

Oh think not then on Religion, as upon some fearful Apparition, whose visage
is so fair and lovely. You say, nothing delights you more, then to love, and to
be beloved; and is not a true Christian the best Lover, and beloved of the
best? You say nothing is more ravishing then Beauty, and can you he better
delighted then in the highest Beauty of your Savior.

Briefly, that you may the better behold that precious Ointment which drops
down from the head of Jesus, into the Souls of his Saints, you shall there find
that there is a Chamber within us, and a bed of Love in that Chamber, wherein
Christ meets, and rests with the Soul. O sweet communion! whereby we are also
made the Temples of the Comforter himself; and in which communion stands the
fullness of joy and beauty. Here the more you love, the more you may. If you
love abate, here will it be renewed; If it grow cold, at this Fire may you
re-kindle it; if it be lost, here may you find it.

Here may you confer with the infinite perfections, and (with joy) often repeat
the unspeakable Bounties of your Savior, far beyond all those fabulous
Imaginations which Poets feign, and idle wits have framed Errant Ladies to have
engaged their Servants in. Here may you retire from the noise, and distraction
of the world, and entertain thoughts with the sweet still music of
Contemplation. Here may you sit alone, and [excluding even your self] be
chastely ravished with the dear embraces of the divine Spouse of your Soul.

Ah the pleasantness of such a life of Love! Then only indeed [and not till
then] do we live when we enjoy divine Love; Nor can our bosoms breathe out the
breath of life, before Christ breathes in us the breath of Love! Alas! what
Dr^ans are our highest strained Lovers! what dull bussing of Beetles, are their
kindest expressions, to the sweet melting Notes of this Heavenly Harmony!

Away then with your false Boxes, filled with loathsome trash of sundry kinds
of Colors, and compositions for the hiding of your Deformities. Look but in
this Glass of perfect Beauty, and you shall have no need to provide
Looking-Glasses [embossed with precious Stones] in length and breadth
answerable to your Bodies, some whereof stand you dearer then the Dowry of your
Ancestors. You will find little time to bestow in Patching and trimming your
selves, whereby to invite all kind of Luxury, and infamous Pleasures.

And if you but once draw near this perfect object of heavenly Love; if you but
fix your eyes upon him, [who is the fairest of men, the perfection of spiritual
Beauty, and the treasure of heavenly joy] if your Affections be but once
inflamed, and fixed on him, who is the chiefest of Beauties. Oh how will you be
sick of Love; how importunate will be your wishes; how unsatisfied your
desires; yea, how will ye pant and breathe after him, and never leave until he
be brought to rest within the Chambers of your Soul.

The Epistle to the Reader.
THat which is most pleasing to the Soul and nature of man [next unto God] is
Love; the general subject of this whole Work is Love; and the several parts
thereof, tending to the better ordering of a Godly, moral, and civil life.

To tell many of a Life of Love, beyond what Sense feels, is a Mystery which
they can neither perceive, nor believe. Many (indeed) can spend days and weeks
in reading the fond Fancies of ilde Lovers, but have not an hour to meditate on
the love of God. Oh! how often are we singed in the flames of that late Love,
which cannot hold without jealousies, nor break without Repentance!

It is a strange weakness of judgment, that our eyes should be so enflamed in
the violent pursuits of worldly Pleasures, since the worlds best Jewels [though
followed by a million of Idolaters] are but like the empty Imaginations of a
sick Spirit; and he that too eagerly Courts them, its twenty to one but he
perishes in their Embraces. Nay, is it not madness outright, that our eyes
should reserve to themselves no other Objects, then such thin colors, which
put upon them so many Illusions, to occasion our misery; and (like so many
dangerous Snakes) lie lurking under the green leaves of sugared Speeches, and
fair persuasions; and which (unless we timely resist their influence) will at
last lead us into irrecoverable Precipices.

Our blessed Lord, met the young man carried to be buried, at the Town of Naim,
which [being interpreted, the Town of Beauties] may show us how soon the glory
thereof fades; and how dangerous it is, passionately to affect the objects of
the world (which never gives us fine Ware, but pincheth it, either in the
measure, or continuance) seeing we cannot but with abundance of grief, lose
all that which with unlimited Love is possessed. So subtly does Satan sound
our inclinations, and discover our Dispositions, as that he intermedleth, and
lays snares in all things wherein he observes us with most fervor and
earnestness to be busied.

And must not every judicious man, needs be in forced to confess (through the
sole consideration of nature) that the most noble Loves [yea, the greatest]
ought to be employed in things invisible? For what are all the Glories of the
World, but Towers, and Columns of Dirt, plaistered over with Gold, and the
deceitful varnish of fading Pleasures? whose amorous assaults will at last
prove but like Rocks of shipwreck, Fountains which send forth poisoned Streams,
and Trees whose fruit will be bitter in the stomach, how pleasing soever it be
in the mouth.

Carnal Souls [I confess] have much ado to conceive how any man can become
passionate in the love of God. They know no affectation but for temporal and
visible things. O blinded spirits! ignorant of the Mysteries of Heaven! a
Country wherein you have no commerce. How wretched (alas!) are your loves,
which dote on the fading Beauties and vanity of the World? since you Idolize a
little exterior skin, which being pulled off, you will take that for a Monster,
which you now adore for a Goddess.

But on the contrary; we find the holy Scripture [speaking of Love] to say,
Genesis 34.3. That it canseth one Soul to claspe into another! If once you begin
to love Jesus Christ, you will think upon him almost every moment. Every time
you fetch breath (says St. Gregory) there will come a pleasing Idea of God, to
fill your Soul with Comfort and Affection.

Ah! how will you feel distaste, and unsavoriness of heart, against all
Earthly things! yea, the most pleasing objects of the world, will then seem
mingled with Gall and Wormvvood; you will seek for Jesus in all Creatures; you
will speak of him in all Companies; yea, you will earnestly desire to see him
honored, esteemed, and acknowledged by all the World. Your Solitude will be
in him; your Discourse of him; Jesus will be in your Watchings, and in your
Sleep, in your Recreations, and all your Affairs; and you will account it your
greatest misery, to lose sight of him but for one hour.

Go then (fond Lover!) and see the Ashes of those who have been burnt in the
Flames of the worlds love, and thou shall find nothing answerable to this Love.
Here may thou silence all thy troublesome Thoughts, all thy inordinate
Passions, which so often bereave thee of thy Saviors presence. Here may thou
appease the storms, and troubles of a wearied life, and silently speak unto
him. Here may thou Allegorize all earthly Vanities into heavenly Truths. Here
may thou find the Pilgrimage of a perfect Christian, following his Savior
home to the Cross.

Briefly, Here may thou be wrapped in the contemplation of his Bounties, and
ravished in the consideration of his Beauties; It having been my desire, and
endeavor (by setting forth the Vanities of the World, and the Excellencies,
and Riches which are in Christ) to draw the heart of his Spouse to be sick of
Love to him, and to be enflamed with longings to enjoy him, until by the sacred
ardors of love, he dive into our hearts, and make us enter with him, into the
great Abyss of delights, which he has reserved for the most purified Souls.

The CONTENTS.
THat Love in its self, is not a Vice, but the Soul of all Virtues, when it is
tied to its proper Object [which is the Sovereign Good.] Page 6. Of the Nature
and Qualities of Divine Love, and wherein it exceeds all other Love. p. 10.
That our love to God ought to precede and exceed all other Loves. p. 16. That
the Soul can take pleasure in nothing, until it meet with satisfaction from its
Maker. p. 24. That many may have their eyes Love-proof, and their hearts shut
up against all the assaults of Fond-Love. p. 30. The Misery of those who have
yielded to the Passion of Love, and the Glory of Souls which have overcome it.
p. 39. How we may avoid the Snares of Love. p. 44. That Outward Ornaments
should not invite our Love. p. 53. That when all Loves fail, the Love of God
remains. p. 55. Temporal Goods cannot content the Soul, and therefore deserve
not our Love. p. 61. The Soul complains of her Condition and Misery by reason
of the darkness and ignorance of sin. p. 77. The Souls solitude and content in
her Separation from the great enticements of the world. p. 72. The Soul admires
the infinite Riches of her Saviors Love, in taking Humane Nature upon him. p.
83. The Soul checks her self for her backwardness, and too much neglect of her
Saviors invitations. p. 92. The Soul repents the time that ever she was
Cloistered up in the walls of Clay, and thrown into the Dungeon of that corrupt
mass of Flesh. p. 96. The Soul calling to mind the infinite Love of her
Savior, bewailes her ungratefulness, and the coldness of her returns. p. 104.
The Soul breaks into Sighs, and dissolves into desires for the presence of
God. p. 111. The Soul filled with Heavenly Love, sends forth the pure flames of
her Affection. p. 117. The Soul contemplates, and sets forth her Folly in
hazarding Eternal Joys, by preferring Earthly Vanities. p. 124. The Soul
(being ready to sink under the weight and apprehension of her Sins) bemoanes
the weakness of her Faith, and desires help from her Savior. p. 130. The
Sin-sick Soul can take no rest until she be further reconciled to her Savior.
p. 140. The Soul is ravished upon the Return of her Saviors Presence. p. 150.
The Soul being re-advanced on the wings of Faith, sends up her choicest
Affections toward Heaven. p. 159 The Soul [in a Phrensey] breaks out into
admiration of Gods love, in being freed from the misery of everlasting flames.
p. 164. The Soul [being sensible of its former Mercies] sits weeping under the
Cross of her Savior, and resolves to partake with him in his Sufferings. p.
169. In Imitation of our Saviors great Patience under his Passion; the Soul
resolves for ever to yield an humble submission to his Will. p. 181.
Of LOVE in General.
IF we go about to describe fond love, what better resemblance may we have,
then to that man who is bitten with a Tarantula, or has eaten a weed which is
called Sardoa, and so laughs himself to death, being murdered by that which
looks like merriment; or like a mouth wounded with a sting dipped in honey, the
Taste enjoying what the Touch suffers: Or may we not compare it to him, who
(through too much wantonness) is tickled to his Grave?

And surely, had we as many eyes opened toward heaven, as heaven opens
toward us, to behold the sleights and danger thereof, we should be stricken
with horror, to see a depr^ved soul to change all his abilities, as incentives
to sin, and to make such delights and pleasure, the true snares to entice it to
Eternal misery.

O God of purity! How many (now adays) do we see, who (through too fond and
free a conversation) receive as many wounds, as glances; yea, as many deaths,
as Beauty shoots Arrows against them: Solomon (who well knew the effect of this
Possion, Prove: 23.33.) said, Thy eyes shall behold strange women, and thy heart
shall utter perverse things: And in another place he says, With much fair spee
ch she caused him to yield, with the flattering of her lips she forced him: He
goes after her as an Ox to the slaughter, and as a fool to the correction of
the stocks; till a Dart strike through his Liver, as a Bird hastneth to the
snare, and knows not that it is for his life, Prove. 7.21, 23.

See how a senseless soul (like a lazy Pilot, or one fast asleep in the midst
of the Sea, being oppressed with drowsiness, and having lost his Helm) deludeth
it self! It Is true (says he) I am struck, but I feel no pain; they have drawn
me this, and that way, but I am not sensible of it: when shall I be awaked, to
be again drunk with love, and to return to my accustomed pleasures? Alas! poor
soul! How do thou (not having well guarded thy senses in the first Assault)
deliver thy heart over as a Prey, whereby it sinks into the bottom of misery.

Our Love, being indiscreetly tied to women, at first presents us shows, which
are fair, and specious, seeming bright, with a pleasing serenity, and full of
Beauty, whilst all this while we do but consult with Spirits and strange
Apparitions, full of obscurity and darkness, and the issues thereof dismal, and
hideous; or, as a stone thrown into the water, makes first a small Circle,
which causes many to follow, until it fill up the total superficies; so
happens it in Love; it falls into our heart not perceived, nor foreseen, giving
a slight touch in the beginning, which multiplies, and distends it self over
our Soul with Chains and Arrows, which will require much labor to dissolve and
unloose.

The most generous spirit becomes a Captive, when this tempting, and imperious
visage, and Commandress comes and knocks at the door of his heart. It
exercises our discourse, it enflameth our desires, it busieth our thoughts, to
go, to speak, to visit, to complement; yea, it insinuates into Prayer, and our
best Devotions, with distractions pleasingly troublesome.

Love in the heart, is an exhalation in a cloud: It cannot continue there idle;
it forms a thousand imaginations, it brings forth a thousand cares, and
necessarily is accompanied with anxieties and trouble. Yea, fond Love is like
the heart of a wicked man, which (says the Prophet) is a troubled Sea, whose
waters cast up mire and dirt, Isa. 57.20.

And what Hipocrates said (deploring the evil effects of Covetousness) namely,
That the life of man was miserable, because Avarice (like a spirit of Storms
and Tempests) had poured it self on Mortals; and that it were to be wished,
that the best Physicians might meet together to cure the Disease: The same may
we say of Love, since it is the fatal Plague among all Passions, and no simple
malady, but one composed of all the evils in the world: A Passion which makes
charms and illusions to march before it, and draggeth on Furies, disasters, and
rapines after it: Was it not this which sharpened the sword which transfixed
Ammon? Which shaved and blinded Sampson? Which gave a Halter to Phillis?

Alas! How many wretched and caitif souls, how many ship-wracked Spectacles may
we behold, standing on Promontory tops, who tell us of the ruins which this
Passion has caused? Simon Magus was undone by a Hellen, being more bewitched
by her love, then he enchanted others by his Sorcery; Apelles was corrupted by
Phylumene; Donatus by Lucilia; Montanus by Maximilla: Women having ended
amongst all these, what Heresy and Magic had but begun; which made one
wittily to say, That Heaven was most happy in having a God, In Coelo Angelus
and Angela, etc. Tertul. adversus Val.
and Angels, and no Goddesses, since it might be feared, that if there were
diversity of Sex, it would alter something of its tranquillity.

Was it not the love of Women which caused Sampson's, David's, and Solomon's
shipwracks? Has it not besotted the wise, conquered the strong, deceived the
prudent, corrupted Saints, and humbled the mighty? Has it not trodden down
Scepters and Crowns, blasted the Laurels of the greatest Conquerours, troubled
the most flourishing States? Has it not thrown Schism into Churches,
corruption among Judges, and the greatest cruelties into Arms? Has it not
acted Treasons, Furies, firings, poisons, murders, and ransackings?

And how should it spare its enemy, since it is so cruel to its self? It kills
and murders those that have most constantly served it, drinking their blood,
and insensibly devouring them, and making many to sink in the twinkling of an
eye: It will open a Flood-gate to a Deluge of miseries and cares: It will by
some invisible hand (as it were) shoot Arrows amidst the Vermilion of Roses,
and the whiteness of Lilies: It is the worm which gnaweth all our great
actions, the moth which eats all the vigor of our spirit; the Labyrinth
which hinders our chief designs; yea, it is the true snare of our soul, which
too often hides poison, and death, under a seeming sweetness.

See here the goodly sacrifices of Lust! Behold the transfigurations of sottish
Love! What? Nothing but Poison, Gibbets, Massacres, and Precipices? Nothing to
be seen but smoke, flames, darkness, despairs, and the sad complaints of
unfortunate Lovers? O God! What is he who [beholding these Pictures] would ever
betray his soul, heaven, and his God, to yield obedience to loathsome lust!

In time then let us behold the disasters which wait on the experience of this
miserable sin, which is so ruinous to our body, soul, estate, and reputation;
so full of fetters and snares: It being impossible to write all the Tragedies
which arise from this Passion; for which all Pens are too weak, all Wits too
dull, and all Tongues would be dried up.

Neither is it to be wondered at what the Wise man said, That the too free
familiarity with Women, was a firebrand in the bosom; Prove. 6.27. and as
another said, It was as easy to live among burning coals, as to converse with
this Sex, and not to wound the soul. How careful then should we be to avoid
whatsoever may endanger the scortching, not only of our Body, but our precious
Soul: yea, how should we fear our Relapses, and shun all occasions which may
re-enkindle the flame.

For if vain Love be a Tree, the fruit, flowers, and leaves whereof are nothing
but sorrows; if it be a Sea full of Tempests and Storms, where a Haven is not
to be hoped for, but with the loss of our selves; If it be a Passion which
causes a continual drunkenness of Reason; If this Banquet, which seems to be
the source of life, brings an Edict of Death with it, and the best sports
thereof are ordinarily bloody, why should we embrace such cruelty as is mingled
with delights? Or that pleasure which is attended with Funerals? O my Make us
to bury all our concupiscences, before we go to the Grave, and so strive to
live, as that when death comes, it may find us prepared, and that we may have
little other business then to die.

That Love in its self, is not a Vice, but the Soul of all Virtues, when it is
tied to its proper Object [which is the Sovereign Good.]
NEver shall the soul of man act any thing great in this world, if he retain
not holy fire in his veins; since from the beginning of the world, all things
are held together by this Divine tie [Concord;] which in its union causes the
happiness of all things; and those sacred influences of Love, have woven
eternal chains to tie [indissolubly] all the parts of the Universe. True joy is
nothing else but a satisfaction of the soul, in enjoying what it loves; neither
is the accomplishment of Pleasure, any thing but the presence, possession, and
fruition of the good which is known to us, and which we love.

We cannot have one silly spark of love for God, unless it be inspired into us
by himself: That which the Air is in the Elementary world, the Sun in the
Celestial, and the Soul in the Intelligible, the same is he throughout All; He
is the Air, which all the afflicted desire to breathe in; the Sun, which
dispelleth all our clouds; the Soul, which gives life to all things: and
therefore, he that is thus the Lover of our souls, ought really to be the
object with which our soul ought everlastingly to be in love.

And oh, how happy are they who entertain this chaste and spiritual love for
things Divine! who embrace the wisdom of heaven, which is so far beyond all
humane Beauties, as the light of the Stars surpass the petty sparklings, and
flitting fires of the earth: but miserable are those who mount not above the
flatteries, and fading Beauty of the world!

From hence it was, that the beauties of Solomon's Mistresses were no sooner
adored, but that [through the neglect of his former Zeal and Courage] Idols
were worshipped: That Sampson was no sooner blinded with love, but that Dalilah
forthwith blinded the eyes of his reason and body together. Hence was it that
David paid so dear for that unhappy cast of his eye on Bathsheba; all which,
God is pleased to place as broken masts on the top of a mountain, to make
others take heed of the shipwracks of love.

And great care surely ought to be taken in the whole course and progress of
our life; sin being usually killed by flying the occasions of it: Absence,
resistance, coldness, silence, labor, and diversion, have overcome many
assaults of the enemy; solitude of heart, fasting, prayer, and the Word of God,
are weapons of an excellent force, and which the Word teaches us to use in our
conflicts.

And sure, it imports us much to fight valiantly, and to bring with us the
hearts of Lions: what honor can we expect by yiedling to the first Temptation?
How many Martyrs have been roasted in burning flames, because they would not
speak an ill word. Let us consider also the Crown we shall get at last, by
fixing our love aright. If God be the Essence of Essences, why do we please our
selves by making so many nothings? If God be a Spirit, why should we our selves
be perpetually fixed to carnal pleasures, which only flatter, to strangle us?
Why should not the day yield up all our thoughts to him? Why should the night,
which seems made to arrest the agitations of our spirit, any way raze the
remembrance of him from our heart?

Oh the unconquerable fire of holy love, that can neither be quenched with many
waters, nor drowned with mighty floods! but (like the Ark in the Deluge) by how
much the waters swell higher, by so much the more it ascends toward the
place of its birth, and first original [the bosom of him who is the Author and
Father of it.]

Did we but behold all humane things from the top of the Palace of eternity, O
how would they seem like rotten pieces; yea, alas! How often would the heavens
and the elements conspire against thy affections, which thou have so
unworthily, and disasterously placed! Or did we but see the miseries attending
us in the violent pursuit of our desires, who (alas!) is it, who would enter
into this Hell of torment, to rob himself of the joys of chastity, and to live
(like Ixion) on the wheel of Eternal vexation. Were it not much better to throw
away this frantic love, this troublesome curiosity, this rashness of
judgment, and all that fomenteth and nourishes so ill a passion?

O my God! Make me from henceforth to enter into the bottom of my soul, and to
silence all those tempting and troublesome creatures, these inordinate
affections, which so often bereave me of the happiness of thy sight, and my
eternal welfare! O thou which can draw Being out of the Abyss of nothing, and
bring the shades of death into light, make me to put a difference between true
love, and concupiscence; the which (being once enjoyed) dies, and is ofter
resolved into the smoke of disgrace, and the ashes of hate; whereas the other
is still more ardent toward the thing beloved, by possessing and enjoying it!

O unexhaustible Fountain of all Beauty! whither shall I go to quench those
violent distempers and wicked thirst (kindled within my soul) but to thee (O
Savior!) who can show me my stains, and give me water to wash them: to thee
who only can quench those in-lets of sin, with the tears of repentance.

O then, melt that heart which has retained so many vain and lustful thoughts,
in the sacred Limbeck of thy Love! and distill it out by my eyes! Why should any
impure thoughts pollute that soul which thou have sanctified? Why should any
profane words pollute that Tongue, which thou have commanded to be the Organ of
thy Praises? Why should any unchaste action rend the vail of that Temple,
wherein thou have pleased to enter, and chusest for thy habitation?

And thrice happy shall all those be, who can seal up all their senses from
vain objects, and suffer them to be wholly possessed with Religion; fortified
with prudence, watchfulness, and mortification; and have bound up their eyes
and heart from all strange and disorderly affections; and have so far watered
them with the smoke which arises from the fire of this worlds prosperity, as
to find delight in nothing here below, neither to prefer any thing before the
hopes and expectation of celestial glory.

Of the Nature and Qualities of Divine Love, and wherein it exceeds all other
Love.
ALL things here below being transitory and frail, little is the support we can
find in them, until God has poured his holy Love into our heart, which can
alone purify our life, and eternize our Souls. It is he which inspireth the
love with which he will be loved: It is his gift alone by which we love him
above all, and all for him. God in the first place gives us a taste of his
Word, and makes us to taste sweetness therein; and he only it is who gives us
good resolutions toward the amendment of our life.

Consider then (O Soul! redeemed with the blood of the Son of God) that thou
can not live without Love; since on what side soever thou turnest, thou must
necessarily love; and God (who is the Author of Love, and makes of the
lightnings thereof, eruptions, whereby to communicate himself to man) seeing
this necessity, would that thou take the object of his love, for the object of
thy own, who is altogether lovely, neither is there spot or blemish in him.

And (O my soul!) when thou have heedfully contemplated his Beauty, strive to
find a reciprocal love enkindled in thy breast toward him, who loved thee,
when there was nothing lovely in thee; who made no love to Beauties, to gold,
or greatness, but loved thy very poverty and miseries.

From this Love it is, that we are diligent and assiduous in praying to him;
that we endeavor the keeping of our Conscience unspotted, that sin is weakened,
his Law observed, our lusts abated; that humane considerations, and all the
respects of flesh and blood are trod under foot; yea, that we account all
things worse then a Dunghill, to gain Jesus Christ. Hence further it is, that we
are patient in adversities, that we embrace the Cross, that we love our
enemies, and do good to those that persecute us.

Behold the accomplishment also of true love, left us in the pattern of our
blessed Savior, who made himself the highest example thereof, in laying down
his life to save us. Few there are, who in an unshaken constancy persevere till
death: we read indeed of strange examples of Amity and Affection between Luci.
Toxorh.
friends, as of him who left his whole family in a fire, to carry ^ut his
dearest Friend on his shoulders; of another, who gave his own eyes for the
ransom of him he tenderly affected.

We find mention also of many Women, tied with the indissoluble chains of
virtuous inclinations: As Valeria, who said, Though her husband were dead to
others, he was not so to her. Of Sulpitia, who (in spite of her Mother) broke
doors and locks to run after her banished Husband. Of Eponina, many years shut
up with her Husband in a hollow Tomb. Of Mithridates Queen, who in the midst of
all his Captains, followed him through snows, storms, and wildernesses. But
especially of Mary Magdalen [that mirror of Love, and ardent affection] whose
soul dissolved and melted with spiritual languor, on the heart of her beloved
Savior.

We read also of some who have licked whole the envenomed wounds of their
Husbands, who have breathed out their last upon the Graves of those who first
gave them heart and affections; and of those who have forsaken all their
friends, renounced their fortunes, and exposed themselves to the greatest
hazards envy or time could bring upon them. But alas! says the poor soul,
what is all this, if heaped together, to the love of my Savior? How far is it
from that beatifical love? How small a drop to that Deluge of his mysterious
and adorable love?

Now those that desire to profit in this love, must by fervent prayer beg it of
God, they must value and esteem it above all earthly things, and apply all
their actions thereunto, since it will no way be entertained in a soul sullyed
with worldly and terrestrial affections. They must render him fervency and
earnestness in all their meditations and devotion; no hour must pass without
some ejaculation; in all companies we must publish his greatness: we must refer
all objects, all creatures to his love, and love nothing but in him, and for
him; yea, we must engrave all his words, wounds, and actions in the bottom of
our hear.

And O that we could often present unto our selves (as the principal means
whereby we may come to this heavenly obedience) that infinite love of Jesus
Christ! Oh that we could here be raised on the highest Region of Grace, and
poize our selves on the wings of Faith, there being no tongue so eloquent, no
pen so learned, sufficiently to express it. But oh the deadness and dullness of
our spirits! Could we but here reflect, and a little lift up our eyes
[surcharged with so many earthly humors and vanities] to behold that president
which he has given for the rule of our Love, What secrets? What mysteries of
love should we there find? What greatness and purity must we needs conceive
therein? And oh how much shame ought we then to have, so to defile our love
with the impurities of the earth?

This, this alone, is it which has made many forsake the shaddows of Diadems,
and Scepters, which so easily deceive the credulity of the most passionately
ambitious, by their fond illusions, and have thereby attained Renown on earth,
and a Crown in heaven. These are Celestial fires, which ever proceed from God,
as being their proper Sphere. It is he that begets them, and breeds them;
being no way constrained to descend upon earth, to seek nourishment from
perishing creatures.

Those (indeed) which seek nothing in the world, but sensual pleasures, which
are more thin then smoke, and lighter then Wind, cannot imagine how much these
fair amities (which are the daughters of Virtues) nourish holy delights. The
love of God (says one) is an influence of Eternity, because coming from an
Eternal God. It is rather inspired, then studied: It is given to us by the
favor of heaven. Though good Books and Discourses contribute much to this
purpose, yet they who think to learn the love of God only by precepts, have
little in them that is solid.

And those Lovers who have the ardours of heaven, who entertain chaste and
spiritual love for things divine, partake of those pleasures which the jealous
eye cannot espy, the slanderous tongue cannot hite: And when we thus love God,
we find him every where, we serve him every where, and every where meet with
the recompense of our services: we may Jonah (with Jonah) cry unto him out of
the Whales 2.2. Belly, as from a Chapel; and talk with him (with the three
children in the midst of flames, Dan. 3.25. Surely, to love truly, is to love
aloft, and to love him who made us; when once we are come thus far, we shall
find all the greatness of the world lower then our feet.

Let us not then put a Balm so precious, into an unclean Vessel: Let us retain
no Idols, or passions in our hearts, to oppose or withstand this excellent
Guest. Let us entertain this Love with all the strength and vigor of our heart
and soul, yea, make it our continual practice.

Shall we set our Affections so eagerly on the despicable and inconsiderable
affairs of the world? Shall we slight a matter of so great importance as the
love of God? Shall worldly Lovens espouse all occasions, use all ways and
diligence, transform themselves into all shapes and humors; pass through fire,
ice, tears, blood, fearful Torrents, enraged Seas, enflamed Serpents, to attain
their hearts wish, and arive at the least of their desires, and pretensions;
and shall not we with the greatest applications of mind and soul, use all
possible industry to profit in a more divine and heavenly Love?

O shameful reproach! That all this should be done for a vain and worldly love,
which ends always in bitterness, and endangers our souls; and there is none but
Jesus [who is chiefly to be loved] for whom we will not stir a hand or a foot!
Out alas! Why are we so blind as to love servitude, and to make a Goddess of
the Worlds Beauties? Why should we make it our glory to sacrifice our Liberty,
and kiss the Fetters of our slavery?

Alas! How dear does it cost us to destroy our poor souls? Did the man of
uncleanness but think, that whiles he is in the embraces of his fulsome
Mistress, that his soul is waited on by death, and death by eternity? Did he but
think that those eyes which did burn in Lust, should in a bottomless Furnace be
scorched with Brimstone; That those ears, which here were wont to wanton it
with Minstrels, shall there be filled with nothing else but the groans of
Devils, and the shrill screetches of the damned; that the Tongue which
delighted in the relation of fond and idle Stories, should there cry out for
water to cool it; and the whole Body, which was here clothed in rich and
fantastique garbs, should be hereafter enwrapped in a mantle (at once of
darkness, and yet) of flames; and the Voice, which here was taken up with the
Songs and Ditties of Love, should there nothing but complain of Torments: Would
he (I say) but consider all this, it were impossible, that he which thus loves
pleasure, and cannot endure to be tormented, should delight to thrust himself
into the fire; or, that he which fears to lose one drop of blood, should
delight in the wounding of his whole Body.

Stand amazed then (O poor Soul!) and bewail thy self, that thou should no
better value so inestimable a favor as thy Saviors love; and resolve for the
remaining part of thy life, to be crucified unto all those Objects of pleasure,
profit, and honor, which have heretofore transported thee!

O sweet Jesus! Thy Beauties are without stain, and shall I be of the number of
those souls which are distasted with Manna? Shall I languish after the Onyons
of Egypt? O make me rather (dear Savior!) to sanctify all that is esteemed
profane! If my Eyes have been the cause to entertain fond love, O let them now
become Vessels of Water, to wash away the spots of all unchaste glances: If my
Hairs have been Nets to captivate any soul under the yoke of wanton Love, O let
them be trampled under feet, as the Ensigns and Standards of wicked Cupid. Let
those Embraces which carried nothing but the poison of a luxurious passion, now
clasp him, under whose shelter I shall eternally rest secure. Briefly, let me
breathe nothing but the delicacies of Chastity, and let those pleasing Odours
which were once vowed to sensuality, at last become the sweetest exhalation of
odoriferous persume at the Altar of my Savior; that so I may practice a
sanctified revenge on my self, and my Repentance never end but with my life.

That our love to God ought to precede and exceed all other Loves.
SO many and great are the delights and enticements of the Flesh, the Devil,
and the World, to withdraw man's love from God, as that he has not only
imprinted in his heart, that he was solely to love his Creator; but such was
his infinite goodness [to the end man might never forget it] as to leave him
his spiritual Law, written in Tables of Stone, Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy might, Deuteronomy. 6. Neither
do we find any Law or Precept so strongly and largely enjoined, as this;
binding the heart, tongue, hand, eyes, and the faculties of our soul to love
God.

How then can we answer our own Soul without blushing here, or without
confusion or condemnation at the last day? Or, can we render any thing less
then love? Can any price be set too high for so infinite a ransom, whereby
both soul and body [forfeited by our sins to Satan, and eternal Hell fire] are
freed, through the shameful tortures, the disgraceful usage, and cruel
murdering of a merciful Savior?

Had God (as justly he might) in return of his infinite love, commanded thee to
offer unto him all thy Wealth, to sacrifice all thy Children (as some Heathen
have done, and) as once he tempted Abraham. Had he required thee with stripes
and fastings, to mortify and kill thy body. Had he commanded bounty to the
poor, the poor man might have said, I cannot give it: If labor or fasting, the
sick and infirm, (or if knowledge, the simple) might have said, I have them not
in my power. But if in lieu of all this, he require only that which is the
least [thy love] and which without expense, pain, or labor, thou may easily
afford, O my soul! How can thou make a better purchase, then (by love) to
make God, Heaven, and Earth to be wholly thine?

All that God Courts and Wooes man for, is his Heart; Prove. 23.26. and will thou not grant him this desire, O my soul? He might have required all thy
substance, all thy actions, to be spent in his immediate service, and worship.
He grants thee thy wealth, and the fruits of thy honest labor, and bids thee
give only what thou can best spare of all thy Increase; he takes only a
Tenth, and from all thy worldly labors only a sevonth part; Love, and the
affection of thy heart being all that he entirely calls for.

Thy blessed Savior so highly valued this Treasure of love, as that (even then
when he was to depart and leave the world) he left it [as his last Will and
Testament] to his Disciples, and that, as he had loved them, so they should
love one another, John 13.34. Ah! says he (being at the last point, as it were
before his Possion) to his Disciples [and in them to us] my time is but short,
and I find death approaching, before which, I have one only remembrance to
give you, That you love one another. It was not long before that he desired
them, that, If they did love him, they would keep his Commandments: Love being
as it were the Ambassador of God, and has not only proclaimed the Fulfilling
of the Law, (Romans 13.10.) but (as our Savior himself pronounced) thereon
depends the Law, and the Prophets.

O then (my God! my Jesus!) make me to keep the Law of thy Love, and nothing
else: Thy love is a yoke which brings with it more honor then burden: It is a
yoke that has no weariness in it. O my sweet Savior; My soul is weary, and
greatly distasted with all the fading delights of this transitory world, and
does incessantly languish after thee! Show me then my stains, and give me water
to wash them out. Let the night cease to cast a dark Vail over my mortal body;
but let the Sun be advanced high, and the break of day begin to guild the
mountains, where my Soul hovereth, and is ashamed to see its self so dark
before light, and smutted over before thy immortal whiteness. Alas! I am
altogether but one stain, and thou art all purity; do not [however] write me on
the ground, as a child of the earth, but write me in heaven, since I am the
portion which thou have purchased with thy precious blood.

Thy love is the Center of all our true love, on which our heart (as on the
point of a Compass) being set, the other part moves about the Circumference of
the World. Is it not the Almighty, whose mercies are without number? Where has
it been well with us without him? Or, How can it be ill with us where he is
present? I had rather (says one) be a Pilgrim here on earth with him, then be
in heaven without him. And blessed then sure are they, who delight to attend
his service, and cast from him all the fetters and impediments of worldly love.

For what will all things avail, if we be forsaken of our Creator? Can we live
without the Fountain of Life? All places are solitary where he is not; and
where he is, there only is fullness of pleasure. O Jesus! the author of all
Glories, henceforth be unto me my only Crown! For, oh how vain is the rest and
solace of man! who (though nothing brings joy and comfort without God, and that
he finds so little entertainment in all worldly treasures, as that the vanity
in possession will soon reprove the violence of his appetite) is
notwithstanding still sullying himself in the puddles thereof!

How often do we cry out (with the perverse Jews) not Christ, but Barrabas; not
God, but Mammon? How often (with the Idolatrous Israelites) do we say of our
Covetousness, Honors, Greatness, and the rest of our Lusts, Ye are our Gods?
whereas alas! God cannot endure that one Temple should receive both his Ark and
the Idol Dagon. He will not have the Devil, the Flesh, and the World, should
come in and lodge in his Bedchamber [thy heart] it being but just with God to
require it; But oh! how unreasonable art thou in dividing it between him, and
his enemies; between God, and Baal; between Light, and Darkness? 1 Cor. 6.14.

Fond Worldlings! Can you be so great enemies to your souls, as (being once
unloosed from slavery) to sigh, wither, and languish for your fetters? for
shame then forsake the love of these poor Cottages, these fading pleasures,
these little Ant-hills, which inflame thy heart. Thy Country is no longer
Earth, behold the great Globe of Heaven all replenished with glorious Lights;
why do we so extremely torment our poor life, running after this worlds
shadows, which we cannot follow without trouble, nor possess without fear, nor
lose without sorrow.

He that clothes the flowers of the Meadows more gorgeously then Monarchs, who
lodges so many little Fishes in golden and azure shells: He who but opens
his hand, and replenisheth all Nature with his blessings, will never forsake us
at our need, if we love him, and keep his Commandments. A man that must die,
needs very few worldly things, but whole Kingdoms will not satisfy
covetousness. O my God? Shall I always then fly after that which flies from me,
and never follow Jesus, who follows me, and even loves me when I am ungrateful?
Ah no more let me run after the vanishing Beauties of a deceitful world!

Our love to Jesus should be like the Needle in the Seamans Chard, which
(though it be ever moving and casting about as it were to several parts) yet it
still returns and retains its whole settled course to the true Pole Star. It
should be like the Oak, the Heart, and the Elephant, which (as Naturalists
observe, are long lived, and not like Pincks, Roses, and Tulips [flowers of
sight and smell, but] delightful only for a few hours.

If you will examine King David (the man after Gods own heart) he will tell
you, he has conquered the Bear and the Lion, and that great Giant Goliath, yet
was not satisfied: He had stepped from a Sheep fold to a Crown, yet was not
contented. He had subdued all his Enemies and Rebels, yet had he no rest, until
he enjoyed Heaven; I have a goodly Heritage (says he) but the Lord is the
fullness of my Inheritance, in whose presence there is fullness of joy, and at
whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore; Psalm. 16. And therefore it
is that he again says, Psalm. 73.24. There is none O Lord, upon earth, that I
desire in comparison of thee.

We find all sublunary bodies compounded of the four Elements, and all the
goods of the Body, reduced to four heads: First, Life, under which we
understand health, strength, and beauty of Body. Secondly Honor, under which
may be comprised Titles, Offices, Privileges, and Retinue. Thirdly, Wealth,
Lands, Money, and Revenues have place. Fourthly, Pleasures, which are as
various as there are objects of our senses, pleasing to our taste, sight,
touch, hearing, and smell. Now, though all these [ordinately desired, and
lawfully used] may be both useful and lawful, yet are they not able to satisfy
the soul, longer then a wind or lightning. And therefore man should not, (and
indeed truly he cannot) set his love upon them.

And alas! O poor soul! What can thou find in all other loves, which prove
no other then that of Sampson, who paid so dearly for relying on his treacherous
Dalilah; or as the Prodigals Lovers in the Gospel, who (like Mice, Whores, and
Swallows,) make love, and frequent the house in the Summer of prosperity; or
like Lice, who continue no longer then there is sweat to nourish them, but in
the end, (like Actaeon's hounds) prove your destroyers. The like we find of
Job's friends, and of those the Prophet mentions, Isa. 1.23. Who loved gifts,
and followed after Rewards.

Not much unlike to those, were the seeming friends of King David, of whom he
so often complains, and prays against, as being of his Council, and eating his
bread, Psalm. 54. yet while they had butter and oil on their lips, their hearts
and tongues were spears, swords, and very poison: And as these to David were
more dangerous then his public enemies [for of those (says he) I could have
taken heed] so are all the false Loves of Delight, Feature, Beauty, or other
parts or gifts; Yea, their Loves are like the Apples of Sodom, or like that
creature called Acucena, which at twice handling, yields out an ill savor; or
as the flowers of the Garden, which long hold neither color nor scent.

Ye then which cry, Come and let us crown our selves with Roses, Let us eat,
drink, and take our fill of love, Ah! How suddenly are you and your loves
vanished, And your place no where to be found! How do ye starve (like Tantalus)
in the midst of all your glory and abundance? How does that which seems so
much to increase your felicity, occasion your punishment? Yea, How does the
pain you meet with, mix gall and bitterness with all the sweet appearances of
the world?

What wanted Solomon of all the desirable things under heaven? He had seven
hundred Wives, and three hundred Concubines; He built himself stately Palaces,
adorned them with variety of Orchards and Gardens; He had Attendants answerable
to his Wealth and Glory; yet when he weighed all together, instead of
proclai^ing himself happy, he cried out, All is but vanity, and vexation of
spirit: Prove. 1.1. How great then, alas! is our folly, to seek and expect our
happiness here, in the best enjoyments, and most pleasing delights the world
holds forth unto us?

Sit no longer then, O my Soul! by the fire of earthly comforts, where the cold
of carn I fears and sorrows do still afflict thee; Will thou house thy self
still on worldly thoughts, and confine thy self to worldly dullness? Away with
those Soul-tormenting cares and fears! Away with those Heart-vexing worldly
sorrows! Stand by a little! O forbear to trouble my aspiring soul, whilst I
look up, and see my eternal happiness; whilst I lay aside my mourning robes,
and partake the joys of an everlasting Spring!

Happy change! to leave these clods of earth, and perpetually enjoy the glory
of the Sun! Blessed Conquest! to triumph on earth, and enjoy heaven; to conquer
death, and enjoy life; to withdraw thy love from a wretched world, and wholly
fix it on thy Savior, the Fountain of all true love and goodness. O that I
were able! O that I could feelingly say, I love thee!

But ah Lord! What is a Feast without an appetite? Thou must give me a stomach
as well as meat; Thou may set the Dainties of Heaven before me, but alas! I
am blind, and cannot see them; I am sick, and cannot relish them; I am
benumbed, and cannot receive them: O then [thou Spirit of Life!] breathe thy
Graces upon me! Take me by the hand, and lead me up from earth to thy self,
that I may see by faith what thou have laid up for them that love and wait for
thee.

That the Soul can take pleasure in nothing, until it meet with satisfaction
from its Maker.
GOd having concluded our salvation in Love, shows us, that the best and
speediest way to be happy, is to love him, who is the Author of our felicity,
and the immovable Sun, about which so many changes, and agitations of all
Creatures circumvolve, which continually groan, and aim at this first Beauty,
as the true Center of everlasting repose.

Oh, this is the most assured way to arive to tranquillity! It is a Treasure
which will be infinitely profitable, if we can tell how to attain it. It takes
hearts which (as yet) are but of earth and clay, and enkindleth them with a
divine flame: It beats them under the hammer of Tribulations and sufferings, to
make them fit for their Saviors reception: Yea, it makes fit vessels of them,
worthy to be placed above the chiefest of terrene enjoyments.

We find Love indeed divided into many branches, to wit, Natural love, which
consists in things inanimate, having their sympathies and antipathies; as the
Amber draws the Straw; the Adamant, Iron; and as Trees and Plants bend or
decline one from another. Next, Animal Love, is that beginning which gives
motion to the sensitive appetite of Beasts, to see that which is fit for them,
and to take pleasure therein. Reasonable Love, is that which seeks and
accepts the good represented by the Understanding. But alas! What are all
these to that Divine and Angelical Love, by whose sides are lodged Beauty, and
Goodness, which make up all loves; the soul of man being able no where to fix
it self, until it re-ascend to God.

It is the nature of Quicksilver to tremble up and down, and never leaves,
until it have found Gold, wherewith to mingle it self: so boundeth and leapeth
the heart of man, here and there, in all its troubles and disturbances, there
being nothing but Ebbs and Floods in it, until such time as it is united to its
Creator, as being the Temple of all repose.

There only it is that the Banished find a Country, the Poor a Patrimony, the
Ignorant Knowledge, the Feeble, Support; the Sick, Health; and the Afflicted,
Comfort. It is that only which immortalizeth us after death, and gives us light
in our darkest affairs. It is that alone which is the sanctity of all humane
hearts, the comfort of our souls, the repose of life, and the knot of all
felicities.

And what is the cause that the blessed are never weary of loving, but that
they perpetually find in God new Beauties and Perfections. The body of man is
finite, and quickly thrusts out all its qualities, which with time does rather
fade then flourish: but our soul, in some sort, tends to infinity. Oh what
sweetness! Oh what an earnest of the life of the blessed, is that Love which is
inviolably grounded upon Virtue and Holiness; upon heaven, and the Beauty
thereof?

Whereas [on the contrary] when we wax cold in the love of God, and in the
exercise of Devotion, taking too much liberty in our conversation with such
things as we affect, how insensibly do we find our selves surprised by the
eyes, and ears, the heart, the gesture, the smiles, the speech; yea, the whole
carriage of any, who lays a Plot with our passion to betray our Reason. How do
we dote, wax pale, cry to the woods and mountains, one hour we write, another
we blot, then tear out all; our repast is unpleasant and irksom, and repose
(which charmeth all the cares of the world) seems not made for us. So does the
poison of Love spread it self over all our Veins. Absence, unquietness, and
disturbance of mind, ever keeps waking the imagination. Still our fair one
[still our cruel one] tormenteth us, and God makes a whip for us, of that thing
we most affect.

How wretched then are those poor souls, who seek for pleasure in their
affections? As that of Eloquence, of Poesy, of Music, ingenious sports, and
witty jests, since these (though for a time sweet to the sense) are subject to
the diversity of Ages, Humors Seasons, and Employments. If we consult with
History, how many millions of Lovers shall we find, who complain of the
infidelity of their Mistresses, and those they seem to adore? But the Love
placed upon heavenly objects, never fails to make an answerable return.

It is from thence that the blood is enflamed, the body weakened, the color
changed; That the eyes grow hollow, the senses stupefied, and the whole body
overthrown. And though there be diversities of Love, in some sharp and violent,
in others dull and cloudy, in others light and wanton, in others turbulent and
perplexed, and in others weak, soppish, fantastique, and inconstant; yet (as if
something of Idolatry adhered to it) how do all seem to Deifie the creature of
whom they are so passionately enamoured, and would willingly place it amongst
the Sun, Stars, and Altars; yea, they would die a hundred times for it [chains,
and wounds being accounted honourable] so it throw but so much as a handful of
Flowers, or distill but one poor Tear on their Tomb.

And as for affections, purely Conjugal, you shall find them now adays very
rare; and for Celestial loves, they are much more scarce: But for the love of
Fantasy, the love of sensuality, of servitude, of fury, on what side soever
you turn your face, you shall not fail to meet them, though nothing be
beautiful, or to be affected in the best of them.

Surely, a small Circle (since Volumns are not sufficient) will not show you
the Essence, the Causes, the Symptoms, sorts, and effects of Love; neither the
inconstancy and fickleness thereof. Some feign it to be the Sun of the Wind, to
signify (it may be) the wavering and diversified colors thereof, appearing in
the beginning all in Rubies, Diamonds, and Emeralds over our heads; but
afterward to cause storms and tempests, discovering it self first with such
bright semblances to our senses, whilst it occasions much corruption in our
minds.

Insomuch, that if we do but observe one which is transfixed with violent Love,
we shall find he has all that in his love, which Divines have placed in Hell;
namely, Darkness, Flames, the worm of Conscience, an evil savor, and
banishment from the presence of God: He sometimes enters into quakings,
sometimes into faintings; one time into fits of fire, and another time into ice.

If I go about to fetter Love (says one) it gets out of my hands; if I will
judge it, it grows into favor with me; when I intend to punish it, it flatters
me; if I will fly from it, it seems tied to me; when I destroy it with one
hand, I repair it with the other; if it be too much cherished, it assaults me
more violently; if watching withers it, sleep pampereth it; by treating it ill,
I endanger my life, by pampering it too much, I incur death.

Briefly, Love enters into the most secret places, which seem inaccessible, but
to Spirits and Lightnings. It bewitcheth the mind, dislocateth the brain, and
eclipseth the reason: All that the Lover beholds, all that he meditateth on,
all he dreameth, all he speaks of, is the Creature he loves: He has her in
his head, his heart, he carves her into the most pleasing forms, he fears, he
hopes, he despairs, he sighs, he groans and blusheth, yea, he never takes rest.

If Beauty then, of it self, be so much to be dreaded, when it has no other
companions, how dangerous, think you is it, when Pomp of Apparel, attractives,
dalliances, cunning wiles, freedom of conversation, height of diet, courting,
music, idleness, night-watchings, solitude, and other incitements, are joined
to it? Surely, we need require no other charms to work the ruin of a Soul.

And since fond Love thus sets our reason to sale (if it carefully take not
heed) and insensibly draws it to its side, and thereby fights against our
selves, making use of our members, as of the instruments of its battles, and
the organ of its wiles; since (without the singular grace of God) it causes
Sedition within, War without, and never any true repose: Since we have all one
Domestic Enemy, which is our own Body, that perpetually (almost) opposes the
dispositions of the spirit, how great should be our resistance? how notable our
victories?

Conscience and Honor (indeed) many times make some resistance and glimmering
flashes; yet how quickly does the understanding create to it self many new and
evil Lights, and the will too much false fire, did not the fire of God awaken
us, and make us even ashamed to tell our own thoughts to our proper heart.

Oh this Fever! this perpetual Frenzy! this wandering of the Soul! this neglect
of the true God, and setting up of Idols! How can it be sufficiently deplored?
How is reason hereby weakened, shamefacedness banished, passion entertained,
good counsel abandoned; yea, at last, how do they impute to the Stars, to
Destiny, to Necessity, what is nothing else but their own folly?

It is thought by some, that in great Storms, evil Spirits shuffle to stir up
Lightning-flashes, whereby the Tempests become more dreadful and pernicious:
And may we not well suppose, that the Angel of Darkness involveth himself in
the great Tempests of Love, and many times makes use of the abominable help of
Magicians: Is it not the Rock which wracketh the greatest Vessels? yea, the
Gulf which devoureth our Bodies and Souls?

Let no man then flatter you in the passion of sensual Love, as if it were a
prime virtue of your profession, which is the stain that defiles all the
ornaments of your life: Neither, among all the qualities of a virtuous life, is
there any sweeter odor, then that Temperance which represseth the voluptuous
pleasure of the body.

That many may have their eyes Love-proof, and their hearts shut up against all
the assaults of Fond-Love.
IT is not impossible, but that [the Soul wholly propending to the thing
beloved] virtuous and civil Amities may be between persons of different Sex,
who are endowed with singular and excellent Virtues, and who manage their
Affections with great discretion; the which, though rarely done, yet if there
be any which abuse themselves, by ill placing their Love, through want of
discretion, it does not follow (neither is it fit) by reason of blasted
members, we should blame sound parts; there being not a few, who with much
prudence and chariness, have therein comported themselves; yea, very many great
Souls, who are so powerfully possessed by the love of God (which replenisheth
their hearts, and who live a conversation in continual exercises of Prayer and
mortification) as by a conversation sweetly grave, and simply prudent, to
converse with women, without changing the Love which they bear to the virtue of
Chastity.

And therefore Democritus needed not have voluntarily made himself blind, by
looking steadfastly on the Beams of the Sun, to free himself from the
importunities of the love of women, who perchance shut up two gates against
Love, and opened a thousand to his Imagination; Neither needed Origin to have
deprived himself of the distinction of Sex, to rebate the stings of sensuality,
which bred him much mischief. It being a better way of repulse given by her,
who (being importuned by a young man with all the violent assaults this Passion
could suggest) told him, she had resolved to fast forty days with bread and
water, desiring him therein also to give a Trial of his Love, which being
accepted, in few days, thought more of his death, then precedent folly.

Neither let us think Chastity to be only found in Cloisters, but every where,
where the fear of God is. And though (as Justin Martyr faith) a singular
discretion ought to be had to treat with women, and he does very much, who can
love their Virtues without danger; yet we see there is sometimes need, but of a
Spiders web, to beat back the Darts of Love, that (at other times) the Ramparts
of Semiramis are not strong enough against; and that a well fortified heart is
like the Bed of a Phoenix, which takes no fire, but from the beams of the Sun;
yea, that Chastity is often times impenetrable by the darts of Love, amidst all
the delights and temptations of the World.

A large president whereof we have in pious Joseph, who having opportunities
enough to advance himself in the Court of Pharaoh [by satisfying the desires of
his Mistress, who had tempted him to sin] accounted it the greatest trial of his
Virtues, to have sin in his power, and innocence in his will; neither would
raise fortunes of Glass, upon the foundations of Iniquity: But (preferring
Reason before Passion, Grace before Nature, and God before any thing else)
represented the faithfulness he had promised to his Master, to himself, and
(leaving his garment behind him) came out of the Chamber where the snare was
laid, as a Ruby out of burning flames, without losing any thing of his
integrity.

And surely, as they who will with profit, make use of the proper instruments
of Virtue, must so live, as if they were always under the Physicians hands, so
ought we so to live, as if we were still to give an account for every word of
our mouth, every thought of our heart, every glance of our eye, every minute of
our time, every duty we have omitted, and every sin we have committed.

Jesus our great Master, has (by the account of some) abridged six hundred and
thirteen Precepts of the Old Testament, within the Law of Love. Do but Love
(says St. Austin) and do what you will, only let your love go to the right
Fountain [which is God:] Be not afraid to show him thy heart stark naked, that
he may pierce it with his Arrows; His wounds are more precious then Rubies,
thou shall gain all by loving him, and death it self, which comes from his
love, is the gate of life.

Our Love being once thus fixed, we need not fear the extravagancy thereof:
With this excellent and holy temper of spirit it was, that Hester changed King
Ahasuerus into a Lamb; that Abigal was much stronger then the Arms of David,
and that the eye of Judith (triumphing over Holofernes, and with a little Ray
of its flames, burning up a whole Army) did more then her hand, which destroyed
100000 men, by cutting off one only head: O what magnificent employments had
Love in these Acts! And (to say truth, even consecrating its Arrows) never was
it so innocent in its Combats, never was it so glorious in its Triumphs.

We find in the Ecclesiastical History, that Athanasius being with rage and
fury persecuted by the Arrians (who were thirsty for his blood) was beholding
to a woman for shelter, and the supply of such necessaries as he wanted. And
may we credit the relation of Writers on this Subject, how great do we find
the passions of St. Jerome for Paula? as if all the splendor of Romes
greatness, all the riches of the earth, were nothing to him, in comparison of
the resplendent virtues of this noble Lady: He is not only very large, when he
goes about to praise her, wishing all the members of his body were turned into
Tongue, and that he were nothing but voice to chant out her Praises, but even
in his old age, makes an Epitaph upon her death.

St. Chrysostom also, a man austere in his life, and vehement in the matters of
virtue, is reported to have written letters to his dear Olimpias, from the
place of his banishment; wherein he saluteth her with openness of most ardent
Aeffections: He instructs and encourages her by sublime and grave discourses,
he imparteth and recounts his Voyages and adventures, his comforts and
discomforts unto her; yea, he descends unto particulars of his own health,
habit, and exercises in that ugly place whereunto he was banished; and advises
her in the like manner, what he thinks to be most necessary for her.

If we look further into History, we shall find Chastity to be the Trophey of
Cyrus, the Triumph of Alexander; nay, if we may believe the Relation of
Ju-Julianus apud lian (the worst of Emperors, though re- Arminianum. nouncing
his Christian Faith) would would never renounce Chastity, which he had learnt
among Christians; saying, This Virtue made beautiful Lives, as Painters did
fair faces.

By all which formerly said, we may conclude, Saints have very lively
Affections to those they love: And therefore (seeing there is a necessity of
Love) vain is the opinion of some Philosophers, who teach indifferency; and
say, We must not love any thing.

And however a severe Censurer may (with a supercilious countenance, and a
wrinckled brow) look asquint; yet may we not doubt, there may be love between
Sex and Sex, [pure and ardent] as the flames which enlighten stars, though
belonging [onely] to persons prudent and absolute in Virtue; yea, great
circumspection must be used herein, men usually fortifying themselves with much
precaution, observing diligently the disposition of their Nature, the causes of
Temptations, and the maladies of the Soul, whereby the more successfully, and
with better effect, to attain the Cure:

Love (indeed may be termed the Phronzy of the Understanding, the Poison of the
Heart, the Corruption of Manners, and the desolation of the life in some; yet
does it not follow, that women are always fat of the ruin of men: Many indeed
resemble those Serpents, which requite them with poison who sing pleasant songs
unto them: But what? shall we bring an accusation against Nature in general,
and conclude nothing to be good of all that God made, because it may be
corrupted by the wickedness of men? Shall we accuse the Sun, because it is said
that Phaeton burnt himself in those heats; or take away the water from among
the Elements, because they say Aristotle was drowned therein.

Only let it be our greatest care, not to serve two Mistisses [ God, and the
Beauties of the World] which are so different, as not to agree: When David and
Sampson endeavored to accord them, they became Lascivious, instead of being
Holy; The one at first, could overthrow a Giant; but had no sooner received the
wound from Bathsheba's eye, but Love soon dried up all his Victories; and those
eyes which first discovered her at the Fountains head, had much ado to cure
themselves with the waters of many tears: And when the other betook himself to
the Comb and Looking-Glass of Dalilah, being formerly like a shining Sun,
enlightening his Nation, he became a coal and dark vapor, having no longer
eyes, but to deplore the fondness and disafter of his love, with Tears of blood.

As the best Wine is most subject to degenerate into Vinegar; so we see the
chastest Love (if heed be not taken) changes it self into Flesh. How carefully
then should we avoid and reject the first thoughts of such miserable Designs
(as being the first sparkles of this fire) lest by giving too great a command
to our Passion, we give too great an overture to our unhappiness.

We find, what the World could not do to Solomon (the wisest of men) a Woman
did; and what the Devil could not by himself do to Adam, he did it by a Woman:
Neither was it the Devil, but the Daughters of men, which tempted the Sons of
God, Genesis 6.2, So did Dinah the son of Shechem; Dalilah, Sampson; Bathsheba,
David; and millions more have done the like; whose eyes being like burning
Lamps, or coals of fire, to kindle their breath, their lips, as limetwigs to
ensnare; and their hands, like Manacles or Bands, to bind and hold fast. How
ought we then to make Jobs covenant with our eyes, not to look upon a Maid?

And oh, Happy are those who are so instructed in the Virtue of Purity, as that
they know not the least shadow of those sins which are committed in the world!
It being a Fate sadly attending those, who see and smell out so many vain
Customs, and entertainments of Countries, since too soon they learn, what too
late they will forget; taking so much fire in at the Ears and Eyes, that water
enough will not be found to extinguish it; except (with Mary Magdalen) we sit
under the feet of Jesus, and bedew them with the crystal Tears of our
Repentance:

O wonder of Women! O most happy of a^l Lovers! How did thou make profit of
Sin, which destroys all? How did thou sanctify that Love, which so little
knew the way to any sanctity? (a work only wrought in thee by the right hand of
the Highest) Thou which were a sinner, wounded with Love, curest thy self by
Love. Thou changest the fire of Babylon, into that of Jerusalem; thou pluckest
out the venomous Dart of worldly Love off thy Wound, to make way for the Arrows
of Jesus to pierce thy heart; and that soul which was before black, and burnt
up with the fire of Concupiscence, provideth a Fountain for the King of Heaven,
and draws Tears from its sins, to procure a Pardon.

And for ever blessed are those, who (with this Pattern of holy Sorrow)
considering the evil consequence of sensuality, effeminacy, and the too eager
pursuit of carnal pleasure, use severity, denial, and the frustrating of their
appetite, when it any way grows unreasonable. For why should we thus offer
violence to our selves? Why should we thus endanger our Estate? Shall we drown
those Senses here in a world of pleasure, which will not hereafter be able to
procure one bottle of Water to refresh us? O horror! What? Of the Members of
Jesus Christ, to make them the members of an unclean Creature! O great
indignity! What? To worship and serve our Lusts? to adore our sinful Appetites?
O that we would put our selves any where into the hands of Innocence, rather
then among the imaginary felicities of sin and wickedness!

Say to thy self (O my Soul!) it will not be long until thy Eyes be shut, and
thy body become troublesome to all that come near it, unless speedily yielded
up to the Earth: And no sooner will death absent thee from the eyes of thy
Friends, but forgetfulness will draw thee off from their heart: Thou art
enforced, O my Soul! to inhabit in a sickly body, encountering with all sorts
of pains and maladies: O my God! What a favor then is it to be banished from
so many Gouts, Sciaticks, Collicks, so many pains of Head, Teeth, and Heart; so
much hunger, thirst, and other infirmities which afflict a frail and momentary
body.

And oh that we would but remember this when Temptation comes upon us! When we
are tempted to give up our mind to the world, and drown our selves in earthly
cares; when we are tempted to profits, pleasures, and evil company, with the
neglect of the Duties of Gods Worship! That we would but seriously be-think,
whether the world will then be as sweet as now? Whether our unruly Passions and
Lusts will then bear the same sway with us? and whether all the Glories,
Beauty, Honors, and Preferments of the world, will not then seem needless,
vain, and unprofitable?

Alas! Will any of those things be comfortable to thee at that day of
Reckoning? Is this a day to be forgotten? Is not that man worse then mad, that
is going to judgment, and never thinks of it? Should we not rather forget to
eat, to drink, to sleep, or work, then a matter of so great concernment? What?
To forget that we must remember for ever? O poor Souls! How much rather should
we (in the midst of all our Temptations and allurements to sin) imitate him,
who wheresoever he went, seemed to hear a Voice calling to the World, Arise ye
Dead, and come to judgment.

The Misery of those who have yielded to the Passion of Love, and the Glory of
Souls which have overcome it.

TO mention the sad effects of sensual Love, which has so many ways of
working, will be a Task very hard and difficult, seeing this Fury has a
thousand hands, and a thousand attractives; yea, for the most part different,
and quite opposite: It takes by the eyes, by the ears, by the Imagination, by
change of purpose, by flying, pursuing, honoring, and insulting by
complacency, and by disdain.

Sometimes it lays hold by Tears, by laughing, by modesty, by boldness, by
confidence, by subtilty, by simplicity, by speech, and by silence. It assaileth
us sometimes in company, sometimes in solitude; at windows, in grates, in
Theaters, at Feasts, at Sports; yea, oftentimes at the Church, and in Duties of
Devotion. Briefly, if we behold one transfixed with violent Love, we shall
find, he has all that in his love, which Divines have placed in Hell; viz.
Darkness, flames, an evil Conscience, an ill savor, and banishment from the
presence of God.

Sin will not at first discover its dreadful events, and Tragedies; It will
perchance show you a chamber wherein Beauty is presented, which hides gross
infirmities: It presents you with smiles, glances, Courtships, and flatteries,
which yet carry nothing with them but ruin; yea, it shows you Sports and
Banquets, Tears, and Funerals in one day.

Alas! How many millions of men are there in the world, who would be most
fortunate and flourishing, if they knew how to avoid the mischievous power of
this Passion? Hence is it that so many Virgins are stolen away, so many Families
desolated, and Parents precipitated [often times] into their Tombs, by their
ungrateful children: That so many little Innocents are made away by death,
whose birth also is often prevented: Hence is it, that so many Widows are
dishonored, that chaste Wedlocks are disturbed, and so many Rapes committed.

Is it not hence that so many are abandoned to dishonor, their Estates to
pillage and poverty, their Reputation to infamy, and their whole lives to
continual disturbances? Is it not hence that poisons are mingled, that Halters
are noozed, that Swords are sharpened, and those Tragedies begun in the Night,
are executed upon the Scaffold in full daylight?

Good God! What heavy scourges do always fall on sin? and what a pleasing
spectacle (among so many confusions) is it to see any Victory gained over evil
Love? It were easy to enlarge the History of Loves power, which would require
a Volumn greater then has yet been seen, if I should tell you, how Love
oftentimes rejects the greatest commands, wisest Edicts, and best Laws: How
it despises Honor, neglects Fame, Wealth, Health, Life, Soul, and all.

It is compared also by some to Fire (the most active and strongest worker of
all the Elements) which destroys Castles, Houses, and Cities, which melts and
consumes the hardest Metals; and if our contemplation dive into former Times,
or if we turn over the variety, as well of Modern as Ancient Histories [not
only Divine but Humane] we shall find the sad effects of our evil Love; how
Ambition, Revenge, and Murder [vices which not only eclipse our judgments, but
darken our understandings] have ever proved fatal to the Undertakers thereof,
and that we shall not only see with grief, but find with repentance, how this
Passion of fond Love has brought shame instead of glory, misery for felicity,
and affliction for content, where affection has not had reason for its guide,
nor virtue for its object.

I shall spare to insist on those infamous Ladies, whose memory (purchased by
odious Lust) will survive the course of time; as Cleopatra, Faustina,
Clitemnestra, with the last whereof, Aegistus lost his honor, through too
great a familiarity; and we find not a few to suffer a great eclipse of their
credit, through their too much effeminacy; whence it was, that Demosthenes
being demanded a great price for a little pleasure, by the Courtezan Lais,
answered, I will not buy repentance at so dear a rate: well, considering that
the fairest flowers do as well serve for a shelter to hide Aspes and Serpents,
as to beautify Garlands and Chaplets; neither would desire the fruit of that
Tree, nor the kernel of that Apple, which was at first of that fatal and
dreadful consequence to the Taster.

The things we find commended in Mary Magdalen by our blessed Savior, was her
humility, and the Office she performed to his feet, and no way admiring her
comely countenance, and the pleasant flower of her youth, which she had too
often made as a snare to betrey her Lovers; and all to let us see how
loathsome, disrelishing, and unsavory are the husks of vain and empty Beauty;
and how irksome the taste of sinful pleasures are, (which like deep laughing,
still carries a deep sigh in the end) in respect of those inward virtues of the
soul, to be preferred beyond the fair and ruddy fruit of Earthly Beauty.

But then again on the contrary, how large do we find History in setting forth
the admirable command which some have had over themselves, who would not make
Beauty their Object, nor be surprised with amorous folly. Joseph would not be
tempted by his Mistress. Holy Job, Made a Covenant with his eyes, not to look
upon a Maid; with many other the like Examples we read of in the holy Scripture.

Besides, Do we not read of the Roman Stilpo, who notwithstanding he were
naturally addicted to Incontinency, became absolute Commander of his
affections, by reading only certain Precepts of Moral Philosophy? What
admirable Continency also do we find mentioned of Alexander, in sparing the
Wife of Darius, and his three Daughters? Scipio (after many years prosperous
exploits) purchased not more glory, then by overcoming himself, when a
beautiful maid was brought unto him, whom he returned (with a great reward)
unto him to whom she was espoused.

No less worthy to be noted (not to mention those Noble Matrons, whose Virtue
and Chastity will transcend the Period of all Ages; as Porcia, Octavia,
Caecilia, Cornelia, etc.) were Marius, Solomon the Magnificent, and many
others, recorded for their Princely command over themselves and their
affections:

If Beauty then chance to show thee a fair Visage, remember the Sirens do the
same; if she allure thee by her Caresses, so does the Panther; if her amorous
plaints invite thee, let the sighs of the Crocodile be thy Instruction: Her
greatest brightness is (at best) but a false and fading Meteor: And seldom
(says Plutarch) does Beauty and Honesty dwell together.

Thou then that art beautified with an Angelical Feature, Why should thou
participate of any inferior Creature? Why will thou suffer so great an Eclipse
for a minutes pleasure, since this Vice above all others, derogates so much
from thy Honor.

It was ill Physic, and only fit for so luxurious a a Physician, which
Epicurus used to one of his Patients, viz. To lay him on a Down bed, in a
perfumed chamber, crowning him with a Garland of sweet smelling Flowers, and
(after a Potion or two of good Drink) to bring him a beautiful young Wench,
which could play, sing, and dance. And was it not as great a vanity which
Ctesias relates of a Persian King, that had an hundred and fifty Maids
attending his Table, to play, sing, and dance by turns. The like whereof
another reports of an Egyptian Prince, who still kept nine Virgins of most
excellent Feature, and sweet Voices, to wait on him.

But were these things well considered by those who are surprised with an
amorous folly, their desires would not be so much bent to sensuality, nor their
delights wholly engaged to fleshly Liberty: Beauty would not so often be their
Object, nor Vanity the subject of their discourse; they would not be so often
fieng'd in the flames of that Love, which cannot hold without jealousy, nor
break without repentance. Neither would Complexion take up so much room in
their thoughts, who should rather give themselves to Diviner Meditations.

How we may avoid the Snares of Love.
IF we desire to know the way, how to banish this Passion, for our more quiet
and comfortable living; let us in the first place consider, That we cannot do
it, without having this singular gift of God, who is only able to banish this
Fury, which plungeth our whole life in such great acerbities, and horrible
calamities, and against which we ought to bend our utmost endeavors.

Presume not too much on thy own strength and integrity, and take heed of the
pride of thy heart, arrogant spirits being usually subject to fall into such
sins; and God often makes it a counter-poise [as we see in St. Paul, who in the
height of Revelation, 2 Cor. 12. had a sting in the flesh] to abate the
fierceness of the courage, and to quell the exorbitancy of humane arrogance.

Let us take heed also, of serving, soothing, frequenting, or spying out
occasions: For as Love takes most, and works by idleness and converse; so is it
best resisted, by the contrary, [good employment, and the shunning of wanton
company:] Flight of occasions, is the most assured remedy and rampire for
Chastity; and whosoever [this way] carries himself well, shall appear stronger
in flying, then Conquerours in their bravest Battles; a Retreat in Love, being
as honorable as a Victory.

Take heed of fondness in apparel, behavior, complement, books, songs,
banquettings, and unlawful recreations. Many things (indeed) at first seem
innocent enough, but it too often happens, that as drops of water (incessantly
falling) do hollow rocks, so continual, and ceaseless allurements, soften and
betray the most impregnable Natures.

Art thou weak, then fear thy infirmity; if strong, suspect even thy own
safety: Be not too forward in beginning the Combat, until you know what will
be the end. Love at first will beset thee with the visage of a Virgin, but
leave thee with the body of a Serpent: If you look on it upon one side, you
shall find it infinitely sweet and charming; but on the other a Hideous Fury,
a Specious Bait, a Pleasing Witch, a Living Death, a Fair Disease, a Specious
Plague, a Fresh (but infectious) Air, a Satyr sweetly drawn, and a Wilde-fire
finely covered with Lawn.

Besides, false opinion is ever at the gates of this soft, fly, tempting Slut,
which deceives and bewitcheth all those that come near her: It discovers not
at first the dreadful events and Tragedies of this Passion; it shows them
chambers, wherein Beauty is presented under white and vermilion skin, which
hides a Sepulcher of rottenness; it is attended with smiles, glances,
flatteries, and courtships, which for the most part end in care, terror,
folly, distrust, tears, sighs, falsehood, jealousies, and dolours.

Hence was it, that one wittily compared the heart of a Lover to a Stage,
whereon (at the same time) were seen Sports and Banquets, Battles and Funerals;
yea, this delicate admired Enchantress, will prove but a very sad bargain, even
to those that enjoy her after their own lusts, and at their own rate, she being
no better then a Canker-rose full of deception and sorrow.

Oh, what a miserable thing then is it, to love a Beauty, which is only fair
in the fantasy of a feverish Brain, and of which (in a short time) the most
liquorish worms will scorn to make a Dunghill! O weakness! O false Idea! O
remissness of heart! Is not this to betray our own manhood? to embrace a Cloud
(which vanishes) for a Bright day, which neither admits end nor darkness?
and to neglect that Love, which will at last wipe away our Tears, enrich our
Poverty, and Beautify our Chains?

What delight (alas) can we take to seek out, a felicity which we shall never
find? Shall we then seek to be roasted in ashes? shall we prefer a blast of
smoke, and a glittering chain, before perpetual Liberty? shall we desire to
sleep on Thorns, and feed on Gauls? Oh mere madness! to live a slave to the
world, and not enjoy the Love of the Creator! to seek rest in the Creature, and
neglect the love of the Maker! Oh, let us better employ that time, which
heretofore we have dedicated to the Fantasies of our Spirits: Let Reason get
the upperhand of our Passion; let our eyes be fast settled upon the Law of God;
which tells us, that there is never any thing lost by being faithful unto him:
And let us still represent to our selves, the short pleasure which accompanies
sin, and the remorse of Conscience which follows it, and it will tend much
toward the extinguishing of the Flames of Love, to break all its Darts, and to
make us sole master of our captivating Lusts.

Neither is dissoluteness of habit, the least sign and forerunner of the
Adulteries of the mind; many having (this way) made so proud a monument of
their vanity, as to erect an Eternal Reproach of their punishment: Heaven and
Earth must be turned over, Nature must be forced, and all Arts wearied out, to
serve as instruments to Pride and Luxury; and to what end serves those false
Guiess, those costly Jewels, those shameless Flies, patchings and paintings
wherewith women daub and besmear their Faces, unless to destroy Chastity? To
what end serves the nakedness of their Neck and Breasts? How little do these
things speak or breathe the odor of Virtue? but much rather expose shame to
their Sex, and scandal to civil decency.

Surely, whosoever thus appears too quaint before the world, can hardly carry a
sound heart before God. And Tertullian (bewailing the furniture and equipage of
such a Woman) says, Quasi ad pompam funeris constitutam. Tert. de Hab.
Mulieris.
It would be more fit for the setting forth of her Funerals, then the ornament
of her body; which (indeed) would seem better adorned, if clothed (like Eve)
with simple skins, then in such vain and worldly Pomps.

Our Affections and services can no longer be pleasing to the Savior of the
world, when we are thus engaged to false Divinities. Poor Creatures then as we
are! to love rather to measure the world in its vanity, then to possess it in
the love of God! To prefer darkness, before the Sun; Thorns, before Grapes;
Acorns, before good Corn, and not to place our affections on our Jesus, who was
crucified for us! Proud dust and ashes as we are! since born with supereminency
of body, and seeming the goodliest Creatures of the world, why should we go
about to beg glory from poisons of the Earth, from worms, and spoils of the
dead?

You then that have no other Idol, but Beauty; who worship no other Deities,
but pleasure and Ambition; O consider, that as a Rose adorned with its own
leaves, obscures the Beauty of all other Flowers; so the best Art, is to have
no Art; to take whatever Nature has given, and to render all to God: Let not
your thoughts strike sail to Affection, let not your hearts do homage to that
Beauty, which will ensnare and imprison you in the Fetters of sin; but rather
timely resist the influence of your amorous assaults, being the Rocks whereon
many have sadly suffered shipwreck, the Fountain which sends forth many
poisoned streams; and the Tree, whose fruit is bitter to the stomach, how
pleasing soever it be to the palate.

Consider further, how that in an instant God can turn your vessel of gold into
an earthern Pot. For alas, what a short life have we here? Love (says one) may
be compared to the Punais Worm, which bites while she lives, and after death
makes her infection to be felt. The sin of the body, too often begins in that
of the face, which is insensibly eaten with painting and poison, and too often
do we derive Beauty from corruption.

Neither do I know a better way to stop the beginnings of Lust, then to think
of the end thereof. Those that in the first Temptation will but take the pains
to draw the Curtain, shall behold such a huge Gulf of scandals, injuries,
rages, lothsomness, and despairs, as that they would as willingly almost
descend into hell alive, as consent to this brutish Passion.

Who would not account him mad, who always walks in solitude; who courts a
shadow, who sigheth, laugheth, fears, waxes pale, blusheth, desires,
hates, dies, rises again, is now in earth, and straightway in heaven, in one
hour acts a Comedy of a dozen Personages, and every minute changes and
metamorphoseth himself? What a silly thing is it to see any one thus to trouble
and vex himself in pursuit of a wily Wench, that delights to exercise Her most
infamous Tyranny?

Is it not a pitiful thing to see a man burn in Ice, and congeal in Fire?
Having the color wan, the Visage meagre, the eyes hollow, the cheeks sunk, the
spirits giddy, the reason uncollected, and the whole Body Feverish and
distempered, for a creature that will soon fail his expectation? Who is there
that will not condemn that King, who suffered his Minion to take off his Crown,
and set her Slippers on his head? That Dionysius (the Tyrant) should write the
expeditions of his Kingdom, and that Mirrha (his Wife) should Cancel, or Sign
them at her pleasure? Who would not be astonished at the Roman Macarius, who
having conquered Love in the world, was surprised in the Wilderness, by finding
a Woman's Shoe? And yet may we daily observe an infinite number of matters
much more strange.

Why go we then about to Idolize a Woman? Have we not slavery enough at home,
but we must needs seek it abroad? O let us consider, that they which thus
suffer their heads to run at liberty after such sottish Loves, die a thousand
times a day in following of scornful Beauty; and have little cause to brag,
yea, though they attain the end of their pretensions; their Passions being most
violent for things that must quickly be taken from them.

What a shame is it to observe many, who waste so much of their precious time
for the kiss of a Hand, the touch of a Lip, the glance of an Eye, the untying
of a Shooe-string, and the like? That they should thus make a Goddess of a
piece of Flesh, and kiss the Fetters of their slavery, instead of breaking
them! That they should take a glory to sacrifice their Liberty to that Idol,
whereby at last they suffer a shameful servitude!

And as for the cruelties attending this Passion; What Furies, what Poisons,
what Racks, what Swords, and Gibbets belong to the violence of enraged Lovers?
And shall we still rejoice in the sense-pleasing flatteries of our sensual
Desires? What? Nothing to be seen but Tears, Horror, Grief, Astonishment, and
other representations of death? And shall we thus Court those flames? Shall we
embrace that Stake to which we shall be a Martyr? Ah! Were we but well awaked,
with what horror should we behold the precipices whereinto we are falling? How
plain should we behold these golden snares, which (like the Carcanet of Medea,
or the Trojan Horse) will at last bear Arms against us?

And to the end then, that we may not turmoil and weary our selves in the
Bypath which directly lead us into the mire of violent affection, neither
wholly resign our selves over to such a gross indiscretion, I shall show you
the Medeas we often Court, under the Story of One, who had almost lost his
Wits, as well as Reputation, through the violent pursuit of a Lady he much
adored, who finding no other slight or stratagem to vanquish the importunate
extravagancies of this passionate Lover, showed him her Neck, and uncovered her
Bosom, all gnawn and eaten with a malign Cancer; Behold, fond Lover (said
she) what thou so eagerly Courtest! and so instantly made the Cancer of her
body, to cure the Cancer of his mind: vitae Patrum Occid. l. 6.

Is it not a shame to entertain such worldly Amities, and petty Loves, only to
please flesh and blood, and which are no sooner disliked by the Eye, but
distasted by the heart? We read of some, who have fought with it on Thorns,
Hair-clothes, and other austerities; and we find mention of One, who being
bound to a Bed of Roses with silken Cords, to resign himself to the love of a
Courtezan, spit out his Tongue in her Face. Some have also assuaged their
Passion by flames; Others have quenched the heat of their desires in snows;
Others, by living in rocks, and solitary wildernesses; as if nothing were so
invincible, and hardly attained, as this Virtue of Chastity; Nothing so
difficult as to see all the follies of entranced Lovers.

But the chiefest way amongst many humane Industries, which tend to the curing
of Love [it being to no end to hold long Discourses, and to appoint many
Meditations to a sharp Fever, which is full of ravings, and furious symptomes]
is to owe all our health this way to the fear of God, to Prayer, Fasting, and
Devotion, which is far better then all other inventions.

Make use also often of the memory of death. Set an assiduous watch over thy
eyes, ears, heart, and senses. Avoid anger, since anger and love work upon one
subject. Absent your self from that Presence which is the nourishment of your
Flames. Those Comets which are said to be fed by the vapors of the Earth, are
no longer maintained, then nourishment is afforded; and that Love, which burns
and shines like a false Star in our heart, will soon go out, if you refuse
sustenance from the face you admire, and the company which entertains you in an
enchanted Palace, full of chains and charms.

Withdraw your self then betime from this captivity; gain the Haven, before the
storm surprise you; for if you be once engaged, there is neither Arm nor Oar
can bring you safe. Let us enter seriously into our selves, and daily consider
what passes there, cutting off this Passion which raises such a Storm within
us. Let us ever keep a vigilant Guard, lest Satan betray us and our lusts (like
expert Enemies, who politiquely strengthen themselves with all advantages) make
head against us. And lastly, Let us throw out this Jesabel, who with her
Natural cruelty has slain so many Innocents, ruined so many Cities, disturbed
States, and let us come out of that servitude in which (like a Mill-wheel) we
labor much, and get little; and which has always folly for guide; Poverty for
Dowry, and Misery for recompense.

That Outward Ornaments should not invite our Love.
HE that loves the World, and the Glories thereof, entertains a thousand
businesses, and every business has a world of employments, and those so
multiplied by variety of circumstances, as that it is troublesome to understand
them, and much more to encounter with them: whereas sweet are the sleeps of
those, who prefer heaven before earth, and Chastity and Temperance, before the
wantonness and impurities of a debauched conversation.

Why (alas!) then should we ruin our certainties in the fruitless expectation
of vanity and shaddows? What slender footing will these accessory commodities
have, when death, deformity, poverty, contempt, and sickness are at our heels?
Let us timely consider then, how many boxes full of Pills the fairest Beauties
have at home in their Chests, to take when the Rheum and other infirmities
assail them: Since God gives us leave to dispose of our dislodging from these
fading Tabernacles, shall we not prepare our selves unto it? O let us
seasonably bid farewell to our company, and let us shake off those violent
Hold-fasts, which estrange us from our future happiness.

As those eyes seldom burn with Lust, which are bedewed with Tears; so those
who prefer the light of God's presence before all corporal Beauty, do easily
perceive how little it is to be regarded. They will not exchange the glorious
Sun, for the light of a candle. Here they can have no Lightning without the
Thunder, that makes it seems more dreadful then delightful; and therefore will
prefer a silent night before a tempestuous day; and the everlasting views of
the face of God, before the false Lights of the world.

The light of the Sun (indeed) lights all the world, but how useless will it
be, when Jesus [who is the true light of the world] shall appear in the glory
of heaven. The Rose looks fair (indeed) but is not the Beauty faded, and the
sweetness expired, oftentimes, before the scars in gathering of it be healed?
The honey seems pleasant to the taste, but alas! Who would have it with so many
smarting stings?

Thou (then) that art taken with a pleasing smile; thou whom a sigh, a glance,
or tears beguil; oh, turn thine eyes aside! Forbear to Sail in so dangerous a
Tide, lest Sirens assail, or shipwreck attend thee; few attaining their desired
harbor with such a wind of vanity; all thy labor and rowing in so leaking and
weather-beaten a Vessel, will prove at last but as a handful of waters to a man
that is drowning, which will help rather to destroy then save him.

Alas! What is the Beauty that thou so admirest? When the night comes, it is
nothing to thee; and while thou have gazed on it, Has it not withered away?
Can thou not even shut thy eyes, and fancy all into darkness or deformity? Or
will not a few leprous spots, or malignant ulcers, soon divert thy affections,
and make the Idol of thy Love to become the sad spectacle of thy distaste?
Suppose that thou saw that beautiful Carcass lying on a Bier, carrying to be
buried, or rotting in a grave, the skul dug up, and the bones scattered,
where will be thy lovely object? Can thou then love a skin full of dirt?

Or did thou but behold thy beautiful Dalilah, thy lovely Mistress, on a dying
Bed, panting, schrieching, groaning, turning from one side to another, and
panting for breath, her eyes gastfully rolling, her lips fading, her hands
trembling, her mouth distorted through violent Convulsions, those White and
Reds (so much admired) turned into a black swarthiness, and her whole body
declining into clay; Ah tell me now what thou think! Can thou now sweetly
embrace it, or take any pleasure in it? O my Soul then! Withdraw thy thoughts
from the fading Beauties of the world: Let not the shadow, but the Sun direct
thee: Labor to fix thy eyes upon the only true and lovely object of thy
eternal happiness.

That when all Loves fail, the Love of God remains.
THe Soul of man is unsatisfied, nothing but the Creator thereof will content
it: It walks but sadly amongst the Riches, Honors, and Dignities of the world;
all the joys, glories, and beatitudes of the earth, afford it no comfort. It
wholly represents God as the beginning and end of all things, and is ravished
with its glory, as poor creatures use to be with the heat of the Sun. It is he
alone which the soul seeks, esteems, and honors: All that she sees, hears, or
understands besides, is nothing to her, if it carry not his Name, and take
color from his Beauty; she well knows she shall get all by loving him, and
death it self, which comes from his Love, is the gate of Life.

Here, we every night find a little death in our sleep: sickness and pains are
still subject to overtake us, neither indeed do we know what belongs to a
Crown, Scepter, or Kingdom while we are in this base life: But surely, had we
talked [only] one quarter of an hour with a blessed Soul departed, and
discoursed of the State of the other life, Oh! How would our heart dissolve
into desires? How would we hasten to go out of that ruinous house, where of we
are but Tenants? How would we be ravished to hear these words, Go faithful
soul, out of this Body, go out with joy, in full peace and safety; the eternal
mountains [those glorious Heavens] and all the goodly company of Angels, and
blessed Spirits, which there inhabit, will there receive thee? Go on
confidently, behold God is ready to wipe away all thy Tears; No more sorrows,
no more clamours; behold an Estate altogether new? Oh, What Repose! What Peace!
What cessation of Troubles shall we there meet with!

Our Savior met the Young Man that was carried to Burial, at the Gate of Naim,
Luke 7.11. [which is interpreted, The Town of Beauties] to show us, that
neither Beauty, nor Youth, are freed from the Laws of Death. And it was not
impertinately storyed of a young man, who going eagerly after the pursuit of
his Lusts, met a dead Corpse in his way, which occasioned his return, and the
future amendment of that, and other his exorbitant and lascivious courses.

And truly, as the consideration of our ashes will humble us under the greatest
Pride, so will it abate and consume our burning Lust; he being very strong by
Nature, or wicked by his own choice, who will not amend himself, having ashes
for his Glass, and death for his Mistress.

Oh! What then is it (silly dust and ashes!) that thus strangely enflames thy
swelling veins, when the least breath, or show of death, is like Belshazzar's
handwriting on the Wall, ever ready to affright thee? Will thou then pursue
those seeming joys and fancies which will at last vanish into a dejected
Melancholy? Will thou unadvisedly let loose the Reins of thy affections,
toward the enjoyment of such perishing Pleasures? If so, oh! How dearly will thou buy thy folly!

What are we alas! and what is all we call ours? To day we flourish, and are
well spoken of; we please, and are in favor with men. But (out alas!) our
flower will fade to morrow, and we shall be evil spoken of, and out of favor
with God and man.

And whither tends all this (O my soul!) but to tell thee, that thou art made
to wait on thy Lord, and Spouse, and wholly to thirst after Divine things;
neither must thou ever think to attain perfect rest and happiness in the
troublesome Bed of this world. Three cubits of earth will suffice us, and how
little or much soever we possess, how beautiful or deformed soever we are, this
is all shall be left us. Yet, how often (O God!) does it come to pass, that for
a little deceitful Beauty, a little fugitive honor, a little filthy pleasure
[and that not long] we so slightly regard the joys of heaven, neither dread the
everlasting pains of hell.

He that but truly be-thinks himself of Haman's pride, of Belshazzar's
sacrilege, Ahab's covetousness, Absolon's hair, Sampson's locks, and Dives
riches, shall quickly find, that these things wherein we most presumed, and
which we esteemed our best support, may suddenly become the occasion of our
ruin and destruction. You then that say, Come, and let us enjoy the pleasures
that are; let us take our fill of precious wine, and sweet perfumes, and no way
lose the flower of our time; let us crown our selves with Roses, before they
fade away, and let no meadow be untraversed by us; O that ye would but a little
apprehend, that what this way seems most to afford you content, exposes you a
hundred times a day to the hazard of your lives.

For how little alas! is the continuance [at best] of all the favors of
Fortune? When one Sunshine of pleasure is past, in comes a Tempest; and when
one storm is dispersed, how are we again cast into new despairs; and [at last]
with what dreadful complaints (able to rend Rocks and Marbles asunder) will we
lament our sins, then presented unto us, like so many Furies, which heretofore
we esteemed so light.

If then at any time thou art taken with the Siren and pleasing smiles of the
world; if thou seem here to content thy self in the beholding of earthly
Palaces, rich furniture, exquisite pictures, and sweet Perfumes; if thou seem
here to please thy melancholy Fancy, in high Mountains, goodly Forests, rich
Marbles, fair Meadows, pleasant Rivers, and beautiful Flowers; O do but
be-think thy self! What are these? What is this to Heaven? What is this to
Eternity? All being but a little Atome to the unspeakable joys of the Celestial
Paradise.

Earthly delights may (I confess) astonish, but can never satiate our senses.
Temporal Beauty is but a transitory charm, an illusion of our senses, a Flower
which has but a moment of life, and a Dyal, which we never look on, but when
the Sun shines: What is humane glory, but a Dunghill covered with snow, a Glass
painted with false colors, a sugared Fruit gilded with poison, or a dangerous
Hostess in a fair House? Shall we then trust so fading a good? Shall we hazard
our Souls in so unhappy a snare? Or, shall we tie out contentments to so
slippery a knot? Or dote upon temporal goods, which like chirping Birds, give
us only a little Music in the Summer, and so fly away?

There are some, who upon these words of the Psalmist, By the waters of Babylon
we sat down and wept, have compared the temporal goods and delights of the
world to these Waters; not only for their swift running away, and never
returning; but for their trouble in procuring, and their sorrow in losing; and
well may we therefore hang up our Harps, and sit down weeping, while we live in
this Babylon of Captivity.

And surely, Wisdom tells us, that such is the vanity of all earthly goods, as
that there is nothing so great in this Vale of Tears, whose loss should any way
disquiet us. What are our bodies but the food of worms? Our gaudy Attires, but
nourishment for Moths? Our stately pyled Houses, but stones and mortar? Our
most precious Jewels, but the excrements of an enraged Sea [which borrow their
worth from our weak fancy] and all our honors, but the golden Masks and
Weather-cocks of inconstancy?

O unfortunate Worldling! Where then are thy thoughts fixed? What is here in
the world that can deserve thy love? Behold the whole Fabric of the Creation,
and see what thou can meet with worth thy affection? Can thou then embarque
thy self among such treacherous Sirens? See thou not that thy riches, friends,
reputation, companions, and all will at last forsake thee, as a Butterfly,
which escapes the hand of a child? Whereat then aims thy strong Ambition? What
means thy burning Avarice, Thy profuse Riot? What will one day become of thy
wretched profit, thy fading pleasures? Will not all vanish into fancy, and a
body of smoke; and nothing avail thee, when thy mouth shall be stopped with
eternal silence?

Be not then so bad a Merchant, as to sell things eternal for temporal. It is
for silly flies to gad only in the Sunshine of this world: This Enchantress,
which thou so much admirest, and enjoyest after thy own lusts, will at last
prove but a very bad bargain, full of vanity, deception, and sorrow.

Ah! That thou should love poison, and embrace death! That we should seek
our own ruin and confusion! Does the world tempt thee to honor? Oh despise it
in humility: If to Riches, O scorn it in contentment. And O my Soul! Let not
the wings of thy love to God, be entangled with the bird-lime of temporal
things! God has espoused thee a chaste Virgin to himself; Let not those
Love Tokens which he has sent to engage thy Affections, more strongly to
himself, seduce thy heart from him, who except he may have the choicest, will
admit of none of thy love.

Temporal Goods cannot content the Soul, and therefore deserve not our Love.
ALl the happiness and felicity of man in this world, is a Dream; it comes on
we know not how, and when it vanishes, we cannot so much as discern whether it
is gone: Yea, How do all the possessions thereof pass away in an unperceived
motion. When we suppose them fast locked in our arms, they creep from us in a
mist or smoke, which silently steals out at the chimnies top, after it has
fouled and smutted it within.

Our life is but like the nest of some silly Bird, whose best composure and
materials are straw and dust; and as soon does the stately Palaces and Courts
of the greatest Princes decay, as the poor resting place of a Swallow comes
dropping down at the approach of Winter. What (alas!) shall I say? since
wheresoever we reflect our eyes, we shall find cause sufficient to dissolve
them into Tears. If we look up to heaven, while we behold our Country aloof, we
cannot but consider our selves in banishment: If on earth, it is but the
upbraiding remembrance of our grave; and how proudly soever we trample it under
our feet at present, it makes full account to have the disposure of our heads;
yea, the greatest Emperors after death, are found sitting in Vaults under
earth in silence, and mournful Majesty.

Neither is there any thing (when all other Beauty, Honors, and happiness
proves brittle and inconstant) which remains to yield us comfort, but the
benefit we receive from the few hours we spend in Prayer, Meditation, and the
Exercises of a pious life. Now, now is the time, that in one little part of an
hour, we may obtain pardon here, which all Eternity shall not hereafter. Now is
the time, that in one short day we may have more debts so given us, then in all
the years and times to come.

Here may we so lament for sins committed, as to escape everlasting punishment:
Here Is nothing but the fearful cracks of ruins every where, the dreadful
roaring of storms and tempests on every side. Our house still threatens its
fall, and we are (with S. Stephen) in the midst of a violent shower of stones
on every hand, and shall we not think of retyring our selves to our heavenly
Country? Shall we not willingly then leave the house of our Pilgrimage here,
for those glorious Mansions above! O happy Country! O blessed Mansions, which
are provided for us in our Fathers house!

But O Eternity, Eternity! How little do we think on thee? Or strive to avoid
those endless miseries, and those perpetual nights of horror and sadness,
which custom in sinning will assuredly bring upon us? Alas! What more fond,
then for a little earthly Beauty, for Riches, and for the love of this world,
to lose heaven, and procure eternal wretchedness? Alas! How do all the sweet
waters of our pleasures, at last run hastily into a Sea of sorrows and
bitterness? How does sadness dive into the bottom of the Soul, when delights
tickle us in the outside of the skin? How like a bunch of Grapes (says S.
Bernard) are the Worldlings joys, whose juice is pressed out? How full of
disquietness are they? Their fullness (at best) being seasoned with shame and
repentance. Oh! How do they (like abortives) die in the birth; yea, too often
prove the executioners of the owners, or leave us, like a poor Pilgrim,
dispoiled by thieves?

We find our Savior dissuading his Disciples from Ambition, Matthew. 20.20. and
to call Riches thorns, as bearing fair flowers, but the fruit very bad; yea,
serves as a shelter for Vipers and serpents. Yet, oh insatiable Avarice!
Whither do thou transport our manners and understanding? Ah! the
forgetfulness of our condition: Alas! What are we? Whence came we? Was it not a
few years since we were born naked, creeping on the earth, and having a mouth
open to cries and hunger; and do we think we have nothing, except we possess
all things?

Alas! Our misery lies in our life; we die, when we do not die; In our last end
is all our happiness, which will transport us from earth to heaven, from Egypt
to Canaan, if so be we make it our care to avoid as well the affections as the
presence of all the creatures of this world, and unite our selves to God by the
practice of virtues, which will serve as so many steps to glory.

Nor is there any other way to take away the sting of death, or make our life
comfortable. Our honor will lie in the dust, and sleep in a Bed of earth. Our
Riches will not deliver us in the day of wrath: what if thou leave them behind
to procure a few mourning weeds to attend thy Hearse, or erect some glorious
Monument to thy memory; yet will they at last rather afflict then relieve thee
at the hour of thy passage. Oh, but thou will say, thy friends shall help thee:
Alas! All that they can do, is but to attend thee to thy last resting place,
and to shed some friendly [perchance feigned] Tears, for leaving them behind
thee! Such miserable comforters are all things thou can think on here below.

When all things leave thee, the love of God, and a good Conscience will be thy
familiar friends, and which must ever attend thee: That Balmof Gilead, which
must cheer thee; and that Palm of Peace which must at last crown thee: And
truly, we have daily need of God, and not of man to help us: One cries out
here, Wretch that I am, who will help me out of misery? Where shall I find
Tears enough to save me? Another cries out, What shall I do? Must I needs leave
my only Father, my dear Husband, my loving Brother, my sweet and only Child?
Oh let me die! Some good body or other make an end of me!

The black clouds of sorrow sometimes so sadly overshadow us, as that (with
Jacob) we rend our clothes, and will needs go down with sorrow to our Grave; We
often cry out, What, for ever? In aeternum valedicere? What, to part for ever?
To forsake the world, and all our friends, what more troublesome? What? To take
this young betrothed, this poor Maid, this intended Husband? What? To lay hold
on one so well beloved, in the flower of his age, so fresh, so flourishing, so
full of Honor and Prosperity? O cruel and malicious Death! What? Have thou
Ears of Brass and Diamonds, and wilt not hear our cries? Alas! What do I here?
I am but a living death, and an unprofitable burden to the earth! Why had
thou not rather taken away this Beggar, that Cripple, who has not wherewith to
live? Ah Death! Now shoot the utmost of thy Darts!

Thus do our humane respects too often seem to withstand the Divine Providence.
But oh thou that art thus unwilling to part with a Dunghill, an earthly Cottage,
to enjoy a life of perpetual Beauty and felicity! What (alas!) may we think of
thee? That Heaven should open it self to thee, and thou will neither embrace
it, nor open thy heart to love him that offers it? Alas! O Soul [many times
ungrateful and disloyal] what will thou answer for so great a neglect, when God
shall call thee to an account? Ah! If we love any thing in the world, let us
love it for life eternal! The joys of heaven are without example. Oh that we
might then know our names to be written in the book of Life! Oh how should we
find our Spirits ravished with those beautiful Ideas of glory?

Where can we more fitly commend our selves, then unto so vast a bosom of
Compassion, as shall set a period to all the miseries of this sinful life? To
God (I say) who is an endless Ocean, and boundless Sea of mercy: How can we
better fix our thoughts then on our crucified Savior, and in his countenance,
to read the lively characters of that infinite love he bears us: the
remembrance of death it self, being sweet to those who lead their life so, as
to meet him comfortably, as their Judge at the last day. It will be no more to
him to die, then is one nights sweet repose on a bed of Roses.

Who can but behold the spirit of Jesus amongst those great Convulsions of the
world, moving round about the Cross, in the midst of those bloody dolours,
insolent cries, and insupportable blasphemies? O behold, and see him there, as
in a Sanctuary, bleeding, weeping, and praying, yea mingling his prayers with
his tears and blood, and at last, to die unmoveably upon the Throne of his
patience.

Oh madness of men! That spend all their time, increase their account, and lose
so many fair opportunities [when they might have gotten heaven for a tear, a
sigh, or a groan from a penitent heart] for the attaining of that, which not
only proves their eternal ruin hereafter, but occasions their miserable
vexation here. O worldlings! Thus to deceive your selves! Who shall weep over
you, since you know not how to lament and bewail your selves? Why alas! are you
so careful and tender of your bodies, yet daily entangle your poor souls in a
thousand vanities, a thousand Courtships, and a thousand worldly loves, which
defile you, and must one day be discharged at a dear rate.

Miserable wretches! How will you then cry out, what have we done? Once had we
time to have wrought out our salvation [O precious time!] but these golden days
are past: And have we thus miserably undone our selves? Come Rocks, and fall
upon us! Come ye Furies and tear us, until we moulder into nothing.

Sad creatures then as we are, to procrastinate and put off our Repentance!
Since the Sun, which goes so many miles in a minute, and the Stars in the
Firmament, which go many more, make not so much speed, as our body hastens to
the Grave. The devouring sword, the consuming fire, the winds from the
Wilderness, the Diseases of the Body, and all that afflicted holy Job, are
still at our heels; what daily reports do we hear? Such a man is slain,
another is drowned, a third breaks his neck; this man died eating, that man
playing, another sleeping; this by accident, that by his own hands; Oh how
great an Elephant, and yet how small a Mouse can destroy us; a pin, a comb, a
hair (pulled out) has gangrened: Nay, our joy, our mirth, and laughter, our
shame, and blushing may ruin us; and in the very flower of our youth, and
blossom of our age, we may be untimely nipt, and sent down into the dust.

And alas! If God but a little withdraw our breath, vain is the power of art,
vain is the Physicians skill, vain and fruitless are the sighs and tears of thy
friends, yea vain and helpless are the wishes of all our kinsfolk. Here sits
one weeping, there another lamenting; yet all to no purpose: Neither is it
Beauty, or the Damask skin, that can help us, when we feel the slow pace of our
panting pulse: It is not mirth, nor greatness, which can then affect us, when
death in a moment shall dissolve all our honor into darkness. The whole world
cannot afford us content, when our Soul is expiring from our body. Neither can
all her alluring baits, smiling blandishments, and beautiful temptations avail
thee, when thy spirits shall tremble with affrightful pangs, when all thy
senses shall decline, and all the faculties of thy soul attempt which way
soonest to leave thy body.

O then, that we did but present unto our selves, the sad and miserable
condition at present, and the happiness which is to come; How effectual it
would be to raise up our thoughts from the fading blossoms, and perishing
pleasures of this transitory world! How would it comfort us in all conditions
whatsoever? How little would we care for the losses and crosses of this world,
did we think of a heavenly kingdom?

We are all [in the time of our absence from God] but strangers upon earth: Let
us then pass the time of our sojourning here in fear; 1 Pet. 1.17. and then he
needs not care for ill usage in his pilgrimage here, who knows he is a King at
home. But alas! We too often eat husks, when we should feed on Manna: Great
riches cannot make our clothes warm, nor our meat more nourishing, why then do
we tumble in the myres of this world?

Seek rather (O Christian Soul!) for that Kingdom whereof there is no end; that
Kingdom which is infinitely glorious, Luke 1.33. and every way blessed, the
King that rules is eternal, and they that live there, never die; Let our
hearts and mouths be ever filled with the praises of it; Let our thoughts and
words ever bend toward it, since we have no other way then this to attain any
true and lasting glory.

Let us also wholly resign our selves to him that sent us here. We have too
long lived in the Gardens of Adonis, which in the beginning make show of
Flowers, but at last bring forth nothing but Thorns. Let us then fix a nail in
the wheel of this furious, and yet inconstant Chariot, lest at last we expose
our selves to the hazard of a precipitous fall. Can there be a greater victory
then to conquer our own tumultuous thoughts, in such a conjuncture of time,
when our own ruin lies at stake? Can we better use our choicest skill, then to
shake off those enchanting embraces, and turn away our earsfrom those betraying
sighs, lest (like that insolent Conqueror, who was vanquished by his own
slave) we become strangely cruel to our selves.

Alas! That we did but consider how fearful will be the case of those who have
neglected the day of their salvation! If it be a troublesome thing to be tied
to a Bed of Roses (though but for a little time) with silken strings, oh, what
may we think of those damned Souls, which must dwell in a bed of Flames, as
long as there is a God!

It will be in vain then to cry to the Hills to fall on us, and to the
Mountains to cover us; It will be in vain to repent, and wish we had not
slighted the day of our Visitation, nor sold it for a little pleasure: It will
be in vain then to cry, Lord, open to us, oh spare us, oh pity us, do not cast
us into Eternal Burnings: O what ease! What eternal darkness! Blinded world!
Prostituted World! Desperate World! Ah had thou but known, Had thou but
known! But alas! Thy unhappiness has put a Scarf before thine eyes.

O poor secure Worldlings! What will you then do, when he that will be your
Judge, shall come in the clouds of Glory and Majesty? Where will you hide your
selves? What shall cover you? Mountains are gone, the Earth and Heavens do pass
away, and how do you wish your selves might melt away as they do? But ah,
wishes are now in vain! To what end do thou cry Lord, Lord! It is too late
[alas!] too late, why then do thou look about thee? Whither do thou run?
Can any save thee? Wretches as you are! To what pass have you brought your
selves? How happy had you now been if you had believed and obeyed, having only
time left to bewail and lament your miserable condition?

Ah drowsy earthy Creatures! Are you still hanging downward, when heaven is
before ye? Are you sleeping, when so great a Treasure is set before you? Are ye
taken up with your delights and pleasures? Had ye rather sit down in dirt and
dung, then walk in the Palace of Heaven? Is it better to be there, then above
with your Savior? Alas, deceived Soul! Come away then out of the Wilderness of
this World, make no excuses, frame no delays, look not back on thy worldly
business, thy unbridled lusts, thy sinful company which here took up thy
thoughts in this howling Desert, this Valley of Tears.

Do but consider how soon thou art to depart hence, then will thou find what
thou have neglected, in following trifles, and so much minding thy provision in
the way, whilst thou art hastening so fast to another world, and thy eternal
happiness lies at stake. How will thou then cry out upon thy rocky heart, thy
proud and unbelieving heart, thy Atheistical, and Idolatrous, and worldly
heart, yea thy carnal and sensual heart, for here toyling, and selling an
endless glory for worldly vanities, and adventuring the loss of heaven, for the
pleasure of sin; to have thy portion in this life (where the best things are
often the lot of the most miserable wretches) and to lose thy part in heaven,
and eternal happiness; to take up thy ease and dwelling here in a nest of straw
of wind and vanity, [the greatest of Plagues, and forest of curses which God
can give thee over to] and to lose thy part in Paradise, and thy Mansion in the
heavenly Jerusalem.

But oh the strange aversness of our souls from God! that we should account our
misery a happiness! Nay, that we should rather groan under any intolerable
burden and servitude, then seek our happiness in him! That we should think
these Honors delightful, that Beauty tempting, those goods, lands, and houses,
our dependence, that merry company our solace, that health and strength
contentful, those buildings, walks, apparel, and pastimes to be pleasant, and
(after all those seeming enjoyments, and heart-contenting thoughts) we shall
look behind us, and see death with open mouth proclaiming these words; Fool,
this night shall thy soul be taken from thee.

O gross Idolatry, to make any creature, or means, our relyance! To place any
dependence on the worlds favors! to settle our soul upon such hazardous
enjoyments, or to say, here am I well, here will I rest. And will thou here
rest (oh my soul!) on the top of those tempestuous mountains? Will thou swallow
down those deceitful baits, where death is nearest, when the pleasure seems
sweetest? Alas! Settle not in this perishing world, where all our days are
sorrow, and our labor, grief.

The Souls solitude and content in her Separation from the great enticements of
the world.
HOw strange a thing is it, that God is always with us, and we are so little
with him? We have our life, our being, our moving from him, and yet all this
while we scarce know what he is. Alas! What is the cause? But that our eyes are
dazzled with the false lights of the world, they are darkened with so many mists
and vapors of our own appetites and passions, as that we cannot see the goods
of heaven in the brightest of the day.

Whereas (to speak true) our Soul should always be languishing after her Jesus,
and count it a sad thing to be separated from him so much as in thought. Would
we but learn a little to talk with him; O how would it sweeten the sadness of
our Pilgrimage, by the contemplation of his Beauties! Were we but embarked in
his Vessel, while we sail on the Seas of this troublesome world, we would not
amuze our selves to gather Cockles on the shore, but we would always have our
eyes fixed upon Paradise.

Or had we but our eyes well opened, to penetrate and see what the world is, we
should find its chains (indeed) to have a certain pleasure, and seeming vigor
in them, but only painted, and attended with a most certain sorrow, and
uncertain contentment. Yea, we should then say of all the most ravishing
Objects thereof, How senseless was I when I Courted you? O deceitful World!
Thou did appear great to me, when I saw thee not as thou art, but so soon as
I did see thee aright, thou were no mo more to me but just nothing.

Whither then do thou straggle, O my Soul; Whither do thou fly? O seek out
him, who has marked his steps with his great Conquests! Who has made visible
his way by his own light, paved it with his wounds, and watered it with his
most precious blood. Say unto him (at least) O my Jesus! Stay with me, for it
is late in my heart, and the night is far advanced by the want of true light.
Alas (O my Lord!) wherefore art thou pleased to hide thy self from a Soul that
languisheth for thee? Ah! Take away the vail from my eyes, and suffer thy self
to be seen in the habit of thy excellent Beauties!

Oh my God! If I cannot enter as sorrowful as I would into my grave, I will yet
go repentant into some obscure and savage Cave, where the Sun shall no more
shine on a head so sinful as mine, or trace some desert mountains, where with
freedom I may pour forth my sighs and complaints. There will I make that mouth
which has been often the gate of unchaste and idle speeches, to become a
Temple of thy Praises. There shall those arms and hands, which have been the
chains of wanton embracements, have room enough to be lifted up in prayer to
heaven: mine eyes (O mine eyes!) which first received that fire which has so
passionately devoured my Soul, shall there turn Fountains, and want no water to
wash that heart which has so long been a burning Furnace of worldly lusts and
affections: and those feet which have strayed in the ways of sin and
wickedness, shall there traverse and weary themselves in the desolate paths of
Furies and wild Beasts.

Briefly, O my God! Since I have so betrayed my heart, abused my youth, spent
prodigally thy treasures, and made Crowns of silver to the Idol of my own
inventions; since I have forsaken thee, who art the unchangeable, eternal, and
incomparable goodness, (and without whom all other goods are nothing) to follow
the wanton fires of my own lusts; where alas? shall I find Tears sufficient to
wash away my Offenses? Where shall I find parts enough of my body to be offered
up as the Sacrifice of my Repentance? Wash me, wash me again, O my Jesus! Make
clean, I beseech thee (merciful Savior!) my most sinful Soul; What though it
were as black as hell, yet (being once in thy hands) how soon will it become
more white then that Dove of silver wings, whereof the Prophet speaks!

Oh my God! Have some pity on that heart, which is so many times torn in
pieces, and strays among so great a multitude of Objects, which estrange, and
draw me from thee! Draw me (O Lord!) from the great throng of so many inferior
things, that so I may retire into my own heart, and find peace in thee. Make
me to see the first beams of that Liberty which thou grantest to thy children.
Ah! When shall my thoughts return from wandering in those barren Regions where
thou art not acknowledged? When shall they cease to run in full career after
all that pleases their sense, and account thy Cross only, and the Throne on
Mount Calvary, to be the true Pathway to heaven?

Here I am (I confess) in the Wilderness of sin, in the Desert of this world; O
when shall I be reunited, and so purifyed by thy favors, that I may celebrate
continual days of Feasting in my Soul! I was one of those [and I cannot deny
it] that through my sins, helped to apprehend thee in that obscure and dolorous
night, wherein thou were betrayed; and when thou enteredst into the Garden of
Mount Olivet; to expiate the sin committed [in a Garden] by our first Parents;
Were not my sins then the Traitors that laid hold on thee? Were they not my
sins which drew those bitter sorrows from those most dainty Sweets? Which made
thee suffer pains in a place of delight, and turned that place which was made
for Recreation, into a dismal Den of Desolation?

Oh sad change! Ah, my Jesus! What has my sins brought upon thee? Those
Olives, which were tokens of Peace, did there denounce War against thee; the
Plants there did groan, the Flowers were flowers of death, and those clear
Fountains, were turned to fountains of sweat and blood: What then remains, but
that I be now ashamed of all the fading curiosities of the world? Ah! Shall I
not study this Garden? And (forsaking all other pleasures) make my heart fit
ground for Jesus to reside and delight in? O beautiful Garden! since made so by
the sighs of my dear Savior. Here let me only breathe in thy walks, let me
lose my self, that I may never be lost with my God: Let me gather thy flowers,
since thou have decked them with thy blood; Let me wash my self in those
Fountains which thou have sanctified with thy sweat.

O my dear Savior! Let me have no other Will but thine. Will thou be abridged
of thy own Will, to give me an example of mortifying my Passions, and shall I
retain any wicked or inordinate appetite? Have thou (like the Dove of Noah's
Ark) escaped the Deluge of so many Passions, and torrents of dolours, falling
headlong so fast on one another, to bring me green Olive Branch of peace, and
shall my soul be so audacious, as to wage war against thee by my sins? O what
earth could then open wide enough to swallow me! What, thus to live with a hand
stretched out against heaven, which pours out for nothing but Flowers and
Roses? Out alas!

No, no, Reign (O my dear Savior!) within all the conquered powers of my Soul.
Let thy Wounds be the adored Altars of my Vows: Let me hereupon promise an
inviolable fidelity to thy service; Let me live no more but for thee, since
thou make my life to flourish with thy tryumphant Resurrection.

Ah my Soul! Do thou want any thing to provoke thy Love? Is there not a Sea
of Love here before thee? Cast thy self in then, and swim in the Ocean thereof:
Sit no longer under the weeping banks of worldly sorrow; Thou have long sat
mourning with Hagar, Genesis 21.15. 1 Kin. 19.6. 2 King. 6.16.
in this Valley of Tears. Thou have long been in the posture of Elias, sitting
down under the Tree, forlorn and solitary; yea, desiring rather to die then to
live. Nay, how many times have thou cried out (with Elisha) Alas, What shall I
do? and with passionate Jonah, I am weary of my life?

When shall I be out of this frail, this corruptible Body, this ruinous,
ensnaring, and deceiving flesh? O when shall I be out of this vexatious world,
whose vain pleasures are but deluding Dreams? What remains then, O my Soul! But
that thou strive to get out of this sink of sadness, this skin full of groans,
this snow-bail of Tears, this Carcass of fears, this channel of the wa^^rs of
affliction, and betake thy self wholly into the arms of thy Savior.

The Soul complains of her Condition and Misery, by reason of the darkness
and ignorance of sin.
THe Spirit of Man naturally tends to God, as its first cause; neither can
take any contentment without him, though too often (indeed) hindered by the
weight of the Body, and the bait of Concupiscence. He will what God will; loves
what God loves; and if in this wayfaring life, his love sticks upon frivolous
objects [which like foolish Fires, lead him into precipices and dangerous
paths] he speedily complains how much he is misguided.

Now the reason hereof is, That as every thing tends to the imitation of its
Original, so a Soul [truly Christian] has all its strength and vigor from
God. He is the end of all his works; and if God chance to fail it, the whole
Fabric of its salvation falls to the ground.

When a gracious heart has its eyes cleared by the Rays of Divine Majesty, he
is at the end of its journey, and no longer entertaineth a multiplicity of
desires, since he has found the Center of Eternal rest. And well then may the
Soul of man, which is out of the Limits which God has assigned it, find Inns
to lodge in, but never find a Home to reside in.

Alas, then what is our life, and the affairs of man? That which is past, is
nothing; the present is a fantasy; and the future an Abyss; where even those
that stand on the brink, see not any thing. Our life (only) is hid in Christ,
as says the Apostle. And surely, he only who knows how to accommodate himself
to the Will of his Savior, knows only how to live, and has found the industry
of an infinite happiness, in the accomplishment of his desires.

Neither is there any thing so turmoiled, so torn, and so divided, as a Soul,
which has always before it the Image of its own crimes. And this is it which
makes the Vermilion of the cheeks to fade; that makes paleness to overspread
all the face; hence is it, that a miserable man being fallen as it were into a
Tempest [not foreseen] cries out, Humane hopes, where are ye? Ah true dreams of
aerie Fancies! Fleeting fires! which shine not but to extinguish your selves,
and (being put out) bereave us of all true light, leaving only the ill savor
and sorrow of losing all your seeming glories: To what shall I compare your
Beauties? but to those who carry under a smooth face, a heart spotted like the
skin of a Panther? What are your Pleasures, but like those enchanted Islands,
which recoyl backward, and vanish when men most think to approach them.

Alas my Tears! What fitness can ye find to bemoan my misery? Alas, my eyes!
Why are those flames, which once so sweetly blazed in you, now fallen into an
Eclipse? My voice is interrupted, and words imperfectly spoken; all the Organs
and Bands of my Body are loosened and untyed; Oh how does fear and trembling
spread it self over all the Basis of Natures building?

Nor is this evil passion, content only to seize on our Body, but it flies to
the superior Region of our Soul, to cause disorder, robbing it (almost in a
moment) of memory, understanding, judgment, will, courage; yea rendering us
benumbed, dull, and stupid in all our actions, and would a thousand times
overcome us with Melancholy, were it not from the consolations drawn from the
fountain of true piety. Alas, O Lord! How is our Soul confounded to see so many
sparkles of pride, lust, and covetousness, arise from this Caitiff dust, which
we are composed of! So little do we learn how to live, and so late how to die:
which made S. Austin cry out, My God, my life, and my happiness! I confess my
misery unto thee, after so many temporal consolations have separated me from
thee!

Thus is the poor Soul ever bewailing her condition, and bedewing that face
with mournful Tears, wherein God once caused the sanctity of a gracious heart
to be resplendent. And though formerly it had seemed cheerful, yet now alas,
behold it (though heretofore retaining the vigor of holy alacrity) altogether
dissolved with austerities and maladies: Nothing but specter of terrors,
ruin, outrages, solitudes, darknesses, revengeful thunders and innovations,
extremely weaken and affright the heart, until (at last) having reckoned up the
dolours which on every side environed her Savior, she raises up her self
(like the Palm) against the weight of her afflictions.

O inestimable Bounty! O greatness unheard of! O inexhaustible love of God!
whose goodness is such, not only thus to divert our miseries, and fit them to
our condition, but even from our Tears, to draw sweetness and consolation for
our solace! Now as pious Hannah forsook all the distracted looks which sorrow
caused in her, after she had conceived the little Samuel, so does the poor Soul
(being again honored with the re-enjoyment of God in its heart, drive away all
the disturbances of grief and sadness. Oh (says she) what thoughts of Satan
are these, to deliver up my self to distrust of comfort in the sight of a
Jesus, who bears my reconciliation on his sacred wounds, and pleads my
cause before his eternal Father, with as many mouths as my sins in him have
made wounds.

It is not possible I should doubt of his love and fatherly goodness; if I look
upon his hands, I shall there see it written with those nails that pierced
them, I shall see it in his side which was opened for me, by that Lance which
dug out the remainder of his life. Alas! Who was more destitute then man?
more brutish and ignorant in so great a night, and horrible confusions? Who was
more unfurnished with wise directions? And yet he affords us his examples:
Who more forlorn? And yet he adopteth us for children: Who more needy? And yet
he gives us the treasure of his merits: Who more hungry? And yet he feeds us
with his flesh and blood: Who more imhappy? And yet how does he divide every
part of his body amongst us.

O goodly spectacle to behold! How he blesses us with his presence! How he
replenisheth us by his greatness! How he governs us by his power, and
sanctifies us by his influences? Oh for ever unhappy! If after so many
benefits we remain still faithless and ungrateful: Lord! As thou revealest to
me more of my misery, so reveal also more of thy mercy. I confess my self
(indeed) to be too often entangled in some pleasant or profitable Lust: Satan
is the Bellows, my corruption the tinder, and the world the wilde-fire to burn
my soul, and so dangerously to withdraw my love, as that although (O my
Savior) thou art still calling me, yet am I loath to leave my Bed of ease,
Cant. 5.1. How justly then (to prevent my spiritual pride) may thou leave me
in ignorance and darkness, as thou did thy Spouse; yea, to go to enquire, to
pray, and yet not find the light of thy presence?

But O Lord! Leave not this poor Soul of mine, but make it to understand the
unmeasurableness of thy Bounties and Mercy! Oh for that day, when this
knowledge of mine [now childish and darksome] shall be turned into a full and
clear Vision; O happy darkness, if thus to become lightsome! The more hidden
thou art now [blessed Savior!] the more glorious will thou be then. Ah, that
my heavy thoughts had the wings of an Angel, to soar aloft, amongst those
celestial Quires!

Methinks I see (when thou shall be pleased to remove the skreen of my mortal
body, which now detains me from thy presence, and interrupts the view of thy
glory) how nothing will be able to hinder the eagerness of my Soul, from flying
to thee. Methinks I see Eternity too short to enjoy thee. Surely, there is no
possibility of pleasure without thee, no faculty of Soul to wish, or think any
thing but thee; yea, my Soul would more willingly wain into nothing, then part
with thee; Thee, my only incomprehensible and Eternal All, my dear, dearest
Lord and God!

Adieu then those charming warbles of a fleeting and deceitful world! O
merciful Father! Behold my prodigal Soul, which returns unto thee: Receive me
as a mercenary servant, if thou will not receive me as a Son; for I resolve no
longer now to run after the salt waters of worldly pleasures and contentments.
The light of thy countenance is far better then life it self, being able to
turn the shaddows of death into life, and the midnight of the sharpest
adversities into the noontide of joy and cheerfulness.

Oh how great is the clemency of God, to hide from us the greatest part of
things which will befall us in the world! The knowledge whereof, would
continually overwhelm our wretched life with sadness and affrightment, and give
us no leave to breathe among the delicious Objects of the earth. Had many great
and eminent persons (mounted on the highest degree of honor) but seen how they
were still falling into endless Abysses; or beheld the change of their Fortune,
and the bloody ends of their life, it is impossible but the joys of their
Tryumphs would have been moistened with Tears, and (through a perpetual fear of
inevitable necessity) they would have lost all the moments of their felicity.

And did the poor and seemingly forsaken Soul, thoroughly at once apprehend the
severe anger of an omnipotent God, what alas, would it do, when it sees it self
menaced by the hideous and affrightful terrors and mischiefs of Satan? What
shall the poor heart do, when God is pleased to write bitter things against it;
when he shall scare it with dreams, and terrify it with Visions? Surely, not
pains, imprisonments, poverty, or death it self can be more troublesome to it.

Whereas the comforts of a quiet conscience (becalmed with the gracious
in-comes of Gods gracious presence, and enlightened with his glorious Beams,
which expel the darkness and ignorance of our cursed Nature) as are so many
threads of gold, which involve us here below in precious repose, and a certain
expectation of beatitude, until at last we find wings to take our flight to
the City of Peace and Refuge, promised unto us by that mouth which never erred,
and whose Laws are established upon foundations stronger then the pillars of
heaven and earth, and where we shall receive the excellent Promises, and
clearest revelations of Eternity.

The Soul admires the infinite Riches of her Saviors Love, in taking Humane
Nature upon him.
WIth what admiration is not the heart of man seized on, when he enters into
the great Abysses which are discovered in our Redemption, and when he sees
Jesus [a Saviour] to reveal unto us the secrets and wisdom of heaven, by his
blessed Incarnation.

For what saw he in our Nature, but a brutish body, and a Soul all covered over
with crimes, and wholly drenched in remediless miseries? Or what could he set
before him, but a miserable ungracious wretch, cast forth upon the face of the
Earth, wallowing in uncleanness, abandoned to all sorts of scorns and injuries:
And yet behold how the Prince of Glory looking on us with the eyes of his
mercy, takes us, washes, cloatheth, adorneth, and tyeth us to himself, by a
hand of infinite Love: He laid aside the beautiful Angels, and came upon earth
to seek this lost creature, though a Foe to his Honor, and injurious to his
Glory.

See, O my Soul! How that God [far beyond all other created Essences] has been
so liberal, as to bestow himself on thee! He bowed the Heaven, and came down,
rendering his sacred Person subject to all the misery of humanity; to bruises,
to tearings, to shatters, to violences, oppositions, and tyrannies; and all to
accomplish a King of sorrow, calamity, and scorn. He laid aside all the
Prerogatives of his most perfect Soul, exposing it to labors, to tears, and
griefs, to those stupendous Throws in the Garden, which made him cry out in
those expressive words, My God! My God! To what a point have thou let me to be
brought! and in the end, to be commended even to death it self.

How alas! did thou abandon thy body to heat, to cold, to weakness, to
hunger, to thirst, to travel, to weariness, to fear, to sadness of Soul, and
death it self?

What was it but Love, and Love alone, that brought down God from heaven, to be
incarnate in the womb of a Virgin, and to suffer all the hardships [not sinful]
to which humane Nature is subject? So that thou art not able to conceive the
multitude and greatness, nor any way comprehend the worth of his mercies. And
what then can thou say, but only lie gasping with admiration, of so vast, so
unknown a goodness, and sigh out the rest in the Center of thy heart?

Good God What sublimate is made in the Limbeck of Love? What attractive was
there in Humane Nature, to draw thee from the highest part of the heavens to
its love? Thou (out of thy goodness) would not lose him, who (through his own
weakness) delights to lose himself.

O miracle! That humane Nature should be thus tied to the Divine! That glory
should be separated from the estate and condition of glory, yiedling his Soul
up as a prey to sadness! O dear Savior! Thou stretchest out thy hand to him,
who turns his back to thee. Man flies as a Fugitive, and thou pursuest him
even to the shadow of Death: What may we say more of so profuse a Bounty? Oh
how thou courtest sinful flesh! Being not content to pardon his crimes, but
even through thy own death to procure him a Kingdom.

All the ancient Patriarchs, who were persecuted in times past, and all the
glorious Martyrs, who since our Savior have endured such torments, made but a
trial of his Dolours: Impatient souls then as we are! Can we expect a greater
motive to suffering, then to have our Savior for an example? Who then will
complain? Or who is the man who cannot bear a small burden (to which he is tied
by duty and nature) when he beholds this great Abyss of love, of mercy, of
dolours, of ignomy, of blood, of lowliness, of admiration and amazement, which
swalloweth up all thoughts, dries up all mouths, and stays all Pens and
hands.

And can thou, O my Soul! after all this, think any cross heavy, any
affliction hard to endure? Can thou choose but be vexed and enraged at thy
repinings? O my great and only good! Suppress those unreasonable follies which
boil in my Breast; Make me know that whatsoever happens, good or bad to me, is
my best portion, because it comes from thee. O rich Treasure! O mass of glory!
In proportion to which, all the labors and tribulations which Men or Devils
can heap on me, are nothing considerable.

Thou have seen also, O my Soul! with what unparalleled addresses, and
exquisite inventions the Lord has sought thee, and wooed thy love. He gave
thee heaven and earth, with all their creatures, for thy motives to serve and
love him. He made himself thy fellow and brother in flesh and blood; yea, he
has heaped on thee all the Names and Titles of Endearment, which either Nature
or Use have introduced among mankind. He is thy Father, thy Spouse, thy
Friend, thy Ransomer out of danger, thy Redeemer from thraldom and slavery,
thy Savior from death and misery; yea, he is thy food, thy drink, thy self.

O Eternal Wisdomed How truly then did thou say, It was thy delight to be
with the Sons of men: Can Angels boast of such Privileges, of such
tendernesses, of such Ecstasies of Love? No, None but so weak a Nature as Ours,
was able to necessitate Goodness it self, to so deep a condescendence as this;
and none but all goodness could so appropriate it self to all infirmities. O
melting goodness, that fillest every Corner thou find capable of thy
perfection!

We find the holy Phrenzie of Love, to have possessed many of the Saints of
God, here on earth, Moses, out of his extreme love to his Countrymen, wished
himself blotted out of the Book of God, Exodus 32.32. S. Paul wished himself
accursed, unless his brethren might be saved with him, Romans 9.3. But if ever
any exceeded in Love, above all the Love that was in the world; it was thou O
Savior! Joh. 10.20. who in the excess of thy Love to thy very Enemies,
would suffer thy Self to be taken, delivered up, and shamefully put to
death, for them.

And in consideration whereof, it seems S. Hierom cries out; Oh, ungrateful man
to thy God, whosoever thou art! considerest thou not the wonderful Love of him
who is the Lord of heaven, to be delighted thus to do, and to suffer for thee?
And think thou thy self better, when thou art in the company of the wicked,
and profane? Return Shunamite, return. And surely, methinks, we should not
here so greedily seek after the delights and contentments of Nature; seeing the
God of Nature so roughly handled in the world, which he built with his own
hands. Ah! should not the Example of our Savior, make us ashamed, when we
nearly consider the sorrow of his life, and the ignomy of his death!

We read of one further, who) considering this height of mercy, which abounds
with all Riches, and has the plenitude of all happiness) cries out in a great
Ecstasy; O Love! What have thou done? Thou have changed God into man; thou have
drawn him out of the luster of his Majesty, to make him a Pilgrim here on
Earth; thou have shut him nine months in the womb of a Virgin; Tu deum in
hominem demutatum voluisti, tu deum abbreviatum paul sper a majestatis suae
immenfitate, etc. Zeno. Ser. de Fide, Spe. and Charit.
thou have annihilated the Kingdom of Death, when thou taughtest God to dye.

Ah, Love indeed! which drowneth all humane thoughts, which swalloweth all
earthly affections, which causes the Spirit to forget it self, and to look on
nothing but Heaven. A Love which Angels study, and admire, whichman could not
be without, and conceived in that fire, which Jesus came to enkind^e on earth,
to enflamethe whole world.

Alas! who can choose but admire to think, how thou, O blessed Jesus descendest
from the highest part of Heaven, to take our Nature upon thee, to charge thy
self with our debts; to lay our Burdens and Miseries on thy own shoulders, to
lodge in the silly Cottage of our Heart; to be dispoiled of all for us; to
become our Riches, by thy Poverty; Strength to us, by thy weakness. To become
Contemptible, to make us Glorious; and full of Sufferings, to ease our
servitude. To make thy self of a King, of Glory, a man of Sorrows, and to
purchase our happiness with as many wounds, as thou had ^embers.

And shall none of those Arrows and shafts, flying on every side of thee (O my
Soul!) wound thee to him? shall none of his Favors, Benefits, and Affections,
descend into thee, to fill and replenish thee with flames of thankfulness and
love? Can thou still continue obdurate in the midst of those burning ardors,
and not be wholly captivated with his Bounty; yea, altogether inebriated with
the Ecstasies of his Love? Can thou think of the infinite love of thy Savior,
in suffering for thee, and not admire his goodness? Can thou read the History
of his life [a life of Dolours from the Cradle to his Grave] and peruse it,
without compassion? can thou think of his death, and not commix the waters of
thine eyes, with those of his water, and blood? Ah! can thou consider all
this, and not perpetually languish with fervent desires; yea, cause thy soul to
melt and dissolve with spiritual languour, on the heart of thy beloved?

O mirror! O Perfection! mine eyes dazel in beholding thy Love; my Pen fails
in writing thy Praises. O blind, if thou know not! O insensible, if thou
neglectest it! and O unfortunate, if thou loosest it! Go and see the Ashes of
those who have been burnt with the worlds love, and thou shall see nothing
comparable to his Love, who came to put us into the possession of all his
greatness, by surcharging himself with our miseries.

It may be, thou have seen some to die on an Earthly Scaffold, who with the
sweetness of their countenances, terrified the most terrible aspects of their
Executioners. They did, they spoke, they suffered, they ordered their death, as
matter of triumph. They comforted others, in a time, when they had much to do,
not to complain themselves; But here, here is a Banquet, which carries with it
all the benefits of Life, yet attended with an Edict of Death. Here Is Cruelty
mingled with Delights, Joy with Sorrow, and Pleasures with Funerals.

Ah! what more could he possibly have done, then thus to suffer for us? He has
washed us in his blood, he has regenerated us into his Love. If we endure any
thing for him, he endures with us; he weepeth for us, he prepares eternal
springs of consolations for us; yea, he mingleth all our griefs in the
inexplicable sweetnesses of his bounty.

O the excellency of divine Love, which thus causes a Calm to be found in a
Tempest, Safety in the midst of Dangers, Life on the brinck of Death, Comfort
in Disasters, an Upholding in the midst of Weakness, and which protects so many
people under the shadow of its Branches. Happy Souls! which flies hence into
heaven, enricht with the purple stains of so heavenly a Fountain! yea, happy
are the wounds from whence flow so much virtue and goodness.

What greater mercy could there be, then to see a Humane Nature, sought unto by
God, which was once despoiled of the Robe of Honor, and Diadem of Glory, as a
just chastisement of its Rebellions, and condemned to a Prison of Flames and
Darkness, even then, when it was unable to free it self; and when neither
Angel, nor Man, could deliver it from the misery whereinto it was plunged; To
see it (I say) sought unto by God, when it flew from him; and to consider how
so heavenly a Father (transported with unspeakable love) said unto it, Take my
only Son to redeem thee from thy many remediless calamities: And this only Son
disdaineth not to become its Ransom, and delivered himself for it, to Torments
so enormious, and Confusions so hideous.

What shall we further admire in the ineffable mystery of the Incarnation? Can
there be any thing in the world greater then a Man-God? If we cast our eyes on
our heavenly Father, we there see a work of the power of his Arm, wherein he
seems to have exhausted all his strength. The Heaven and the Stars (says
Gregory Nyssen) were but the works of the Fingers of this divine Majesty; but
in the Incarnation, he proceeds with all the extent of his might, with all
the Engines of his power, and Miracles of his greatness.

Blessed Jesus! who can choose but love and adore thee, who were not content
only to reconcile us to thy Father, but espousedst our Nature, and unitedst it
to thy self by an indissoluble Band, we naturally use to show an aversion, and
dislike to such persons as are loathsome, misshapen, and infected; and if, with
those defects, we find a Soul, wicked, ungrateful, and an Enemy to God, we
conceive him with such horror, as that we had need be more then men to endure
him. But were not we in as bad estate as this? for besides the misfortunes and
calamities which encompassed us on all sides, were we not Enemies to God, by
being too much a friend to our selves? and yet all this while, he accepts us,
and appropriateth us unto himself amongst all these contrarieties.

The Soul checks her self for her backwardness, and too much neglect of her
Saviors invitations.
WHat imagination is sufficiently powerful, to figure to its self, the ardent
dolours of a wounded Soul, who (desiring to be free, and purified from the
contagions of the earth, and apprehending the shadows of the least sins) has
its spirit seized on with the consciousness of some more heinous and grosser
omissions? How hard a matter is it for the Soul, to guide the Helm of Reason in
so tempestuous a storm of disturbances, and (in so dead a night of misery) to
adore the Ray of Gods Providence, since almost swallowed in the depth of her
sorrows?

But Nature having at last evicted a huge Tide of Tears, she thus sighs out the
other in Complaints. My God! how justly have my sins deserved this desolate
condition? yea, to endure the Trial of those sorrows which might ever befall
the thoughts of a wretched Creature? How happy, alas! are those pure and
innocent Souls, who have departed from their Bodies, when they were ignorant of
the sins which have approached my knowledge, and defiled my thoughts? They,
like little blossoms, were cut off in the tenderness of their Age; and thrice
happy had my Soul been to have been transported into the other world, before I
had felt that trouble and anguish of Spirit, which [through the sense and
horror of my sins, in refusing those gracious tenders of a merciful
Saviour] now so sadly afflicts me.

O wicked and ungrateful heart! it is thou which art the source and spring of
all my disasters: wretch! whether go thou? what have thou to do with the
things of the world, which will at last ruin thee? will thou thus cast
underfoot the Laws of thy God! Is it not madness to let pass so many golden
Harvests, which time presents thee, and to sow nothing but wind and vanity,
which only return thee thorns and sorrows, and at last, abandons thee as a
Pilgrim robbed and dispoil'd by a Thief?

O poor Soul! will thou live rather amongst fevers and burning coals, in an
inconstant world, then tie thy self to the will of God? Miserable man, to have
thy heart filled with such restless desires! will thou (like Ravens) be ever
feeding upon Carrion? Is it for such infamous pleasures, thou renouncest the
delights of heaven? unhappy man! where will thou find place to rest on at the
last? Do thou forget the words of the Prophet, Jer. 17.11. Silly Partridge,
thou broodest borrowed Eggs, thou have hatched Birds which were not thine, let
them fly since thou can not hold them. And can thou yet fix thy beatitude
upon this Gold, that Silver, that Beauty, that Profit, and Pleasure, as on a
little Divinity? Is not Jesus (thy Savior) enough to content thee? must a
world be made of Gold, and Roses, to please thee?

Alas, senseless Soul! can thou have any better Object to behold, then a
Savior on the Cross, all naked, and who in his nakedness gives all things?
Oh! how little are all things mortal with him, who looks upon a God immortal!
Blessed Jesus! having thee for my guide, I will walk confidently in the shades
of death, since they cannot separate me from the fountain of life. I came not
into the world glittering with precious Stones, neither can I go out poorer
then I came. Let Poverty then come against me with all its terrors, I shall
account it a Glory to die poor, for a God so dispoiled. If Banishment come,
what need I care what Land be under my feet, so my eyes be fixed in Heaven. Or
what (at last) can Imprisonment, Fetters, Gibbets, yea death it self take from
me but a life of Pismires, and Flies, and a miserable Carcass, subject to a
thousand deaths?

And woe unto that Soul, the darkness of whose understanding is so great, that
though Jesus be all light he cannot see him? how deprived is that will, who
though he be all goodness he cannot love? How are his affections perverted, who
though he be all power, will yet refuse to submit unto him? Alas! how art thou
estranged from him! when thou were created, it was by his power; If thou live,
it is by his bounty; if thou move, it is by his assistance; If thou lie down,
he sustaineth thee; if thou sleep, he refreshes thee; if thou awake, he
enlightneth thee; if thou read, he teaches thee; if thou eat, he nourishes
thee; if thou art clothed, he warms thee; no Creature being able towork by its
own strength, having all but dependent Beings from God alone.

Miserable wretches then as we are! as not to see him with our bodily eyes, so
not to behold his Glory in our most retired Meditations! that he should be all
brightness, yet we view him not; all sweetness, yet we taste him not; That he
should be in all places, yet we feel him not: alas! what strangers are we in
the House of our Father? O that our life here, should be fuch an estrangement
from him, and that when we most behold him, it should be but as it were in a
Glass darkly:

Draw nearer then (O my Soul!) bring forth thy strongest burning Love; here is
matter for thee to work upon; here is something truly worth thy loving. Oh see
what bounty presents it self? Is not all the Goodness in the world contracted
here? Is not all the Beauty in the world deformity to it? Here is comfort for
thy Soul, and a feast for thine eyes. Ah! that ever thou should need to be
invited to feed on it! That thou should be invited to love where thou feel'st
a heavenly sweetness accompanying it, and where the very Act of loving is
unexpressibly sweet. O what would thou give for such a life, could thou be
all love, and always loving!

Come away then (O my Soul) stand no longer looking on that Beauty, admiring
this Face, or Idolizing these earthly shadows. But behold that Glory, which is
only to be enjoyed in the lap of Eternity. Ah that thou could bid the world
farewell, and here immure thy self! that thou could shut the door upon thee,
and enjoy the sweet content of divine and heavenly Meditation! But Oh the
dullness of thy desires, after so great a happiness! How does thy backwardness
accuse thee of Ingratitude? must thy Savior procure thee Heaven at so dear a
rate, and will thou not more value it? must he purchase thy life by the Pangs
of a bitter death? must he go before and prepare a Mansion, and art thou loath
to follow? must his blood, and pains, and care be lost? O unworthy and
ungrateful Soul! what is loathing, if this be love? Ah wretched Creature, if
thou art not ashamed to neglect so great a mercy!

The Soul repents the time that ever she was Cloistered up in the walls of
Clay, and thrown into the Dungeon of that corrupt mass of Flesh.
THe Soul of Man, being embarked in the dangerous Sea of this world, where her
adventure is very hazardous, and full of Rocks; and having no Port to put in
at, but either Repentance or Death, bewailes the want of her Pilot, without
whose guidance, she is sure to meet with a miserable shipwreck, and which she
conceives as natural to her, as swiming is to Fishes, flight to Birds, beauty
in Flowers, and rays in the Sun.

Woe is me (says he) that ever I was born, to see the Light! Why did my Mother
rejoice to hear me cry! and to receive the news that I was a living Soul? when
first I entered into the world, I bore the Image of my Creator in some luster
and glory; but since that time my first Parents (who bore (as it were) in one
Vessel, the Riches of all Mankind) had lost all that, which wretches might
lose, or men desire, and which (with grief) we yet deplore; its scarce
discernable in me, in regard of those Leaprous spots of sin, and taintures of
iniquity which I have contracted from those frail corporeal Organs which have
so pitifully dis-figured and transformed me, as that the Character of my God
is almost lost in me.

Alas! I am but an unweildly lump of Earth, a mere passive thing of my self!
Those eyes of mine which should have been as crystal Casements, through which
I might behold the glorious Firmament, and study my Creator in the Volums of
Nature, have let out the Beams of vanity and lightness. Those Ears, which
should have let in wholesome precepts, and holy exhortations, have been no other
then Trunks to receive idle discourses, and vain sounds. That Mouth and Tongue,
which should have sounded out the praises and glory of my Creator, and sung
Halelujahs to him, have been instruments of Equivocation, Sin, and
Profaneness. Those hands which were designed to deeds of Charity, have been
employed in evil and sinful works. That Throat, which was intended as a
Conduit-pipe to pour out divine and pious Ejaculations, has been made the
instruments of Luxury and excess. And those Feet, which were made to walk in
the paths of Piety and Virtue, have been used to run into the Road of al
Licentiousness.

But oh! when I examine my heart [the seat of my affections] what a sinck of
sin, a Cage of unclean Birds, do I find it; and whereas I should have made it a
Closet for my Savior to sit and reside in, alas! what Hatred, what Hypocrisy,
what spiritual Pride and Choler has infected every corner thereof? And if I
look further; how shall I find every Cell of my Brain infected. My Fantasy is
become wild and extravagant: my Memory has been more mindful of bad, then
good things; my Understanding full of darkness, my Will wholly blinded, my
Reason strangely besotted, and my Imagination wholly puffed up with airy
passions, and malignant humors, which interpose between me, and the glorious
Beams of my Savior.

Ah, whether have the Councels of those transported me, which desire the ruin
of my Soul! How am I environed with admires of Lusts, and besieged with Legions
of inordinate affections? Miserable that I am! what shall I do to hinder the
designs of my natural Corruptions? Alas! How they prevail against me? unhappy
that I am! that the Sun which this day shines so bright over my head, should
see his face defiled with the stains of my sins!

What do I here in this house of Pleasure, where we seem to enter in by five
Gates, which are all Crowned with Roses, and bear the face of youth and
prosperity? Are not those five Gates, the five Senses, by which all the
passages are made into carnal pleasures, and the vain delights of the world? Is
this the way to live like a Christian, to walk according to the Rules and
propensions of Nature? Is this the Babylon of worldly hopes, which in the
beginning shows it self as a Miracle, carrying Honey in the lip, Light in the
face, but Poison in the tail?

Why, alas! should I thus live in the fervours of a Fever? why should I desire
to live in that greatness, which will only serve to make my fall the more
miserable? Why should I rest upon those worldly comforts, whose acquisition is
painful, whose fruition uncertain, and taste unsavory. And how pleasing soever
they appear in the dawning of the day, seeming in the first springing to be
spread with Emeralds, and Rubies, yet will they at last be changed into the
horrors or a sad Tempest, and ever waited on by ignomy and confusion.

O that I should thus spend the latter part of my age after smokes and
fantastic shadows, which will at last pay me with nothing but grief! shall I
flatter my self with the specious hopes of the world, which like Dreams of a
delicious Fountain, never quench the Thirst? Ah, much rather, let me make an
Eternal divorce from all those frivolous worldly hopes! and look on Jesus, as
the Pole Star, always unmovable; let me put my self between the arms of hope,
and (amidst all disturbances of mind) pass the veil, and enter the Tabernacle
of the Sanctuary, whereinto he has entered for our salvation.

Behold how the Soul is troubled, as if, through some melancholy fit, she were
fallen into an Abyss, from which issue forth such an infinite quantity of evil
vapors, as cause night in the most cheerful brightness, and make the most
pleasing Beauties to be beheld with affrightment. The greatest punishment which
can befall a sad and dolorous Soul in this world, consisting in being suspended
from the presence and sight of God. And as it naturally desires to rejoyn it
self unto God, and the least hinderance it feels, is most irksome unto it, so
how does it mourn to be deprived of so infinite a comfort [which it alone
depends on] and to see it self bereaved of so great a happiness (even by its
own fault) which is the Needle of the Dial, which shows, how our Souls
circumvolve times, and the hours of the day.

And well may she complain of the great distance between her, and so infinite a
bounty, seeing the holy Scripture (speaking of Love, Genesis 34.3.) says, It
causes one soul to claspe into another. And truly, did we but once begin to
dislike the world, and heartily to love Jesus Christ, we should almost every
moment think upon him; all the most pleasing Objects of the world would seem
mixed with Gall and Wormwood. We should seek for our Savior in all Creatures;
we should languish after him. All that bears his Name, and memory, will be
delightful to him. We shall speak of him in all companies, desire to have him
honored, esteemed, and acknowledged by all the world; our solitude would be in
Jesus, our discourse of Jesus; Jesus will be in our watchings, and in our
sleep, in our affairs and Recreations. And Oh! how unwilling will be to lose
sight of him, though but for a little time.

Did we but once wipe those eyes, surcharged with earthly Beauties, and covered
with a thick cloud of the worlds vanities, how soon should we fix them upon the
infinite love, mercy, and goodness of God? How cheerfully would our Souls be
carried with full flight into the bosom of our Savior, and be there held in a
sweet Circle of ravishing contemplations? our hearts would be as flaming Lamps,
which perpetually burn before the Sanctuary of the living God; we should have
but one main desire in the world, which is God himself; all creatures which
use to be the Objects of our contentments, will never more be the subject of
our fears.

Neither should we (like silly worms) turn against God, when he permits any
thing to happen, contrary to our liking, we would frame unto our selves, a life
simple and free from all affectations; we would learn to endure any slight
oppositions with great tranquillity; we would cast away our vvantonness, our
pleasures, and petty peevishness, neither would we here think our selves
immortal, seeing that every moment, which is now in our hands, we must
divide with death, and the Sun (which to day you have seen to rise out of his
couch) may before his setting see you in your Tomb.

Oh horror then! to see men enraged with that avarice, which sticks to their
bones, as does their Marrow, and shall sleep with them in their Grave? to see
them pride themselves in their Garments, which are the food of Mothes! to see
them glittering with precious Stones, which are the excrements of the Sea, and
Land; to see them carrried in Coaches, and on Horses, which are the Notes of
their poverty, or to see them glory in Titles, which are but imaginary
Felicities.

Deceitful Beauties of the world then, where are ye? Ah, true Turrets of
Fairies, which are only in conceit! where shall your allurements prevail from
henceforth? to what calamity do you reserve a wretched life, deprived of
strength, and vigor to resist you? and if it have any feeling, it is only of
misery? How few, alas! are your selicities in this world? where your best
lights have its shadows, all fruit its worm, and every Beauty fails not to
have its embracements.

And where are ye also, ye admirers of the fortunes of Glass, that happen to
the wicked? where are these adorers of the Colossu's, and heaps of dirt, that
appear by the help of false gildings, and which are immediately reduced to
dust? How much better had ye been, to have contemplated in that great School
of Nature, where God speaks to us, and teaches us lessons through the veil
of his Creatures? how happy had ye been, had ye looked upon these delights
below, as men blind, whereby ye would the better have looked up to heaven, and
into your selves? that ye had heard of the worlds vanities, as being deaf, and
no ways ravished by them? as discoursing of them, and yet no way concerned?
Thus should he have been as men in part translated to Heaven, and here become
earthly Angels.

For, Oh! how little does the pomp of the world seem to that Soul, who every
day drowns part of his life in Tears, and through long solitude has purged it
self from the impurities of the Earth! Oh, how contemptible do all those
Beauties of dust and fortunes of wind, seem to that heart, which having every
day dilated it self in the greatnesses of God, renders himself capable with the
visits, and commerce with Heaven.

It is time to close the Earth, when God opens Heaven, and to carry our heart
where he is, since all our Riches are in him. What, alas! have we to do (like
Moles) to dig the Earth, and therein to hide our Treasure? surely, he deserves
to be everlasting poor, who cannot be content with a God, so rich as he is.
Can thou love a little shining Earth? Can thou love a walking piece of
Clay, before that God, that Christ, that Glory which is unmeasurably lovely?
Can thou love the World, thy Friends, thy Kindred, whose love cannot
advantage thee, whose weeping cannot ease thee in the time of thy trouble; and
can thou not love thy Savior, whose Tears and Blood have a healing virtue,
and are like Balsome, and waters of life to thy fainting heart.

Oh my Soul! what incomprehensible love is here; If love deserve, and should
procure love, ought thou not here to pour out all the store of thy
affections? shall he not be first served? shall he not have the strength of thy
love, who parted with strength and life in love to thee? Oh that thy love were
more! Oh that thy affections were a thousand times greater.

Alas! what vvantest thou to provoke thy love? is not here a Sea of love
before thee? little do thou know (ah little indeed!) the glory and
blessedness of this love, little do thou know the excellency of this Love. Is
there any thing here below but baseness, in espect of thy enjoyments above? are
the heavy sufferings, the unsatisfying vanities of this world, really suitable
to thy desires? or can thou find any place more suitable to thy misery, then
that of mercy, or of nearer interest or Relation then that of Heaven?

Come away then, O my Soul! stop thine ears to the ignorant language of the
world; what is the Beauty, the Riches, the Honors, thou have so much admired?
Can thou but even close thine eyes, and thou will think it all darkness and
deformity? What is the beauty thou have so much admired? alas! when the night
comes, it will be nothing to thee! whilst thou have gazed on it, it has
withered away; does not the wrinkles of consuming sickness, or of age, or some
other deformity make it as loathsome, as it was once delightful.

Ah then O miserable man that thou art! unworthy Soul! how can thou love a
skinful of dirt, and can no more love the heavenly Glory? art thou not a
Soul? is not heaven the only lovely Object? art thou not a Spirit, and is not
Earth a Dungeon to Celestial Glory? shall Gold, or Greatness, or worldly Pomp,
be thy Idols, which are all dirt and dung to Christ? come forth then O my dull
and drowsy Soul, thou have lain long enough in these earthly Cells, where
cares have been thy Fetters, where sorrows have been thy lodgings, and Satan
thy Jailer.

The Soul calling to mind the infinite Love of her Savior, bewailes her
ungratefulness, and the coldness of her returns.

WHen holy David considered the works of Gods hands, the Sun, and the Moou
which he had made, Psalm. 8.3, 4. he immediately breaks forth into thoughts of
humility, touching the frail and sad estate of man. But blessed Lord! what can
we say, for our great neglect of that Love which has stretched it self for us,
even to the death of the Cross; and what stupidity is it to forget that, that
bloody Banquet, which was to us the source of life, should bring with it the
Edict of death.

O poor Sinner! What have thou done, look upon a Deed, that was worthy of none
but thy cruelty, stretch out thy hands, put thy fingers into those wounds
which thou have made, bedew thy hands [like unbelieving Thomas] in that sacred
stream which flowed from thy Saviors side! Drink (miserable wretch!) of that
River, which there thou see glide, to quench thy thirst; Look, and behold
those dead eyes, which accuse thy nakedness, and which thou still do wound
with the aspect of thy wickedness; alas! they are not shut so much, by the
necessity of death, as by the horror of thy Luxury.

Behold the great temper of thy Saviors Soul, in his most horrible sufferings!
what could be invented, which he endured not? what could be undergon, which he
met not with? Oh, high effect of an infinite Love! which found no belief in
senses, no persuasion in minds, no example in manners, nor resemblance in
nature.

It is storied of a Prince, who being desirous to offer himself to death for
the preservation of his Subjects, took the habit of a Clown, the better to
facilitate his death; he laid down his Crown, and Purple, and all the Ensigns
of Royalty (only retaining those of Love) and lost his life in his Enemies
hands. But alas! this was but a mortal life! and in giving it, he only paid
that tribute to Nature, which at last he must of necessity yield. But where
have we read, that a man glorious by Birth, and immortal by condition, has
espoused that humility, which all the world despises, that mortality which all
must partake of, that mercy which none can equalize, and for no other occasion
then to dye for his friend?

O dear Jesus! thou were by nature immortal, and impregnable against all
exterior violences! thou took'st not the Body of a Peasant, nor a body of Air,
but a true body of Flesh, personally united to the word of God. Thou, O blessed
Savior! consumedst thy body with Travails; thou quailedst it with toils; thou
castedst tottered Rags over thy Purple^, thou laid'st our miseries upon thy own
shoulders, and at last, resignedst thy self as a Prey, to a most dolorous
death.

My God! What a Prodigy is this? Thou foundest a way to accord infirmity with
Sovereignty; Honor with Ignomy, Life with Death, and Time with Eternity! O God
of Glory! O mild Savior! all this have thou done; it was not possible that
sole God should suffer death, nor sole Man should vanquish it; but God, and Man
has overcome it. Ought not then thy pains, to be as much adored by our wills,
as they are incomprehensible to our understandings?

And alas! how much ought we to be ashamed, since instead of enkindling our
Affections, with the sacred fires of thy Eternal Love, we have sought after
profane fire, from the eyes of earthly Beauty, and have opened our hearts to
Foreign flames? Ah, ungrateful Soul! art thou not afraid to hear those
heart-piercing words, Cant. 5.6. I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had
withdrawn himself, and was gone; my soul failed when I spoke, I sought him, but
I could not find him. Shall the love of God be so communicative, as to stream
forth by those two conduit-pipes [of Glory, and Beauty] and art thou not
hereupon, even confounded, to see thy heart so narrow, and straightened in the
exercise of holiness, and good works?

Oh blessed Savior! thou did spend thy time in continual pain and labors
here on Earth, for the redemption of the world; Many were the scorns,
reproaches, and miseries thou endurest for us. Thou did even melt and
dissolve under the ardors of unspeakable affection and zeal, for our salvation;
and at last exposedst thy self to languors, sorrows, ecstasies, and the cruel
punishment of the Cross; and shall ingratitude be all the return thou reapest
for such infinite mercy?

How justly may thou many many times question with me, as thou did once with
S. Peter, Joh. 21.17. Love thon me? Thou seem indeed (poor soul) to love
me; But why then do thou not keep my Commandments? Does not fond love
[which ordinarily delights to see what it cannot attain] find too much
admiration for thy eyes, and food for its flame! Ah, that ever thou should
spend so many hours, endure so much pain, and run so many hazards, to seek
after an unhappy loathsomness! Oh that ever thou should take away thy love
from me, to place it on Creatures which so little deserve it!

And why should the faculties of the eye, which was ordained for light, be thus
applied to darkness? Shall that which was Created for the use of Life, be the
cause of Death? Alas! what can thou gain, by embracing thy Lusts? O poor
deceived Soul! what Snares, what Traps, what Tempests beset thee on all sides?
O Man [miserable wretch!] drenched in the waters of bitter Tears! where, alas,
will thou save thy self, if thou put not thy self under the shelter of thy
Saviors Cross? If thou lose him, thou have nothing left to comfort thee. In
him thou have all things; If thou art Hungry, thou need but to taste of his
love; if Thirsty, the light of his countenance is far better then the Corn
and Wine of this world.

We read of many accomplished Beauties in former ages, which have drawn the
affections of those that beheld them; but what are those, but fading shadows to
the love of Jesus, which wins whole Nations, and Monarchies to it? From
hence it is, that so many Kings, Queens, and great Personages, have forsaken
the Pomp and Beauty of the World, and followed him through Thorns and Rocks,
that so many millions of the wisest, and most purified Souls upon Earth, have
abandoned themselves, and loved him, even to the suffering of Flames, and
Wheels, yea, the dismembring of their whole Body.

Oh that our hearts could then dissolve for him! Oh that they could daily melt
in his service, without consuming, since there is nothing which equalizeth the
excellency of this Celestial Love! But wretched Creatures as we are! can we
choose but grievc, to see them torn and divided by so many vile and base
Objects, which divert our Affections, and hinder us from giving them to God,
for which they were made? Oh, how much should we blush, thus to contaminate our
hearts with the wickedness and impurities of the Earth!

The heart of Man should be as a fortunate Island, wherein there is nothing but
God and it: Or like the Nest of that little Bird, which cannot hold one silly
Fly more then it self. But alas! what Creatures are there there lodged, to the
prejudice of our Creator? O poor Soul! really miserable! do but once open thine
eyes, and thou shall soon see the headlong ruin which threatens thee!

Carnal Souls have much ado to conceive how a man may become passionate in the
love of God; it is a love too high (say they) to transfer our Affections into
Heaven: we know no affection but for temporal and visible things. O blinded
Spirits, ignorant of the glorious Mysteries of Heaven; How do ye thus argue
with your selves? O sad Souls! is Heaven a Country wherein they have no
commerce? Does God speak to thee in all his Creatures; nay, does he seek for
thee, do thou behold him through the veil of Nature, in somany various
Objects? Do thou daily see him in the Image of his Bounty and Greatness of
his power, and the splendour of his Beauty, and in the lively Characters of his
Majesty? and will thou be so much charmed with the present pleasures, and
delighted so with the Workmanship, as to forget the Workman? Will thou embrace
the shadow for the body and momentary Beauties for Eternal verities?

Oh! but thou objectest, that he is a secret, so hidden, and invisible to men,
that our poor spirits, find more confusion, then light in seeking him: I
answer, hold thy peace (O thou ignorant and mis-judging Soul!) God shows
himself in as many mirrours as there are Creatures in the world. All that we
see, hear, touch, or handle, cease not to recount unto us the love of our
Maker. Do we not find the daily experience of his love, in every minutes
preservation? Do we not hear the sweetness of his voice and harmonies, in the
chirping of every little Bird, and Nightingale? yea, the least silly Fly holds
forth a tone, which all the art of the world cannot frame.

If we behold the murmuring of those silver streams, which so sweetly charm
and delight our senses; if we cast an eye upon those various party-colored
Flowers, with what an exquisite delicacie shall we find them adorned, insomuch
that [as we have it from the sacred lips of Eternal Wisdom] Solomon in all his
Royalty was not like one of these.

But when we cast our eyes toward Heaven, when we behold the Sun, the Moon,
and those silver sparcles which show themselves as soon as the Night spreads
its Mantle over the inferior Regions of the World. Ah! how may we (with the
Princely Prophet) cry out; The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the
Firmament shows his handiwork.

Expose not then the loss of thy innocence, and sanctity [O poor Soul!] to the
alluring occasions of this tempting world, and thou need not fear, but in
him to find salve forall thy wounds. It may be thou fear Poverty; alas! has
not thy Savior consecrated it in the Crib, and in Clouts? Do thou fear
Reproaches? he has sanctified them in the loss of his Reputation. Do thou
fear dolours? he has lodged them in his own flesh. Do thou fear Death? he
has overcome it for thee: only, let thy heart be divested from the ardent
affections thou have toward worldly enablements, beholding them as an
inconstant moving of shadows, and Spirits, which with a swift course glide
before our eyes. And lastly, let us look toward the eye of God, which
perpetually beholds us. Let us behold it as our Pole Star, and flaming
Pillar; whereby, at last, we shall learn to repose our selves in his bosom,
slumber upon his heart, and sleep eternally between his Arms.

The Soul breaks into Sighs, and dissolves into desires for the presence of
God.
THe Soul of Man, being made to the Image of God, and for the possession and
fruition of God, will never rest, but in the conformity of its understanding,
and will, to its Creator. It casts its eyes (indeed) oftentimes on the Sea, the
Earth, with so many Rivers, which moisten it, so many Trees, which cover it, so
many living Creatures which furnish it, so many men which inhabit and dress
it, but yet rests not there.

It figures also the Air in its thoughts, with all its Birds, so different in
shape, so various in color, so diversified in their Notes, but (alas!) like
Noah's Dove, she finds no rest for her footing. It glanceth up further to those
Christaline and azure Vaults, where the Sun, the Moon, and so many silver Stars
perform their career with such measure, as God has determined, yet finds not
God in any of them. It contemplates those innumerable Legions of Angels,
Spirits of Fire, and light which resplendently shine as Lamps before the face
of God; yet ever cries out, it is not be, God only being he who comprehends
all things, and not only bounds them, but incomparably surpasses them.

What do I here then (O Jesus!) without thee, but sail without Stars, and
labor without the Sun? Alas! if I can do nothing here without thee, if without
the Sunshine of thy presence, I am but an unprofitable servant, and burden to
the Earth, what do I here? All that satisfies the desires of the curious, all
that which inviteth the admiration of the wisest, all that which enflameth the
hearts of the most passionate; yea, Land and Sea, Thrones and Scepters, Arms
and Empires (are but as a silly drop of dew before thy face.

And will thou yet (O disloyal Soul!) entertain in thy heart a mass of worldly
desires? Will thou rather live among Fevers, and burning Coals, then tie thy
self to the will of God? wretched Rebel! will thou prostitute thy self, and
have affection in store for a deceiving Creature! O ungrateful and faithless
Soul? the same Paradise that God has prepared for him self, he has prepared
for thee; he will, that thou possess thy self in him; and will thou take
liberty to fly after all Objects, as Bees after Flowers? will thou flutter up
and down like a silly Butter-fly, amongst so many Creatures, so many desires,
perpetually hungry, ever distant from thy good, ever a Traitor to thy own
repose and glory; will thou adventure on a Sea that has neither bottom nor
shore? Beggarly Soul! which beggest every where! miserable Soul, which in every
place find want in abundance! when will thou rally all thy desires into one
Period? when will thou begin to live the life of God? to be satisfied with Gods
contentment, and to be happy with Gods felicity?

But alas! methinks I hear thee say, of thy self thou art able to do nothing!
stretch out thy arms then unto me, O mild Savior! a poor Exile I am I confess,
yet redeemed by thy Blood. Cast an eye on me from heaven, in these storms of
life. O lead me to that pl^ce where thou for ever reignest! where youth waxes
not old, where life has no limits, where Beauty decays not, where health does
not empair, nor love abate.

If I cannot reach Heaven, by my own strength, let me go thither by thy love,
which is the true gate whereby we enter into the Sanctuary, eternally to enjoy
the sight of the inaccessible Beauty of the divine Presence. O God, as thou art
dispersed throughout us by love, so banish all the cursed hatreds of hell, and
the world, and make us love all in thy goodness, to possess all in thy fruition.

Never suffer me, O Lord! to fill all the sails of my desires with the windy
vanities of this world, which are more light then Smoke, more slippery then
Ice; whose promises are Perjuries, and whose perjuries are forsakings. Ah,
never let us run at random after the transitory honors of the Earth, which
glister like a worm in rotten wood; which prick like Thorns, and withdraw our
affections from thee, who Crownest the Heads of thy Elect with Eternal
Garlands. Oh let me not live daily in the fits of Fire, and Ice, for the slight
toys and fading beauty of the world, and for such things, as for shame we dare
not oftentimes express, and have neither heart nor thought for thee.

I see all things which environ me [those Riches, those Pomps, those Honours]
are but flitting company, deceitful and momentary things, and serve for nothing
but Snares and Prisons. Oh then let me look on all the Objects of pleasure, not
as they are, when they first sooth me, but when they turn their backs and
forsake me. All pleasures of sense pass but to the outward skin; and all the
Flowers of the Garden of this world are without fruition, pleasing only to the
Imagination, and no way satisfying the desires of a gracious Soul.

Enter then into thy heart, O my Soul! and lay thy hand upon thy thoughts, and
thou shall find, that all thy unhappiness comes, from being too much tied to
Honors, Ambitions, and worldly Commodities. It was the saying of one, defining
the life [which he called the Pilgrimage of a perfect Christian] that true and
perfect Religion is, in a general despair of all things. And truly, the Remedy
of all evils, will never be but in a holy despair of all the frivolous and fair
semblances of the world. O happy despair indeed! to put all our hope in God
alone, to remove those deceitful and treacherous Props, which besiege our
credulous minds, and cease not to enter into our hearts, and hinder us from
bidding adieu to all the charming Promises, and allurements of a barren and
lying world, and from turning our eyes toward the heavenly Jerusalem, our true
Country.

Ah! how sweet are the expressions between the Bridegroom and the Bride, where
she says, My Beloved is mine, and I am his, Cant. 2.16. And again, I am my
wel-beloveds, and my wel-beloved is mine, Cant. 6.3. She first returns her soul
and love to him, and then confirms his to her self. And when Love [like that of
Jonathan to David] has thus united their Souls, all the affections and actions
of the Soul, to will, to do, to say the same thing, will speedily follow.

Surely, the Spouse was at little rest, while absent from her Beloved. When
(says she) will the day of Redemption appear? Where, O where, art thou whom my
Soul loves, Cant. 1.7. By night I sought him whom my soul loves; I will rise,
and go about the City, and in the streets, and in the broad ways will I seek
him whom my Soul loves, Cant. 3.1.2. and when she seeks and finds him not, O
how does she bemoan self to the Watchmen; and having found him, she holds him
fast, and will not let him go, ever crying out; O how shall I adhere unto him?
how shall I incorporate my self with him? how shall I melt into praisings, and
love-breathing Ditties? how shall I get into that Fountain of Goodness? Oh
come, Oh come, that happy day! come even now! I fear neither Hell, nor
Judgment, for I know thou can bear no wrath against those that love thee!
come then, come and draw my Soul from this loathsome body; screw up my
Affections, O dear Savior to thy own self; unloose the Fetters and Bonds of my
imprisoned Soul, which keep me from the sight of my beloved Spouse, and Master;
and at last set me at liberty in the Eternal freedom of thy Palace, and
everlasting glory of thy presence. O free me from the snares of the world, the
wiles of Satan, and the deceits of the flesh. O when will that day of
Redemption come, when I shall drink at the full, those comforts which are here
dispersed, but by small drops!

And thrice happy is he, who has here raised his gain from his losses; his
assurance from this worlds incertainties, his strength out of his infirmities,
his hopes out of his despairs, and is not contented but in God, who can only
satisfy his desires, and Crown him with Felicities! Happy, I say, is he, who
beholds all wordly things, as Roses, which still with their odor, cast forth
some of their substance, who look on them afar off, and in the dark, as painted
Women, and adulterate Merchandice; who behold them as Torches, which wast and
annihilate themselves, leaving nothing behind for the most part, but stench and
smoke.

The world (I confess) thinks it no easy matter to trust Christ upon his word,
though he have told us, Mat. 11.30. His yoke is easy, and his burden light.
What (say some) is it so easy to renounce all that a man has [Wealth,
Liberty, Life and all] are these so light? yes, poor Soul! Truth it self has
spoken it, and most true it is, that love makes them both light and easy.

What though thou here seem to weep for a time, thou shall but only resemble
the Flower-de-luce, which weeps a little, and out of its own Tears, produces
seeds to renew its Beauty. The salt Sea of this world shall become a
flourishing field, as it did to the people of God, when they came out of the
chains of Egypt.

We are here in this World, like little Infants, without Air, or Light,
besmeared with blood, and swadled in Clouts, which Nature only gave thee for a
time, to fit thee the better for that life, where thou shall for ever breath in
all freedom and liberty. We are yet in Prison, Fetters, and Obscurity, until
the coming of the great day, wherein God shall give us a Spiritual body. All
the pomp of this World, all our life, yea all that pleases here, and takes up
our heart, is but the shadow of that Glorious Beauty, and contentment which
passes in Eternity.

Let me then (O my God!) continually exercise my self in the desires of joys
Eternal! let me sanctify all other Loves to the love of Jesus Christ; let me
forsake all humane things, O my God! and betake my self wholly to the
consideration of his excellency. When I speak, let it be of Heaven, as of my
resting place, and of thee as of the Object of my Felicity.

Ah! what can be more divine, then to see a Soul thus capable of the influences
of Heaven? whom the Sith of Time cannot affright; whom the Threats of the
world, nor the wheel of Inconstancy, neither the power of Death can dismay. O
House of God! O Temple of Peace! when will the time come which will divest us
of all that is mortal, which will sweeten the bitterness of our life, replenish
our hearts with spiritual refreshment, and at last put us into the bosom of
Immortality?

The Soul filled with Heavenly Love, sends forth the pure flames of her
Affection.
GOd, who loves the importunities of his servants, often hides his face the
longer, to the end his Grace may with the more brightness afterward appear. We
find in Nature, that the Sun is never more resplendent, then after an Eclipse;
the Sea never more calm, then after a Tempest, nor the Air brighter, then after
a shower. Neither is it ever too late to knock, and cry at the Gate of Heaven.

The fainting Beggar, which neglects the re-inforcing of his complaint, often
goes away without his reward. The weary and lingering Christian, seldom attains
the end of his journey, where he shall live for ever in the Palace of Peace and
contentment; where our happiness shall be perpetual, and our fullness never
occasion loathing to him that possesses it.

Neither does God do us any injury, if (after long waiting here) instead of a
Crown, which is the Weathercock of winds, of a Scepter, which is the Reed of
the times, or of a Life which is the Harbenger of Death, he affords us
delights, and glories which outstrip the flight of Thoughts, which dry up all
our Tears, and surmount all our Imaginations.

It was once told a great Prince (being in his Infancy bred up in the House of
a Peasant, whose Son he took himself to be) that he should no longer follow so
mean an employment of life; that his Hat should be turned into a Diadem, his
Spade into a Scepter, his Rags into Robes of Gold, his Cottage into a Palace,
and his servitude into an Empire. Oh, can we think how he was ravished with the
love of a Father, by whom he was born to so much Treasure, and Greatness! And
shall we not have the like approbation, when our Savior tells us, we are not
created to live among Mire, and Dirt, to be tied to a wretched frail and
miserable Body, to walk among Briars and Thorns, and embroyl our selves in the
toyls and cares of a mortal life?

Bring me then, O dear Jesus! in thine own time, into those celestial Palaces,
of incomprehensible lights, and unspeakable Beauties? Enlighten me (O thou Son
of Righteousness!) to discover those glorious excellencies (all white with
Innocence, and resplendent with the Rays of Glory) from the Sirens of the
world which so much abuse us with deceits, vanity, and infamies. I acknowledge
(thus far) the infinite mercy of thy divine Providence, that while I was in
darkness, and under the black Cloud of thy heavy displeasure, thou sanctifiest
my Fetters, and have now raised up my Ashes above the Crowns of the World.

Thou might (indeed) have made me ambitious, delicate, haughty, covetous,
and adorned with worldly Treasures, to have walked on Roses, to have putrifed
in delights; yea, made my happiness seemingly to have outrun my desires. Such
there are (I confess) who have defiled their names with reproach, wearied the
Earth with their vices, astonished Posterity with their deportments, and
peopled Hell with their crimes. But, O mercy! that thou make me to see light
in the most dusky Nights, and a Haven of comfort in the most forlorn shipwracks:

O most Mighty, O most Sovereign Lord of all things, visible and invisible!
were I with thee, in the shades of death, what should I fear, being between the
arms of Life; O great eye, who see all, and art not seen of any here below!
Thou art truly worthy (if we with mortal lips may call thee worthy) yea worthy,
to whom all the world should give continual thanks, for thy inexplicable
Benefits. Worthy, before whom we on our bended knees, should all our lifetime
remain prostrate; Worthy, that for thee, we should have Prayers, and prayers
everlastingly on our lips. O Monsters of impudency, if yet we see not thy
goodness, and persist insensibly of thy mercy!

With these considerations, if the Soul now wholly ravished; she walks on
Earth, as a man suspended in Heaven, drenched in God, and filled with the joys
of his Spirit. Her eyes are listed up toward Heaven, though streaming down
tears for sin upon Earth. Her hands are still lifted up thither by prayer.
Her heart (formerly contracted with sadness for crimes, committed against so
good a God) now melts with joy unspeakable. Neither earing, nor drinking, nor
sleeping, is able to dissolve the sweet conversation she has with God.

Now is it, that the Soul begins to lead a life wholly Celestial, as one, who
seems to have nothing to do with the Bodies and conversations of the living.
Now is it, that after so many Tempests, so many Thunderclaps and Whiriwinds of
grief and sadness, she arrives at a Port, not of temporal felicity, but of the
unspeakable joys of Heaven.

Ah ignorant that we are, of the works of God! perpetually fixed to the Earth,
and deprived of those sparkles of heavenly fire, and light! Let us but a little
draw aside the Curtain, and we shall see through so many Clouds, the glorious
Rays of lasting happiness. There may you behold the Effigies of a gracious
Soul, with a Crown on its Head, and Scepter in its Hand, with prosperity
continually smiling; with loves free from disturbance; with desires void of
denials; with affairs without trouble, Greatness without change, Pleasures
without sorrow; and at last, fully laden with celestial Honors.

This surpassing Joy, having one time so far transported a heavenly lover, as
to give occasion to some, who beheld him, to think him besides himself; you are
in the right (said he) my Beloved has taken away my will, and I have given him
my understanding, there is nothing left me but memory to remember his mercy.

Oh what a great Abyss of Delights are reserved for those purified Souls, who
are thus wholly rapt in the contemplation of heavenly Beauties, and altogether
ravished in the consideration of Gods divine Goodness! No longer do they suffer
themselves to be transported with earthly prosperities, but (in the midst of
all worldly Pomps) their eyes are firmly fixed upon the many benefits received
from God; their Ears being charmed, their Tears wiped, their Fetters broken.
And what way do they more seek out, then how to testify their gratitude, and
pour themselves as incense upon Coals, toward the Altar of divine Majesty.

Yea, there is a love so tender in them, and a fear of offending so infinite a
Savior, as that, they apprehend the least shadows of sin, as Death. Day and
Night do they send forth Sentinels before the Altars, who cease not to implore
the assistance of Heaven, for the salvation of their Souls.

How often, in the deep silence of darkness [when no eye sees, nor ear hears]
do they cause their weeping eyes to speak to God, and address their many vows
to Heaven, for the attaining of Eternal life? How willingly do they part, with
all the Interests of Flesh and Blood, and all other impediments about them?
They think they can never do too much for eternal happiness; whatsoever are
their sufferings here, the know Paradise will still be purchased at a good
pennyworth.

Oh true zeal! O most powerful Alchymie! changing all Tears and Troubles into
Marble and Gold. What Wisdom, what Grace, what Eloquence, does a heart [truly
endowed therewith] use toward the attaining of Heaven? What love for its Soul?
what fervor for its salvation? what care for its direction? what resignation
of its will to the mind of God? What a heart of Diamond does it express against
a thousand strokes of dolours, and sufferings? how joyfully does it meet death?
yea, what Triumphs afterward, in all conditions, and after all its
afflictions, offering up unto God the obedience of the heart, the Prayers of
the lips, and all the faculties of Soul and Body, which appear in a general
conformity to the commands of God.

And what (indeed) can that Soul fear (nay, what can he not hope for) who has
a Jesus for a Protector, and a God absolutely powerful, and whose power and
essence walk hand in hand, which is without limits, embraces all places, and
no way confined to any certain number of Ages, since it is Eternal, and
involveth all time? What can he doubt of, who can conclude an Interest in him,
who made the world, with the least blast of his mouth, and can as easily [the
same way] unmake it? all the great variety of this Universe, where there are
Creatures without number, Beauties without end, and Greatnesses innumerable.
being but an effect of his word.

O how brave a thing do we account it, for a Prince to possess an earthly
Kingdom in the hearts of men! to make himself a Throne of Peace, to which love
raises an Eternal Basis, and on which God raineth infinite Blessings; Whereas
what a hideous spectacle is it, to see Tyrants hidden (like Owls) in perpetual
Nights, with a mind possessed, and beset with horrid Fancies, filled with
suspicions, and seized by distrust; whose Dreams are full of bloody spectacles,
for whom Thunder seems to roar, and for whom Heaven prepares all its
Thunderbolts.

Oh, what horror is it to see them not dare to appear in public, without being
clothed with Iron, and dispoiled of the peoples affections; to appear among
their Subjects in nothing but Blood, Terrors, Torments, and Massacres; and
afterward, to be hated like Plagues, and poisons! Is not this the way to make
a Hell of his life, a Tyranny of his manners, and to increase vows toward his
death?

Just so, is the difference between a poor Soul, who daily marches under the
standard of Gods providence, and is every hour replenished with the mercies and
benefits of Heaven. Like a virtuous King, the one adventures to live in the
most unfrequented Wildernesses, without Corps-du-gard. He finds assurance in
Battles, prosperity in his House, veneration abroad, admiration at home. When
he sleeps, his Savior [who is more watchful then a million of eyes] wakes for
him, when he prays that voice [which is better then a million of mouthes]
makes intercession for him. His joys are pure, his pleasures innocent, his
repose dreadless, his eating and drinking without fear of poison, his Life
happy, and his Memory blessed.

Whereas divine Providence (which sharpens the Sword of Justice in the Tears of
the miserable, pours it on the head of the other, consumes him by strange
Maladies; a thousand hands are ready to punish him; his life is a reproach, his
memory full of cursings, dung-hills are provided to interre him; yea, the
Stones or Metals afterward punished and defaced, for no other crime, but to
mention his Actions, and set forth his feature.

The Soul contemplates, and sets forth her Folly in hazarding Eternal Joys, by
preferring Earthly Vanities.
AReprobate sense, being the last step which any one makes to enter into Hell;
O how great is the happiness of an enlightened Soul, which sets all the glory of
the world at its feet, and preferres the knowledge of Christ, and an obedience
to his will and command beyond any thing here below which shall come in
competition with it.

Often does she thus expostulate with her self; what alas? shall the sight of
Temporal Beauty, which too often fills our Soul, with nothing but fire and
flames, abate the more fervent love of Eternal things? Is it possible that I,
should so adore my prison, and fetters here, as to balance them with the Cross
of my Savior Jesus? who alas! can give me Tears sufficient, having thus
forsaken my God!

Origin mentions of Mary Magdalen, That Heaven and the Angels were a burden to
her, and that she could live no longer then she beheld him that made them; and
shall we here prefer an Earthly Pilgrimage, before a Heavenly Paradise? Is it
possible that I should suffer my self to be entangled with worldly vanities,
which are more brittle then Glass, more light then smoke, and more swift then
the wind? that I should fatten my self in earthly Pleasures; that I should
nourish this Carrion, this Dunghill of my Body, and neglect, and forget, and
despise my Soul? Oh! what horrid Phantasms will seem to reproach me with
ingratitude, when the affairs of my conscience shall be set in order, and say
unto me; I am the Pleasure thou have obeyed; I am the Ambition to which thou
were a slave; I am the Covetousness, which was the aim of all thy Actions.
Behold thy sins, thus begotten by thee; Behold thy iniquities, which thou
did love so much, as to prefer before thy Savior. Alas! alas! what
Comfort, what Happiness, have thou now in all these?

Thus the unhappy Soul (thinking her self undone) cuts off her words, and
deeply sighing, with sobs of true Repentance, and a lively penetrating grief,
(wishes her self any thing rather then a Reasonable Creature. And how glad
would a miserable sinner be, if he might turn to nothing, and cease to be. But,
alas, how does he find himself lost, and involved in misery; yea, perpetually
gnawn, and torn, with a torrent of inexplicable dolours, which cause him to
break out into unheard of Phrensies.

O Palace of God (says he) that I have lost! O ugly Den of Serpents,
whereinto I am thrown! O hideous darkness, which shall for ever be my
inheritance! O infernal countenances, of enraged Devils, who must for ever be
my Companions! The brightness of Paradise will now be nothing unto me; the
joys of Heaven will now but aggravate my grief; what alas then shall I do?
whether shall I turn my self?

Go then, ye Worldlings, go! let Love fool ye, Ambition rack you, Covetousness
rust ye, Lust inflame ye, Hope tickle ye, Pleasure melt ye; Let Anger burn,
Envy gnaw, and Jealousy prick ye, Revenge exasperate, Cruelty harden, Fear
sreez, and sorrow consume ye. Yet know, that one day ye will wish to have
divested your selves of all your worldly affections, and that ye had loved
nothing, but for God, of God, and to God.

See, see, fond man of Earth! who art glutted with delights, and (with the
Richman in the Gospel) signest Requiems to thy Soul, Luke 12.11. As having
Goods laid up for many years. See, I say, at the doors of these Sirens [or
rather, the Sepulchers of thy lusts] the smoke and stench of these dainties,
which have heightened thy sins, ready to smother thee! See, see, those
pleasures, which (like Lots wife, over the burning Ruins of Sodom) cry out
against thee with an Eternal voice; Traitorous Pleasures! Pleasures, Enemies of
the Cross of Christ! how alas have ye beguiled me, how have ye deceived me?

Alas! O voluptuous! O carnal Creature! how short a time will it be, ere those
Members which thou would not crucify, by a holy mortification, on the Cross
of Jesus, shall be tormented with those pains of the justice of God! Ah
Illusion! ah Witchcraft! why should we live in the excess of those pleasures
which we shall one day have more occrsion to curse then cherish? Oh thou
ungrateful to God! Traitor to thy own salvation! Go, I say, and place thy self
in a better state of happiness; Go thou, and make a Covenant with Hell, and
agreement with death. But O remember what will be the event! Alas! poor Soul!
that thou should purchase Repentance so dear, to give up the expectation of
Eternity, and the fruition of so many glorious years, as a prey to one unhappy
minute of pleasure! Where is thy faith which thou have promised to God? where
is thy weariness to avoid sin? Do thou think that God does not see thee
sinning?

The time is drawing on, when Death shall strip thee to the very skin, and
leave thee nothing but what thou have done, and given for God. How would it
then comfort thee, to have conformed thy self to a religious life, and to have
made every action thereof a step to Eternity? What greater thoughts of comfort
can possess thy heart, then those, which bring to thy remembrance a lively
faith, purity of life, exemption from grievous sins, poverty of Spirit,
affection to the word of God, humility, charity to thy Neighbor, clemency, and
a full resignation of thy whole mind to the will of thy Creator? Alas, how
will one sole pleasure, taken in heavenly Objects, be a thousand times better,
and more esteemed then all the delights and contentments of the world?

But on the contrary, how sad will it be, when thy conscience [which as Phylo
terms it, is the little consistory of the soul] shall sit on a Throne, with a
Scepter in her hand, and say unto thee; wicked Servant! recall thy Thoughts,
Words, and Actions; how have thou misspent the time of thy life? how many days
have thou carelessly lost? what sluggishness at thy rising? what negligence in
thy employment? how great Words, and how little Works,? Why this rash
judgment, that curious question? these wandering eyes? these straggling
thoughts? this angry passion? that hasty slander? why this days intemperance?
that days excess? this days neglect of thy God? that days uncharitableness
to thy Neighbor?

Oh how sad will these expressions be at the last day! Cursed Atheism! why
would thou rather feel thy torments, then believe them? Cruel Ambition! to
what pass have thou brought me? deceitful Riches! how have ye beguilded me?
wicked Company, vain Companions, worldly Pleasures! how have ye been the chains
of my Ruin? Alas! how can I write, or how can thou hear, or read this
without trembling, to think on thy forlorn condition? Poor wretch! what
will become of thee, when thou shall look above thee, and see the God which
has forsaken thee, the Saints whom thou have despised, and all the faithful at
the right hand of Glory? when thou shall look below, and see those hideous
flames which thou must a bide for ever? vvretched Soul what would thou now
give for a Christ, which only can [but will not] save thee? what would thou
give for one hours time of repentance? which once thou slep'st under,
refusedst, and esteemedst of no value.

Then will thou say unto thy self; O God! O God! whom have I lost, yet cannot
lose? I have lost thee as my Savior, yet have thee still present, beholding my
pains. O Eternity! shall there never be end of my evils? shall those Torments
be always beginning? Ah, why was not the womb of my Mother the Sepulcher of my
birth? Why did not the Stars which then ruled, throw the sparkles of their
influences against me? why did not the Earth swallow me up in my Cradle? must I
live one sole minute on earth, to live an Enemy to God eternally? Ah Lord! what
a depth is there in thy judgment! let silence smother the remainder of my
complaints, since I can no longer endure my self, nor my Tongue make known the
conceptions of my heart!

Neither can thou justly complain (poor Soul, whatsoever thou be!) that God
did thee wrong in making such a hell for thee, seeing thy sin has neither
end, nor limits in its Eternity. It is an infinite evil, because it strikes at
the head of an infinite Divinity. Will thou say to an Omnipotent God, thou
createdst me to serve thee, but I will live for my self? Thou maidst a World
for my use, but I will fill it with my sins; thou redeemedst me with thy blood,
but I will contemn and trample it under my my feet. O horrible confusion! O
unspeakable wickedness!

No way of redress then is there left thee (O poor Soul!) but to live always
in a state, wherein thou would die; to fear Hell always that thou may not
fear it ar all; to frame a tender and timorous conscience to thy self, and to
call thy self often to account in this manner. Ah poor Soul! if thou were now
at this instant to dislodge out of this world; art thou in an estate to be
presented before the Throne of the supreme Judge? have thou not some sins
unrepented of, some restitution to make? do there not some vain thoughts and
worldly lusts lodge and remain within thy heart?

Say further to thy self; alas! what is a little time when it is gone? how
quickly shall I be in another world? how speedily will our years pass? how will
our minutes of pleasure be then repaid with everlasting sufferings? what have I
then to do, but to provide for heaven? And let me think that time lost, wherein
Nothing is done to that end. And seeing all the pleasure of sin here in this
world, is but to converse with Swine, and feed on Husks. O that we had but a
right apprehension of the fullness and pollution thereof, and how momentary and
uncertain that delight is which we reap by it.

The Soul (being ready to sink under the weight and apprehension of her Sins)
bemoanes the weakness of her Faith, and desires help from her Savior.
THough Prosperity, and the Beauty of the world, does not easily corrupt Souls,
which have once taken upon them to live in the fear of God; yet notwithstanding
they oftentimes would, and in some sort change them, every sin being a
tripping off of the Souls heels.

The poor laboring and industrious Be, sometimes goes so long upon her honey,
as that by much walking she there entangles her feet. So a Soul [yea one of
those who are most devout] being continually soothed by a long sequel of
pleasing successes, and the delights of the world, takes some small flight out
of it self, and seeks content in the smiling and delicate air of the worlds
delights, though at last they prove nothing but the Objects of grief and sorrow.

But no sooner does adversity strike, and God hold up his finger, but the Soul
re-entereth into it self, it raises it self above the ways of the Moon, and
compass of the Sun, to the goodly Temple of Eternity, where Spirits live
dispoiled from these Masses of flesh and Bones which we draw along with us, in
the midst of the various revolutions of this mortal life. This is the way which
the Soul takes, so soon as (through sin) she is alienated from the Court of
Heaven. She enters into a sad retirement, and in this manner bespeaks her
self.

O Lord, this World is irksome to me; I cry unto thee, Lord! unto thee do I
fly. O thou whose clemency reaches from Heaven to Earth, set my sins from
me, as wide as the East is from the West. It is thou only, O Jesus! that can
cure the ardours of my Sufferings. It is thou only, that can dry up my
Tears, break my Fetters, and dissipate all my Troubles. If I am in darkness,
thou art light; if in doubt, thou art my council; if in danger of shipwreck,
thou art my Haven; if in a Labyrinth of Dangers, thou art the Thread to guide
me out; yea, if at the Gates of death, thou art my Life! O suffer me not, dear
Savior! now to sink under the grievous weight of my many infirmities!

Then she looks about her, as if it seemed Nature had displayed the Mountains
and Valleys, the Woods, Forests, and Rivers, and the great Theater of the
works of God, altogether to assist and further her in the height of her
sadness. She that formerly seemed like those, that shined in the Majesty of
sumptuous attire, was now covered with course Cloth. She who seemed like those
that altogether sparkled with precious Stones appeared now in a Livery of
Sackcloth; and since he had formerly entertained a mortal beauty, was now
wholly taken up, and wasted with sadness, and mortification of the Flesh.

Methinks I hear how the Soul (reasoning with her self, and being ever
perplexed and involved, finding pain in repose, thirst in abundance, and
seeming separated from the fountain of true comfort) sadly cries out; My God! I
know that no good can be had without thee, the true and sovereign Good! In
every place that I am without thee, I am in pain. All the Riches which are not
in thee, seem to be mere poverty; All the greatness, pleasures, and profits of
the World are nothing to me, unless I can call thee Savior. From thee only
comes that joy, which all the Saints have studied, with pain, with delight, and
tasted with Glory. It is that which S. Peter calls, 1. Pet. 1.8. A joy
unspeakable and full of Glory. It is that which S. James said, contained the
consummation of all comforts, Iam. 1.2. which S. Paul found in the Caverns of
the Earth, which some have found upon Wheels, others in Flames, some in
Gibbets, others on Gredirons; and lastly, it is that which descenderh from
Heaven, and with Eternal streams of comfort waters the dry and parched hearts
of distressed Souls.

Thus was the divine Soul, like the Moon in an Eclipse, which appears wholly
dark on the side toward the Earth, but fails not to be most bright in that
part which looks toward Heaven. And though some who behold her with carnal
eyes, in such a state, may think her totally darkened; yet God, in this
retirement and sweetness of repose, darts his glorious Rays upon her, through
the Cloud of the Body, and causes her to see the eyes of Angels, as a Soul
wholly invested with the Sun of Righteousness.

In the mean time, she relisheth this retreat, as Manna from Heaven, and
tastes this deep silence, with incredible delight, after so many confused
clamours of a troubled Conscience. It seems unto her, that she then speaks to
God face to face, and that she saw all the pride of the Earth much lower then
her feet. Her Soul was whitened in her Tears, and purified in her desires,
pouring out all unto God, as it were through the Limbeck of her ardent
Devotion, and drawing the Curtain over all worldly affairs, to be only
entertained with God.

And from this time forward, she lives beyond the sense of worldly affections.
Time seems to have no Sithe for her; Death is unprovided with Darts? Calumny
loses its Teeth at her, and Glory spreads throughout the Ensigns of
Immortality. She seems only to live on Ecstasies, turning that little breath
which remained on her lips, to the praises of God. She now also sees it a
matter very reasonable, that God should make use of all manner of Arms, to
prosecute a Fugitive from his Providence, who has made a divore from its
Creator, and seeks to save himself in a Region of nothing. She can bethink of
no better way to purify those eyes, then with tears, which are now wholly bent
toward Heaven; neither any better course then mortifyings, and fastings, to
whither the beautiful Roses of her face; and at last to give up that amorous
heart which has been the corrupt fountain of so many Lusts, only to be
washed, and cleansed with the blood of her Savior.

O Lord (said she) my heart was created for thee, and it will be restless until
it return unto thee! Do I hunger? thou art the bread of life. Do I thirst, thou
art the waters whereof whosoever drinks shall never thirst. Am I Naked? thy
Righteousness is my Robe, Isai. 25.4. Thou art a Refuge from the storm, and a
shadow from the heat. If I am Ignorant, thou art Wisdom; to know thee, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent is Eternal life, Joh. 17.3. Since therefore
all things are nothing unto me, without thy self, be thou all things unto me. O
God! true God, of my salvation! my heart which feels it self moved with an
affectionate zeal, thinks always upon thee. O let the breathings of my heart
fill my lips with the sounds of Love! The Lingua amoris Tuba.
Tongue is Loves Trumpet; and that love whic his sweetly in the bosom, sounds
sweetly in the breath; O therefore let my voice be the silver Trumpet loudly to
sound thy praise!

Love is the commanding affection of the Soul, consisting in the expansion, and
going out of the heart toward a person or thing it wishes well to. It is the
Queen Regent of the Soul, and sits upon the Throne, commanding all; where then
can the distressed Soul better fix her affections, and but upon her Savior,
the ends of whose love (^ike so many several Lines in a Compass) meet all in
Love as in their alone Center? who alas! but the shaking hand [trembling for
fear of guilt of sin, and the wrath of God] is fittest then to lay hold upon
him? He is all comfort, who should partake of him, but such as are ready to
faint? He is our Physic, and who should receive him but such as are diseased?

In this manner will the Soul, which is ever longing after her Savior, be ever
seriously meditating upon the spotless innocence, and unblameable conversation
of its Lord and Master. It will consider what it is, through the defilement of
sin; it will frequently converse with the word of God; it will still keep
communion with God in prayer, it will often participate of his holy Supper; and
if at any time it be surprised with Temptation, and overtaken in a fault, oh
how vigilant is it at all times, and in all places [privately by her self, and
publicly with others.] And when any inordinate Passion, Lust, or Distemper,
does begin to stir in her, how does she fly to the rich mercy and free Grace of
her Savior, for strength to crush it, in the very first rising, that she be
not given ovet to impetuous desires, nor that sins of a high hand get
dominion over her.

The thoughts also of a Gracious Soul, will be ever frequent toward Jesus
Christ. If she lie down, all things are commended to his protection. If she
rise, she desires his guidance. If she read, or meditate, she craves his help.
If she ear, she intreates his blessing. When she is satisfied, she praises his
Bounty. In the beginning of her Work, she labors in his fear; in the end
thereof she referres it to his Glory. In scarcity, she is contented with his
fullness; in plenty, she distributeth it to his Glory. All things are nothing
without him, and he is all things unto her, if she have nothing else.

And though she oftentimes labor under spiritual affliction, when God is
pleased to turn her midday into Night, and many times afflict her with
barrenness in her Soul, yet will she still be setting forth the praises of her
God. If she cannot chant with the Nightingale, she will chirp with the
Blackbird; she will chatter with the Swallow, yea croak with the Raven, rather
then the sighs and groans of her heart shall want pouring out. A serious
survey of her manifold slips and failings shall be taken. She will be deeply
humbled, loathing and detesting what she has done amiss, confessing her
offenses with a mournful heart, and a weeping eye, unto the Redeemer of Men,
who only is able to comfort her.

How does she complain, that her sins have even excluded all the comforts of
her God, and all his Graces from her Soul? once she enjoyed a sweet communion
with him, but now she sinks in the Valley of sorrow. For why? he passes by as
a Wayfaring man, is become a stranger to her, and takes her for his Enemy. Ah,
they are my sins, they are my sins, (says she) which have thus occasioned the
withdrawment of my Savior! And what? shall my dearest comforts be thus driven
away by my self? woe is me, that I am constrained to live in thy Anger, and to
have such a sad habitation in the dark Tents of thy heavy displeasure.

My God! my God! why comes thy wrath so fast upon me? O what Billows of
disquietness. arise within my heart! what sad thoughts arise within my Soul? I
know not what to do, I know not what to answer, so unworthy am I, not having
any thing in me to move thy affections to me. Alas! how unfit am I to perform
any service to thee? How dull, how poor, and liveless therein? yea with what
vanity and distractions, are my best Actions accompanied? And will Christ stoop
to uphold such a worm as I am? Yes, sure Lord! my eyes are toward thee. Its
true, I am a sink of sin, but thou art a Gracious God; I am the chief of
sinners, yet such thou came to save. What though I am darkness, yet thou art
light? and however thou now seem far from me, thou can again fill me
with light and refreshment. If thou once appear, the Tempest of my
weather-beaten Soul will cease.

Thus at last, through a true humiliation, having found her Conscience
appeased, her bloody Issue stanched, her heart enlarged, her footsteps
ordered, with delight to run the ways of God, and her poor (and almost
ship-wrack't) Vessel arrived at the Haven of Gods amiable Presence, she
comfortably concludes, that God had heard the requests of her lips, saying unto
her (by the testimony of his Spirit) as once Christ did to the sick of the
Palsy, Mark. 2.5. Son, thy sins are forgiven thee.

And here we see, how that God (who many times enricheth us by our losses,
enobles us by our disasters, and raises us by our Ruins) brings us low, that
we may not. Fecitque cadendo ne caderes.
fall into the Precipice of everlasting misery. He leaves us here for a time,
to behold dying Creatures, who fade, wither, and shrink insensibly into nothing
[when once unsupported by the divine hand] that the House of God, and the
Palace of Essences, may be the more welcome to us, where all things are
immortal, vigorous, perfect, and incorruptible.

In this world, we see but with the two Eyes of Flesh, the whole world being
still tottering, and altogether imperfect. But there it is where the blessed
behold all things, stable equal, and absolute in all its dimensions. Here it
is, that our Reason is Eclipsed, and we often stray from our chiefest good; but
there it is, that (after an admirable Transformation) the Soul is wholly
absorpt in Felicity. And as a small drop of water pouted into the Sea,
instantly takes the color and taste there of; so the Souls taste is fully
inebriated and colored with the divine Glory. O Beauty! O Greatness! O
Goodness! Beauty to inhabit in the Idea of God, as in a Paradise of Glory; and
Greatness to have capacity infinite, and truly apprehensive of divine Majesty.

Hence also may we take notice, that as there is ever some weakness in humane
things, which sticks to the most smiling Felicities, and never gives us
wine, but with a mixture of dregs; so never does the day of God shine clearly
in a Soul, which has too much light of man, and sips too deeply in the fading
vanities of the world [such days being seldom without Clouds.] For, O
deceitful Riches! O fading Beauty! O Phantasms of Honor! How painful are ye to
those that sue for you?

How Traitorous are ye to those that possess you, and dolorous to those that
leave you? unhappy are those that prize you through error, that court you
through vanity, and obtain you by iniquity.

How much better is it, to put our hands in flames, then to lay them on Crowns
covered with injustice? what will it avail us, to have worn Purple, when we
arrive at the period of Death, if we have defiled it with the spots of
uncleaness, and that we must make an Exchange of all our glory and greatness,
for a habit of Flames, which shall no more wear out, then Eternity? And who so
blind as those who behold not the Diamonds of a Royal Crown, to sweat with
horror, upon a Head poisoned with Pride and Ambition? Who is so weak as sees
it not, his best course to withdraw from the great conversations of the world,
from the imbroilment of affairs, wherein is so little profit, from the Court,
from specious Offices, Preferments, and Negotiations, from all worldly
Ambitions, and to cultivate a sweet repose and quiet in the service of Jesus.

O God of the Patient, and Eternal mirror of Patience! may my Soul for ever
hover in that Region where thou inhabitest; may it speedily arrive to that
fortunate Island, where divine tranquillity dwells, and where there is an
everlasting springof Beauty, and Glory! may it enter into the Temple, and may
the continual odours of the Sacrifice of Reconciliation, Mercy, and
Propitiation, mount up to thy Throne, which thou taughtest us upon Calvary, in
the bitter and sharp dolours of thy body; amidst the sorrow of Heaven, the
darkness of the Sun, the opening of Sepulchers, the breaking of Stones, the
effusion of thy Blood, and the desolation of thy Soul. And as thy arms, Blessed
Lord! were stretched out upon the Cross, so at last receive me into the
stretched-out arms of thy mercy.

The Sin-sick Soul can take no rest until she be further reconciled to her
Savior.
AS there is never any thing good, without the experience of evil, so God is
often pleased here to afflict his Children, the berter to make them relish his
comforts. And hence is it, that (as David says) Psalm. 55.19. The wicked fear
not God, because they have no changes; God sending troubles to his Children in
mercy, but gives prosperity to the wicked in his wrath.

And hence it is, that while the workers of iniquity do flourish, the children
of God [being heavy laden with the weight and burden of their sinnes] cry out
Lay on us, O God! any affliction, rather then suffer us to prosper in the way
that is evil! As the little Nightingale which lives innocently, by some little
seeds of Plants, sings sweetly (while we see all those Birds of Prey, which
feed upon the flesh of Beasts, send forth a horrid cry.) And as the poor Turtle
cease not to groan, having lost her Mate, and often beholds her self in the
silver streams, where, in every wave she sees, she laments the waving Image of
her misfortune, yet is far more secure (since the memelancholly Object of
pity) then those who are more obvious to the eye of the Fowler; so a pious
Soul (though seemingly deprived of her sweet liberty, and seeing her self
severed from all commerce with Man kind, to be banished into a Desert, where
nothing but Rocks are witnesses of her sufferings) is notwithstanding still
fastened unto God by Chains, not to be dissolved, whom she fervently desires to
vouchsafe her comfort, and to confirm her spirit, which was descended into the
bottom of the miseries of this world.

When the poor Soul has offended her God, she can never be friends with her
self, until she be reconciled to him, and conceive his countenance to be
turned again to her. If he once but hide himself, she looks forward, if he be
there; on the right hand, and on the left, if she may find him. She takes all
ocasions of holy Conferences, and uses all means (with the Spouse) to enquire
for her Beloved, which way he was gone, and whether he was turned aside. Early
and late does she seek the Lord of her life; she takes no rest in traversing
the Forests, the Woods, the Meadows, the Mountains, and Floods, Cant. 1.3. and
6.3. She seeks him by night whom her Soul loves; she will arise, and look
about the streets, with groans and cries, with sighs and prayers, in her
Chamber and Closet, in Church and Chapel, she sends up her vows to the God of
her salvation.

How powerfully also does she desire God (first bedewing her own eyes) to water
the barrenness of her Soul? what sad complaints (being all swollen with Tears)
does she pour out? What, is Heaven turned Brass, that neither Tears, nor sighs
can enter, Shall there be no more commerce between Heaven, and the unhappy
Progeny of sinful Adam? Alas, O God! says the forlorn Soul) Will thou always
be hidden from me? Shall I never see that face, which with one glimpse of
splendour, can make me eternally happy? where am I? what do I? Alas my soul is
in night, and darkness; and I sadly feel, (O blessed Savior! that thou art far
from me. My heart is near sinkingin a sea of sorrow; I row strongly, but can
advance nothing, except thou come into my Soul. Come then, O my most blessed
Savior! walk upon this tempestuous Sea of my heart; say unto me, It is I, be
not afraid. O come speedily and Reign within me, to disperse those cares, to
enlighten my understanding, to inflame my will, to cure my Infirmities, and
recover my decayed Senses!

Many and bitter (no doubt) are the assaults of Satan all this while, within
the poor Soul. Can God love thee (says he) and leave thee thus to my power?
Why then is all this befaln thee? where are all his mercies thou boastest of?
sure he has now forsaken, and delivered thee into my hand, why then should
thou wait any longer? But still does the Soul stop her ears to the voice of his
deceitful charming, not doubting, that (however Christ had for a time withdrawn
his wonted favor) he was still her Advocate, and (even at that instant)
pleading her case, and answering for her (at the Bar of Gods Justice) all those
suits which Satan was then objecting against her.

Oh (says the Soul) it is he that dyed for my sins, and rose again for my
Justification! my own Righteousness (alas!) is but as menstruous Rags. It is he
only that was made [for me] Wisdom, Righteousness, and Redemption! Romans 5.25.
It is he that has satisfied an infinite Justice for my sins! Isai. 53.4, 5,
6. It is he that bears my grief, and carries my sorrows, and will at last cure
my sufferings.

Behold then the various Dispensations of a merciful God! Oh the wonderful
experience of a strong belief, in a high mounted Soul! whose excellent Graces
of Charity and Humility, are like so many wings to carry her above all the
sense of her present Afflictions; giving her to see, that though Jesus were
sometimes pleased to hide himself in the Gospel (as the Sun within a Cloud) yet
he would again draw the Curtain, the Sun of Righteousness would appear with
healing in his wings; and (notwithstanding his present withdrawment) did
receive her sighs, and bottle up her Tears, and would again show himself in the
best time.

And whenever the ship of her Soul seemed wrack't, then would she endeavor
to save her self upon the Rock of his infinite mercy: at this Pool of Bethesda,
would she still lie, until he cured her; on this Thread would she catch to bear
up her wounded spirit; and upon him would she still wait, who loves those to
the end, whom he once loves, whose presence she always desired to cherish, and
resolved still to wait on him, who (but for a time) hides his face from the
house of Jacob, Isai. 8.17.

And Job. 10.1. [laying her complaint upon her self] How often would she thus
expostulate with her offended God. Ah Lord! the marks of thy bounty Semel
electus, semper dilectus.
(I confess) are no less, then all I am, and have! Ah, wretched I! that
continually wear about me all the Tokens of thy kindness, and yet not love
thee? what shall I answer, when thou say unto me? I created thee like unto my
self. I made thee a little God on Earth, I imprinted on thy forehead the
Character of my Greatness. The Sun shined on thee, the Earth supported thee,
the Creatures clothed thee, and yet thou have forgotten me. O admirer of thy
self, and ignorant of my works! Why have thou husbanded my goods, as to change
them into evil?

Alas, poor Soul! what evidence will (at the last day) be produced against
thee? The Devils, who first tempted thee to sin, will then rise up as witnesses
against thee. The Angels of God (before whom thou should not have sinned)
will then testify against thee. The abused Creatures will then be brought in
to thy conviction. The Messengers of God will cry aloud against thee for
neglecting their Doctrine. All the personal mercies which thou have received,
will also be so many evidences against thee; the Earth that bore thee, the Air
thou breathedst in, the Food which nourished thee, the Clothes which covered
thee; the Creatures that labored for thee, the Houses thou dwelledst in, and
all things else that served for thy use, will then further thy condemnation.

And may not God himself justly expostulate with thee? Did all my mercies
deserve no more thanks? should thou not have better served me, that gave
them? was I so hard a Master, was my work so hard, and unreasonable; or my
Rewards of so little value, as no way to persuade thee to my service? Ah
ungrateful wretch! that the love of God, the evil of sin, the blood of thy
Savior, the Judgments to come, the Glory promised, and the punishment
threatened, should not be as forcible to draw thee to Holiness, as a little
fleshly delight and worldly gain, is to draw thee to wickedness!

O whether will thy mind fail, when distempers shall steer it! Whether will thy
Fancy run, when Diseases shall ride it! What Hell will thou frame within thy
Conscience? Watchings will surprise thee, Dreams will terrify thee; and if
some terrible Bird do but croak in the Night, it is presently, the sad voice of
some dead man, who bids thee prepare for another world.

Ah! that thou could but think of thy perplexed condition, when thy
conscience (being once awakened) shall blush, and stare thee in the face! when
thy sins [with David] Psalm. 51.3. Shall be ever in thy sight! Then will thy
mouth be confessing, thy eyes weeping, thy cheeks blushing, thy hands
writinging, and smiting thy bosom, thy heart-bleeding, thy Heartstrings
breaking, and thy voice crying out (with Cain) My sins are greater then can
be forgiven! Then too late will thou cry, Lord have mercy upon me; when a
ruinous house shall be ready to fall about thy ears; when tediousness of
sickness, loss of Goods, and confusion of understanding, shall encompass thee,
when thy windy sighs, and deep-fetch't Groans of thy breaking heart, when the
misty Clouds of thy closing eyes, the Roaring thunder of thy stammering tongue
[sometimes perchance venting horrible Oaths and Blasphemies] shall represent
nothing but Images to the Beholders.

And alas! what vvilt thou do, when in the last agonies of Death, thy Body
shall feel such great disturbances, as will make thee to turn here and there,
to rub the Bed-clothes, which overpower thee with Convulsions, which choke
thy speeches, make thy Visage Pale, thy memory to faulter, and a cold sweat to
overspread all thy body; which is only encompassed, with weeping eyes,
whining countenances, distracted looks, affrighted and dejected Visages,
hideous outcries, and perchance (which is worse) with petty Furies?

Ah! what content will thou then take, when Death comes to sound his last
Trumpet in thy Ears; saying unto thee, Come, let us be going, thou must
dislodge from thy Riches, thy large possessions, from thy Beauties and fading
Pleasures, from thy friends, and from thy kindred, and never more to return
again?

Oh! how bitter will be the remembrance of death; how harsh will it be unto
unmortified spirits, when they shall say to the Body; ah, whither go thou,
dear Hostess! whether go thou! Thou have hitherto most tenderly pampered me,
pompously clothed me, wantonly cherished me; I was thy Idol, thy Pride, thy
Glory; and whether now must thou go? What, into a Grave with Serpents, and
Worms? alas! what will thou do there, and what will become of thee?

Thus fares it with distressed Souls in the shades of Death, when (fixing their
dying eyes upon their former acquaintance) they find some weeping, others
screeching; some fainting, and all (under a veil of sorrow) encompassing their
Bed, with this sad Note: alas! do you leave us, and shall we meet no more?
Farewell pleasing amities! adieu all our sports, feasts, and loves! now is the
time come, that me must leave all our earthly acquaintance, all our Table
friends, Ranters, Gamesters, Amorists, and all the delights of former
Companies, since from this moment, we shall be for ever separated!

Whereas, far otherwise shall it be with those heavenly and victorious souls,
who have lived to God. Time, and the Laws of Death, have nothing to affright
them with. All that they have to do, is but to go out of a dark Dungeon, and a
straight Prison, to leave a world of sadness and misery, and enter into a
spacious Temple of Eternal Splendors; where their Being shall have no end,
their knowledge no ignorance, nor their love suffer change.

Repair then unto him (O my Soul! who is all-sufficient; and though the
discharge of thy duty be above the power of thy ability; yet can he give thee a
heart to perform what he requires from thee. There is no Prison for a Soul
whom God has set at liberty. The whole world belongs to him, who knows how to
misprise it. God seeks thy conversion, and he is able to turn thee; He
requires thy faith, and he is able to make thee believe; he requires thy
love, and by knocking at the door of thy heart, he is able to get entrance into
it.

Be not sad then, O my Soul! but adore that infinite mercy, which does at any
time chastise thee with Temporary punishments, being not willing to make thee
an Object of that fury, which is kindled by Eternity of Flames! Why should
thou not bend all thy affections to Jesus, who is only able to delight thee?
Why should not thou be enamoured of his Beauties? Why should thou not sigh
after his Attractives? If we behold the Sun, we cannot choose but love God, that
Glorious Light being the Image of the Sovereign King, the Eye of the which
enlightneth the Stars in Heaven, creates the Fruits and Flowers upon Earth,
and gives strength to all living Creatures. How pleasant a thing also is it to
behold those goodly Forests, to trace those flourishing Woods, to be delighted
with the murmuring Waters, to hear the pleasant notes and warbling of Birds, in
the sweetness of solitude, and retirement.

But, O my Soul! rest not here. Let thy Spirit fly to that hidden Spirit, which
thus distributeth it self through so many melodious Divisions throughout the
whole world. When thou contemplatest the world, and all things thereto
belonging, think on that secret Spirit which insinuates it self thereunto with
such admirable power, ravishing sweetness, and incomparable harmony! Oh love
thy Jesus, because he is fair, and made all these Beauties, presented before
thee! Love him, because he is good, and communicates himself unto thee! Love
him, because he is thine, and thou art wholly his! O be thou still touched with
his beauty, his wisdom, and goodness, and let his mercy still soften thy heart!

And how (a thousand times) will thou bless the hour of this Resolution? Ah
Jesus! why should I argue any longer with my vain Thoughts? Why should I
dispute any longer with my sinful Lusts? Why do I not fly away, weigh Anchor,
set Sails, and go forward toward my Eternal happiness? Shall I create unto my
self an Empire in my Banishment? shall I suppose my self in a Haven, in the
midst of shipwreck? surely the Soul, which is ravished with the contemplation
of Heaven, will not stay upon Flesh. She has nothing to do with the standing
puddles of Egypt which do only inflame thirst in her veins; but is ever
seeking refreshment in the Cisterns of Bethel.

No more will she ask, where is her God become? not a tract of a Tear will be
visible on those cheeks, where Floods and Billows of sorrow had formerly
appeared. Though formerly she went weeping under the heavy load of her sins,
she at last returns with precious seed, she soons recovers her joy, Psalm.
51.10.11.
and peace, and loses no Grains, Psalm. 126.6.
but rather gets ground in the fire of Temptation, she receives double (with
Job) for all her losses, for a Cup of Affliction, Vessels of joy; and for a few
disconsolate days, months, and years of delight, and comfort in Heaven; where
she no longer complains of her frailties, but cries out; It is enough Lord, it
is enough what am I, or what is my Fathers House, that thou should thus deal
with me? And oh! if there be such pleasures in the Kingdom of Grace, how
unspeakable are those laid up for us in the Kingdom of Glory.

The Soul is ravished upon the Return of her Saviors Presence.
THough the Soul of Man may live at uncertainties, upon a certain Faith, and
(in time of desertion) trembling may accompany the people of God; yet it truly
relies upon Christ's mercy, Job 13.15.16. Psalm. 6.8.
it shows a true saving and justifying faith in the very act of Reliance and
dependence. And though Gods Afflictions are oftentimes like hot Spices,
comfortable to the stomach, though hot in the mouth, yet the Soul [with the
Spouse] is ever waking, whenever it falls into any spiritual slumber.

The greatest darkness ordinarily (as we use to say) is about the break of day.
And it is not impossble, but that (when sadness and melancholy [which is many
times the Nurse of doubting] shall pervert our Reason, and clad the Soul in
mourning weeds) there may be an Eclipse at the fairest Noon, through the
with-drawment of Gods favor, and the interposition of Satan's Temptations. The
dark Cloud which sometimes comes between God and the Soul, is again cleared
with many Lights, and most sweet consolations, insomuch that being again gilded
over with the most radient Splendors and admirable Beauty of her beloved, she
breaks out with profusions of heart, not to be expressed.

Holy Asaph may complain, Will the Lord absent himself for ever? Will he be
favorable no more? has God forgotten to be Gracious? has he in anger shut up
his tender mercy? Psalm. 77.7.8, 9. and yet all this expostulating with God, is
not because he suspects the truth of his Promises; but because (at such times)
the Soul cannot so plainly see it; it looks upon its sins in a
multiplying-Glass, and in the gloomy day of Affliction, is ready to behold
them, as an evidence that it wants that interest in God, it should have, and
thinks (with David, and the Church) it is wholly cast off, Psalm. 43.2. and 44,
9, and 80, 1.

But after those fainting and soul-swounding fits, and too much eying and
poaring on sin, without observing the nature of God in his Covenant, when the
poor Soul, as well looks upwards with one eye toward Gods mercy, as with the
other downward on her sins, she is kept from being over-powred with Satan's
temptations; she concludes there is yet some help in her God; she still lays
hold on the merits of her Savior. And however her stomach may be gone for a
time, yet (when she awakes out of her spiritual Desertion) she cries out,
Surely the Lord is in this place, though I knew it not. Ps. 4.3.8 I shall again
sit at David's Table, who bids me to come and taste, and see how good the Lord
is. Fear not (O Spouse) thy Beloved is not wholly departed; Be not troubled if
thy journey to Canaan be through the wilderness of this world, and if (in thy
way to Sion) thou pass through the valley of Baca, since Christ is a Cloud and
Pillar to direct thee.

Thus by the Gates of Hell, does God oftentimes show us the way to Heaven. He
(who is not tied always to bring a Soul thither by one and the same Road) can
make Death the way to life. The Sun of Righteousness is still bright, though
behind a Cloud, and not seen to us. The Nurse is withdrawn oftentimes, that the
Mother may get the chiefest affections of the Child. And though God leave a
poor Soul, laboring in the Pangs of Desertion; yet (through the Sunshine of
Gods countenance ripening its Graces) cloudy weather still advantageth her
growth, and her Barrenness, at last yields a fruitful Harvest; Gods relief
coming always in the best time, and she patiently attends his help from
Heaven, even until the fourth [which is the last] watch of the Night.

And when (with Peter) she is freed out of the Prison of strong Temptation,
and God is pleased to come in unto her, with abundance of comfort: Oh! how is
she raised to bless the Lord, who has forgiven her sins, and healed all her
infirmities! The waves of Terrors, and floods of Afflictions, never beat so
violently upon her, neither did she so much complain of spiritual wants, as now
she saw the wonders of God in the deep, and the infinitenefs of his Wisdom in
the dispensations of comfort, and joy, of grief, and terror. The Souls
complaint, now is no longer, Where is my God become? or that, There is no
soundness in her flesh, because of his anger. All her distempers seem but as so
much Physic, to cleanse her from her manifold sins: Yea, she now seems even
drowned in sweetness, and (in sinking, cries out; Oh the breadth of thy
unfathomable love! what Saint; what Tongue, what Angel, can speak out thy
unexpressible kindness? Ephesians. 5.17.
Thou have loosed my Bonds, Oh that my heart could burn in love toward thee!
Oh that I could (as I desire) make known to others, how good thou have been to
me! in preserving, strengthening, and fixing my fiath on a Rock, not to be
overborn with the storms, and swelling Surges of Satan's Temptations!

Methinks I meet thee every where (O blessed Jesus!) with a hundred arms
unfolded, to do me good! what place, what time, what moment, is not filled
with thy Bounty? Though passions have (for a time) assailed my mind, and thy
Terrors have affrighted my spirits; yet behold, now thy Grace has shot
through the dark Clouds of my Sin, and doubting, thy Darts have pierced the
Center of my heart, with quickening sparklings, my spirits are come again: Ah,
how my Soul is filled with joy, ravishment, and admiration.

Oh God! who is he, who beholds the fading shadows of the world [this dismal
place, where cares and sorrows are still growing young, and never die] that
would ever betray his Soul, Heaven, and his God, to yield obedience thereunto?
who would betray an Eternity of blessing, for a Pleasure so short, and
wretched? who would build Tabernacles here, to lose a Mansion among Celestial
Souls, where Love only Reigns? who would not give a farewell to those earthly
Cottages, to ascend those mounts of Bliss, where every season is a constant
Spring? who would desire to make his name great here on Earth, and desire to
have them enrolled among the Saints in Heaven?

O what Celestial mirth! what an expansion of all the faculties of the Spirit;
yea, what rejoicing is there in the heart of Man, when Christ begins to make
it his Throne? all Powers do him homage, all Passions render him service. Who
can conceive what joy passes in the Soul, when Jesus is pleased to take up
his lodging in it? How is the heart excited, awakened, and enflamed toward
Heaven? what distaste is there of all things in the world? It is as light to
bleared eyes; It is as food to hungry Travelers; It is the repose to the
wearied, the Country of poor Pilgrims, and the Crown of all our happiness.

Nothing but Fires, Desires, Sweetness, Affections, Joys, and Admirations,
will transport our Souls, having once regained our wel-beloved; our thoughts
will wholly be employed upon Jesus, we shall be dead and insensible to all the
Objects of the world. All the Thorns wherewith it is encompassed, will seem as
Roses. If we swim in the Tears of Wotmwood, it will be no other then sweet
water. All the wounds we receive will be but like Rubies and Pearls. Our
Maladies will prove but sports; our Calumnies will be our blessings; yea, Death
it self no other then a happy life.

When the Soul sleeps, Jesus is in her sleep; when she speaks, Jesus is under
her Tongue; when she Writes, Jesus is under her Pen; and when she is merry, she
chaunts forth the praises of her Jesus; in her solitude, she seems all
environed with Raptures. And when any reproves her for being alone, she cries
out, nothing less, before she was interrupted with their company. In the
morning she grieves to think, how often she shall offend God before Night.
Being about to rest, she bitterly (with scalding Tears) laments, that she
shall have no more power over her Dreams, but offend her Savior while she
slept.

Thus is her mind always running after her dear Spouse. Se is in a prison of
Love, where her Thoughts, her Hopes, her Joys, were Chains. And still does
she elevate her self upon the wings of Faith, in the highest postures she can
toward Heaven, taking the choicest affections with her, whereby to ascend
that Mountain of pure and inexpressible light. She well knew, that true
Pleasure, was to be found no where, but in God, whose Joys are like those
Gardens which never wither, but are perpetually watered with immortal Graces.
And oh! How [if it were possible] would she express her love to him by daily
offering her self a hundred times for him, in as many Sacrifices as she has
Thoughts, and Body, Members!

Never Ship (laden with Gold) arrived more gladly at the Haven (after many
tedious Tempests, and a thousand disasters among Pirates at Sea) as the poor
soul now seems to take content in the love of God. And having spun out all the
Web, which he gave her, cries out, I have ended all, the hopes of the world!
why stayest thou O my God! to receive my Soul, which I bear in my lips? O
Jesus! at whose name the Heaven; the Earth, and Hell, do bend the knee! I now
care not what I suffer for thee, so I sin not against thee, so I may for ever
enjoy thee!

Thus the love of God is like Lightning in a Cloud, still striving to break
forth; and suffers the Soul to take little rest in any thing, but what it
undertakes for the glory of her Maker, Joh. 11. who many times defers the cure,
that his power may be the more manifest; the heats of affliction, being but the
chafing of thewax whereby he means to seal us nearer to himself, and the spots
of our infirmities, but the Letters wherein to write his Name. He makes his
servants more eminent in their sufferings, then actions; yea, makes them
remarkable (with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.4, 5.) In much Patience, in Afflictions,
in Necessities, in Distresses, in Stripes, in Imprisonments, etc.

And as in worldly Amities, it is not enough to have affections, languours, and
lip complements, without some better effects; so the Souls love consists not
in slight affectations, or idle Devotion. She knows that whosoever does truly
love, must serve Jesus, whose will must be executed, his Cross carried, and our
selves wholly transformed into him, by imitation of his Example. She looks no
more upon a withered and rotten Gourd, upon the seducements and flatteries of a
most odious and decayed Prostitute. But Heaven is still in her Eye, where
wealth, without want; delight without distaste, and joy without sorrow (like
undefiled and uncorruptible Virgins) sit clothed and crowned with Glory.

A devout Soul, resembles those Rivers, which run under the Earth. It steals
from the eyes of the world, to seek for the eyes of God. It studies solitude
and retirement, and is wholly shut up within it self. Whence it often happens,
that those of whom we speak least on Earth, are the best known in Heaven; and
while the world thinks they lie upon Thorns, their Beds are made of Roses.
Yea, God usually makes Ladders and Footstools of our Tribulations, to lead us
unto Heaven.

Happy then, is that life, which has no eyes for carnal Beauties! it being a
shame for us still to tread on Flowers, and think to attain Heaven, without
being acquainted with the troubles of Earth, to be embarked in the great Ship
of Christianity, and not sometimes to cast our eyes on the Rocks; but (like
Jonah and the outcasts from Gods Presence) to sleep securely under the Hatches.

And for ever blessed is that life, which is no way dazeled with the sunshine
of worldly vanities! How freely does it taste the comforts of Heaven? How does
it forsake the painted pieces of the world? what pleasures will it [one day]
take in this one Pleasure? what joy is it to derive all our Joys from this one
Fountain? Why say we not then with S. Austin? O Fountain of Life, when shall we
come to thy Delights, and eternal sweetness! I sigh here on Earth [holy
Hierusaleus] in a dry Land! O dear City! with weeping eyes, we behold thee afar
off!

Tell me then (if thou can) O fond worldling! what is it that thou so
strangely sets thy thoughts on? What, alas! is it that thou so passionately
seek? Will thou have Honors? who has more then God, to whom so many
States, Kingdoms, and Empires are but a drop of dew? Have thou high thoughts
with thy self, who more high then thy Savior, who makes Heaven to bow under
the shadow of his Majesty, who sits upon Thrones, and shall at last come with
his Angels to judge the World? Oh, but thou would have power in thy hands!
Alas who more great then this Judge, who makes the Thunder to roar, the
Lightning to fly, the Rocks to rent, the Earth to quake, the Elements to melt;
there being neither Place, Time, nor Power, which can deliver any out of his
hands? If wisdom affect thee, who more wise then that God who has the Riches
of Eternal wisdom, who sees all within himself, and to whom all things, past,
present, and to come, are [at one instant] represented?

But it may be (O wavering Soul!) thou art wearied with the cares, griefs,
vexations, and anxieties of the world; If so, where can thou find repose out
of God? Has he not all the contentments for the Soul and body? But thou say
again, thou art no body without Pleasures; yea, the desires of thy heart, are
unsatisfied without them. And is there not a fullness of joy in thy dear
Savior? Is he not an abundance, which never fails; a sweetness, which never
corrupts, a Feast which never consumes? Is he not a perpetual Treasury of
Comforts, and an unexhaustible fountain of all contentments?

Methinks (oh unsatisfied Soul!) I hear thee yet further to complain, thou
want Riches. And do thou think to receive them anyway, but from him who
possesses all? He is the Beauty of fields, the luster of Flowers, the
pleasantness of Fruits, the wealth of Minerals, and the Magazin of total
Nature? Cannot he, whose care it is every year to make Garments, all
besprinkled over with the pearls of so many Meadow flowers, satiate thy hungry
desires?

Surely, would we but thus, by continual familiarity, adore that most pure
Spirit which thus enlivens us, and disperseth it self throughout the whole
world, we should not look upon the Sun, but break out into desire for that
eternal Light, wherein there is neither blemish nor darkness. We should not
behold the Sea, but admire the secret depths of the Judgments of God, We
should not cast our eyes upon the Fields, but [in so many sorts of Herbs and
Flowers different in color, and quality] behold the beautiful eyes of him that
has ordained them; neither should we hear a Bird to sing, but we will conceit
it to speak the love of our Maker.

The Soul being re-advanced on the wings of Faith, sends up her choicest
Affections toward Heaven.
THose that are thoroughly wounded with heavenly love, Cant. 3.1, 2, 3. are
sending out their sighs and groans, their thoughts and tears, to seek out the
welbeloved of their Souls. No return, nor Letter pleases them wherein the Name
of Jesus is not comprised. They pretend not any more to the Greatness and
pleasures of the world, after their former affliction, but throw themselves,
between the arms of the Cross, that they may there find those of their Savior,
daily dissolving themselves into Tears, and meeting no comfort but in the
wounds of their Savior, and a heavenly Retirement.

And O how great is the comfort, in seeking the remedies of our wounds, in the
Mercies of an infinite God! who [being in his Nature most wise and bountiful]
has not so given man over, as a prey to grief and calamities, but has
[withal] reserved a life of spirits to himself, whereby to please and adore
him. He wipes the eyes of those that are his (so many times drenched in Tears)
and makes them see (through their greatest sufferings) a glory and happiness
not imaginable, which expects their Soul in another life.

Ah welcome, welcome, that affliction which is raised from our Saviors Love!
Happy is that chastisment which comes from so fatherly a hand! What though I
smart, though I bleed under the stripes of my heavenly Father? sure there
cannot be so much pain in them, as comfort in the love of him that lays them
on. Did he not use to chastise every one whom he does receive, Heb. 12.6, 8.
Alas! I might suspect my self? But O repining Soul! must thou always feed upon
dainties? will not the Crumbs which fall from thy Masters Table, sometimes
suffice thee? Can thou not be content to touch the Hem of his Garment? Have
thou eaten so plentifully of the Loaves of his mercy, and can thou not
sometimes be content to fast with him in the Wilderness? Will thou be with him
in the Calm, and not (with Peter) adventure to him on the waves of Trouble?

Thus does the poor Soul often check her self for her great faintness under the
power of some affliction. But though she see it a sad thing to row, where Jesus
is not in the Boat, yet at last she finds all things to fall out aright with
those who embarque with him! If he once say, It is I, be not afraid, Mat.
14.6.26. How quickly does the storm of temptation cease? Nothing seems grievous
to a sincere Christian, so as (at last, with the Apostle) he may finish his
course with Joy. He is like a Pearl coming out of the salt Sea, beholding
himself involved (almost from his birth) in great acerbities, and horrible
confusions, from whence he mounts with so much luster, as to make his
adversities the steps to the Temple of Glory.

That Soul, which has brought it self to love God above all, and to despise
all, in comparison of him, and accounts it self unhappy, if [for one moment of
time] diverted from the sweet Idea's, and most sublime thoughts of his person,
will with comfort, pass over all the troubles and acerbities suffered in in his
service, perpetually languishing with most ardent desires, to behold him face
to face.

Have you never seen those poor Tulips in a Garden, shut up with melancholy
under the shadie coldness of the night, which in the next morning have been (as
it were) unlock with the Key of the Suns Rays? Just so does it happen to those
drooping Souls, who sometimes seem benumbed and frozen through the want of that
Presence, which at last enlivens them with great refreshment and cheerfulness.

Who would have thought that Jonah, when (contrary to the advice of his Master)
he would turn Politician, and fly from his Presence, should forthwith be
swallowed by the greedy Ocean; yet behold (when the Tempest pursued him, the
Sea raged on him) the Belly of a Whale which we thought his Sepulcher, became
his Palace, and wherein had he not been buried, he had dyed.

Sure there is, I know not what kind of charm, in holy sadnesses, which cannot
be sufficiently expressed; but such it is, that a Soul [contristated from God]
when it is fallen into those Abysses, wherein all the world reputes it lost,
finds in the bottom of its heart, such lights and sweetnesses, as that there
is not any comfort in the world to be compared with them.

Still is the dejected Soul crying out, My God! I adore thy holy Providence,
which sometimes drencheth me with Gall and Wormwood, in an age wherein others
are accustomed to walk on Roses! Thou know (O Lord!) that my pride has
need of such a counter-poise, and in all equity, have thou done that, which thy
wisdom thought good. What though mine eyes are moistened, and fail not every
night to pour forth streaming Rivers? Is it reason I should live without some
light hurt, seeing thee wounded on all sides for my example? Can I receive or
take contentment in the hopes of a better fortune? Where should I gather those
pleasures that I shall (at last) in joy in thee? Its true; I am yet upon the
weeping banks of the River of Babylon; But since thou have (at last) promised
to wipe off those Tears, since thou have told me, Thy yoke is easy, and thy
burden light, and have at last promised to ease all those that labor and are
heavy laden; why should I not fix all my consolations and songs at the feet of
thy Cross? why should I desire any thing more in the world, then the
performance of thy holy will?

Observe then, whosoever thou art that read these lines, of what wood God
uses to frame his Saints. Do we not see oftentimes, that some escape out of
Prison by fire; others (falling into precipices very gently) have found their
liberty in the bottom thereof; others, to whom poison has turned into
nourishment; others, to whom blows of a Sword have prolonged life! by opening
their Impostumes; yea often it is, that the seeds of good hap, are sometimes
hid under the appearances of evil. Oh silly humane Prudence then, which dare
to row against the providence of God! finding us many precpices in thy
passions, which seem so pleasing to thee, as thou openest snares to betray thy
poor soul!

Is it possible that any, who bears the Name of a Christian, should not be
grieved to lead a life an Enemy to the Cross of Christ? That so many good men,
as we read of, should by the power of virtue afflict their bodies, and prefer
contempt above all that the world esteems, that they might conform to the
sufferings of their Savior, and any contentment should be delightful, which
comes not from divine things, and blots out all the memory of sensual
delectations.

Can it possibly be, that the Soul, which has forsaken the Love-dalliances of
the world, and razed out of his heart all other love (as the Rays of the Sun
scatter the Shadows and Phantasms of the Night) should any more delight in its
former pleasures? No sure, she returns (as from the Country of the dead) with
languishing voice, and interrupted words, she bedews her self with tears for
every vain thought and idle word, which offers violence, or makes the least
breach on her former engagement.

When David avvaked (as it were out of a dead sleep) after he had remained nine
months covered with filth, and blood, without coming to himself, until Nathan
took away that veil that blinded him; how soon did he become another man? He
was no more that amourous David, but a Penitent exceedingly humbled; having a
heart bleeding, eyes weeping, a sad and disfigured face, a body made thin,
sighings redoubled one upon another; Joints pined away with fastings, and
austereness, Bones broken, by reason of his sin. Society was unpleasing to him,
the light unwelcome to him, because reproaching him with his offense. His Couch
swam with Tears, his Harp was employed in expressing his griefs, and his whole
Body (all this while dying to all mortal things of the earth) ecchoed his
groanings, and swelled with weeping on the Sea of Repentance, until he regained
that presence, from which he desired God never more to cast him.

And oh, that we could but cast those eyes, which have so often descried the
fair prospects of the world upon Jesus our Savior, the true brazen Serpent to
free us from the Serpents of Hell Fire! yea (O dear Savior!) look back upon
me, as thou did upon Peter! cast those eyes upon me, which did incessantly
watch for my salvation, even to the passing of whole Nights in sighs and
Prayers! O cast those eyes of love, of mercy and compassion upon me, which dart
the beams of daylight into souls that love thee! Let those eyes (which are
always flourishing) cool and shadow my wandering eyes, from the burning glances
of lustful concupisence. Let those eyes, which no sooner began to exercise the
functions of life, but were seen all in blossom, and an amourous aspect for us,
allay the spreading Rays of those open Casements. Let those eyes which from
the top of a mountain, looked on a poor famished people, who wandered through
the deserts, as sheep deprived of their shepherd, guide my straying heart to thy
own self.

Briefly, let those crystal fountains, which daily distill the sweet influences
of mercies; which (in dropping tears) so freely poured out themselves over
miserable Jerusalem; which proved so efficacious for us, when thou gav'st up
thy Soul, with weeping, and bleeding in the Sacrifice of the Cross, quench the
flames of all unholy desires, and abate the fervor of all sinful thoughts and
affections within us.

The Soul [in a Phrensey] breaks out into admiration of Gods love, in being
freed from the misery of everlasting flames.
THe discourse of Heavenly things, is the sweetest Manna which the Soul tastes
in the wilderness of this world. She is ever crying out, O Glory! O Bliss! O
Happiness! how have ye struck me to the heart? O when will the happy day come,
that I shall sit at this Fountainhead, and not need with pain, to draw the
water of pleasure? When shall I arrive at this sweet Ravishment and Ecstasy?
Alas! my dullness, my weakness, my drowsiness? yea, ever and anon, is she crying
out! Oh the compassion of that Physician; which finding his Patients in a
Frenzy, and knowing that nothing could preserve their life, but the loss of
his own, is contented to die, not only for those who were the causers of his
death, but the Actors, and instruments themselves!

Solomon says, That Love is as strong as death, Cant. 8.6. But if we examine
the strength of each, we shall find Love to be the stronger. Its true, all
earthly things submit to the power of death; young and old, Kings and Peasants,
Scepters, and Spades, are all alike to him. Not the Supremacy of the King also;
not the holiness of the Prophet (as we see in David) not the gravity of the
High Priest (verified in Eli to his Sons) Not the wisdom of Solomon, or the
strength of Sampson, are any way exempted from owing Homage, or paying tribute
to Love, as unto Death.

If we compare also, the acts of Love, with those of Death; we shall find Love,
not only as powerful and universal, but much stronger; Death being only seen
in taking the Rich, the Strong, the Wise, the Young, the Great: But O behold,
how Love has prevailed over the Son of God, the Savior, and life of the
world! See how he submitted himself to his death, out of Love! Was it not Love,
and only Love, that wrestled with God, and overcame him in this, that he
should leave the Heavens, and lay down his life, submitting himself to that
death which had no power over him?

O my God what do I here see? what is this my eyes behold? Truly, my Lord, my
God! death has transported thee, even to Ecstasy! Alas, what shall I say to
thee? my heart overwhelming love! when I consider how many Millions are
swallowed up in Eternal perdition, while I am one of that small number thou
have brought to the light of knowing thee, and finding the narrow way to
salvation? Why did thou set thine eyes upon me, preferring a wretch before so
many thousands? was it because I was Nobler, or more excellent then they? Ah no!

O my Soul! what do thou expect, if this be not enough to set thee on fire?
Look about thee, and behold yet a further endearment; see thy own Country, thy
Neighbors, Acquaintance, thy Kindred, and Friends; yea, how many may thou
find of all degrees, more worthy of acceptance then thy self? Oh how the Soul
is filled with a Seraphick Love, with a fire drawn from the most pure flames of
Heaven, which is uncessantly burning (being shut up within a melting heart)
without consuming! and which like a Diamond, in the midst of a thousand
Hammers, is never moved with all their violence; is never tempted with the
glittering of Honors; but is always tempering of Gall, with the most
delicious contentments of this life, to follow her Jesus, her wounded Jesus,
her Jesus that was crucified for her.

Still is she crying out to her self, whence come those Lights, those Joys,
those Pleasures, Consolations, and Hopes, which are thus above our strength,
and wherewith we often find our thoughts to be transported and raised above our
selves? Is it not from thee, O Jesus! who enters into our Soul, and becomes our
Comforter? we need not seek thee in Heaven, seeing thou art thus in our heart,
and there utterest thy Oracles. O do thou still raise us above all the
concupisences of flesh! let us ever love and dilate our selves in thee, which
thus fillest us with the height of thy Glories! Let the sweet familiarity we
have with thee our Redeemer, steal from us all extraordinary care of the worlds
employments; Though we are within the world, let us be nothing less then of the
world. Let us (like Fishes) live silent in the roaring of the waves, and keep
our selves freshamidst the brinywaters of the Sea of this world; yea, like the
beams of the Sun, let us touch the Earth, but never leave Heaven.

And since mercy provoked, changes it self into severe Justice [and what
Creatures then are there which will not punish a fugitive Soul, which flies
from her Savior through her ingratitude, when he draws her to him by the
sweetness of his love.] O let me [above all things] fear to be forsaken of
thee, my God! O let not mine eyes be the snares of my Soul! Blessed Lord! thou
have given thy self for a portion, thy Son for a Ransom, Romans 8.32. Ier. 10.16.
Psalm. 16.5. thy Spirit for a Pledge; thy Word for a Guide, and thy glorious
Kingdom for an Inheritance: and alas, how unable am I to value the least of thy
blessings, much less to repay thee any thing for them; since I am infinitely
below all thy mercies; and had I any thing worthy thy acceptance, it were all
thine, and I could offer nothing to thee but thine own.

What then shall I do, but throw my heart to the feet of thy bounty all naked,
all melted, without self-will, or power of resistance? Lord do thy pleasure
upon me, 1 Samuel 3.8. Howbeit I will not despair of my Disease, whilst I
remember the Physician. Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean. Yea, I
hope I am, even now, under thy healing hand. And though during my continuance
in this Body, many infirmities oppress me, yet will I never leave craving what
thou have taught me alvvayes to ask.

Give me therefore a Gracious disposition; a more watchful obedience to thy
law, a more mortified conversation for the future, and more sorrow, and
contrition of heart for what is past. O let my eyes be open to see the
shortness of the pleasure of sin, and the perpetuity of sinners Torments; the
easiness of thy gentle yoke, and light burden here below, and the weight of
thy glory, provided for me above! since there is no moment (O Lord!) void of
thy goodness; why should there be any moment void of my praise?

I know it will not be long until death consume me to the very bones, and I
shall then possess nothing, but what I have done for thee. Shall I then live in
this world to my self, and be still vexed with care, how to preserve a
miserable life? Dear Jesus! suffer me not thus to be taught by thy Judgments,
what I have neglected to learn from thy mercy. Time and age will one day wither
the blossoms of youth. The best of our joys are but fires of straw, or
flattering sun-shines, which are suddenly either washed away with a shower, or
banished by Tempests. The Sun will (at last) daver the freshest Roses, and
Lillies. O let not then my thoughts strike sail, or my heart do homage to the
transitory beauties of this world (which will only ensnare and imprison me in
the Fetters of sin) least the storms of an evil conscience suddenly arise, and
trouble the serenity of my delights, and the tranquillity of my seeming felicity!

The Soul [being sensible of its former Mercies] sits weeping under the Cross
of her Savior, and resolves to partake with him in his Sufferings.
AS Humility is seldom planted upon Crowns, and Scepters, so the wisdom of
State, seldom joins with that of the Cross, where its luster is too often
darkened, by the too much glittering of the world and ordinarily finds slippery
footing amongst the Rubies and Diamonds of a Crown.

It was the saying of Tertullian, who flourished two hundred years after the
Nativity of our Savior, when there had been no speech of any Emperors that
had embraced Christianity; Tertul. in Apol.
That if the Caesar's would become Christians, they would cease to be Caesar's:
and if the Christians would become Caesar's, they would cease to be Christians;
conceiving that poorness of spirit cannot consist with so high and stately
Riches, neither Humility with a Sovereign Empire, or the Tears of Repentance,
with the vain delights of the Court.

Surely, the hungring and thirsting after Righteousness [upon which our Savior
so often leaves his blessing] can no way stand with the desire of Pomp, and
Greatness in the world, no more then Peace can subsist with Licentiousness of
War, or pureness of heart, with the conversing with most pleasing and tempting
Beauties, or the fairest hopes of the world, which are mowed dow in their
flower, by the pittiless Sithe of death. Peter was never so near his ruin, as
when he was warming himself in the Priests Hall: John Baptist was far more
secure amongst Wolves, Foxes, and Tigers, then among the wicked Courtiers of
Herod; He was more happy with his little Dinner of Locusts, and wild Honey,
retired in his Cabin, then amidst the Pomps and Pleasures of the King of
Galilee.

Do we know whether our Fancy will run, when Ambition rides it; or our Minds
sail, when distempers steer them? What makes a Hermit at the Court, a solitary
man in a Tumult; a David in his Tower of Pleasures; a Solomon in the midst of
so many Wives and Concubines; and a Sampson, under the enticing hands of his
treacherous Dalelah? Yea, what makes a sacred man amongst the profane, or a
Saint in the house of a Tyrant?

So hard is it also for Carnal eyes to behold the bitter Agony of our blessed
Savior; so hard is it for any Tongue (without being steeped in Gall) to
express his sufferings, or for any person (without pouring out of Tears) to
approach his Cross. What eyes can look on thee as they should, and behold all
thy flesh wholly imprinted with dolours, and thy heart drenched in acerbities?
What eyes can (without bitter relenting) behold thy deadly sweat of blood? can
see thee dragged through the streets of Jerusalem, (every one looking out at
the windows to fill their eyes with gazing, and astonishment?) can see thee
buffeted, flouted, tossed from one Tribunal to another; spit on every where,
despised, and maliciously affronted? What eyes can look on thy spread Arms, thy
nailed Hands and Feet, thy racked sinews, thy pierced side, thy bended Neck,
thy fallen looks, thy torn Body, thy pale and bloodless flesh, thy company to be
of infamous Thieves, and thy miserable Favorite, and forlorn Mother, ready
(through grief, to expire their last breath? what ears could (with patience)
hear thy doleful outcries to Heaven? and what heart could apprehend thee at
first, received into a wretched Stable, and there laid in a Manger, and at last
to conclude thy innocent life, in so great nakedness, as that thou had no
other veil to cover thee, then the blood which gushed from thy wounds?

Behold, O my Soul! the whole life of thy Savior, which he passed here on
Earth, and thou shall find it a School of Christian manners; by the
contemplation whereof, Holiness is perfected in the fear of the Lord, 2 Cor.
7.1. The world loved Riches, but he would be poor. The world loved Honors, but
he shunned and refused a Kingdom, and the Treasures thereof, the world delighted
in a carnal offspring, but he desired neither Marriage not Issue. The world
feared nothing more then disgrace, desertion of friends, insulting of enemies,
bodily Tortures, and Death; whereas Christ endured the rebukings of the people,
the flight of his Disciples, the mockings of the Soldiers, the spitting of the
Jews, and the death of the Cross.

O wonderful! that the mighty power of the Divinity would thus manifest it
self in the infirmity of the Cross! Sure it was only for God to perform this
great Design, and thus ascend up to his Throne of Glory, by the basest
disgraces of the world; and if we will be his Children, we must make it
appear by participation of his Cross, and by suffering Tribulation. By this Sun
it is, that the Eagles are discovered. The good Thief saw no other Title, or
sign of his Kingdom, but only his body covered over with blood, and oppressed
with dolours, by that Book of the Gross, he learned all the Glory of Paradise,
and apprehended, that none but God, could with such patience endure so great
Torments.

Methinks (blessed Savior!) I hear devout Simon (seeing thee heavy laden with
the burden of the Cross) thus expostulating with thee. O Jesus! whether go
thou with the extreme weight of this barren piece of Wood? whether do thou
carry it, and why? where do you mean to set it; What? upon mount Calvary?
Alas, that place is most wild, and stony! How can thou plant it there? who
shall water it? to which thou answerest; I bear indeed a piece of Wood upon my
Shoulders, and carry it to mount Calvary. This Wood I bear, must bear me, to
bear the salvation of the world, and to draw all after me. I bear it to place
it by my death, and water it with my blood.

Oh Love! can thou love more, or express it beyond this? yet to all these,
and infinitely more tortures, and unspeakable miseries, was thy Savior exposed
[O my Soul! for thy sake, for thine my soul!] that thou may not complain,
thou want an Object, a Motive, a Pattern, or invitation to love. O mirror
of Love! Love it self, Christ our Savior! How earnest were thou; nay, how
delighted were thou to Treat of thy Passion? It were thy sweet words, not long
before thy death, With desire have I desired to eat. And when S. Peter would
have dissuaded thee from thy last Sufferings, thou reprovedst him more for
this, then for his denial of thee in the High Priests Hall. Thou only castedst
thy eye upon him, for the first (as minding him thereby of his great promise
made never to deny him;) but for the other, thou bidst him avaunt; yea, call'st
him Satan, as being the hinderer of thy much desired and longed for death.

Ah! incomparable Love! who can think on, and not admire the Ecstasies of our
sweet Savior? How is he even ravished with the object of his Death, and
transported with the Idea of his sufferings? Behold, how he encourages himself
in this combat? How troubled he is at all those that hinder it? How confident
does he look on the Cross, as the Fountain of his Glory? And shall we not love
his Cross, which Jesus has cherished? every place is a Paradise to him that
knows how to love the Cross, and every thing a Hell to those that fly it.

Oh blessed Savior then, who can lift up all the Earth, with the least
finger of thy power, raise up a little this sinful mass of my Body, which so
sadly weighs it self down by its sins! O my God, fix thine eyes upon me, and
thou shall thereby bring me to the fountain of true happiness! The Father has
given me to thee, and I am the conquest of thy precious blood; and will thou
suffer a Soul to be taken away from thee, that has cost thee so many sweats
and sufferings? Alas, Lord! thou have but one life, and I see 1000 instruments
of death, that have taken it away! Was there need of so many bloody Doors to
let out thy innocent Soul? Could it not part from thy Body, without making (on
all sides) so many wounds, which after they had served for the Objects of men's
Cruelty, serve now for those of thy mercy

O Lance! cruel Lance! why did thou open his most tender side! But in thus
playing the Murderer, thou have made a Sepulcher, wherein I will from
henceforth bury my Soul. When I behold the wounds of my dear Savior, I do
acknowledge the strokes of my own hand, and will therefore likewise there
engrave my Repentance, Give me then (O sacred mouth!) give me that Gall which I
see upon thy lips, to sprinckle all my pleasures! divide with me, (O beautiful
head!) thy dolorous Crown of Thorns, seeing it were my sins which sowed them!
Lend me (O sacred hands, and adored feet!) the Nails that have pierced them!
and while I live, let me never breathe any other life, but that only which
shall be produced from my Crucified Savior.

Surely, we shall never be worthy of him, until we thus bear the Ensigns of his
War, and Ornaments of our Peace. And alas! what reason has wretched man to
complain? Is not suffering our Trade, our Vow, our Profession? As the Clock
goes on by the help of its counnter-poise, so a Christians life never
proceeds so much in virtue, as by the counter-ballance of its Crosses. Make
me then to serve thee, to imitate thee; yea, to suffer for thee, O thou King of
the afflicted! Ah, that I had a Sea of sweet odours, to empty on an Object so
worthy of love! Art thou unwilling to bear part of thy Saviors Cross? yet give
(O my Soul!) give at least, tears to him, who satisfied for thy sins!

Consider that thy [miscalled] Sufferings, ifrightly used, are (indeed)
Blessings. What if thou lose thy fortunes, it is to make thee know thy self;
what if thy Health be empaired, it will make thee disaffect this world? What if
thou lose thy Riches,, is it not to make thee seek out better? By all which,
God is pleased to show us the straightest way to that life, which he has
promised us; and to assure us by his own Tribulation [who could not but know
and embrace what is best] that the way of Tribulation, is the highway to
Heaven.

We find (indeed) Tertullian, in one place thus complaining; Eternal Wisdom!
which thus cuts thy childrens Threats, and use them as Sacrifices, as if thou
could not Crown them, but by their Torments, or Honor them, but by their
punishments! But alas! he that will love, must serve. And, Behold, August.
Sermon. 19. de verb. Apost.
(says S. Au-gustine) The foolish Lovers, and Amorists of the world? are not
they who are surprised therewith, ready to serve, to endure all commands, in
Attire, in Habit, and behavior, for a Mistress sake?

Oh foul confusion of life, and prostitution of spirit! God (who promises
never to behold us with a good eye, unless we keep his Commandments) deserves
to be loved above all things. Love that cannot suffer, is not Love. Yea, the
last Character of love to our Savior, is to suffer for him, the Prince of
Sufferings. Our Souls are engaged by Oath (says Tertullian) to this warfare,
so soon as we first enter into Christianity. Tertul. ad Scap.

Besides; know we not that all Creatures of the world groan, and bring forth;
that all the Elements are in Travel, and in a ceaseless agitation. The Air it
self (say the Philosophers) is perpetually struck with the motion of Heaven, to
prevent the hatching of Poison. The Rivers are purified by their streaming
current. One deep must call upon another; the deep of Afflictions calls for
that of Honor; and the heights of Honor are prepared according to the measure
of our Tribulations. In this world Cruelty is mingled with Lights, and
Pleasures with Funerals.

Gods Prison is a School of Wisdom. In this Captivity are we free, under these
Bonds and Irons, our Soul can walk with God, in the midst of Groans, and sighs,
our heart can rejoice, it can talk with him (though with the three Children in
the midst of the fiery Furnace.) And as the most rigorous of Punishments,
became a Throne of Honor to those three Champions (the fire forgetting it self
to be fire, and the Furnace strewing it self with Roses) so all the Thorny
paths of our Pilgrimage here, seem but like a Meadow, enamelled over with
Flowers. If we here make Jesus the Object of our present Dolours, he will
hereafter prove the Fountain of our Eternal Joys.

Behold then, the exact method which providence keeps, in the conduct of her
chosen ones! Behold the Character of an humble Soul, persecuted by the Tongues
of Slanderers; by the Arms of his kindred; by the contempt of his friends, by
the ingratitude of his Enemies; yea, of those upon whom he had still heaped
good turns, without having the least motion to revenge, always rendering good
for evil. And last of all, behold him pouring out Tears of joy, under his
Saviors Cross.

Here only is the Sanctuary of rest, where wearied Souls may lay their heads.
Here shall we be sure to meet with comfortable embraces. Here shall the
banished live more contented, then Kings in their greatest Royalty. Farewell
Honors! farewell Empires, Riches, Reputation, Pleasures, and gorgious
Habiliments! Farewell stately Buildings, great Possessions, Gold, Silver,
precious Stones, Feasts, and all earthly Pastimes! But welcome that Sickness,
Banishment; welcome those Chains, Reproaches, Punishments, yea Death it self,
which at last brings us asleep under our Saviors Cross.

O happy Cross! O welcome Troubles! why (blessed Jesus!) should I grieve to
have those shoulders wounded with such a load, as (through thy aid) will become
so pleasant unto me? The world is an uncertain Sea, where usually a Tempest
does arise, when a Calm is expected. But here is Constancy in a good course of
life; Here Is Patience in Tribulation; Here Is Courage to support injuries, and
Comfort against distresses. O the poor Treasures, that can be hoarded in Caves,
in Houses, in Towers! What proportion do they bear to this Heavenly Treasure? O
the scant presence, and jealous absence, of all the Goods and Delights of the
world! How fleeting and momentary are they? how changeable are their
inclinations? how hungry are the Benefits, and how pinching their
Prodigalities? How base their Ends and aims, in their most real Professions?
how weak and frivolous their Passions? yea, how easily are all consumed in a
few trivial distasts?

O my only God! what miserable, penurious blasts are these to blow the Coals
of my love unto thee? Henceforth, for ever make me to run with Mary Magdalen,
after the sweet odours of thy glorious presence; make it all my pleasure, to
sit days, nights, and hours, weighing the greatness of thy Excellency, the
richness of thy Glory, and the beautifulness of thy Attributes. Make me to
spend all my strength in blessing thee for thy goodness, in rejoicing at thy
Mercies, in admiring thy Justice, and adoring thy Truth, and in an awful
Reverence of thy Eternal Majesty.

Thus does the Soul (filled with Humility, and the zeal of Devotion) often (and
not without groans) speak unto her self; What? shall I triumph where my Master
has been covered with Reproaches? Shall I take glory on my head, where my
Savior has taken the Cross upon his Shoulders? shall I adorn that head with
Crowns of Pearl, where he received one of Thorns? No, O Jesus! I have too long
in deep draughts, drank of the poisonous sweets of this worlds alurements. Now
will I hang all Honors at the feet of thy Cross. What is Beauty, Strength,
Valor, Wisdom, Industry, Eloquence, or all the things in the world, but Dung
in comparison of thy Cross? O beloved Jesus? there can I sit, and condemn
whatloever the world does honor and esteem.

O my Savior! what sweetness and allurements are there in thy Sufferings? Here
is our Wisdom, our Justice, our Sanctification and Redemption; Here is the
splendour of the celestial Father, and the Character of his substance, who by
his Word, does support the world. And shall I not take up my Cross and follow
him, (as he has commanded) amidst the many great Affronts, Disgraces, and
Persecutions, suffered by him? Shall I not therein also accompany his Prophets,
the glorious company of his Apostles, and the Noble Army of Martyrs? Did my
Savior fly from Scepters, and run to the Cross? would he have no worldly
Kingdoms, because their Thrones were made of Ice, and their Crowns of Glass,
and shall I not believe, that where he is, there can be no Desert or solitude?

See, see then how the Characters of a suffering God, are the dearest delights
of a sanctified Soul, which is no more it self, but altogether transfigured
with a heavenly transmutation! It lives wholly on the blood of its Savior; it
breathes not, but by his spirit; it speaks not, but by his words; it thinks
not, but by his Meditations. It defies Tribulation, Anguish, Pain, Nakedness,
and Dangers. It adventures amongst bloody Swords and Persecutions, and is no
way affrighted with burning Faggots, and boiling Cauldrons.

And if thou (O my Soul!) art at any time unwilling to part with this Earthly
Tabernacle, think but how willingly the glorious Martyrs of Christ sacrificed
themselves in as many Torments as they had members. They preached on Crosses,
sang in Flames, triumphed on Wheels. Deserts and Tears, Scorchings and Snows,
were nothing to them in the way to that Glory for which thou art unwilling to
forsake a Dung-hil.

But O my God! if thou think it fit to exercise my patience, to try my faith,
to correct my sin, by the wickedness of men, give me grave never to be so
disturbed with the injustice of Creatures, but that I may consider the justice
of thee, who art the most righteous Creator! O let me not be vanquished and
suppressed by the burden of the Cross, but rather enabled by the weight of it,
to walk more steadily in all holiness, Justice, and sobriety, before thee.

And though Affliction here seem like the Cloud, which the Prophet saw to carry
winds and storms in it [but was environed with a golden Circle] yet let it, at
last, be encompassed with the brightness, and smiling felicity of that day,
wherein Calumny shall change it self into Adoration, Rage into astonishment,
and those that are thought lost in the Labyrinth of misery, shall see
themselves consecrated, and carried through their punishments, into the Haven
of Eternal safety!

Be not dismayed then, (O faithful Soul!) in the Sufferings and troubles of
this life! suffer not thy self to be overcome with those Temptations, which
will snatch so rich a Crown out of thy hands! Happy, and for ever blessed will thou be to enter into so incomparable a Glory! when it shall be said unto thee
(having left the Deserts of this world) come now, and dwell in the everlasting
delights of thy God! O throw away those vanities which too much, too much
flattered thee, with the splendors of a deceitful world! Raise up thy self, and
say; O when will that day come, which will restore me a body to render it to
God; a body no longer of frail pondorous and perishable Earth, but a body
immortal, and gilded with the splendors and sufferings of my Savior!

Yea, let us more fix our Thoughts on an Immortality, a Resurrection, an
Eternal Life; a life of God gained for us, by the pains, sweats, and blood of
Jesus, to which he daily invites us; a life which will charm all our Troubles,
sweeten all our rigours, purify all our intentions, animate our virtues, and
at last (after so many hardships and Travels of a wretched life, so many
Calumnies and Reproaches, and after so great a Tumult of miseries) Crown us
with happiness, rest our weather beaten Ark, and bring us into a sweet and
quiet repose.

In Imitation of our Saviors great Patience under his Passion; the Soul
resolves for ever to yield an humble submission to his Will.
THe Soul of Man can hardly entertain any Portion of Gods will, but that
wherein its own is concerned. It is usually more troubled for any chastisement,
then for its sin; yea, it often mourns for sin, rather because it deprives her
of comfort, then because it provokes God: Nay, how hardly can it embrace his
word, with that joy, and his providence, with that contentment, as to say [at
all times] with patient Eli, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good!

Alas! what patience has it in committing sin; but how impatient in
suffering for it? how ready to execute vice; but how unwilling to endure the
punishment? Oh good God! How many years have I retained an inclination to sin?
my Soul is bound (as it were with Iron Chains) in this unhappy Bed. Will there
be no Angel to move the water for me? How strange a thing is it, that God
should be so near us, and yet we so far from him? But alas! we are too much for
the world, too fast nailed to the Earth! He that desires the society of Angels,
must not embarque himself deeply in worldly affairs: God is a Spirit, and he
that intends to receive good from him, must not be a slave to his Body. He that
intends to find Christ, must search for him [as the three Kings did] in the
Manger of his Humility; he must look for him [as the blessed Virgin did] in the
Temple in his piety; yea, he must seek for him [as the Mary's did] in his
Sepulcher, in the imitation of his death:

But where (O Savior! shall I begin thy passion? shall I go with thee into the
Garden? indeed there it begun; there it was, that thy Soul began to be
exceeding sorrowful even unto the death. There it was that thou beggest, That
the Cup might pass from thee, Mat. 26.38, etc. There it was that thou sweatedst
in a cold night on the Ground, in a cold Garden; yea, there it was that those
drops of blood which so freely issued from thy veins, were forthwith congealed
with the Air. Oh thy matchless love! Ah how sweet is the smell of it there, in
thy great Agony.

But shall we follow thee from the Garden into the High Priests Hall? O how
hideous were the outcryes of the rude Rabble against thee! Ah Lord! what was
that which stopped thy ear, that thou would not regard; or silenced thy
Tongue, that thou would not reply, was it not thy Love? Some spit upon thee,
others smiled on thee; some railed on thee, others blasphemed thee; some
scoffed, others buffeted, many accused, and all cried out against thee. But
stay; may we not yet follow thee further, and ascend mount Calvary? Shall we
not here see thee Nailed to the Cross for our sakes? Shall we not here find
thee breathing out thy last, and pouring out thy hearts blood in a shameful
cursed and tormenting way? Ah the depth of thy Love! O the transcendency of thy
affections! No man having ever thus laid down his life for his friends.

Unfortunate Sons of Adam! the effects of whose fond disobedience are now
become so sadly evident! Behold thy Savior cast on the Ground, his knees bent,
his eyes over-flown with Tears; his Hands stretched up toward Heaven [all
covered with gloomy Clouds, and darkness] his heart swollen with grief, and is
ready to break into some loud and doleful complaint against man's Ingratitude. O
my God! what means this universal strife, and contention within thy own breast?
Art thou daunted at the sight of danger? Is the sight of danger become so
frightful to thee? Thou weepedst indeed over Jerusalem, and Mary Magdalen drew
Tears from thy eyes, but not with such astonishment as this.

Thou discoursedst of thy Passion on mount Tabor but with a Glory which
ravished the eyes and hearts of all that beheld it; thou have often professed a
great desire to see the hour of thy suffering; and can horror possibly seize on
thee? Can grief surround thee? cold and stupifying Tears possess thee, now thou
art arrived so near the place of thy wishes? O no! thy great Design is to be
tempted in all things without sin, that we might be comforted in the
tremblings and faintings of our heart, and that we might learn this great and
difficult Lesson, how to comfort our selves at the full Tide of anguish and
Tribulations.

Behold further (O my Soul!) what a glorious Lesson of Patience thy Savior
has set before thy eyes! Bend but thy ears to those sacred words, Not my will,
but thine be fulfilled: and who would think but that the excess of grief should
a little disturb thy memory? Thou fore-saw'st [no question] Blessed Savior!
those Clubs and Lantherns, Soldiers, and Officers, prepared to lay hands upon
thee, and with loud cries and scorns to carry thee to Jerusalem. Jerusalem,
where thon had done so many miracles. Jerusalem, where thou so lately
enteredst with Joy and Triumph; and yet, thou cryedst thy will be done!

Thou well knew that Judges of all sorts, Priests and Divines, and Religious
men which daily ministered at thy. Holy Altar, were appointed to discredit and
accuse thee. That Kings, and Presidents, Jews, and Gentiles, and an infinite
number assembled at this great Feast, would scorn and condemn thee, and yet
still thou cryedst, thy will be done!

Thou beheldest those whips, and scourges, those Spe^rs, and Thorns prepared
to afflict thee; a mock purple, and the ridiculous Scepter of a Reed to vilify
and abuse thee; a heavy Cross, and tearing Nails, unmerciful hands, and
ungrateful hearts to torment and affront thee, yet could no way alter thee from
crying, Thy will be done!

It was no news to thee, that a Murderer should be preferred before thee, and
begged in thy place by thy beloved People, amongst whom thou spentst thy life;
that two Thieves should be thy Companions and fellow sufferers; That Judas
amongst thy own Disciples, should betray thee; that three of thy best friends
should lie sleeping by thee; that Peter himself should deny thee; yea, that all
should shamefully forsake and fly from thee; and yet still O dear Savior) thou
said, Thy will be done!

Thou saw before hand, thy weeping and disconsolate Mother stand at the foot
of thy Cross, and afflicting thy departing Soul, with the sight of thy grief
and disconsolate condition thou leavest her in; and last of all, that thou
should be abandoned on all hands, and not so much as thy life's last breath
spared. O invincible Courage! O admirable Fortitude! which neither life, nor
death, nor things present, nor things to come, nor fears, nor torments, could
so far alter thy resolution, but still thou submittest in these words, Thy will
be done, Lord! and not my own.

But alas! Is there no remedy after all this submission, for thy blessed Soul?
Must thou alone drink of this sower Cup? Must thou alone tread the winepress of
sour Grapes? Alas dearest Savior! where is then the God of Elias? Are his
bowels of mercy turned into Adamant? are the Eternal Springs of Lebanon dried
up? are the Heavens become Iron, that no drops of dew can distill down to
refresh thy languishing Soul? Where are now thy old friends, which were so much
delighted with thy Glory upon mount Tabor; who lately sung so cheerfully at thy
entering into Jerusalem; yea, even solemnly protested their readiness to die
with thee! Alas! they are all asleep! so fast, so dead asleep, that neither
shame nor compassion on their Masters disconsolate condition, can make them to
say so much as one short prayer for themselves.

Oh weak condition of humane friendship! unhappy, and miserably deluded are all
they who build on so false a Bottom! How far better is it to trust in God then
Man? O ill requited Master! is this the fruit of all thy Teachings? Is this thy
reward for all thy Benefits? Is this the Profit of all thy Wonders thou have
made amongst them? What though Judas were tempted with the glittering of
Silver, which dazels the eyes of all the World; yet what Plea have thy beloved
Disciples to excuse their dullness, their coldness, and want of Love? Though
Earth fail, Heaven should be kind.

And now, O my Soul! thou who have been witness to this great Spectacle; What?
shall not this strange and incomparable love of thy Savior, make thee wholly
to go out of thy self? Look [if thou are able to look at so glorious a Light,
or judge of so infinite charity] and tell me what thou can do? Can thou
love any thing after this, but thy Lord Jesus? Can thou affect any thing but
thy dear Savior? Can thy greatest troubles or hardships distaste thee? Thou
complainest indeed of thy Sufferings, but weigh them in this Balance; and
alas! how little cause have thou to complain?

Ah! what poor flea-bitings are those which thou art afflicted with, in respect
of the Torments thy Savior underwent for thee? whom thou thus see to have
traced out the way with his own gored footsteps; having his Head Crowned with
Thorns, his shoulders charged with the infamous Burden of the Cross; his ears
pierced with Reproachful speeches, and his eyes floating with Tears; in which
condition he ascended mount Calvary, and invites thee to follow him.

Were they not thy sins (O my Soul!) which were the Nails that fastened his
Hands, and his Feet? were they not the Spears which pierced his sacred side?
Look upon thy Hypocrisy, which was the kiss that betrayed him? Behold thy
Backslidings, which made his Soul weary to death, which caused the
withdrawment of his Fathers love, and made him cry out that he was forsaken?
Has Christ endured so much for thee, and will thou not suffer a little for
him? Ah happy is that Affliction which is raised from thy Saviors love! How
rich shall we be, when we have him for our Portion? yea, how high, when we
shall see a true contempt of the world under our feet?

May thou forbid (O blessed Jesus!) that I should go about any worldly
Throne, which carries not thy Scepter, or that I should talk of Honors, when
there is mention made of thy Holy Cross! Let all greatness where thou art, not
be baseness unto me; and let me mount up unto thee by those stairs of Humility,
whereby thou came down to me. O let me kiss the paths of that Mount, which
thou have sprinkled with thy precious Blood, and esteem that Cross above all
earthly things, which thou have consecrated by thy cruel pains!

Alas! is it not a shameful thing that God should seek us, among the heats of
his Love and Sufferings, and yet we cannot be found by him? Shall we not
forsake all the Disorders of a sensual life, which hinder the effect of his
Grace? shall we not (with the Samaritan woman) forsake, and leave behind us our
Pitcher, that we may return full of Jesus Christ? shall we not bid farewell to
all those occasions which lead us to sin? O dear Savior (the most pure of all
Beauties!) since it is for thee that so many Champions have peopled Deserts,
and passed the stream of bitterness and sorrow, bearing their Crosses after
thee, and (amongst the most cruel of dolours) have felt the sweetness of thy
presence! shall I shed no Tears for those sins that pierced thee? shall Jesus
carry so many Thorns upon his Head, and shall I have none in my heart?

Alas, my Soul! can thou behold a Crown of Thorns grafted upon a man of
sorrow? what Spectacle alas, is this? no more a man, but a skin dispoiled, and
bloody, taken from the teeth of Tigers and Leopards! Every stroke made a wound,
every wound a fountain of blood. O hideous Prodigies which took away from us
the light of the Sun, and covered the Moon with a sorrowful darkness! Heaven
wears mourning upon his Cross; all the Citizens of Heaven weep over his
Torments. The Earth quakes, the Stones rend, the Sepulchers open, the Dead
arise; and all to teach us [by insensible Creatures] the pity we should take
of his Sufferings!

And, in conclusion of all, what should we hence learn, but [imitating our
blessed Savior, who having sadness in his Soul even to death; yea, taking up a
resolution and deprecation in the approaches thereof, cried out, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me] willingly to submit to all those Sufferings he
shall think fit to lay upon us. Neither to be any way fearful or solicitous, in
what manner God will please to take us to him; or in the least manner to be
troubled touching the place, hour, or manner of our Dissolution, since he that
made us, best knows how to dispose of us as he please, who can give us a
Cordial in our greatest fainting Fits; and therefore his will ought to be the
rule of our Life, and Death, our Sufferings, and our Sorrows, since from him
[who is all goodness of himself] we cannot expect any thing but the best.

Are we mortal, and shall we grieve to die? Shall we not gladly drink of that
Cup, whereof our Savior has begun? Death is unwelcom only to those who have
not mortified their desires and affections, here while they lived; why then
should we have regret to leave so miserable a lise? Why should we be unwilling
to bid adieu and quit this place, where we have endured so many Deaths, and
which has so long been the place of our sorrows?

O my God! what a vain fear then is that which startles me? what a sad
Pensiveness which over-spreads me? Oh when, and where shall I take my flight
unto thee! Do not tell me (O dear Savior!) there is a great Chaos between
thee, and me, since thou have already passed it; and will thou not then lift me
up by thy mercy? I am here (as within the Deserts of Africa) in a burning
world, the drought whereof makes it a habitation for Devils. O my God! I am
tormented in this flame, until some Lazarus be found to dip the end of his
finger in thy blood, to allay the burning of my thirst, and restore me into the
bosom of a merciful God.

O bessed day! when we shall be free from sorrow, and suffering, but not from
comfort, where we shall rest from our Labors, and perfectly enjoy the most
perfect God; who, as he is love it self, will perfectly love us, yea love us
for ever. O comfortable words! how sweet must they needs be to our ears? how
refreshing to our wearied Senses, and languid Spirits?

Ah, What smiles shall we then perceive in that face of Sorrows [and with whom
we have here suffered] when he shall pronounce that joyful sentence, Come ye
blessed of my Father; shall we then repent our Sufferings and Sorrows? are not
the Tears of Repentance sweet unto us? This is that joy which was procured by
sorrow. This is that Crown which was procured by the Cross. Jesus did weep,
that our Tears might be washed away. Our Savior bled, that we might not be
wounded. O blessed Love! Oh, in what a frame will our Soul then be! who can
express? who can conceive the infinite love, and unexpressible joy of so happy
a Union, so sweet a Reconcilement! who can question the love, which he does so
sweetly taste? or doubt of that, which with such joy he feels, when we
shall be incircled in Eternity, and for ever praise him.

FINIS.

