A SERMON PREACHED At the Funeral of the Right Honorable ANNE Countess of
Pembroke, Dorset, and Montgomery, Who died March 22. 1675 / 6. and was Interred
April the 14th following at Appleby in Westmorland.

With some REMARKS On the LIFE of that Eminent LADY

By the Right Reverend Father in God, EDWARD Lord Bishop of Carlisle.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to his most Excellent-Majesty, and
H. Broom at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's, 1677.

A SERMON Preached At the Interrment of the Right Honorable Anne Countess of
Pembroke, Dorset and Montgomery; who died at her Castle of Brougham, March 22th
1675 / 6, and was buried at Appleby April 14th following.
THe occasion of our present meeting being to pay our duty to the Memory of the
Great, and Good, Anne Countess of Pembroke, Dorset, and Montgomery; whose
earthly Relics now lie before us. I sought after a Text which might give me
scope pertinently to speak and recount such things, of this their noble Lady, a
great Pattern of Virtue, and an eminent Benefactor to her Generation; as that
thereby God may be glorified in his Saint, and such Honor given to her Memory,
for all that was praiseworthy of her, that others may be inflamed with the
Love of all those Virtues, which gained Love and Esteem to her in her life; and
shall make precious her Memory after her Death.

Let me therefore desire that your Attentions may accompany my Meditations,
while I treat on that short, but comprehensive portion of Scripture, which is
contained in part of the first verse of the 14th Chapter of the Proverbs of the
Wise King Solomon.

Prove. 14. 1. Every wise Woman builds her House.
THese Words are a full Proposition, a clear Assertion, and although there lies
under the terms some figurative meaning, as in all Proverbial or Parabolical
Sentences there commonly does (even throughout this Book called the Proverbs or
Parables of Solomon) yet these words in the Text come in the plainest kind of
Assertion, the most regular form of a Proposition, Categorical and simple, open
and Affirmative, and with the most universal note of Comprehension. So that if
there be any difficulty by reason of the figurative sense, it may be cleared by
the full scope of the Text, and the business of it dispatched, by answering two
short questions:

Who? and What?
1. Who it is of whom the Assertion in the Text is verified? And, 2. What is
the full scope of the Assertion?
Who, is the Subject in the Proposition. The wise Woman.

And What it is that is asserted? What, To build her House?

These being answered; Then the Copula, the Connection of the parts, the truth
of the Proposition in the literal sense, and also in the Figure will be
manifest, and made easy to our Application, and suitable to the occasion of our
present meeting: And so also the truth of the Proposition will be amplified by
one great instance, an evident Example here before us; that both the Subject of
my Meditations, and of your Contemplations (what we hear and see) may also be
the Subject of what we read, the Proposition in the Text; a Woman, adorned with
the Adjunct Wise; a wise Woman presented to your Memory. And being such, the
Assertion that she built her House (in the Letter as well as in the Figure)
built her House, that is, did all things necessary, decent and convenient for
the building of it, brought the greatest blessings desirable to her House,
shall be manifested by many instances.

I must first remind you that the manner of expressing the great and important
truths in this Text (as in this Book of the Proverbs) is for the most part
Figurative, Synecdochical, Allegorical, by Parables, Proverbs and Similitudes.

Men of the greatest Wisdom and Spirit, even those who spoke by the Holy
Spirit, the Penmen of the Holy Writ, have thought it fit to cloth such
Truths, as of themselves are simple, and naked, with these kind of Rhetorical
Ornaments; to draw men's more considerate attentions and researches, to fix the
eyes of the mind more earnestly on them. By these Goads and Nails, as the
Eccles. 12. 11.
wise Preacher tells us, to rowse up dull Affections, and to fasten the things
in our mind, least at any time we should let them slip. Thus Holy Job and the
Prophets, thus Holy David, as well as his wise Son King Solomon, opened their
Mouths in Parables; nay, a greater than Solomon here, our Blessed Savior did
open to the people his Wisdom in Parables so frequently, that St. Mat. 13. 34.
we are told, All these things spoke Jesus unto the multitude in Parables, and
without a Parable spoke he not unto them.

This Text then, short in Words, but full in Sense, has no less than four
Figurative expressions, the Terms, and the other which bear any Emphasis, or
matter to make up the Proposition have something of Scheme or Figure in them.

1. The subject here, to whom this excellent work in the Text is ascribed,
Woman, we must allow to be so far figurative as, (to say no more) by a
Synecdoche, under one to comprehend both Sexes (or the species;) For no doubt
but what is asserted here of the Woman her Act, Virtue or Duty, belongs even in
the first place to the other Sex, Man, Building being more properly his, the
Manswork; and it may be as truly said, Every wise man builds his House.

The Note or Enquiries here, then might be, why, here and in other places of
the Holy Scripture, in this Book of the Proverbs more especially, so many great
sayings and deeds are attributed to, or have had their instances in Women, in
the Female, whereas the same might be exemplified or said much more of men.

It were needless to speak much of this, yet there might be some Reasons given,
and on this occasion I shall briefly touch upon a few, Why great Actions, and
the procuring great blessings, have had designedly their instances in that Sex,
and that the excellencies of Women have been so often and in all Ages recorded.

One Reason might have been to put an Honor on that weaker Sex, lest the proud,
or more exalted nature of man should undervalue, look down upon, and despise
that Sex, as too much inferior to men.

For that in those things wherein man's greatest excellency consists, the Soul,
and its Faculties, we are told by Scripture-philosophy, that all souls are
equal, made so by God, all come out of the Hand of God with equal Faculties,
and when they return to God, shall in their degrees, be Crowned with equal
Glory. All souls are of the same Kind and Order; Souls know no Sexes; when
separate, are (...) like to the Angels, Marry not, nor are given in Marriage;
In Christ Jesus neither Male nor Female, all stand alike related to Christ, as
they who hear and obey his Word are his Mother, and Brother, and Sister, stand
in equality of Relation in identity of Sex. Souls I say in Substance are alike
perfect, it is accidental that other things come, Infancy, Childhood, Age,
Infirmities; Souls know nor feel such things from their own pure principles;
these flow from Union with the Body, the Crasis and Temperaments of the
Elements, otherwise I say souls would not Pati Senium, souls of men and women
are alike immortal.

3. Women have been the Instruments to convey great blessings to their
Generations; nay, by a woman was conveyed the Greatest Blessing to mankind, our
Blessed Savior, for whom all Generations Shall call her Blessed.

As God made the first Adam, the Father of all mankind, without the help of a
woman, and by taking woman out of man's flesh peopled the World, so God took the
second Adam out of woman, without the help of a man, from whence has issued
the Holy Seed, which has replenished the Church.

4. Women have given as great examples of Virtue in every kind (and in some
kinds of Learning) as men have done.

It were endless to instance, or compare, we find Women to have been adorned
with as great Eulogies in Histories Sacred or Profane, as men have been.

Hence we find them memorable in so many Addresses to them by Epistles and
Panegyrics while they were living; Celebrated by Elegies, Funeral Orations and
Epitaphs when they were dead; Canonized, placed in the highest degrees of
happiness which Opinion, Fame, or Faith could give them after their death.

I need not bring to witness the most Learned of the Heathen Writers, Tully,
Seneca, Plutarch especially, who has written a Book purposely of the Virtuous
deeds of Women. Greg. Nazianzen sets out the great praise of Gorgonia, Basil of
Matrina, St. Ambrose of Marcellina, St. Hierom of Eustochium, Marcella, Asella,
etc. He, and St. Austin directs many Epistles, and some of their Books or
Treatises to Eustochium, Paulina, Proba and others; women pious and exercised
in the learning which the Holy Scripture teaches. Nay, the beloved Apostle,
Evangelist and Divine, St. John directs his Epistle to a Lady; either to a
particular Eminent Woman as the most averr; or if to the Church Catholic, as
some would conjecture, yet under the Scheme of a Lady, a Woman.

What Honorable and frequent mention do we find in the Old and New Testament,
of Women Eminent for Prudence, Constancy, Courage, Piety, and all Graces, as if
the Female Spirit had had the ascendant, and had been productive of the highest
and most memorable Achievements and Effects. Most Languages, and those who
have set out the greatest things, have commonly shadowed and represented them
under the Hieroglyphics, Figure, and Scheme of a Woman.

The Earth it self, the four parts of it, Great Monarchies and Commonwealths,
as a Great Queen or Lady. So the Scriprure frequently speaks of great Cities,
Daughter of Babylon, of Tire, Danghter of Jerusalem, of Zion.

Nay further, thus the Church, the Synagogue and Jewish, thus the Church of
Christ is expressed and represented; a Spotless Virgin, the Spouse of Christ,
the King's Daughter. The Woman, Rev. 12. 1. The wonder in Heaven, clothed with
the Sun, the Moon under her Feet, with a Crown of Stars on her Head; this a
representation of the Church, Jewish by some, Christian by others.

Lastly, all the Virtues Intellectual, Moral, Prudence, Justice; Nay, even the
Theological, Faith, Hope and Charity, in the import of their names, the
Properties and things ascribed to them, are represented under the Schemes and
Figures of Women. Even this Wisdom it self is so set out through this whole
Book of the Proverbs. Wisdom calls, she lifts up her voice, invites by sweet,
yet Powerful Arguments the simple, and those that lack Understanding, to be her
Proselytes; Say unto Wisdom thou art my Sister, and call Understanding Prove. 7.
4.
thy Kinswoman. And therefore this great Action and Blessing in this Text
figuratively expressed by building the House is fitly here attributed to a wise
Woman, as the same thing had been before, Chap. 9. 1. of Wisdom it self, under
the Figure of some magnificent Queen or Lady erecting some stately Fabric.
Wisdom has builded her House, she has hewn out her seven Pillars, i. e. she
has built, as all the wise do, with Symetry, with Strength, Beauty and Order.
That shows her a wise builder.

And that is the Epithet or Adjunct to the Woman building in the Text, wise,
every wise Woman

Wise. The word rendered from the Original, literally is the wise of Women, and
so as Grammarians note, admits some Figure here, but we need not recede from
our own Translation.

Wise, the Subject is so denominated from the Habit, Wisdom, which is
demonstrated by Arts suitable to it, and gives the Title of Wise.

But neither this, nor the Habit of Wisdom is to be taken in so strict a sense,
as Philosophers commonly do, making it only one of those which they call the
Intellectual Habits, and to be only Speculative, and so define it by knowledge
of all things Divine and Humane, from whence those who studied, and sought
after such Knowledge or Wisdom, gained the Title of Philosophers, Lovers and
Searchers after Wisdom.

To omit what others restrain it unto, who define Wisdom to be the knowledge of
the highest things, and their Causes.

It may suffice in this place, to take wisdom in that large sense, which this
wise Author of the Book of the Proverbs does, throughout this Book, chiefly in
the beginning of it; where he discovers the Heavenly root of the knowledge from
whence the true wisdom grows, namely, the fear of the Lord. And this imports a
knowledge of God, such as has always a religious and awful fear of him joined
with it, and an endeavor to know and practice all things which conduce to his
Worship and Glory, and to man's happiness. Plainly, it is to be wise to
Salvation. Therefore this wisdom cannot be a single, nor only a speculative
Habit, nor destitute of any of the other Intellectual or Moral Habits, but they
all minister unto it as means to attain the highest end; God, and Happiness:
but in the first place it may intimate those habits which more immediately
perfect the Understanding, Knowledge, Prudence, Discretion, Sagacity, Sound
Judgment and good Understanding. These are Wisdom's Companions, or rather
Handmaids, always attending upon her, and after these all moral Virtues will
vinculo sororio, as they say, willingly follow. Whosoever is wise will seek after
all these, all Virtue, these constitute a wise Man, or Woman. This is the wise
Woman in the Text.

This may answer the first Question, Who?

Both why a Woman is here the instance; and who is this wise Woman? The Subject
in the Proposition on which is founded this Assertion in the Text. That she
builds her House.

And that brings in the second Query, What? is meant by building her House?

The Design of King Solomon in this Text, being to set out the praise of a wise
Woman, or rather of Wisdom under the Scheme and Figure of a Woman. He instances
in that part of Wisdom, or of Philosophy, which is esteemed by all Philosophers
to be most proper to that Sex, namely, the Oeconomical, or what appertains to
the House, the well ordering of that: which although it be an equal Duty,
(where the Family is complete and mixed of man and wife) belonging to the Man as
well as to the Woman, yet in regard the Man's employment is commonly more
abroad, and without doors, the well ordering of the House seems to be more
particularly, the Woman's Office; who therefore in our English is properly
called the House-wife, and if she perform that part well, Good Housewifery is
her praise. And where even the chief Government of the Family is in the Woman,
singly, yet her part will be most within the House.

The House is the Woman's Province, her Sphere wherein she is to Act, while she
is abroad she is out of her Territories; she is as a Ruler out of his
Jurisdiction.

And therefore our wise King Solomon makes it not only a Brand of a bad
House-wife, but of an ill-woman, Prove. 7. 11. That her seet abide not in her
house; And St. Paul makes it a Character of idle House-wives, 1 Timothy 5. 13.
That they learntobe idle, wandering about from house to house. And he gives
charge in the next verse. Let the Woman guide the house; and Tit, 2. 5. That
they be, as, Discreet and Chaste, so, Keepers at home. A good Housewife seems
wedded to her House, as well as to her Husband. Thus King Solomon may intimate
in the first place, the Economy in General of a Wise Woman.

But the principal thing, and the great Honor in Economy is to be the Founder
and Builder of the House. He who has Builded the house, has more honor then
the house, (Heb. 3. 3.) or then any belonging to the house. So that by this
manner of expressing the chief thing that belongs to the House, the very
Building of it is here attributed to the Wise Woman; made her part and praise
in this Text.

Therefore both these Terms, House and Building, being, as I did premise
before, Figurative and Metaphorical, the plain sense and meaning of them will
be; that a wise (and virtuous) Woman performs the principal, the greatest and
most necessary thing (as Building is) to the House; that is, to the Family, to
the Children, to the Servants, and to whomsoever, or whatsoever may be
comprehended under this Metonymy, the Notion of House; chiefly viva domus, the
Household, as Prove. 31. 27. She looks well to the Household, or as Joshua 24.
15. I and my House, (that is, all persons belonging to my House) will serve the
Lord. And this is farther extended and comprehends all the Descents, Relates or
Clientels, as they say of Families; these are belonging to the House; As the
Honse of David, the House of Saul; All these are contained under that Metonymy
of the House.

So that the Sum of what may thus be collected, is, That the wise Woman's
building her House is, doing all things which belongs to good Economy; the
well ordering of a Family, as Aristotle in his Treatise of that Science tells
us, that the wise Matron or Mother of the Family is to the House, as the Soul
to the Body, and moves all under her in their several Stations, orders all
things and persons within the House, and takes care for them; and all this, as
by an Art, as by written Laws and Rules of Economy, or good Housewifery.

And in this Text this is comprehensively the wise Woman's building the House,
well ordering of all within her House, belonging to her Family in the largest
sense.

There is, I confess, noted by some Interpreters, another sense of the word
House, that which they call a Tropological, or some a Moral sense, when the
Figure is carried inwardly to the Soul and the manners, so that as House may
signify first an Artificial and Material House; and then by the Metonymy, the
Oeconomical House, the Family; so in the Trope, they tell us of a Moral House,
whose materials are Virtue, a Spiritual House, which is made up of Grace; but
this I shall pass by here, intending to resume it briefly, when I shall come to
apply the Text to the present occasion.

Thus you have seen both the Questions answered, Who is the wise Woman; the
Subject of the Assertion; and What is asserted, in saying, She builds her
House.

Now remains the Copula, or Connection of the Terms, the truth of the Assertion
to be proved, And that, as I told you, by one great Instance; waving briefly
the ordinary Method of Logical Proofs, by Arguments Topical or Apodictical, I
say this shall be represented in the Instance here laid before you; the Remains
of a great Personage, in whom may be comprehended all that has been said of a
Woman, a wise Woman, applying her Wisdom to this great End and Effect (in all
the Senses which the Letter, or Figure will bear) of building her House.

So that for Method's sake, the words as they stand in their Natural and
Proper, together with their Parabolical and Figurative sense, shall be the Clew
which shall lead me through all the Labyrinths, the Passages and Rooms of this
great House, while I shall apply the Letter of the Text, by a Figure, to the
Subject before us on this occasion.

1. At the first then, we see a Woman, which might lead us to consider only
what is Natural, either in the Original from what Stock she came, or the
Portions wherewith Nature endued her.

But as to the former, I need not be her Herald. Her Blood flowed from the
Veins of three anciently enobled Families, Cliffords, Viponts, and Vesseys;
Lords and Barons in the North; and she added (to her Escotcheons) Pembroke,
Dorset and Montgomery, the Titles of three great Earldoms in the South.

But as St. Hierom professed, when speaking upon a like Argument, the praises
of Marcella, a noble Roman Lady, and of high Descent: Nihil in illa laudabo,
nisi quod proprium, he would not praise her for any thing, but what was purely
her own: So for me, let this deserving Lady, be praised only by her own
Achievements. The Additions of Honor wherewith her self adorned her
Ancestors; Prove. 31. 31.
The Fruits of her Hands, her own Works, these shall praise her in the Gate.

2. You look at a Woman; but, one of those whom Nature had blessed with her
best Dowries. Men's sana, in corpore sano, is the sum of Nature's gifts. She had
a clear Soul shining through a Vivid Body; her Body Durable and Healthful, her
Soul Sprightful, of great Understanding and Judgment, faithful Memory, ready
Wit.

These are great Advantages for Wisdom and Virtue; and without these, without
the aids of a healthful well-constituted Body, fitted to serve the Commands of
a great Mind; seldom any Great and Heroic Actions can be produced. Wisdom if
it be not well seated, has not fit space and room, nor well disposed Organs;
cannot exert, or lay out it self; without Tools the best Artificer, cannot
finish any Work, nor bring it to Perfection, although never so well projected
and begun.

Her Body was a faithful Servant to her Mind; had served it fourscore and six
Years, and was useful in all the dispatches of her Will; she had accustomed her
Body to the Yoke; she had trained it up so well in all Virtuous Exercises, by
her admirable Temperance, that she had it perfectly at her Command, and wholly
at the Discretion of her Soul. A thing not very observable in this Age of the
World, amongst Men or Women. The Body, the will of the Flesh, commonly governs
the Man. The Soul in most is drudge to the Body; imploys its Wit, and all its
Faculties to serve the Interests and Needs of the Body, To make Provision for
the Flesh; a Delicate and Luxurious Master.

So that, truly, if some Vertuoso's had not been convinced of an extraordinary
and sublime Spirit in Man, (scarce intelligible by old Philosophy) and some
gripes of Conscience had not whispered, that it is immortal, capable of Eternal
Bliss or Pain, some of their Epicurean Wits would hardly have believed there is
such a thing as a Soul, in the Vulgar notion of Divines. But if they could well
dress, had Salt to relish, could feed and satisfy the Cravings of the Body;
they then did, been sapere, were wise and happy enough, as happy as Soul could
wish: Indeed when we observe what care some of this Sex, nay, of either Sex, do
take about their Body; making it their whole days work, first to adorn, then to
glut, then to recreate their Body, then to lay it asleep; not allowing one of
twenty-four hours, to speak with, or pray for their Soul; much less to take it
to task, and employ it in Religious and Virtuous Exercises (the Meat and Drink,
as necessary to preserve Life in the Soul, as those are in the Body;) I say,
this Carnality might make the Vulgar believe, that although Preachers, and some
Women talk of Souls, yet in truth, there is no such thing.

This excellent Lady then, who neglected, or spent so little Time or Pains
about her Body, except it were to make it serviceable to her Soul; which she
adorned with her chief care and diligence, may serve for a glass or Mirror,
for others of that Quality, or Sex, to dress themselves by her Example.

So that although nature framed her but as the Subject of this Text, a Woman;
yet she having a Body so well ordered, as well as built; a Soul endued by
nature with such acute Faculties, we need not doubt to give her the Adjunct,
which is given to the Woman here in the Text, to call her Wise; to say that in
Her the World had found, and has lost, a wise, a virtuous Woman.

For that is it; Virtue, which only makes and denominates a Woman wise; wise and
virtuous are almost Terms reciprocal; every wise woman is virtuous, and all the
virtuous are Wise.

It was a strange Question for King Solomon to ask, Prove. 31. 10. having had
seven hundred wives,) Who can find a virtuous woman? And it was as strange that
he should answer that Question, when he was become a Preacher, Eccles. 7. 27.
Behold this have I found, (says the Preacher) counting one by one to find out
the account. And what was the sum total, when he had cast up his Account? Why!
it is come to one, and none; one man among a thousand have I found, but a woman
(a virtuous woman he means) among all these have I not found; and He had the
full number of a thousand, seven hundred Wives, three hundred Concubines.) The
meaning is, that a truly Virtuous Woman was a rarity in his time, even while
King Solomon was a Preacher.

But I hope the World is better since, better for his Preaching, but especially
for the Preaching of the Gospel; and although the number of the wise and
virtuous men and women be not so great as were to be desired, yet, God be
thanked, we want not Examples more plentiful in this looser Age, of either Sex;
and here we have one Eminent before us, a Woman, who deserved the Title of
Virtuous, and therefore of Wise; a wise and virtuous Woman.

Therefore to demonstrate this rarely ennobled Woman to have deserved this
greatest mark of Honor, to have been truly Wise, I will not stray from my Text
in the proof of it; but set forth her Wisdom from the great Effect of Wisdom,
set down in this Text, under the Allegory of Building her House; taking the
liberty which the Scheme of the Text allows, to extend it to all which so
copious a Figure comprehends; but still having regard to the scope, and chief
intent of the Text, That by building the House, we may intend the deriving of
blessings, most noble, most useful, most necessary to her Family, to her
Allies, and to the Generation wherein she lived, for which, that, and many
other Generrtions may call her blessed.

I did put you in mind before of several Houses which the Allegory comprehends;
viz. the Artificial, or material House, the Oeconomical House, the Family, the
Moral House, whose materials are Virtues; and the Spiritual House, built by
Grace. In all these she has made it to appear that she was a great Builder.

Now first, that this wise Woman declared her wisdom in building her House in a
literal sense, the material House, I can call you all to witness, who have seen
so many Houses of her famous Ancestors, which Time had ruined, War, or sad
Accidents demolished, rebuilt by her, raised out of their Rubbish, or decays,
to their former greatness and beauty.

To have been a great Builder (if wisdom and discretion were overseers of the
Work) was in all Ages accounted an Heroic thing; sufficient to commend the
Fame and praise of such Builders to all Posterity.

To build, importing a design of a great mind, studying to be beneficial to
Posterity; whom Builders commonly intend to accommodate and gratify. Thereby
Princes, and the greatest of Men, have gained to themselves the greatest Renown.

Certainly, none had greater Fame upon Earth than King Solomon, nor was his
name exalted higher for any thing which his Wisdom enabled him to perform, than
for his Building the Temple, and his Houses.

Thus Trajan, the best of the Emperors (while they were Heathen) was the
greatest Builder, the most renowned, the best beloved. It Is made a signal
blessing, Isa. 58. 12. To be a builder of the old waste places, to raise up the
Foundations of many generations, to be called the repairer of the breaches, the
restorer of paths to dwell in.

But, because I am recounting the praise of a Woman; the first, as I take it,
that is extolled for this in Story, was a Woman, the Babylonian Semiramis; to
whom, for that, and her famous Acts, Berosus.
a Prime Historian tells us, that no Man could ever be compared.

And it was a Woman also who gave the Pattern to the greatest Princes, how to
build their Monuments with most Magnificence. That Monument which She called
after her Husband, Mausolus his name, had the honor to give the name to the
noblest Monuments of Emperors, and the greatest Princes in the World, the most
famous of that kind since, being called Mausolaea.

But as in all Great Actions, so in this of Building, the End is to be
considered; which not being wisely done, many have erected buildings to their
Folly, and their Houses (which they designed for Glory) have been called by
that name for want of a Wise Master Builder to foresee the End for which they
built.

As most of the Pompous Builders of old, those vain Persons who built their
Babel, and the proud King his Babylon, to get a Name, or a vainglory; and
therefore they did, as Tully terms it, struere insanas moles, amass together
wild and confused heaps, vast bulks, things of more admiration than use.

Let us therefore see what kind of Buildings this wise Woman erected, and for
what end they were repaired, or built: And here we shall find, that Piety and
Charity, Gratitude and Kindness, were her Inciters to this Work; that all her
Buildings were for God, or for the Poor, or for the Honor of her Progenitors,
or the Benefit of her Posterity: these were the ends which she propounded* to
her self in building.

Indeed, one of the first things (as I was informed) which she built, was (what
Jacob had first done) a Pillar. She built a Pillar, a Monument which stands in
the Highway, at the place where her endeared Mother and she last parted, and
took their final farewell. And as Jacob did, she poured oil upon this pillar,
the oil of Charity, pouring down then, and yearly since, (and that the Cruce of
oil may never fail, ordered to be always continued;) at a set day every year a
sum of money, that oil to make glad the heart of the poor; and withal to be as
a precious ointment to perfume her pious Mother's Memory, that her good name,
and their mutual dearness of Affection might be engraven, and remembered by
their Posterity and the Poor to all generations.

A good omen of a happy Builder, whose foundations are Charity and Piety; the
Sapphires and Agats mentioned, Esa. 54. 11.

But her Buildings for Charity were larger than a Pillar; such as gave Shelter
and Maintenance to the Poor. Besides the repairs and restoring of an
Almshouse, built and endowed by her pious Mother, Margaret Countess of
Cumberland, she built At Bearmky.
an Almshouse in this Place, and made decent provision Appleby.
for thirteen poor women, a Mother and twelve Sisters, as she called them, to
the perpetual relief of the poor and destitute; and that Alms and Devotion
might not be separated, she gave allowance for the Prayers of the Church to be
daily administered to them.

Indeed she might have an eye to Charity in all her Buildings, by which she did
set the poor on work, thus curing their idleness, as well as supplying their
indigency.

Secondly, Gratitude to her Ancestors was another End of her building, that she
might with some cost hold up, what they with such vast expense had founded and
built.

Six ancient Castles, ample and magnificent, which her noble Ancestors had
built, and sometimes held up with great honor to themselves, security to their
Sovereigns, and hospitality to their Friends and Strangers; now, by the rage of
War, or Time, or Accidents, pulled or fallen down, or made un-inhabitable,
scarce one of those six that showed more than the Sceleton of an House; her
reviving Spirit puts life into the work, made ( all these dry bones live) these
scattered Stones come together; those Ruins forsake their Rubbish, and lift up
their* Heads to their former height. A mavelous task it was which she
undertook, to design the re-building so many, and such great Fabrics; to rear
up them, when the earthly house of her Tabernacle began to stoop and decline;
being about the sixtieth year of her Age when she began: who then could hope to
finish? but when she did consider in her great mind, did think (as Psalm. 102.
14.) upon the stones, and it pitied her to see them in the dust One had lain
140 years desolate, after the Fire had consumed it. ( Brough-Castle the Timber
burned, Anno 1521.) Another 320 years, after the invading Scots had wasted it.
( Pendragon-Castle, wasted by David King of Scots, Anno 1341.)
. Her Prudence (as with her hands) set on the work, raised, cemented, finished;
and where others might have thought it glory enough to have been the Restorer
of any one, she laid the Top-stone on them all. These Houses, the End of her
building them was, I say, Gratitude to her Ancestors: and also,

Thirdly, Kindness to her Posterity and Successors, that they might find the
blessing of Canaan, Houses which they built not, accommodations ready prepared
for them.

But lastly, She could not forget the main End of her building, Piety to God,
in re-building, or repairing his Houses, Churches, or Chapels. She rebuilt,
or, by repairing, restored six Houses of her own, but of God's Houses seven
Brougham, Nine-Kirks, Appleby, Bongate, Mallerstang, Barden, Skipton.
. She had no dwelling for her self, where God had not a House to be worshipped
publicly, besides private Oratories in her Houses.

If now I could set before your eyes, or before your Imaginations, six Castles,
seven Churches or Chapels, besides the two Almshouses, and other inferior
subservient Buildings, which she made, or made useful; if I could represent all
these before you in one Landscape or view, you would imagine you saw something
greater than an Escurial: an eighth Wonder, or something more wonderful than
the seven, which the Heathen World has boasted of; at least more Beneficial to
the world than they. Some of those Wonders were (possibly) but Poetical; built
but by fancy; all of them (as I take it) these great and monstrous Buildings,
were to no greater End than to make the name of the Builders Endless. But all
this wise Woman's Buildings, as you see, were to some good End, were given
either to Charity toward the Poor, Gratitude to her Ancestors, Kindness to her
Posterity, or Dedicated to the Worship of God.

As that good Emperor Trajan was by his emulous Successor (finding his Name or
Motto on so many Walls built by himself) called Parietaria, a Wall-flower, a
flower (which seldom dies, or easily revives) with us, a flower fragrant, and
of a sweet smell; so let the name of this Excellent Lady live, and grow, and be
a fragrancy; be a sweet savor to all those who shall possess or find
Hospitality, or Charity, or the Service of God celebrated within these Walls,
or any of them, which she has thus erected or restored.

And thus much for this Wise Woman's building her material House.

Secondly, Her Family. The Allegory leads me to another House worth your
viewing, and that is it which seems most aimed at in the Text; and the building
of which is a greater instance of a Wise Woman than any outward building can
be. This is the Oeconomical House, the Building, that is to say, the
well-ordering of a Family.

The doing of which is a piece of so great Skill and Wisdom, that Wise men,
Philosophers and Moralists, Aristotle himself has given it a place, and name of
a particular Science (amongst those which are the Prudential) Economy;
directing in it, by as good Rules and Precepts as in any other, in any part of
Moral Philosophy. And it is indeed as necessary that the World should be well
instructed in this, as in any other Science in the whole Circle.

For Mankind, which is made up of single Persons, could not have been
supported, if they had been to live always separate and single; and not formed
themselves into Society, which supposes Government, made up of Order, and that
supposes subordination.

It is true, every particular man has a government in himself; is a King in
Plato's sense, has a Body and Soul, Passions and Members, Words, and Thoughts
under his Power and Government; Ethics, Moral Philosophy teaches this Art of
Selfgovernment.

But man being intended for Society, the first rank of that is a Family; it is
the Science of Economy teaches to rule that well, to Order the house. Now in
this House the Subordinate in it are chiefly the Children, Servants, and
Retainers; And to continue the Allegory, the Building of this House is the
Governing, the Providing for, the Nourishing and Maintaining, the Ordering and
Well-disciplining of these by certain Rules, of which Wise men have said much
in their Books; and of which we find much in the Book of God; this Book of the
Proverbs most copiously. So also in the New Testament ( Ephesians. 5. chapter 6. Coll.
3. 4. Tit. 2. and dispersedly in several other Places.

And certainly good Economy, or right ordering of a Family, is a noble and
profitable Art, to be learned by much prudent thinking and consideration;
Although the World think little of it, and few study this Art, deeming
themselves naturally wise enough, or inspired with the knowledge of this; if
they have means and conveniences to set up a Family, they govern it by rote,
not by Rule; if they be rich enough to support it, they mind not to govern
(morally) otherwise than by Had-I-wist, hand over head, as things fall out
contingently; I mean as to the Moral, or Religious part of governing, live like
( Nomades or Tartars) those that live at random.

Now this neglect of Government in a Family, breeds the greatest mischief in
the World; spreads disorder over the face of the Earth. Families illordered
will make ill-governed Cities, and these mis-govern'd, will fill the whole
Commonwealth and Kingdom with disorder and confusion; Families being the first
Principles of Bodies public, the Seminaries which stock Cities, out of which
Kingdoms and Commonwealths do grow.

There is no greater cause of decay to the Commonwealth, nor bane to the
Church, than want of Discipline and good Order in Families, especially as to
one branch of them; mis-governing, and ill-educating of Children, who are the
first Elements of Cities and Kingdoms: Undisciplined and bad Children, will
hardly make good men, nor honest Common-wealths-men, nor wellprincipled
Subjects, of which a Kingdom consists.

Train up a child then in the fear of the Lord, season a new Vessel with
wholesome Liquor; if they at first are not seasoned with good, or if bad
principles be infused into them, they will (without extraordinary Grace do
renew them) carry a tang, and ill savor to old age. Mis-government in this
part of the Family, vicious humors in Children, like a fault in the first
concoction, breeds an exuberancy of habits, seldom to be corrected and purged
out.

Now this part of Family-Government chiefly belongs to Women; who, when men's
occasions call them out, are commonly fixed to the House, as Intelligences to
their Sphere; who, although the man, as the primum mobile, directs the general
motion of all; yet the particular and regular inclinations in the Children are
commonly formed by the Woman; and if she be indeed intelligent and Wise, none
can do it better. Children well instituted in Gynaeceo, as plants well ordered
in the Nursery, will thrive, and prosper, and fill the World with good fruit.

Now this House, the Family, and the well-governing of it in all the members
(which is indeed the building of it) this Wise Woman did perform with greatest
Providence and Prudence. Her Children, which were but two Lady Margaret
Countess of Thanet, and Isabella Countess of Northhampton.
, that grew up to perfect age; she built them up in the nurture and fear of the
Lord; seasoned them with sound Principles of Religion, as was sufficiently
evident to those who have known them, and their constancy to the true Religion,
in which they were trained up; teaching their Children the same Principles
which they had sucked with their Mothers milk.

This excellent Lady had, I say, but two to build on; but God did so bless
them, even in the sight of their Mother, that she saw them arrive at the pitch
and praise of Wise Women. And by their issue they gave her Pregnant hopes, that
they would build up, or keep up the House of her Ennobled Family, like Rachel
and Leah, which two did build the house of Israel. So that her Children, and
her Childrens Children, and their Children, did spring up, crave, and receive
her Blessing; and shall always call her Blessed, who has intayled such
Blessings upon them, by her Affection, Piety, and Providence, Prove. 13. 22.

Next, As to her Servants domestic, she well knew that they were pars domus;
and how necessary a part of the House the Servants are, and therefore to be
kept tight, sustained, and carefully to be held up, if in decay, repaired; and
therefore this part of her House she was always building or repairing by the
hand of her bounty, as well as by good and Religious Order in her Family.
Indeed she looked on some (and possibly on some of the meaner sort of her
trusty Servants, whose Offices might occasion their nearer attendance) to be
such as Seneca allows them to be, humiles amici, Good Servants are humble
Friends. As Friends in no ill nor insignificant complement, style themselves
humble Servants to their Friend, true Friends being willing to stoop to the
meanest offices of Servants, when their Friends need requires it. Therefore as
many great and wise Governors of Families have been observed to do, in certain
seasons to condescend, let down themselves and their state, by taking up their
discreeter Servants, into some degree of Familiarity with them; so, I say, this
Heroic Lady would, (besides the necessary discoursing with them about her
Affairs) divert her self by familiar conversation with her servants; in which
they were sure (besides other gains from her bountiful hands) to gain from the
words of her mouth something of Remarque; whether pleasant or profitable, yet
very memorable for some or other occasion of life. So well did she observe the
Wise man's Caution, Eccesiasticus, 4. 30. Be not a Lion in thy house;
intimating that some are always in rage, and brawl, and fright their Family
from their presence; her Pleasantness and Affability made their very addresses
a great part of their preferment.

It was indeed observable, that although she clothed her self in humble and
mean attire, yet like the wise and virtuous Woman, Prove. 31. 21. She clothed
her household with scarlet; her allowance and gifts were so bountiful, and so
frequent to them, that they might afford to clothe themselves in such Garb, as
best became the servants of so great and so good a Mistress. And some of the
Wise have thought it a great Error, and against the Rules of Oeconomics, to be
niggardly to good Servants, to grow richer by such a thrift as makes the
Servant's back bare, or belly empty, to fill the Master's Purse.

But although in this she did follow the pattern given to all the Wise, Prove.
31. 15. Give meat to her household, and in such a plenty, that Hospitality and
Charity might have their portion with them; while she her self was contented
with any pittance, little in quantity, (but enough to keep life and Soul
together, as we say) Viands not costly or rare, not far fetched and dear
bought, but such as were at hand, parable and cheap. Yet here I may be bold to
tell you something to wonder at; That she much neglected, and treated very
harshly one Servant, and a very Ancient one, who served her from her Cradle,
from her Birth, very faithfully, according to her mind; which ill usage
therefore her Menial Servants, as well as her Friends and Children, much
repined at. And who this Servant was, I have named before. It was her body,
who, as I said, was a Servant most obsequious to her Mind, and served her
fourscore and six years.

It will be held scarce credible to say, but it is a truth to averr, that the
Mistress of this Family was dieted more sparingly, and I believe, many times
more homely, and clad more coursly and cheaply than most of the Servants in her
House; her Austerity and Humility was seen in nothing more, than (if I may so
allude to Coloss. 2. 23.) in neglecting of the body, not in any honor to the
satisfying of the Flesh.

Whether it were by long custom, to prove with how little Nature may be
content; and that, if the Appetite can be satisfied, the Body may be fed with
what is most common and cheap. She taught us that Hunger and Health seek not
Delicacies nor Fullness.

O that those who think they cannot live, except they fare deliciously every
day, would but make trial one year, how they may preserve their own health, and
save their poor brethren from starving (by hunger or nakedness) out of those
superfluities and surfeits, by which they destroy themselves. That those who
clothe themselves in Purple (beyond what their station or estate requires)
would inquire into more particulars than I can yet inform them, of this great
Ladies Abstinencies and humble Attire, and how successful they were to her long
Life, with Health and Reputation.

Some Texts out of this Book of the Proverbs, the Parable of Dives, and even
this Ladies Example, might supply the defective Application of a Sermon; reform
or shame Gluttony, cause vain Gallantry to impose sumptuary Laws to it self,
sit content with homebred fare, home-growing, and homespun manufacture, and
not run to France or Persia, to fetch form or matter for their Pride.

This opulent Lady might, if she had pleased, have fetched from far, and at the
dearest rates, provisions for the flesh, the Back or Belly, but her greatest
appetite was after Wisdom, and she knew as well as Seneca, that Corpora in
sagina, animae in mane, Ep. 88.
that in a fatted Body, commonly dwells a lean, and starved Soul; and had heard
of St. Gregorie's Aphorism, Wisdom is seldom found in terra suaviter viventium,
it will not thrive so kindly in those territories, where men delight to fare
deliciously every day.

We may conclude that this great Matron, who had such Command over her self,
knew how to Deny her self; had learned our Savior's lesson of Self-denial; and
St. Paul's Affirmation (1 Cor. 9. 27.) might be hers; Contundo corpus meum, I
keep under my Body, and bring it into subjection. These Abridgments were in
this Lady a Mortification, which Humility and Modesty concealed, but which
Wisdom and Resolution did put in practice.

I should now have done with that part of Economy which respects her Servants,
but that she had another way of Building, as to them; namely, building them up
in the most holy Faith; and also giving them their meat in due season; that
meat, which our Savior told his followers would not perish, but endure to
everlasting life; this he told them of in the sixth Chapter of S. John, when
they made such haste to find him, soon after he had fed them with the loaves;
and by this Meat, in opposition to the perishing, some Interpreters tell us, he
meant his Body in the Holy Sacrament, the meat that would nourish them to
everlasting life.

This spiritual meat, this Lady wisely took care that it might be provided for
all her household in due season; that is, at the three Seasons in the year when
the Church requires it; and once more in the year, at the least; besides those
three great Festivals, she made one Festival more, for all that were fit to be
invited, or compelled (as in the Gospel) to come to that Supper.

And that all might be Fitted, and well-prepared, she took care that several
Books of Devotion and Piety might be provided four times in the year; that
every one might take their choice of such Book as they had not before, by which
means those that had lived in her house long (and she seldom turned any away)
might be furnished with Books of Religion and Devotion in every kind.

By these, and more instances, which it were easy to produce, it appeared,
that this Religiously Wise Lady had deliberately put on Joshuah's holy
resolution, Josh. 24. 15. I and my house will serve the Lord; and might have
the Eulogy which that memorable Queen pronounced of the best ordered Family in
the World, 1 Kin. 10. 8. Happy are thy men, happy are these thy Servants, which
stand continually before thee.

But yet House and Family, in this copious Allegory, may comprehend more than I
have named; Besides Children and Servants, Allies, Relations, and even Friends,
were in some sort of her Family and Clientele. The House of Saul and the House
of David is taken for all that adhered to either House. Indeed the whole
Country, considering the freedom of her Hospitality, was, in this sense, her
House; nay, even all of Quality that did pass through the Country. It was held
uncouth and almost an incivility, if they did not visit this Lady, and her
House, which stood conspicuous and open to all Comers, and her Ladyship known
to be easy of access to all addresses in that kind. And seldom did any come
under her roof, who did not carry some mark and memorial of her House; some
Badge of her Friendship and Kindness: she having always in store such things as
she thought fit to present. She did not always consider what was great, or what
might by value make the present worth acceptance, or how it suited to the
condition of the Person; but what (as her pleasant fancy suggested) might make
her memorable to the person who was to receive it.

Now for the Building, or Repairing, or Adorning all these kinds of Houses, of
which I have spoken; the Material, and Houses literally taken, or her Household,
her Family of Children, Servants, Allies, and the rest, she had a Providence
and Forecast with her self, and also an After-cast, as you may call it, and
casting up her expense, and consulting with her Officers. She well understood
and followed the advice of our Wise King, Prove. 24. 27. Prepare thy work
without, and make it fit for thy self in the Field, and afterward build thine
house. That is, be sure you have Materials in readiness for Building. Now the
most material thing to be prepared, and in readiness, is that which provides
all materials in every kind; that is, in plain English, Money; which the same
Wise man tells in another place, Money answers all things; all things useful
to be prepared claim it, crave it, call for it; and, if it be present, it
answers them all with satisfaction.

Before she began to build a Tower (to build in any kind) she first sat down
and counted the cost, as our Savior intimates wise Builders will do; she kept
exact accounts weekly in Books of her own Method, and the Totals were duly
signed with her own hand.

This way of strictness, indeed has been slighted in this looser Age, as an
impertinent piece of Providence, in persons of great Birth and Estate, but yet
the total neglect of it has not only frustrated the designs of many, who had
laid good Foundations for Building, and could get no higher; but has let fall
many well built Houses, for want of Means to hold them up; and indeed has been
the occasion of ruin to many Noble Houses and Families; while making no
reckoning of what they did or might spend, have brought themselves or their
Successors to an easy and even reckoning; to have nothing left in remainder;
or nothing proportionable to support and hold up the Honor of those Families
and Houses which their Progenitors erected.

This was wisely foreseen and prevented by this Noble Person, by which means
she was able to hold up, and enlarge her Houses, and so left them and her
Patrimony entire to her Posterity, which otherwise might have been wholly
wasted and dilapidated.

But yet we have not taken any view of the Chief of her Houses, the immaterial,
inward House of her Soul, so termed by Hugo, so by Bid; the former speaks of
building the Moral Fabric by Virtue, the other the Spiritual House by Grace.

And here I must seriously profess my self to have been perplexed in my
thoughts, where to begin, and how to make an end, and in what Method to proceed.

If I should say was well furnished with materials of every kind, to build up
this House of her Soul, that is, with all Virtues belonging to her Sex and
Condition; if I should say these Virtues were perfected with Divine Graces, I
believe I should have plenty of Witnesses who now hear me.

Virtues, Intellectual, Moral, Theological, they were conspicuous in her
Sayings, in her Doings, in her Conversation, and the manner of her Life. As to
her Self, in great Humility, Modesty, Temperance, and Sobriety of Mind; as to
the World, in Justice, Courtesy, and Beneficence; and to God, in Acts of
Piety, Devotion, and Religion. These have so flowed, so crowded together, into
my Meditations, that as they brake into my thoughts tumultuously, as it were,
and without Order, so I must crave your pardon and leave, if I shall take them
up as they came, and speak of some few of them, without that exactness of Order
which might be thought requisite.

To have attained to the Title in the Text, to have been Wise, might (as I have
intimated before) comprehend all Intellectual, nay indeed, all Moral Virtues,
and Divine Graces. Whosoever is truly Wise, has all these in some measure, or must
use all diligence to have them; he must add to faith, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7.
virtue; and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and to
temperance, patience; and to patience, godliness; and to godliness,
brotherly-kindness, and to brotherly-kindness, charity.

He that will build for Heaven, or as St. Peter there speaks, be partaker of
the divine nature; or as our Savior expresses it, would take the Kingdom Mat.
11. 12.
of Heaven by violence, he must ( addere Pelion Ossae) accumulate, add all
those Virtues one to another; He that will build his hopes in Heaven, must be
provided of all these materials reckoned up by St. Peter; and when he has
cleared the ground from Briars and Thorns, purged out Lust, got clear from the
Corruptions which is in the World through Lust; he must lay the Foundation of
Faith; and then must add Virtue, Knowledge, Temperance, Patience, etc. all
kinds of Virtue and Grace.

I might first tell what advantages she had for intellectual Virtues, even from
Nature it self, which had endowed her Soul with such excellent Abilities, as
made her ready to build up her self in the knowledge of all things decent and
praiseworthy in her Sex. She had great sharpness of Wit, a faithful Memory,
and deep Judgment, so that by the help of these, much Reading, and Conversation
with Persons eminent for Learning, she had early gained a knowledge, as of the
best things, so an ability to discourse in all Commendable Arts and Sciences,
as well as in those things which belong to Persons of her Birth and Sex to know.

She could discourse with Virtuoso's, Travelers, Scholars, Merchants, Divines,
Statesmen, and with Good Houswives in any kind. -- Insomuch that a Prime and
Elegant Wit, well seen in all humane Dr. Done.
Learning, and afterward devoted to the study of Divinity (by the
encouragement and command of a Learned King, and a rare Proficient in it) is
reported to have said of this Lady, in her younger years, to this effect; That
she knew well how to discourse of all things, from Predestination, to
Slea-silk. Meaning, that although she was skilful in Houswifry, and in such
things in which Women are conversant; yet her penetrating Wit soared up to pry
into the highest Mysteries; looking at the highest example of Female Wisdom,
Prove. last. Although she knew Wool, and Flax, fine Linen, and Silk, things
appertaining to the Spindle and the Distaff; yet ( ver. 26.) she could open her
Mouth with Wisdom, knowledge of the best and highest things; and if this had
not been most affected by her, Solid Wisdom, knowledge of the best things, such
as make wise unto salvation; if she had sought Fame rather than Wisdom,
possibly she might be ranked among those Wits and Learned of that Sex, of whom
Pythagoras, or Plutarch, or any of the Ancients, have made such mention.

But she affected rather to study with those Noble Bereans, Acts 17. 11, 12.
and those honorable women (as St. Paul there styles them) who searched the
Scriptures daily; with Mary, she chose the better part, of Learning; the
Doctrine of Christ.

Authors of several kinds of Learning, some of Controversies very abstruse,
were not unknown unto her. She much commended one Book, William Barklay's
Dispute with Bellarmine, both, as she knew, of the Popish persuasion, but the
former less Papal; and who, she said, had well stated a main Point, and opposed
that Learned Cardinal, for giving too much power, even in Temporals, to the
Pope, over Kings and Secular Princes; which, she seemed to think, the main
thing aimed at by the followers of that Court; to pretend a claim only to
govern directly in Spirituals; but to intend chiefly (though indirectly) to
hook in Temporals, and in them to gain Power, Dominion, and Tribute; Money and
Rule being the Gods to which the Roman Courtiers and their Partisans chiefly
Sacrifice.

She was not ignorant of knowledge in any kind, which might make her
Conversation not only useful and grave, but also pleasant and delightful; which
that she might better do, she would frequently bring out of the rich
Storehouse of her Memory, things new and old, Sentences, or Sayings of remark,
which she had read or learned out of Authors, and with these her Walls, her
Bed, her Hangings, and Furniture must be adorned; causing her Servants to write
them in Papers, and her Maids to pin them up, that she, or they, in the time of
their dressing, or as occasion served, might remember, and make their descants
on them. So that, though she had not many Books in her Chamber, yet it was
dressed up with the flowers of a Library.

Go now, and tell the Superfinical, who disdain the meanness of her Chamber and
Apartments; who cannot dress themselves, but in well-dress'd and gorgeous
Rooms; let them come hither and see the riches of her Furniture, better than
Silver and Gold, if King Solomon (who had Silver beyond weight, and Gold in
abundance) may be Judge. The Sayings of Wisdom, which he determines to be more
precious than Rubies, these were strewed about her Chambers, these were instead
of those rare Trinkets so much in use, Esa. 3. 20. So that you may safely tell,
that her Furniture and Chambers were adorned with many precious Jewels, more
eligible than all that glittering bravery which God threatened to take away from
the haughty Daughters of Sion, Isa. 3. 18. I will not name them, but it were
worth your considering the particulars set down in five or six verses of that
Chapter, where the pride and vanity of those women of Sion, who sat at ease,
and swam in plenty, is described, and exposed; so that the Great ones of these
times, of either Sex, may compare, and see, with how many of those
superfluities their Tiring-houses abound, of which this great and noble Lady
had neither use nor esteem.

It was apparent that the virtue which this Lady most studied and practiced was
Humility. Those that will build high, must lay their foundation low, no fitter
virtue than Humility for this work, for this Builder, and for that which she
esteemed her greatest building, which was to build for Heaven.

This virtue of Humility shined through her whole Conversation, her easy
Reception, her Affability, the Plainness, as I said, of her Chamber and
Furniture, so of her Apparel, her Dress, her Garb; she was, as the Apostle
advises, Clothed with humility, 1 Pet. 5. 5.
all over. Her greatest Ornaments were those of a meek and quiet spirit. She
was (by the merit of her due Titles) in Honor three Countesses, but had a
stranger seen her in her Chamber, he would not have thought he had seen one
Lady, as Ladies now adays appear. Indeed you might have sometimes seen her
sitting in the Almshouse (which she built) among her twelve Sisters (as she
called them) and, as if they had been her Sisters indeed, or her Children, she
would sometimes eat her Dinner with them, at their Almshouse; but you might
find them often dining with her (at her Table) some of them every Week, all of
them once a Month: and after meat, as freely and familiarly conversing with
them in her Chamber, as if they had been her greatest Guests. And truly the
greatest of her Guests, her noblest Children, could not please her, if they did
not visit them, and pass their Salutes at her Almshouse, with those Sisters,
and the Mother, sometimes, before they made their first Address to her self,
their Mother; whose natural Affection was known to be great, but her Charity
and Humility greater; and she commonly admonished her Children, coming from far
to pay their Duty to her, that before they made their Address to her for her
Blessing, they should take the Blessing of the poor, the Alms-women's blessing
by the way.

Nevertheless, although the Nice and Delicate, who look only at things after
the outward appearance, might think meanly of her Chamber, her Accoutrements,
Company, and Bodily presence, yet of that plainness, (her choice, not
necessity, compelling) the Sober and Wise had other thoughts. And indeed they
might look at her Chamber, as a Temple, a Court, a Tribunal, an Almonary; a
place where God was daily, nay, thrice a day, worshipped; where almost every
day some addresses were made from some of the chief of these parts, and
strangers of the best Quality; a Tribunal, where all submitted to the Doom of
her Judgment, even to the sentence of her lips, as to an Oracle; and it were
not insignificant if I should call it a Royal Burse, or Exchequer, where
variety of presents and money flowed, and was issued out daily to some or other
Objects of her Charity, Kindness, or Bounty.

She had known greatness, as well as any other, being bred in the Courts, or in
the Verges of the Courts, of three great Princes, who (reigning in Peace) had
as much magnificence and glory as any that had swayed the Scepter of this Land.

But whether she lived in, or near it, she was one of the Ornaments of it, and
knew, when time and occasion served, to shine in her Sphere, and to adorn her
self with Ornaments, such as are proper for the Courts of Princes. But when her
outward clothing was of wrought Gold, valuable in the sight of men; her inward
clothing was humility, a meek and quiet spirit, which God most values; which is
in the sight of God of great price. 1 Pet. 3. 4.


It was one great sign of Humility in her self, that she was not Censorious of
others, and of the Liberty which they took, and might lawfully take, in those
outward Garbs, to apparel themselves according to their Rank and Place; which
she knew they might do without affectation of Pride and Vanity.

When of later times, and since the happy Restitution of the King to his Court,
she sometimes beheld in Visitants of several Ranks, what others did perchance
look at as affected and fantastical, she would only make such innocent and
pleasant reflections, as the parties themselves were rather delighted with the
freedom, than troubled with any show of Censure.

She was, I say, so unwilling to be Censorious, or to seem uneasy to any of
those, who as she thought did necessarily pay an obedience to Fashion and
Custom; which she knew was a kind of Tyrant, and will Reign over the most,
while we live under the Moon; That when a Neighbor, a Lady, whom she used (as
she commonly did all) with great Familiarity, expressing together with her
their Joy, in discourse of His Majesty's most glorious and happy return to his
Kingdom, and Court at White Hall, and the Gallantry which at his entrance
attended that place; the Lady wished that she would once more go to London, and
the Court, and glut her eyes with the sight of such happy Objects, and after
that give up her self to her Country retirement: She suddenly, and pleasantly
replied, if I should go to those places, now so full of Gallantry and Glory, I
ought to be used as they do ill-sighted, or unruly Horses, have Spectacles (or
Blinkers) put before mine eyes, lest I should see and censure what I cannot
competently judge of; be offended my self, or give offense to others; Her
meaning was thought to be, that she, having taken leave of worldly glory, as to
her self, now unfitted for it; ought to give leave to others, to whom such
things, of course, and by the Places which they held, did belong, to enjoy
their freedom, without her Censure.

Her Conversation was indeed meek, affable, and gentle, her Words, according to
the Circumstances of Persons in her presence, pleasant, or grave, always
seasoned with salt, savoury, but never bitter. I had the honor to be often
admitted to her Discourse, but never heard (nor have been told by others) that
she was invective, or censorious, or did use to speak ill, or censoriously of
Persons, or Actions; but she was especially cautious in censuring Public
Persons, or Actions in matter of State. I was present when she was told of the
certainty of the War with the Dutch, and of the great preparations on all
hands; on which Subject she only said, If their sins be greater than ours, they
would have the worst.

Constancy was so known a virtue in Her, that it might vindicate the whole Sex,
from the contrary imputation.

She was observed to be very constant to all her determinations, and would not
easily vary from what she had once declared to be her mind. She had that part
of Prudence which some call (...), consultiveness, deliberating, and
well-distinguishing what was fit, what indifferent, what was necessary; She
used, as she said, to chew the Chud, ruminating of the next days business in
her night wakings. When she had once weighed the Circumstances, and resolved;
she did not like to have any after considerations, or be moved by them.

This made her constant to her resolutions, even in lesser matters, as, the
times of her removals from one of her houses to another.

She had six Houses (as I have intimated) in each of which she used, at her
prefixed times, to keep her residence.

None can call this an unsettledness, or humor of mutability; it was not
only, that she might the better hold up, and keep in repair those Houses,
which commonly in the Owner's absence (who is the Soul of the House) turn to
Carcasses, ready to be dissolved, fall to ruin and dust; But she resolved by
her presence to animate the Houses which she had built, and the Places where
she lived; to dispense and disperse the influences of her Hospitality and
Charity, in all the Places where her Patrimony lay, that many might be made
Partakers of her comforts and kindness.

In her frequent removals, both going and coming, she strewed her Bounty all
the way. And for this end it was, (as may be charitably conjectured) that she
so often removed; and that not only in the Winter season, less fit for
traveling; but also that she chose to pass those uncouth, and untrodden, those
mountainous, and almost impassable ways; that she might make the poor people
and Laborers her Pioneers, who were always well rewarded for their pains; let
the season be never so bad, the places never so barren, yet we may say it, by
way of allusion, Psalm. 65. 11. She crowned the Season with her goodness, and
her paths dropped fatness, even upon the pasture of the wilderness; the barren
mountains. If she found not Mines in these Mountains, I am sure the Poor found
Money in good plenty, whenever she passed over them.

But that which I speak of this for an instance of her Constancy, is a known
Story in these parts.

When about three years since she had appointed to remove from Appleby to
Brougham-Castle (in January) the day being very cold; a frost, and misty; yet
much company coming (as they usually did) to attend her removals; she would
needs hold her resolution, and in her passage out of her house she diverted
into the Chapel (as at such times she commonly did) and there, at or near a
window, sent up her private Prayers and Ejaculations; when immediately she fell
into a Swoon, and could not be recovered, until she had been laid for some time
upon a Bed, near a great fire. The Gentlemen and Neighbors who came to attend
her, used much persuasion, that she would return to her Chamber, and not travel
on so sharp and cold a day; but she having before fixed on that day, and so
much company being come purposely to wait on her, she would go; and although
as soon as she came to her Horse-litter, she swooned again, and was carried into
a Chamber, as before, yet as soon as that Fit was over, she went; and was no
sooner come to her Journeys end, (nine miles) but a swooning seized on her
again; from which, being soon recovered, when some of her servants, and others
represented to her, with repining, her undertaking such a Journey, foretold by
diverse to be so extremely hazardous to her Life; she replied, she knew she must
die, and it was the same thing to Her to die in the way, as in her House; in
her Litter, as in her Bed; declaring a courage no less than the great Roman
General, -- Necesse est ut eam, non ut vivam; She would not acknowledge any
necessity why she should Live, but believed it necessary to keep firm to her
Resolution. She did indeed discover by this, not only a Moral constancy, but a
Christian Courage, against the fear of death; from whence might also be well
supposed, a Soul ready and prepared to meet Death any where, knowing what the
Apostle had taught her, 2 Cor. 5. 1. That if her earthly House of this
Tabernacle were dissolved, she should have a Building of God, an house not made
with hands, eternal in the Heavens.

That Death was but a removal from one house to another, from a worse house, to
a better, an earthly house to an heavenly; flitting from an House built by
Nature, a Tabernacle earthly and dissoluble, to an House, a firm Mansion,
prepared by Christ, built by God, eternal in the Heavens; from a Tabernacle to
a Temple.

And having mentioned her Courage, I might show, that although it be a Virtue,
not so often to be found, nor expected to be found in that Sex; yet, that she
had it to an Heroic degree; I will set before you but one instance, which has
been brought to me by good Information.

It was in the late time of Rebellion and Usurpation, when they threatened to
level all degrees of men and women, and had no respect to Honor, either in
Titles or in real Worth and Dignity; but did studiously, and affectedly, seek
to affront, and pour contempt upon those, chiefly, who by their Birth and Place
might challenge Honor, as due to them, as Propriety and Inheritance could
Entitle any to whatsoever they possessed. Having cut down Honor in its great
Emblem, the Royal Oak; intending that in this our Druina, no Loyal Oak should
be left, none to give shelter to any of the Royal Branches, (although
Providence confuted them literally) but as they could, and by degrees, to
extirpate all the Loyal Nobility; I say, when they had dried up the Fountain of
Honor in their King, it was too great an eyesore to behold the luster of it
in his Subjects; to let any Noble, but especially Loyal Blood, run in the
Streams, that derived their Honor from that Fountain.

It was even then, that this courageous Lady dared to own her self Loyal; then,
when they had filled her Castle with Soldiers, and those of fierce and
phanatical spirits, and none more fierce than they.

The Head of those Locusts, like those in the Revelation, 9. 7. armed and
crowned; for then every fanatical Head fancied himself to have, or deserve, a
Crown: They were the Saints, and they must Reign: Holiness, you know, gives
great pretense to govern in Temporals, as well as in Spirituals. The Head of
those who at that time oppressed this Noble Lady, was one, whom even his great
Harrison.
Master himself, looked upon as under a Dispensation, more terribly phanatical
than any in his Host, terrible even to himself and his usurped Power. This
dreadful man quartered himself under the Roof of this Noble Lady; had made
suspicious inquiries, or rather declared his presumptions, of Her sending
Assistance privately, where he was conscious that Loyal Duty required, and her
affection might wish it, if there had been means with safety to convey it; but
being not able to make proof of that, he would needs know her opinion, and
dispute her out of her Loyalty; at a time when she slept, and lived but at his
mercy, giving her Alarms night and day when he listed.

If she had now shrunk, and seemed to yield to his Opinion, she might pretend
the Learned Philosopher's excuse, who, disputing with a great General, and
yielding up the truth of the Cause, pleaded (to those who upbraided him) that
he had done wisely, to be confuted by him, who had so many Legions, such an
Army to prove what he list, near, and at his Command. But this undaunted Lady
would not so easily yield, but would be superior in the Dispute, having Truth
and Loyalty on her side, she would not betray them, at the peril of her Life
and Fortune; but boldly asserted, that she did love the King, that she would
live and dye in her Loyal thoughts to the King; and so with her Courage dulled
the edge of so sharp an Adversary, that by God's merciful restraint he did her
no harm at that time.

Diligence was a noted Virtue in her; her active Soul filling up all the Gaps
of Time, with something useful or delightful to her self or others. But to
undertake to describe this, and her other Virtues, that is, her Life, were
endless* and not necessary; none could describe it but her self that lived it;
And, indeed, by her great diligence, she did describe much of it; but if I
should tell you how much, possibly you would neither Credit me, nor Commend so
much, as Admire, her. But she had such a desire to know, review, and reflect,
upon all the occurrences, passages, and actions of her Life, as thinking it an
especial mean to apply her heart to Wisdom, by so numbering her days, that none
of them might be wholly lost.

That (as St. Bernard advised) her actions in passing might not pass away; she
did cast up the account of them, and see what every day had brought forth; she
did set down what was of more remark, or dictated, and caused much of it to be
set down in Writing, in some certain seasons, which she contrived to be vacant
from Addresses; judging her time to be better spent thus, than in that ordinary
Tattle, which Custom has taught many (of her Sex especially) who have no
business, and know no greater duty of Life, than to see and be seen, in formal
visits, and insignificant parley. As if it were a Game to play away Time, in
which all parties cheat each other, yet never feel that they are Couzened of a
Jewel most precious and irreparable; which he that wins from another is sure to
lose himself. Whatsoever kind of Censure others may pass of this exactness of
Diary as too minute and trivial a Diligence; I think we may thence charitatably
conclude a serenity of Conscience, clear, at least, from foul and presumptuous
sins, which durst bring all past actions of Life, to a Test, and Review. Who of
a thousand is there that can produce a thousand witnesses (such is Conscience)
of the innocence of their Life? that can, or dare tell, even themselves, all
that they have done or said, and open their own Books to rise in Judgment for,
or against themselves?

Oh, that we could do so! This were praejudicium summi illius Judicii, a
fore-judging of our selves, that we might not be judged, (at least) not
condemned with the world.

I confess, I have been informed, that after some reviews, these were laid
aside; and some parts of these Diaries were summed into Annals.

As she had been a most Critical Searcher into her own Life, so she had been a
diligent Enquirer into the Lives, Fortunes, and Characters of many of her
Ancestors for many years.

Some of them she has left particularly described; and the exact Annals of
diverse passages, which were most remarkable in her own Life, ever since it was
wholly at her own disposal; that is, since the Death of her last Lord and
Husband, Philip Earl of Pembroke, which was for the space of six or seven and
twenty years.

But this I will say, that as from this her great Diligence her Posterity may
find contentment in reading these abstracts of Occurrences in her own Life;
being added to her Heroic Father's, and Pious Mother's Lives, dictated by her
self; so, they may reap greater fruits of her Diligence, in finding the
Honors, Descents, Pedigrees, Estates, and the Titles, and Claims of their
Progenitors, to them; comprised Historically and Methodically in three Volumes
of the larged size, and each of them three (or four) times fairly written over;
which although they were said to have been collected and digested in some part,
by one, Sir Matthew Hales, Lord Chief Justice.
or more, Learned Heads, yet they were wholly directed by her self; and
attested in the most parts by her own Hand.

But I will not spend more time in presenting before you her Personal Moral
Virtues; any one of which singly might have made some other Eminent; but in
Her, all, or the most of such as might deserve praise or admiration (for their
degree) might have been found.

Her whole Conversation was regular, a Rule (scarce subject to exception)
strict, and straitlac'd, as to her self; but benign, candid, and favorable,
leaving others to their Liberty.

There might indeed seem in the opinion of some, many Paradoxes and
Contradictions in her Life; She lived, and conversed, outwardly with the World,
as easily as might be; yet her Guise inward and reflex'd, was quite as one of
another World.

Of an humor pleasing to all; yet like to none; her Dress, not disliked by
any, yet imitated by none. Those who fed by Her, might be full, if with Her,
starved; to eat by the measures she took to her self. She was absolute Mistress
of her Self, her Resolutions, Actions, and Time; and yet allowed a time for
every purpose, for all Addresses, for any Persons; None had access but by
leave, when she called; but none were rejected; none must stay longer than she
would; yet none departed unsatisfied. Like him at the Stern, she seemed to do
little or nothing, but indeed turned and steered the whole course of her
Affairs.

She seemed (2 Cor. 6. 10.) as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing,
yet possessing all things. She had many occasions of sorrow, but appeared as if
she sorrowed not, and again, rejoiced as if she rejoiced not. She had no
visible Transports, she did use the World as not using, at least, as not
abusing of it.

None disliked what she did, or was, because she was like her self in all
things: sibi constans, semper eadem, the Great, Wise Queen's Motto, whose
Favor in Her first, and that Queen's last years, she was thought worthy of,
and received, as her self has expressly remembered. I say, she was to her self,
her own Reason and Resolutions, constant, permanent, knowing that the fashion
of this world passes away.

If she had been like the world, she could not have liked her self, nor have
been so much approved by the Judicious, and Wise. Great Examples, and those
that give them, are things rare, and seldom seen; exempt and separate from the
Ages they live in; gazed at while living, praised and admired when dead: Future
Fame being wiser and kinder than the present Opinion or Judgment of
Contemporaries.

There are a Generation who think that none can be eminently Good, or in any
degree Perfect in this world, until they go out of it; by voluntary solitude,
and sequestring themselves wholly from Converse with others in it, become
secluse, shut up from common Society.

I have indeed found some Men and Women, eminent in Zeal, wholly devoted to the
Church of England; who thought it would be of great advantage, Religious, and
Politic, if some kind of Protestant-Nunneries were allowed, and instituted
amongst us; for which some have projected Models, and Rules very considerable,
and some have well considered them; But I shall not interpose in that now.

But I find Women of high esteem, whom St. Hierom, St. Austin, and others of
the Ancients, have commended for their Holiness of Life, (seen in their
Devotions, Abstinencies, Charity, etc.) who never were professed Votaries in
that kind.

And when I call to mind this great Ladies exemplary Regularities, without
affectation, and constancy in them; not for some hours, or days, or years; but
even all the time that she had the absolute Rule over her self: I cannot but
reflect, that Virtue and Piety are more glorious, by how much they are more
conspicuous; that it is not necessary that Piety should be less sincere and
intense, by the extensiveness of it; but that it is far more useful for the
Generation, that our light should shine before men, to draw all eyes to the
love and liking of Virtue, than which nothing can be more beautiful, (if an
Heathen Philosopher may be Judge) if we had eyes to see it, or mind to
understand it.

As it is more difficult, so it is more praiseworthy to be Good amongst the
Society of the Bad; with Lot to remain pure in Sodom; with Joseph and Moses in
Pharaoh's Court; with Noah to keep integrity, to be upright against the world,
to be so in a crooked and perverse generation.

Certainly to overcome the World is more generous than to fly from it.
Temptations and dangers are not to be sought for, yet he only is to be crowned
that overcomes, when necessarily engaged in them; rather than he that quits his
Post and Station to avoid them.

I may say in this case to you, as St. Paul said to 1 Cor. 5. 10.
his Corinthians, That if you will altogether decline the company of
fornicators, covetous, extortioners, or the Idolaters of this world, then must
ye needs go out of the world; but he does not advise them, (nor I you) to do
so. But rather (as he advises Timothy) 1 Timothy 4. 12.
to be examples in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, etc. that your good and
chaste conversation (as St. Peter) may win, or shame, or convince, and possibly
gain, those with whom we have converse or affinity. For what know thou, O
man, or woman, (as he said a little after to Believers) but thou may save
thy unbelieving Wife, Husband, Friend?

Surely, it had been great pity, great loss to the World, to the Church, that a
Person of this Ladies Character, should have been a Recluse, shut up as a
Monial; No; rather than confine her large Soul to one Cell; let her expatiate
her self, and fill her six Houses, and her Patrimonial Country, with her
charity, piety, bounty, and good conversation.

As Ep. 15.
St. Hierome says of the devout Asella, living strictly in Rome; In Vrbe
turbida, Eremum invenerat; so she was a Nun in a Court; using the same, or
greater Abstinencies, Hours, Devotions, Reading, Praying, and all kind of
decent Regularities, more strictly than they in their Cloisters. And had she
been of a Church set upon seven hills, would she have been with outward pomp
professed, and have adored him that exalts himself above all that is called
God; she should have been mounted up to Heaven, Canonized (for another St.
Anne) and peradventure, more deservedly than the Saint with the Wheel, St.
Bridget, whose Revelations so ill agree with S. Catharines, Madonna Teresa, or
any of those, with whose Miracles and Praises, their old, or new Legends have
so swelled, and abused the Credulity of those, who walk not by Faith, but live
by Trust.

She had built a truly Religious House, (if such may be deemed a Nunnery) and
was a kind of Abbess over it, by awful oversight, and conversation with the
Sisters, and keeping them to Religious Orders and Observances, (such were her
Rules) for more than three and twenty years; for so long these twelve Sisters
and a Mother, had been her Eleemosynaries, after her own hands had laid the
foundation of the House, and led the whole number at first into it, and placed
them in their several Rooms.

I have hitherto spoken of her bulding by her Virtues; but I am not yet come to
her main Building, her Temple; that is, her Religion, and the Worship of God,
at which she daily wrought, ( serving of God night and day) framing fitly both
the outward Porches and the Body of it; composing her Body and Soul to constant
and reverent Addresses to God; and by inward Acts of Piety and Grace, ceased
not, until she had finished the Sanctum Sanctorum in her Soul, had (as to some
good degree) perfected holiness in the fear of God.

I have mentioned before her outward building, or repairing the Houses of God;
a good sign of inward Devotion, that she affected not a cheap Religion, was not
willing it should cost her naught; she thought it not decent to repair her own
Houses, and let God's House lie waste.

But it is her inward building, of her Spiritual House, which we now speak of;
her Faith, Patience, Mortification, Devotion and Holiness of Life.

For her Religion, and professing of the true Faith, she did boldly, upon all
occasions, acknowledge what it was; but especially upon one remarkable
occasion, and it was this.

About the same time when the Swordmen usurped Dominion over the Persons and
Estates of all the Loyal in the Land, they permitted their Spiritual Emissaries
to exercise Dominion over their Faith; and they were busy in Catechizing, but
whom? not Children in the Church, (no more than they cared to Baptize them
there;) But they must Catechize Men and Women of all Ages and Ranks whatsoever,
in their Houses, or where they appointed them to appear.

Well, this great Lady was not more dreaded for her Loyalty, than suspected for
her Religion, and therefore, as they had brought her to the Touchstone for the
one, they must bring her to the Test, and Trial for the other.

Whether it were a Committee, with a Club of their Divines, Lay Elders, and
Superintendents, over all that were appointed, I have not been informed; but to
gain countenance, they drew in with them some Ministers of better temper, and
came to her Castle, which had a Garrison (no good Guests to her, but sure
Friends to them.) They bring her to be examined; what their Questions were, I
have not particularly learned; only by her Answer, I may suppose one in
general to have been, What Faith and Religion she professed?

One might well have thought, in a Person of her Quality, Age, and Spirit,
Disdain at such Insolency should have kept her from answering, or saying any
thing, except in reproaching their Arrogance, and proud Hypocrisy.

But she having learned another Lesson, 1 Pet. 3. 15. To be ready always to
give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you
with meekness and fear, her readiness and meekness made her willing to give a
reason of her Hope; Hope, which is built upon Faith; and she told them to this,
or like, Effect.

That her Faith was built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles;
that is, upon the Holy Scriptures, the Word of God, as delivered and Expounded
by the Church of England, whose Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship, as by Law
established, she was bred in, and had embraced; and by God's Grace would
persist in it to her Lives end. This general (with other more explicit) Answer,
was so apposite; delivered with such firmness of mind, that some Ministers whom
they had drawn in with them, to give a color to their presumption; observing
that this well-taught Lady had purchased a good degree of boldness in the
Faith; observing, I say, the stedfastness and trial of her Faith, more precious
than Gold that perishes, (they knew that Gold she would easily let go, upon
all occasions, very liberally, but saw she would hold fast the Faith once
delivered to her) they left her; one of them going out weeping, amazed, and
confounded, to find such Knowledge, Constancy, and Courage, in a Woman, her
Faith so sound, and laudable, and mixed with so much Christian meekness, and
Condescension.

The rest also (being no doubt, astonished at her Understanding and Answers)
left her a glorious Confessor, willing enough, no doubt, to have been a Martyr,
and to have sealed to the truth by undergoing any more fiery trial.

And she was after this so resolute, to stick to the Order of the Church in the
main point of Practice, partaking of the holy Eucharist, that when there was a
kind of Interdict on the Land, a forbidding to administer the Sacraments
according to the Common Prayer, She would not, what danger soever might happen,
communicate any other way; sticking close to the Rules and Forms of sound
words, prescribed by the Rubric, to which she had always been accustomed, and
had approved it by her own Judgment: having sucked also, as it were, with her
Mothers Milk, wholesome Institutions, who trained her up as an obedient daughter
of the Church of England.

Her self being also observant of those Rules; and that Ladies great Piety is
not only mentioned often in the Annals, which this her affectionate Daughter
dictated, but also taken notice of by the Learned and Godly Mr. Perkins, who
dedicates one of his Practical Treatises to Margaret Countess of Cumberland,
the Mother of this Lady, which I the rather note, that some may take notice,
who so readily follow him in doubtful Disputations, and yet scruple to walk
with him in his practice of Conformity to the Rules of the Church.

She was, I say, devoted to the Church of England, notwithstanding that she was
compassionate and charitable to some Dissenters; She would tell, that Her
Family had furnished this Diocese with one Vipont.
Bishop, and that by her assistance an Eminent Prelate now living, was made a
Christian, of which, B. of W.
and of whom she would often make mention with great contentment.

For her Devotion; some thought less of it, because she had no Domestic
Chaplain; and it was an Objection, which I knew not how to answer, until I was
assured, that although she had no Chaplain Menial, in her House, yet she had
six Household Chaplains: at every one of her Houses the Parochial Ministers did
Officiate to her Family, as well as at their Cures, and they wanted not all due
encouragements from so good a Patroness.

Indeed when Age had deprived her of the benefit of her Limbs; her hearing also
being much decayed, her Chamber as I intimated was her Oratory, a house of
Prayer, not that the Morning and Evening Service were performed daily there,
especially of late, when her Hearing failed. But she seldom ommitted, Morning
and Evening, and at Noon, to offer up her private Devotions to God, and in
whatsoever Posture she was, to send up some holy Ejaculations. The Psalms for
the day of the Month were never omitted to be read by her self; or, when under
some indisposition, read to her by her Attendants. She much delighted in that
holy Book, it was her Companion, and when persons, or their affections, cannot
so well be known by themselves, they may be guessed at by their Companions.

No greater Testimony of a Soul having her Conversation in Heaven, then by
being conversant in that Heavenly Book, which, as holy Athanasius has well
demonstrated, is fitted for all persons; suited for all occasions: To receive
comfort, express sorrow, to cast down, or lift up the Soul with joy; to praise
God, to expostulate with him, to strengthen Faith, to nourish Hope, to stir up
Holy affection; to allay Passion, to teach Patience, to await Gods leisure. So
that, indeed we may apply to this one parcel of Scripture, what St. Paul makes
the scope of the inspired Books, that it is profitable for Doctrine, for
Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the man of God,
(and not only so, but that every Godly man or woman) may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished to every good work.

It is scarce possible for any to be bad, that frequently reads and meditates
on this Book, with desire to be good: He that reads and digests, shall be
transformed into the image of it, be acted by the spirit which breaths in it.
No doubt the Compilers of our Liturgy had all this in their eye, when they made
the reading a part of the Psalms of David, so great a portion of the Morning
and Evening Service.

Besides this, which she did commonly read her self, she usually heard a large
portion of Scripture read every day, as much as one of the Gospels read every
week. So that let her Body be fed never so sparingly, her Soul was nourished
with sound words, the words of Faith, which must needs give her a growth in
Grace, and make a sincere heart.

She took a particular delight in one Chapter, which she used to repeat every
Lord's day in the year, and never failed to do it, it was the eighth of the
Romans, which she had by heart (in the best sense) had laid it up in her heart;
and truly, she could hardly find a better Cordial in any one Chapter in all the
Holy Scriptures.

Which, how comfortable, how pertinent, how useful it may be to any Christian,
in any Condition, who desires with Meditation and Reflection, to peruse it; it
may be sufficient to refer them to the serious reading of it, and I doubt not
but they will approve this Lady's Wisdom and Piety, in her choice, and
frequent application of it to her self; and she did so when Death looked her in
the face; repeating it the first day when her Sickness (which proved mortal)
seized on her.

As this might excite many Graces, Faith, Hope; so especially, what is the
proper effect of those while we are on earth, Patience: and on Earth only these
three Plants grow, Faith, Hope, Patience, though they send their fruit to
Heaven, yet their Root is only on Earth, Faith is perfected by Vision, Hope
consummated by Fruition; and at Heaven's gates the Patience of the Saints
leaves them; no more sufferings, pain, or grief: all tears are wiped from their
eyes at the first glimpse of the Beatifical Vision: But, I say, in that
selected Chapter ( Rom 8.) the greatest Emphasis in it, is to teach Patience,
either in inward afflictions of the Soul, or outward pressures on the Body,
securing the Soul against the fear of damnation, though under sinful
infirmities; and susteining the Body, and outward man, though under the Cross
and greatest afflictions: assuring, that where Patience has endured to the
utmost, when Patience shall have perfected its work, it shall have its reward,
a Crown at the last.

I might enlarge by particular instances of her Patience, in bearing, and even
Taking up, submissively, the Crosses which she met withal; as it cannot be
imagined but one who lived so long in a perverse and crooked generation, must
meet with many crosses in several kinds; both in regard of Public revolutions,
and Private cross-accidents. Indeed she saw, and felt great varieties, and
mixture of better and worse in both. She spun out almost the measure of one
whole Age; and the Age wherein she lived, might give her experience of the
greatest misery, and also felicity in the late revolutions in these three
Nations, that any one Age had ever seen. Wherein the greatest Students and
Searchers into the Methods of Providence, could never extricate or clear the
doubts which first arose from seeing these Nations, from the top of earthly and
heavenly blessings, thrown into the abyss of misery, and hellish slavery; and
then again, by a powerful, but gentle hand of Providence, restored, and raised
up to its former prosperity and glory.

Herein this Lady (as many less aged) Had something like the fate of Noah; saw
the times before the Flood, which Sin brought down; weathered out, with
Patience, the time, under the Floods of War and Misery (Faith and Providence
building her an Ark) she lived to see the deluge of Blood, and War dried up;
God, in his never to be forgotten Mercy, clearing the Skies, and making the
Sun, and Stars shine upon us again.

Those were times to exercise her Patience, in a joynt-stock, with others,
under public Sufferings.

But she had (and it may be seen, that she well remembered then) many private
trials of her Patience; not only those, which in Common Providence, happen to
all mankind, especially to the long lived, who must needs see the Funerals of
Parents, and hear of the Deaths, Misfortunes (or Miscarriages) of Husbands
Children and Friends; in all these, there might be work for Patience; although
I acknowledge that true Christian-Patience looks upon such as Corrections and
Chastisements; and that they are more often the Indulgences of a Father, then
the severity of a Judge, Corrections not Judgments. And it is one of the safest
ways for any to assure himself that he is the Child of God, when he can
willingly submit to his stroke as to the Correction of a Father.

Amongst the trials of this kind, I was able to observe one great work of
Patience, wrought out by this pious Lady.

When the astonishing news was brought her, about three years since, from the
Isle of Garnsey, of the strange and disasterous death of one of her dear
Grandchildren, with a Lady of great Piety and Honor, and diverse others, by a
terrible blast by Gunpowder, the relation of which amazed the Court, and all
that heard of it; although she first received the news with a sorrow, suppressed
by a silence and wonder; yet after, when she heard that the Noble Lord, her
Grandson, who had also Lord Hatton.
been blown up out of his Chamber, (and by a wonderful Providence, being thrown
upon an high Wall) that he, and two of her Grandchildren escaped, without any
harm; she discovered a patient Submission to the Will of God, in many Christian
expressions, which soon after I did receive from herself, and several times
after, when she was pleased to renew the remembrance of it, with much
admiration, and acknowledgment of the secret ways of Gods Judgments, and
Mercies; on which she could enlarge with many heavenly expressions.

But now Patience through all these experiences, began to draw its work to
perfection; which it never does, except it dye with them, whom it has
supported in Life.

A little before Her death, Patience, and Meekness, and low thoughts of Her
self, which had been Her practice, were now Her Argument. Discoursing
frequently, with one of her nearest Attendants, and seeing her, and others,
passionatly concerned, and busy about her, she willed them not to take so much
pains for her, who deserved less; expostulating, why any, her self especially,
should at any time be angry; why any of these outward things should trouble
her, who deserved so little, and had been blessed with so much? By which it
might appear that she had brought into subjection all great thoughts, she had
cast down imaginations, and every high thing, bringing into Captivity every
high thought, and submitting the World and her Soul to the Obedience of Christ;
her passions were mortified and dead before her: So that for three or four
days of her last sickness, (for she endured no more) she lay as if she endured
nothing; she called for her Psalms, which she could not now, as she usually had
done, read her self (the greatest Symptom of her extremity) she caused them to
be read unto her. But that Cordial of which I have spoken (kept, in Romans 8. and
in her heart) this her Memory held to the last, this she soon repeated: No
doubt to secure her Soul against all fear of Condemnation, being now wholly
Christ's, having served him in the spirit of her mind, and not loved to walk
after the Flesh, having (as often as she affectionatly pronounced the words of
this Chapter) called in the Testimony of the Spirit to bear her witness, that
she desired to be delivered from this Bondage of Corruption; into the glorious
liberty of the Children of God; and so to strengthen her Faith and Hope by
other comfortable Arguments, contained in the rest of that Chapter, being the
last words of Continuance, which this dying Lady spoke.

The rest of the time, as if it had been spent in Ruminating, Digesting, and
speaking inwardly to her Soul, what she had uttered with broken words, she lay
quiet, and without much sign of any Perturbation; after a while in a gentle
breath, scarce perceptible, she breathed out that Soul which God had breathed
into her; rendering it even to that God which gave it. So breathed her last, and
quietly slept, not to be awakened again, but by the Archangel's Trumpet, when
it shall call her to the Resurrection of the Just.

Thus fell at last this goodly Building; Thus died this great wise Woman; who
while she lived was the Honor of her Sex and Age, fitter for an History than a
Sermon.

Who having well considered that her last Remove, (how soon she knew not) must
be to the House of Death; she built her own Apartment there; the Tomb before
your eyes; against this day, on which we are all now here met to give her
Relics Livery and Seizin, quiet possession.

And while her Dust lies silent in that Chamber of Death, the Monuments which
she had built in the Hearts of all that knew her, shall speak loud in the ears
of a profligate Generation; and tell, that in this general Corruption, lapsed
times decay, and downfall of Virtue, The thrice Illustrious Anne Countess of
Pembroke, Dorset, and Montgomery, stood immovable in her Integrity of Manners,
Virtue, and Religion; was a well built Temple for Wisdom, and all her train of
Virtues to reside in; is now removed and gone to inhabit a Building of God, an
House not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens. To which blessed Mansions
let us all endeavor to follow her, by treading in the steps of her Faith,
Virtue and Patience: That having fought the good Fight, finished our Course,
and kept the Faith, we may receive the Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord,
the righteous Judge shall give at that day to all that love his appearing.

Now unto the King Eternal, Immortal, the only wise God, be Honor and Glory
for ever and ever. Amen.
THE END.

