Impudency and Ranterism REBVKED; AND THE Quakers Sincerity VINDICATED From a
most unjust imputation of Prevarication, cast upon them by Robert Rich and R.
Bacon; Whose Spirits are Discovered in this Answer, which is Published for the
Truth Sake, By G. Roberts.

They are grievous Revolters, walking with Slanders. Printed in the Year, 1670.

Impudency and Ranterism Rebuked, and the Quakers Sincerity Vindicated.
AS for the Pamphlet, styled Mr. Robert Rich his second Letter from Barbados,
etc. which is licenced and divalged by Robert Bacon: It savours altogether of
Malice, Boasting, and Railing; and is filled with Ostentations, Lies, and
Slanders, against the People called Quakers; and the Folly, Confusion, and
Ranterism therein is so obvious, that every impartial Reader may easily see it,
and the spirit from whence it came; and therefore we shall need to say the less
to it, but so much as to manifest this Charge true against the said Pamphlet,
and the spirit that gave it forth, or that owns, or spreads it; as also to
clear the Truth professed by the said people, called Quakers.

The Envy and Outrage of this R. Rich and R. Bacon, against the said People,
is of late broken forth, on the occasion of thirty Pounds, sent them by R.
Rich, as its said in common with their Brethren ( viz. other six Churches) as
they are falsely termed by them, they being Papists, Episcopals, Presbiterians,
Independents, Anabaptists, and (to which he adds) the Church of the Firstborn
[ intending such as (he says) have no visible Church or People] page 8. and
the Outcasts from among the People, called Quakers, which in plainness are
Ranters, and such like among whom he numbered the Quakers so called, for a Share
in his vaporing donation, so much talked, scribled, and trumpetted about by the
said R. Rich, and his Agent R. Bacon, which in that the Quakers, so called,
could not gratify a Whimsical, Ranting spirit, nor blemish their Reputation,
by eating and drinking with the Drunken or partaking with Ranters, and such
like, of a Cains Sacrifice, a Balacked Reward, and a Judas's oblation, in their
not accepting of R. Rich his thirty pounds (or thirty pieces) to dispose of as
he ordered, but only some two or three, admitted of the payment of the money to
them (pro tempore) till they could have an oppertunity to return it back to the
said R. Rich again, not at all intending to lie under such a Blemish, as to
partake and dispose (amongst the Quakers) of such a superstitious and
idolatrous Gift, proceeding from a ranting boasting spirit (as is the spirit of
R. Rich and R. Bacon) however, in their Title page, they have most slanderously
branded and defamed the said People called Quakers with prevarication in the
matter of thirty pounds, which was never their principle, nor intention (either
in that, or any other matter.)

And where R. Rich in his tenth page accuses us called Quakers with a spirit
of Pride, Emnity, and Falsehood; for that W.B. should affirm, That the thirty
pounds, whicw R.R. had ordered to be given to the Poor of their People (meaning
the Quakers) was not received by any of them (for they denied both him and his
Gift) W.B. further explaining himself [as R.R. is made to lay down, what he
said in that case] namely, That they never received it (the thirty pounds) from
him to that end and purpose, but upon this very ground only, that the Money was
sent, to be returned him. Thus far R. R. his own account of the case; now, that
not any of the Poor among us had it, nor did any of us receive it, but to
return it to him again is true and evident; albeit, he unjustly has imputed
Deceit and Falsehood to the said People in this matter.

And further this R.R.impudently and falsely adds, [Note] That the said money
was received with a clear intent to be disposed of to the Poor among them, and
the three persons (meaning J.B. A.S. G.R.) say the recived this Money, as from
him (to bestow upon their Poor, and yet decline their engagement in the
distribution, as (R.R.falsely says)

For answer to which, and for the clearing of the Truth, Indecency; and Honesty
of our Intentions in this matter, from R.R.his unjust and impudent Imputation
of Prevarication Deceit, and Falsehood; We do conscientiously, and in the Sight
of God, testify against him herein, as having injuriously abused us and our
Intentions; for we did consider of it before we received it, only to receive it
for that end, as to return the same Money back again to him, and to prevent any
others from receiving it under the Name or Color of Quakers, thereby to
scandalize us; for then R.R.might have boasted herein, having boasted already
upon a I ye and false Ground; as believing we would dispose of it according to
his Order, (among our Poor) which we never intended, neither did we need it.

For, First, in receiving his thirty pounds, we had no intent at all as to
dispose of it, to the Poor among us; but to return it to Robert Rich again, as
we could have oppertunity.

Secondly, it was never said by us (as he accuses us) That we received this
Money to bestow among the Poor.

Thirdly, We could not decline any Engagement therein, when we were under none
in that case, as for that end to accept of his Money or Gift (for that end)
which he and his Agents have so loudly trumpetted abroad; he many times over in
his Pamphlet, telling us of his thirty Pounds, his thirty pounds, and his
disposing of it, which instead of gaining Fame and Repute thereby, has brought
Infamy and Disgrace upon himself, as a Proud boasting Pharisee, and insulting
Bravadoe; however he would clear himself, as not being the Cause of his Foolish
(as he calls it) private Letter coming abroad; howbeit, he has sent the noise
of his Gift abroad, both to those he calls the seven Churches, and others, and
in making so much mention thereof in this last letter of his, as also his
Agents and Factors have sounded his Trumpet loud enough for him, and his Gifts.

Fourthly, That our intentions of returning the said thirty Pound to Robert
Rich again, were both real and performed by us; we here present his Receiptt
which runs thus (viz.)

December 23. 1668. Received then of John Grove Master of the Trial, the sum of
Thirty Pounds, and is upon the account of Gerrard Roberts, Amor Stodart, and
John Bolton; I say received by me according to the Receipt within.

Robert Rich Senior.

Now judge whether this R.R.or any of his Agents, had any cause or need
aforehand so much to trumpet up the noise or fame of his Gifts, or have either
boasted, or reproached us about it, or yet have been so confident as to say, we
received it with a clear intent to dispose to the Poor among us (which is an
absolute falsehood) for after it was received, it was immediately sealed up, on
purpose to return him the same money back again, as we were intended, that no
blemish might lie on the Truth, or us about it.

And now the Reader may mark, that we are not only villified by this R.R.and
(his Agent or factor) R. Bacon, for our denying him and his Gift; but this R.
Bacon has sounded his Trumpet on the behalf of R.R.and his Gift or Offering of
money (or Earth) where, in his Preface he sounds, or expresses the matter in
these words (viz.)

I have waited long, and hoped much, that at length you would have made some
acknowledgement to God, Mr. Rich, and indeed to me, whom you know unanimous
with him in this late, and only saving Dispensation of divine Love and Grace,
exhibited by and through him irrespectively to all (adding that) Mr. Rich has
dug open a Well among you, another and a better Dispensation; Comparing it to
the favor which the Prodigal found: Thus far R.R. and R.B. (page 3. and 4.
after he mentions the dispose of the thirty pounds) adds (viz.) It being a
work, which in truth, tends to the gathering and uniting of all the Seed of
Jacob -- into the new Jerusalem, and c. Thus far R.R.has blasphemously
trumpetted up his Gift and Fame therein to his own infamy, as all impartial
Readers may see and judge; as also, how blasphemous and Idolatrous this R. B.
has showed himself in this matter, upon Riches money, offering with these
Epethites on it; viz. This last and saving Dispensation of divine Love and
Grace exhibited by him, a Well, a better Dispensation, the Prodigals favor,
etc. Yea, and such a high one (and R.R.and R. B. so highly concerned in the
exhibiting thereof) that R.R.by this Idolater R. B. must be joined next to God
in it, and R. B. (next to R.R.) whose imposition runs thus; viz. You should
have made some acknowledgement to God, Mr. Rich, and inded to me, etc. And for
what should we have thus highly acknowledged to this Mr. Rich (as he proudly
calls him) next to God? What, for his feigned love in his hypocritical Gift of
thirty Pounds, which we never intended to accept, either for our own, or
Friends use; to gratify such Blasphemous Idolatrous spirits as yours (R.R.and
R.B.) are, whose Idolatry, Money-Dispensation, and feigned Love, which is now
turned into Enmity, and Railing we utterly deny, and the Lying spirit, by which
you, are acted; and if you come not to a better Dispensation then such beggarly
stuff as this of R.R.that shows it self in his Gifts of money, so much bragged
of; we may say to you, You and your money, Perish; for divine Love, which is
God's Gift, and the saving Dispensation is not to be purchased with money, nor
uniting into the new Jerusalem bought with his thirty pounds; nor any Feast
procured thereby (or your eating and drinking with Ranters, etc.) procure that
unity, that is in the new Jerusalem: Neither will R.R.with his Gift of thirty
Pounds (nor R. Bacon with his Trumpet to sound it up) gather the Seed of Jacob
into new Jerusalem, with money; whereby R.R.exhibites his last dispensation,
which R.B.falsely styles that of divine Love and Grace; so that we, refusing his
money, have stopped Rich and Bacons Well, and (as they judge) hindered the
gathering the Seed of Jacob into new Jerusalem; when as that which we have
stopped is nothing but Balacks Gift, Balaams Wages, Judas thirty Pieces, and
Simon Magus his money, (which that nature was always against the Seed of God)
which is now found in Rich and Bacon, as may be seen by their Book, as the
raging Wave of the Sea, that has foamed up shame, and fury, and madness, and
not a spark of divine Love, but a spirit that would murder, as after may be
made appear; and R.R.and Bacon are deceived to think to over come the Quakers
with Gifts; and now all People may see their folly (and what a madness they are
in) who read this.

Now R. Bacon, thou have in several things, in thy two pages in thy Preface,
belyed and abused us, called Quakers; however hypocritically thou call us
thy beloved Friends; but belyest us, as follows.

First, That we have rejected the only saving Dispensation of divine Love.

Secondly, That we have in Pride refused a better Dispensation, and that the
dread of it has been long upon us.

Thirdly That we show our selves herein contrary to all men, as the perverse
and obstinate Jews, who rejected Jesus, etc.

Fourthly, False also is thy Prophecy, What will be the exit of us, (to wit)
that of Boasters.

Fifthly, That the hour of our Judgment is now come, even as we have feared it
would also come upon us; (this false instance follows) which accuses us of
unchristian, violent, withstanding, and rejecting that appearance of God in
J.N. J.P. and many others, and last of all in Mr. Rich (as thou call him.)

Answer, This is a very Lying and Slanderous Accusation against us; for we
never withstood nor rejected the appearance of God in J.N. or any else (much
less violently) but the appearance of the Enemy, which veiled the appearance of
God for a time, until the appearance of God did arise and bring J.N. to a
sense and sight of his loss and fall, and to Judgment and Repentance, wherein
he in his latter days gave Glory to God, in judging, and in condeming that
spirit which had darkened him and others; and the same antichristian spirit he
gave testimony against, both in R.R. and the rest that followed and joined with
him in the hour of his temptation and darkness; and he was restored before his
Decease, so far as to vindicate the ancient Truth, and that he could have no
fellowship with such airy ranting spirits as you (R.R. R.B.) are of: Wherefore,
do not proceed any further to cover your selves with J.N. for his seriousness
and sense of Truth, that he was restored to, judges your light frothy spirits,
and this spirit of opposition and apostasy in J.P. which led him to where you
are, into rantism and false liberty in the World; and after the glory of it,
that he did not honor the Truth nor witness to the appearance of God in his
latter days; his spirit was not steadfast with the Lord; so there is no fit
comparison between J.N. (in his recovery to a sense of Judgment, Repentance,
and Mercy) and J.P. in his Stubbornness, Self-separation, and Apostasy from
Truth. And whereas R.R. in his 19th page, maliciously and falsely renders us in
these words, viz.

R.R. I have long seen the abomination that makes desolate, standing among the
Quakers, ever since that time wherein G.F. did judge J.N. and invited his
Friends so to do, without showing the least ground of his Censure, etc.

Answer, These are a Pack of notorious Lies, and Slanders against the Quakers
and G.F.in that case; for many can testify, and G. Fs. own Letters and
Testimonies; also concernining J.N. and the rest of you that applaud him in
your madness in the time of his darkness and captivity, under that dark power
[wherein thy self (R.R.) and such like, together with those silly Women, were
also infatuated and blinded, to the great prejudice and reproach of Truth, by
your means, your mad vain carriages and behaviors toward him] that G.F. and
Friends did judge nothing among you but that which was contrary and
dishonorable to Truth; and for eternal Judgment, the spirit of Antichrist,
Superstition, and Idolatry he and we judged, and G.F. showed reason enough for
it, though he did not invite his Friends, as is falsely said, for they saw
enough both in J.N. and the rest of you, which afterward he condemned, and you
both who persist in the condemned thing, remaining in that dark spirit; so that
we need not now renew their particulers (or dark things) against J, N. which
are condemned, dead, and buried (on his part) nor rake into such old Sepulcres
(that being not the work of our present day) for J.N. with some others (that
had been beguiled) did sufficienly judge and condemn that dark spirit, that led
into those extravigancies; and he gave diverse ample and public Testimonies
both in words and writings for the clearing of the Truth, and satisfaction of
the Righteous, who felt Life and Virtue from God in his Testimonies, against
that dark spirit and power which leads into Ranterism and Idolatry, wherein
thou and R.B. do yet persist; so that J.N. his Testimonies for God and his
Truth do live and are on record against you and your abomination to your
condemnation; so he has showed you reason enough in his Testimonies of
condemnation above ten years ago, against those things which he was in (who
after repented) but you still live in them without repentance, or condeming
your Abominations.

And Robert Rich, Did not J.N. see and judge that light frothy life thou live
in before his public Recantation? do not cover thy self with thy hypocritical
pretense of J.N. for he shall rise up in Judgment against thee.

And on what account say thou? That neither have thou seen many among us (
besides J.N. and J.P.) who by their fellowship with Christ in his death have
denied themselves, and made themselves of no reputation, page 25.

Herein thou have not dealt plainly, nor told us wherein their fellowship with
Christ, and making themselves of no reputation consisted beyond all others of
us; and thou wrongest J.N. in joining J.P. with him; for did J.P. show such
fellowship with Christ in his death? or so debase himself to be of no
reputation in his opposition to Friends, his singularity and self-separation,
when they could not set him up (as he would have been) and in his turning into
the World, it is honor and preferment in Jameca, whose way and end is
sufficiently known there? And art thou following the example of such as have
fellowship with Christ in his Death, or make themselves of no Reputation in thy
ranting light spirit, and in thy trumpeting up thy Gifts? Let all sober Readers
judge of thee herein.

And now, whereas thou call thy thirty Pounds thy Gift of Love, and
pretendest to that Charity, which neither sees, nor knows, nor thinks Evil
of another; leaving all others to the Righteous Judgment of God; and tells of
Humility, Love unfeigned, etc. p. 10. 16.

But thy pretense of Love, Charity, and Humility is turned into open outrage,
belying and slandering us, as will farther appear by the discovery of thy
hypocrisy in that pretense, who have not left others to the Judgment of God,
but presumptiously have set thy self in the seat of false Judgment, in the seat
of Scorners, Railers, and Slanderers; for all thy pretense of Love, the higher
Power, and of the Spirit of Peace and Love, p. 21.

And now that the Readers may see the extent and fruit of thy love and charity,
whether it be really so or nay, let them take a view of thy manner of Language
and Phrase against the People called Quaker, whom thou thus revilest and
threatnest accusing them as follows; (viz.)

R.R. his Railing and Slandering, Cursing and Sentencing the Quakers so called.

Not careing whom they slander, or what Lies they tell so as they may advance
their Party and sect. p. 11.

Compares them to those Bloody Persecutors, who used to put the Christians into
Bears-Skins, that the Dogs might tear them. p. 12.

This Hypocritical, Proud, Self-righteous Generation. p. 13.

This high and luciferian People, the Quakers, who for their show and numbers
have been as the Stars of Heaven, and who for their pride and emnity are now
cast down, to whom is reserved the blackness of Darkness for ever; insomuch
that carnal Whoremongers and Adulterers shall sooner repent and find Mercy. p.
15.

Babilonish Garments, Spiritual Wickedness among that Tribe called the
Ministry. p. 18.

The very name in which ye have prayed and prophesied, when innecent, and in
which you have cast out Devils, and wrought Wonders, shall now reject you,
saying, Depart from me ye Rulers of Sodom, and People of Gomorah, it is this
spirit, etc. That spirit of Wickedness in the Form of Righteousness, the Scab
of Contention and Strife will never cease to divide you, till the name of
Quakers become a hiss, etc. p. 17.

This Lying, Wrathful, bitter, Persecuting spirit, the King of the bottomless
Pit shall so rend, tear, and devour you, till not one stone be left upon
another. p. 20.

Ye must fall with Hamon, Saul, and Herod. p. 21. Thus far R.R. with his
Charity and love.

Answ. Are these expressions of thy Love and Charity? And is this the fruit of
thy high Dispensation? Have thou not here shown what spirit has acted thee,
and whence thy thirty Pounds were sent? Why art thou thus outrageous, and like
railing Rabsheca against the People of God, foaming out thy own shame? Art thou
angry that we would not be taken with thy Bait of thirty Pounds, Alas Poor man!
we rejoice over thy Railing and Reproaches, and trample upon thy Envy and
Malice, thy Charms touch us not, thy false Prophesies and Sentencing us thus
finally, to utter destruction, reach us not; neither can thy Enchantments, thy
feigned Singing, nor Gifts allure us; for we are in that Power that stands over
thy head, and thou will be disappointed of the fulfilling of thy Curses and
Sentences against us; like those that curse where God does bless; however it be
the desire of that black malicious spirit in thee, to have thy Threatenings come
to pass, to our destruction; but the Lord has blasted it, and will cross its
evil desire, and wicked design: And we are glad for the Truths sake, that we
suffer Reproaches by thee and such malicious ranting spirits; we are more glad
that thou (in the spirit thou stand in) have thus reproached and vilified
us, then if thou should have altogether commended us; for we should think
the worse of our selves if thou should commend, and speak well of us, in the
state thou art in.

And now after thou have thus cruelly and finally sentenced us (the People
called Quakers) as with utter destruction, and the blackness of darkness for
ever: The Reader may take notice, how manifestly thou have contradicted thy
self (as one whom madness and outrage has infatuated) by what follows, where
thou usest these words to us, viz.

R.R. You have been and still are exercised under fear, being bound to strict
Observations thereby working out your Salvation with fear and trembling, all
which the Son of Man also fulfilled in the days of his flesh, as being born
under the Law, learning obedience by the things he suffered; and thus far you
stand with him in your earthly Testimony, p. 24.

Answ. However thou blasphemously call the Testimony of Christ among us
earthly, yet thou have confessed enough for us, to confute thy own false
testimonies and railing before; for if we be such as work out our Salvation
with fear and trembling, follow the Example of the Son of Man in his obedience,
and stand with him in our Testimony, we are not such as before thou have most
shamefully rendered us in thy outrage, nor to fall with such utter destruction
as thou have foretold, and thy confusion, and gross contradictory, bedlam (and
Babylonish) stuff against us is as much as if thou had foretold us in these
words; (viz.) You Quakers, that work out your Salvation with fear trembling,
and stand with the Son of Man in your Testimony and Obedience, you are a
luciferan People, for whom is reserved the Blackness of Darkness for ever,
carnal Whoremongers and Adulterers shall sooner repent and find mercy then ye,
depart from me, etc. And thus have thou most shamefully reviled the Followers
of the Son of Man, and so in effect have thus blasphemed against Christ, in as
much as thou have done it to his, with thy dark confused spirit of Envy and
Malice, who also to manifest what an Enemy thou art to Christ and his
Righteousness say, That even the Innocence and Righteousness of the Son, the
Seed must be offered-up, and nailed to the Cross; addest these Popish terms,
viz. This may be truly called Purgatory or Limbo patrum p. 24.

Answ. See how like a ranter thou have herein showed thy self, who would have
the Innocence and Righteousness of the Son of God crucified; whereas it is the
old man which is corrupt with his deeds that must be crucified; but thou like a
Ranter have both undervalued the Example, Obedience, and Righteousness of the
Son, and have prefered Whoremongers and Adulterers before such as stand with
the Son in his Testimony, it appears thou have a great deal of respect to
Whoremongers and Adulterers, thy spirit having most affinity with such, as will
further appear.

Again, notwithstanding thou have so finally and cruelly sentenced and
threatened us, as before thou give us these Exhortations, viz.

R.R. Go humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, that in due time be
may exalt you into the number of that Name unto which every knee must bow, p.
25. And to look to the Root that leads us either to do or suffer, and earnestly
to pray and seek for the best and most excellent Love and Charity, etc.

Answ. Here its again obvious, how thou have contradicted thy self, and thy
confusion and contradiction runs thus, viz. You luciferian People, for whom is
reserved the blackness of darkness for ever, who must be cut down, and fall
with Hammon, Saul, and Herod in the pit; go you and humble your selves that God
in due time may exalt you into the number of the Elect, look you to the root
that leads you to do or suffer, and earnestly pray, etc. Do but see the
confusion and madness of this R.R. and how like a mad Bedla m he has acted his
part, one while bitterly exclaiming against us, and judging us to the pit, and
for the blackness of darkness for ever; another while bids us humble our
selves, and pray that God may exalt us, as if now there were hopes for us, when
at other times he will not own there is any hopes for us; thus he has bewrayed
his own madness and folly, through his envy and outrage.

And now (Robert) can Lucifer, Hammon, Saul, and Herod, look to the root to
lead them, or they that are chained in darkness for ever, when thou say
Christ, the root bids them depart, and yet thou say we must look to the root
that leads us, etc. Is this R.R. and R.Bs. Retorick from their higher
dispensation? Judge Reader.

And now as to R.R. his dearly saluting and owning the Outcasts from the
People called Quakers, as his brother Benjamin, Bone of his bone, and flesh of
his flesh, etc. p. 8.

Answ. Such as are Outcasts from amongst us are such as have cast themselves
out, by turning from the living Truth and Power of God, to wit, such as turn
into prejudice and enmity, and such as turn into corrupt Principles, tending to
a false liberty in the flesh, out of the fear of God, and contrary to the Truth
received, and so into a spirit and principle of ranterism (such as R.R. himself
is turned into) and such as turn into looseness, liberty, and scandalous
practices, to the dishonor and reproach of Truth; these and such like are the
Outcasts that are denied by us, and are no Members of our Body, no Bone of our
Bone, nor Flesh of our Flesh, how nearly soever they be related to R.R. and
such as he, as Members of that corrupt body; for they are none of the true
Church of God, as falsely he terms them: So the whole body of Ranters, Envious
persons, Seedsmen of Strife, Drunkards, and Whoremongers, our testimony stands
against, and over their heads what ever they have professed, etc. So we leave
R.R. to the body which he is related, whose Members are of the first birth of
death, being twice dead and plucked up by the roots.

Again, R.R. tells us of such, As are redeemed out of the evil of all Sects,
Kindreds, and People, who have no visible Church, etc. (and to such he would
have the distribution of his thirty pounds) who are under any Sect or sort of
People whatsoever, p. 7, 8.

Reply, What gross absurdity and contradictions are here! Are they redeemed out
of the evil of all Sects, and yet under all Sects and sorts of People? This is
of not only contradiction, but exactly the Ranters Principle, who make no
difference between the many Sorts and Sects of People, deeming them all the
Church without distinction; and how does he reckon, that in joining, To dread
and fear the Lord, to watch and keep to the Light, to be a hard imposition, as
p. 22.

Its hard to the dark ranting spirit, but easy to them that are under Christ's
Yoke; for his darkness can not endure the Light, nor his vain mind the Fear of
God; And how does he say the Redeemed have no visible Church or People to
shelter under, when in contradiction he tells of the Inhabitants of Mount Sion,
the numbers of One hundred forty four Thousands, p. 22. And that such a People
there are in this present World, even as he is, in Heaven, p. 25. And surely
such will not own R.R. with his money, nor any such Ranters who deem it a hard
imposition to fear the Lord watch and keep to the Light; so it appears he and
his Fellow Members neither fear God nor watch, nor walk in the Light: But in
his confusion he forgets himself; for in p. 8. tells us of owning all that fear
God and love Righteousness; and thus over and over he contradicts himself.

And whereas he accuses W.B. (how true is a Question) of saying, Rich, thou
art a Whoremonger, have an Adulterous Whoremongers Spirit, etc. at which he
seems greatly offended, making chiefly these exceptions, that it is a Judgment
without knowledge, or other proofs, and that Christ Jesus refused to meddle
with the Magistrates works, bidding us read John 8. 3. and Luke 12. 13.

To which we say, R.R. has not in his answer cleared himself of these things,
which he takes as laid to his charge, but rather has rendered himself
suspicious, at least, in that he would not have us to judge Whoremongers
because it is the Magistrates work, as he says, as also by his instance in
that of John 8. 3. which is concerning the woman which was taken in Adultery,
and whether he does really own that there is any such thing or action as
Adultery in it self (any more then his brethren the Ranters) is a Question;
besides, R.R. renders himself the more suspicious in the matter aforesaid, that
a little after he prefereth carnal Whoremongers and Adulterers before us, as
those that shall sooner find Mercy: Its no marvel he has so much pleaded for
Whoremongers, and such as are of whoreish spirits, when he has set himself so
shamelesly to rail at and reproach the Innocent: So he is to be left to his own
body, which he is a member of (as before) who are of adulterous, unclean,
ranting spirits, whom God will judge.

And when as this Rich, after he has vented forth his most bitter storm of
railing (and threatening us with rending, tearing, and devouring by the King of
the Bottomless Pit) he most wickedly and scorn fully adds these words, p. 20.
viz. Which thing tell G.F. that Foxyour King, etc.

To which we say, That as this Rich has threatened us with being torn and
devoured, no doubt but the Devil, and he would have it come to pass (with his
envy and venom he has showed in this, as all People may see) and thereupon he
appears as the Devils Agent, as one in a murderous blood-thirsty spirit, as
if he would instigate the outward Powers or Rulers to rend, tear, and devour
us, like the murderous Blood-thirsty Jews, and Persecutors, against Christ, who
when their Accusation against him, of being a Blasphemer, would not take, to
put him to death unjustly, made this his Accusation, that he made himself a
King, viz. The King of the Jews, and that he was an Enemy to Caesar, upon which
he was cruelly put to death, notwithstanding he had plainly given them account
of his clearness of that matter, telling them, My Kingdom is not of this World;
and likweise we answer on the behalf of G.F. that he, with the rest of the
faithful Servants of Christ among us, have such reverence to Christ, and
respect to his example, as also such an innocent subjection to the Powers that
are ordained of God, that a worldly Kingdom they seek not, neither is that our
design to seek; howbeit, as G.F. and the rest of the faithful Followers of
Christ among us have known Redemtion in him, they are anointed and made by
Christ Kings and Priests, not after a carnal commandment, but in the Power of
an endless Life are made to reign over darkness, envy, and wickedness, and over
both the old Murderer R.R. and the Devil, and the Ranters, and such murderous
spirits, as seek to slay the Innocent, and to crucify the Innocence and
Righteousness of the Son of God, which R.R.has sought to do in others as he
has in himself, according to his doctrine in p. 24.

And now we must a little look back to an Accusation of R.B. in his Preface
against us, where he accuses us, That our Glory is the abhorrancy certain
outward Forms and Ceremonies, introduced (as he says) of old by wiser men then
our selves, to wit, the Elders and Teachers of the People, for a Manuduction to
the holy Understanding of the Heavenly things, whereby (he says) Christianity
was upheld in great Unity and glory for many hundred years, till there was a
strife about them, etc.

Answ. Now seeing that R.B. has thus justified those outward Forms and
Ceremonies, which we deny and abhor, without exception, or declaring what they
are, and counts them a Manuduction to the holy Understanding, and those things
whereby Christianity was upheld; it is therefore needful that we should hint what
outward Forms, and what Ceremonies they are that we abhor, That they are such
as are Superstitious and Idolatrous; such as contraey to the Form of Godliness
in the Night of Apostasy, as Popish Idolatry bowing to Images, their Doctrine,
Transubstantiation, adoring a Piece of Bread, or their Sacrament, or Eucharist
(so called) as being Christ the Lamb of God, etc. though but a Christ of their
own making, such Idolatrous and Heathenish Practices; and whatsoever Forms or
Ceremonies are brought in the Apostasy, among pretended Christians, which are
upheld or imposed either by Papists or others, contrary to the Example and
Doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles, and contrary to the Dispensation of the
Gospel Power of Godliness, these and all such Forms, Ceremonies, and Practices
do we deny and abhor, however this R.B. counts those outward Forms and
Ceremonies which we abhor as a manuduction to the holy Understanding, etc.
(without making distinction which) see how exactly herein he has acted the
part of a Ranter; for the Ranters used to say, they own all Forms, Ways, or
Religions to be as so many steps and degrees toward Heaven, not owning any
distinction between Truth and Error, true worship and false, nor between the
true spirit and the false, but say, that all are acted by one Power; but the
lying spirit does act them to be sure, and the Devil has made Fools of R.R.
and R.B. and the Ranters; but the Power of the Lord and his living Truth is
set, and stands over all their heads, and his Seed reigns over their
wickedness; and that wicked spirit in Rich, who after he has vented and showed
his Malice, and Envy, and Bloodthirsty spirit, often uses that expression in
the Revelation, HALLELVJAH, but we know that spirit that tempted Eve and
Christ, but Christ has bruised his head, and the pit he must go down into from
whence he came; Lucifer is fallen, let R.R. read.

G.W.

A Postscript.
R. Rich, We have taken notice of many of thy slanderous false Predictions, and
Railing, more then related in this Answer, and have collected above forty of
them dispersed in thy perverse Pamphlet, which we have on record, which at
present we forbear, publishing.

Thou art one of them that went out from us; for no doubt had thou been of
us, thou would have continued with us, but thou went out, that it might be
made manifest that thou were not of us, John 2. and so now calls Light
darkness, good evil, and evil good, and now art become a wandering Star, up and
down in thy imaginations, and now art become a raging Wave of the Sea, casting
up the mire and dirt, as may be seen in thy book; for had R.R. but Power we
should have heard his Bell, Book, and Candle ere now, but now being become
twice dead and plucked up by the roots; and also see his malice, rage, envy, and
bloodthirsty mind against G.F. and all may see his mountain brings forth
nothing but Briars and Thorns, and out of his mouth comes Wrath, Bitterness,
Anger, Clamor, Evil-speaking, and Malice; so the Proverb is come upon him, The
Sow is turned to the wallowing in the mire and the Dog to the vomit; any one
that looks upon R.R. may see how the Sow is mired, and what a vomit the Dog has
cast up, but it may be some of his spirit may lick it up, especially they that
received his gifts, hoping to get 30. l. more, such as R. Bacon, But will the
Fool say in his heart now there is no God, that blasphems his Tabernacle and
them that dwell in Heaven? and so thou that have uttered Slanders against thy
Brethren art a Fool called by Solomon, who have showed forth thy perverse lips;
and so thou who art so right in thy own eyes, and scoffest at them that be in
the eye of Faith, art a Fool. But the lips of a Fool will swallow up himself,
and so this is come to pass upon thee Robert; the beginning of thy mouth is
foolishness, and the end of thy talk is mischevious madness, And bray a Fool in
a mortar and he will be never the wiser; For anger rests in the Breast of a
Fool; for how long has anger and foolishness rested in the breast of R.R. ever
since the days of J.N. even 11. or 12. years, and has shut out love; and it
is to be feared the envy foolishness, and a lying spirit will guide him to his
grave, and what is the matter that makes R.R. to rage, because the Quaker would
not receive his gift of thirty pieces, which is published in two Pamphlets, and
sounded over the Nations; here is a Pharisees Trumpet indeed; and now because
he cannot therein be accepted, he appears Cain like, as if he would murder, as
many that are not Quaker may see his expressions in his Book, and see his
wicked mind, as his wicked, devilish, blood-thirsty words (from a blood-thirsty
spirit) against G.F. his rage is so great, but the Lord will reward him
according to his works, though for a time he may huff, and puff, and swell, and
rage; had he been in Nebuchadnezers day, he would have been a fit man to blow
his fire, as now he is blowing the fire fro the true Israslites, with his
envious spirit, thinking thereby to castthem in, but the fire will take hold of
him first, and the true Israelites will lescape by the Power of God.

E.H.

THE END.

