Thursday 24th of October, 1695.
By the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled.
ORDERED,
On motion, that the Earl of Mount-Alexander and the Lord Viscount Charlemount
do give the Thanks of this House to the Lord Bishop of Killaloo for his Sermon
Preached before this House at Christ's-Church Yesterday, being the Anniversary
of the Three and Twentieth of October, And that his Lordship be desired to
cause his Sermon to be Printed.

Gerard Bor. Cler. Parliamentorum.

A SERMON PREACHED In CHRIST's-CHURCH, DUBLIN; On the 23d of October. 1695.

Being the Anniversary Thanksgiving for putting an End to the IRISH REBELLION,
which broke out on that Day, 1641.

BEFORE THE HOUSE of LORDS,

By HENRY Lord Bishop of KILLALOO.

DUBLIN, Printed by and for J. Ray, and are to be Sold by the Booksellers in
Dublin. 1695

A SERMON Preached on the 23d of October, 1695.
Job, 8.13. The Hypocrite's Hope shall Perish.
IT was the saying of a Great and Wise Man, that most of the Creatures are
worthy of our best Thoughts, and deserve our serious Observation: That
something is to be Learned from every one of them, as well from the smallest
Insect under our Feet, as from the glittering Canopy over our Heads; as well
from the least Atome in the Sun Beams, as from the Glorious Luster of the Moon
and Stars. Naturalists tells us, That the Engle taught us Architecture, and
drew the first Model of an handsome and convenient House; That the Spider showed
the Weaver the use of the Shuttle and the Loom, the good Housewife to manage
the Spindle and the Wheel; That Swallows were the first Professed Oculists;
That the River-Horse taught us how to breath a Vein, and that we are obliged to
several other Animals for many excellent Discoveries; both in Surgery and
Physic: We find too many of the Creatures instructing us in things that more
nearly do concern us, Reading Lectures to us, and Discoursing with us, like so
many Professors in Divinity: The Prophets direct us to the Stork, the Turtle
and the Crane, to the Ox and to the Ass, to learn us Gratitude, and our time of
returning unto the Lord. Solomon sends us to the Ant, to Preach to us Frugality
and Thrift, and a Greater and Wifer than Solomon, to the Serpent and the Dove
for Innocence and Wisdom.

Nay all the Trees, the Plants, and Flowers of the Field, from the Cedars of
Lebanon to the Hyssop that springs out of the Wall, are spoken of by the Holy
Penmen, who condescending to our Capacities, borrow many handsome Allusions
from things, that we are intimately acquainted with, from the Vine and the
Fig Tree, the Thistle and the Thorn; and indeed from almost all the Herbs and
Greens of the Earth.

Thus Bildad introduces the Words Read unto you. Can the Rush grow without
Mire? Can the Flag grow without Water? whilst it is yet in its Greeness, and
not cut down, it withers before any other Herb, so are the Paths of all that
forget God, and the Hypocrite's Hope shall Perish.

In the Words we shall consider,

First, The Person, the Hypocrite.

Secondly, What his Hopes are, and how he comes to Hope.

Lastly, The End and Consequence of his Hopes, they shall Perish.

This indeed may be thought no very proper Subject for the occasion; the
Tragical Story of the day, the horrid Cruelties, Barbarous Murders, and
unspeakable Sufferings the poor Protestants groaned under, might very well have
been expected to have been fairly represented to our View: When Readiness Sword
against the Amalekites, seemed to be drawn among us, and to act with that large
Commission, to slay both Man and Woman, Infant and Suckling, Ox and Sheep,
Camel and Ass, only with this difference, that our implacable Enemies spared
not so much as the best of the Sheep and Oxen: When the merciless Persecutors
of our Forefathers, had not always so much goodness as to Kill, so much
Humanity as utterly to destroy; But prolonged their miserable Lives, took care
that they might linger under their Torments, and feel themselves dye, and at
last out of the abundance of their Compassion, dispatched them with a Stab at
their Hearts, and that dreadful Imprecation, Thy Soul to the Devil. When the
Blood of the Innocent was shed like Water on every Side, Lamentations and
Wailings were Echoed from every Corner, and our weeping Rachils sat bemoaning
themselves, and had none to comfort 'em: When the Cry in most Places was
something louder than that of Egypt, for there was scarce an English Family in
which there was not more than one Dead; when the dead Bodies of Gods Servants
that lay weltring in their own Gore were denied the common kindness of the
Grave, and were given to be Meat unto the Fowls of the Air; and the flesh of
his Saints unto the Beasts of the Field, and the most brutish fury of that
bloody Crew was esteemed Meritorious, and thought to deserve not only the
Encomiums of a Conclave, but the Apostolical Benediction. It may I say be
expected, that I should enlarge upon these particulars; but hope that the Task
may be equally ungrateful to us all; That as we delight not in the Effusion of
any Man's Blood, so we Sympathize too far with the Sufferings of our Ancestors,
to disturb the weary that are at rest, to lay open their Bleeding VVounds, to
revive those persuasive Calls to Revenge, those Cries and fearful Screeches
which run Parallel to nothing, but that in the Revelation; How long Lord, Holy
and True, will thou not Judge and Avenge our Blood?

We shall therefore proceed according to the Method laid down, and as we
insist upon the several parts of the Text, take some notice of the Hypocrisy
and Dissimulation of our false Brethren, show you what their Hopes were, and
that they also fell short of all their Expectations.

First, Then we shall consider, the Person, the Hypocrite; the word Hypocrite
in its Natural and Genuine Sense, signifies an Actor or a Player, one who upon
the Public Stage personates another, imposes upon the Spectators, and pasles
for the Man he only represents.

And indeed as the Heathen long since observed, the whole World is a Large
Theater, where the generality of Men do no more than decently represent the
Persons they would be thought to be; and the very best of them may put the same
Question to themselves, that the Emperor Augustus did to his Friends, when he
lay a dying; have not I acted the play of Life very well. For they are
disguised into a thousand several shapes, are all mere show, face, and
appearance, and he that knows not how to act his part, to play the Hypocrite
and Dissembler, knows neither how to Rule nor to Obey; he will make but an
awkard Monarch, a rough unaccomplish'd Courtier, and in most Professions, will
want many of those Qualifications, which usually polish and recommend a Man, to
the good opinion of the mistaken World. But then the word Hypocrite, signifies
a Religious Cheat, a Wolf in sheeps clothing, a Devil in the habit of a Saint,
in the Garb of an Angel of Light, one who has much the color, but little of
the substance, a great deal of the form, but scarce any thing of the power of
Godliness; one whose best side is always outward, who makes it his business to
be thought Religious, who labors not so much to be really good, as to appear
unto Men to be so.

And now to draw up the Curtain, and bring him upon the Stage; First, Let us
take a View of him at his Devotions. He enters into the place of public
Worship, with a solemn set Face. He perhaps prostrates himself on the ground,
zealously lifts up his hands and eyes toward Heaven, flashes and disciplines
himself after the manner of Baal's Priests, cries aloud, smites upon his Breast,
and makes a Profession of confessing his Sins, with an humble, penitent and
obedient heart.

By the show he makes, any Man would imagine, That he was above the trifling
Things of this lower World, that his Soul was upon the Wing, and full of
heavenly Meditations, and that he was talking with his God, as familiarly as
ever Moses did, even as a Man speaks to his Friend; and yet all this while he
is but acting a Part, mimicking the Saint, and giving a lively Representation
of an extraordinary Pious and Religious Man. For he is Proud, Impenitent, and
Disobedient; God is not in so much as one of all his Thoughts; he draws nigh
unto him only with his Lips, and thinks of every thing more than of Him; he
then only pretends to Worship, and perhaps in his whole Life, never made a
hearty Prayer, nor sent up one sincere Petition to the God and Father of all
things.

But to shift the Scene, sometimes you may see the Hypocrite in his Penitential
Dress, in a hair Shirt, in the habit of a Pilgrim; or in Sackcloath and Ashes:
At other times, you may observe him, hanging down his Head like a Bulrush,
sowring and disfiguring his Face, looking indeed like a Man that did afflict
his Soul, mortify his Members, and bring them into subjection to the Spirit;
And yet these external Severities are rarely attended, with any inward Devotion
of his Heart; all the while he keeps his Body Low, Thin and Meager, he feeds
his Old Sins, he pampers and every Day recruits his Inclinations to new
Transgressions; in the midst of all his abstinence, his Soul has its secret
Revels and Frolicks in Sin, he drinks Iniquity like Water, and acts all
Uncleanness with Greediness,

And as his Fasting is only acted, so are his deeds of Charity. When he bestows
his Alms, it is with all the outward Pomp and Solemnity that may be, in the
Streets or in Places of the greatest Resort and Concourse; He proclaims the
time of his Benevolence, to morrow I will give; He sounds a Trumpet before his
good Dees, rattling his Money into the poor Man's Box; and reaches out his hand
with such a sad Countenance, with such an Air of Goodness and Compassion; as if
he indeed felt their Wants; was their Brother and Companion in Tribulation, and
bore a part in all their Sufferings and Necessities; and yet the kindness is
only designed to himself, and were it not to gratify his vain glorious Humor,
to get the Reputation of being pitiful and tender Hearted. Were all his
Charitable Acts to be secret, and the World not to know, what either his right,
or his left Hand did; they would be confined to a narrow compass, even end
where they begin at home, and he would part with that Trash his Money, as if it
was indeed, what the Rabbis call it in their Language, his dearest Blood.

If we look into the Hypocrit's Behavior, in all other Cases, you never find
them, without their little Shifts and Devices, to secure their Credit, without
some specious pretenses to palliate the blackest of their Crimes; I might
instance in several particulars, but shall only name some few, relating to that
Barbarous Rebellion in this Kingdom; and here the Popish Party tell us, they
took up Arms in Defense of his Majesty's Person and Royal Prerogative; whereas
in deed those great Pretenders to Loyalty, raised Armies, coined Money, granted
Letters of Reprisal, sent Ambassadors to foreign Princes, invaded and rifled
all the choicest and most valuable Jewels of the Crown.

It was say they, A Just and Holy War, for the Liberty of their Consciences,
and the freedom of that which they call their Faith and Religion, and yet at
that very time, they enjoyed such a licentious freedom of all their
Superstitions, that if one of their own holy Fathers may be credited, the Frogs
in the second Plague of Egypt were not more numerous, than the Priests and
Friars, that then swarmed within the precincts of this one City; but it has
never been thought any Reflection, either on the Piety, or Charity of the good
Catholics, to shelter their Pride and Ambition, their Malice and Revenge,
under the color of Religion, to counterfeit Christ's Commission, to put his
Cross into their Banners, and to express their Zeal for the Lord and his House,
in the Blaze and Flames of their Neighbors.

But then alas! The Protestants were the first Aggressors, and the Papists not
daring to stay at home, Assembled together, purely for the safety of their
Lives, and their mutual preservation; and therefore admire that they should be
called Rebels, who were only a few discontented Gentlemen, apprehensive of a
general Massacre, and could not but make some little defense for themselves,
and civilly oppose them, who first blew the Trumpet, and were ready for the
Battle.

It would be endless to enumerate all the Pretenses they made use of, for the
advancing of their Cause, the frequent professions of their kindness and
affection to their English Neighbors, the deceitful Kisses, and treacherous
Embraces they gave them, the Crocodiles Tears they shed over them, till they
had got their Goods and Arms into their Power* the Obliging Distinction they
made for some days, between the British Inhabitants, till they had Complemented
and Wheedled the Scotch too into the Snare, the breach of all their Articles,
the Perfidious Violation of the most Sacred Oaths and Promises, and the many
other little Arts and Pious Frauds, their Holy Church at that time especially
Legitimated, to Decoy the credulous Protestants into their Nets, till they were
miserably betrayed, and basely Butchered by those they Trusted, upon the
insignificant Pledges, of their Word and Honor.

Thus if you follow the Hypocrite through all the other parts of his Life, the
best thing you can say of him is, that he is a good Actor, he treads the Stage
handsomely, he pronounces his Words with a Grace, and speaks his Part admirably
well, he has the Garb, the Gesture and Countenance of a very honest Man, of an
Israelite indeed, in whom is no Guile, he looks like the Tombs and Monuments of
the Dead, which are set off with a great deal of Cost and Charge, appear
Beautiful, and make a goodly Show, but within are full of dead Men's Bones, of
Rottenness and Corruption; for he has not so much as one of those good
Qualities he pretends to; take him but into the tiring Room, strip him, and lay
aside his Robes, pull off his Mask and Vizard, that Paint and Fucus, which he
lays on with so much Art and Cunning, he will then be seen as he is, a deformed
shrivel'd Piece, a miserable Spectacle indeed; and yet for all that, he hopes
he shall come off very well, and claps and applauds himself: And therefore in
the next place we shall consider, what grounds he has for his hopes, and from
whence they do proceed.

First, Then the Hypocrites Hopes may proceed from this; he has found by long
experience, That his bare Pretenses to Virtue, have served his turn very well
in this World, promoted his Interest, and been as advantageous to him, as if it
had been real: He has acquired it may be, a great Estate, Honors, and
Preferments, by the appearance of being a good Man, got his Fathers Blessing by
the smoothness of his Carriage, sound Favor in the Eyes of his Prince, by
Dissimulation and Flattery, and with Absalom, stolen the Hearts of all the
People, by his fair Speeches; his courteous and obliging Behavior, his
Honesty, such as it is, as far as he knows, has never been Mistrusted; and he
hope still to carry on the Cheat, to deceive Heaven, as well as he has done
Man, and concludes, That the same Arts which have Enabled him to go beyond his
Brother, may do him the like Service, in Overreaching and Abusing of his God.

He has been Blessed with the Fat of the Earth, and the Dew of Heaven; the Sun
has Shined as Warmly, and the Showers of Rain, Refreshed him as much, as the
best of his Neighbors; he prospers in the World, and has Riches in Possession,
and he cannot but look upon such Blessings, as an earnest of some future
Favor. By the large share he has of the things of this Life, he judges what
proportion he may expect in the next, and from every lucky hit, still draw this
inference, That he who has been so Fortunate, and had so much Goods laid up for
many years here, must have some Happiness hereafter, at least a Child's Portion
in Reversion.

But suppose the worst; seeing the Tares grow together with the Wheat, he hopes
that at the general Harvest he may be thrown into the Barn among the other
Sheaves; that the Counterfeit may not be discerned in so great a heap of
Precious Stones; that the goodness of the Foyl may give it such a Luster, that
it may sparkle even in the Eyes of God himself, and pass without suspicion,
when he comes to make up the fairest of his Jewels.

Secondly, The Hypocrite may hope upon this account. His constant endeavors
have been to set himself handsomely off, to acquire all the outward visible
signs of Piety and Holiness, without any regard to the inward purity of his
Heart, and he has been so long used to dissemble with others, that he has even
forgot to deal honestly and sincerely with himself.

The foolish Actor, who was to personate a King, when he saw himself surrounded
with Guards and Attendance, with all the pomp and solemnity of a Court, tho he
had not one Royal Quality or Princely Virtue, nothing of that largeness of
Soul, none of those generous and noble Thoughts, which are absolutely necessary
to so considerable a Dignity, to so high a Calling: He began to fancy that he
was born for some great Designs, that he was cut out for a Crown, and really
was the mighty Person he represented. So our Religious Player, tho he has none
of the qualifications of a Saint, nor any Truth in his inward Parts. Tho he is
utterly a stranger to all the great Duties of Religion, and never heartily
bewailed or truly repented of any of the Errors of his life, yet he has worn
the Robes of Rightteousness so long, that from the color of his Habit he
judges of the cleanness of his Heart; from the whiteness of his Garments, that
he has kept himself unspotted from the World; and at last is given up to the
strongest of Delusions, to believe himself, and concludes with the proud
Pharisee, That he is not as other Men are; That God cannot forget to be
gracious to him, but will accept his person, and receive him into his mercy and
favor.

Thirdly, The Hypocrite may hope, imagining that there is some recompense due,
to the good Figure He has made in the World, and that there is something of
merit, even in his dissimulation. Religion in his opinion gets some credit, by
the respect Men only seem to pay it. It is one proof of his virtuous
Inclinations, that he hides and conceals his Vices, and surely think He, the
outward Expressions of Piety, the borrowed disguise of Devotion, has a better
Title to forgiveness, than down right Atheism and Profaness; a counterfeit zeal
for the service of God, such a one as Naaman's in the house of Rimmon, must be
much less offensive, than to kick at his Sacrifices, pollute his Sanctuary, and
Convert that Holy Place, into an House of Merchandise, a den of Thieves.

For thus he may be willing to justify and argue for Himself: He constantly
frequents the Church, no Man comes with more reverence and humility, or cries
louder, Lord, Lord, than He does, He fasts twice in the week, and makes little
or no provision for the flesh, He is nicely Exact in observing all the minutest
circumstances of the Law: had rather starve than gather a few Sticks, rather
perish with Hunger than pluck a few Ears of Corn on the Sabbath Day; He gives
Tithes of all that He possesses; It is a weighty matter, in his Opinion, to
scruple the payment of so just a Debt, a robbing of God Himself; and He would
not be guilty of Sacrilege, no not in that sense, for all the World; He gives
alms, and has lent considerable Sums unto the Lord, and believes He has put his
Money into good hands: He never turns so much as his Face from any poor Man,
and he trusts that the Face of the Lord, shall never be turned away from him.

For his part, He cannot but think, he has contributed some thing to the honor
of God, and the Interest of Religion; and could wish there were many more such
Hypocrites as he is; That all our Leopards would rather conceal their Spots,
and our Ethiopians change their Skins, than that they should publish their
Transgressions, make their Crimes their Reputation, declares their Sins as
Sodom, and Glory in their shame.

Thus the Hypocrite, tho he has not lived up to the strictest Rules of our most
holy Religion, nor made his Heart bend to the severer Precepts of the Gospel,
yet for as much as his good deeds, have been transacted in the sight o fall the
People, and in the face of the Sun, and his bad ones in his secret chambers, or
in those darker recesses of his Soul: That his life may have been exemplary,
and the Copy taking, seeing no Man knows the defects of the Original; That he
has brought as he vainly dreams, no blemish to his Profession, nor done any
public dishonor to his God; Tho He cannot pretend to that great Reward, due
to the sincere, honest, and good Heart, to them that have born the heat and
burden of the Day; yet he sees no reason why he may not hope for his Penny in
the Evening; why He may not gather up some of the crumbs that fall from his
Masters Table; why God may not dispense with a Commutation, and accept the
formality of holiness, for real and substantial Virtue and Religion.

These may be some of the Reasons, which the Hypocrite gives for the hoes that
are in him, These the Reeds on which He loans, the feeble props which shore up
his tottering Expectations; for after all the poor Apologies he can make for
himself, He is in a lost and undone condition, he must be miserable, he and all
his hopes must Sink and Perish together, and that for these following Reasons.

All he aimed at, in the whole course of his Life, was to be popular, to
insinuate himself into the good esteem, and to get the praise and commendation
of Men, That was the recompense he principally had an Eye to, and having had
that in so large a measure, he ought not to expect or hope for any other. Had
the Cardinal as he too late considered, served his God, as faithfully as he did
his Prince, He would never have cast him off in his old Age, nor have forsaken
him when he was Grayheaded. Had the Hypocrite courted the favor of Heaven.
with as much earnestness, as he did the applause of the World, had he been as
ambitious of the Glory of God, as of the fair Character of his fellow Servants,
he might have enlarged his desires, and promised himself; even all those good
things, which God has prepared for them, that sincerely love and truly fear
Him: But seeing that all his good Works, were done upon no other account, but
to be seen of Men that that was the Grand design and drift of all his actions,
and that he made that his chief end, God has made it so too, he verily has had
his reward, and must never look for more; he has had his Reward: It is indeed,
one of the most terrible Sentences in all the Scriptures, and as the Learned
interpret, imports thus much, He has received all that was due unto him; he has
given God a Discharge, subscribed an Acquittance in full satisfaction, and can
never in reason, or justice, demand and thing surther from him.

But then again; The Hypocrites hopes must Perish, for he provokes and affronts
God as much as the most lewd and profligate sinner living He professes a great
reverence for him, it is part he tells you of his Creed, That God is present
every where, that he searches the Heart, and darts his Eyes into every corner
of his Soul, and yet he uses him worse then he would do the meanest Man, and
securely acts the greatest Villainies, under his Eye, which he would tremble to
commit, under the inspection of the poorest Child.

So that let the Hypocrite pretend never so much to believe, There is something
of Atheism in his Heart; for without that he might dissemble with Men and
Angels, but never du^^^ entertain one thought of prevaricating with his God, of
putting such tricks upon him, as Michol did upon Saul, of deluding him with an
Image, with a Puppet neatly dressed, in-instead of a David, with a demure
formal Saint in the place of a Man after his own Heart, and after his own Will.

Certainly, this must be a Sin of the very first magnitude God is in Honor
concerned to vindicate Himself, to cut off the hopes of such a wicked wretch,
to make so daring a Sinner, a dreadful monument of his Fury and Indignation.

But supposing our Hypocrite not Atheistically inclined, That he is no stranger
to the Principles of Religion, that he believes in his Heart, that God
regards not the outward behavior of any Man, when his inward parts are full
of wickedness; and then let him tell me, what he thinks of his own condition,
what ground he has to hope for the Mercy and Favor of God, with whom, he has
dealt so basely and unworthily. Will not his own Heart tell him, that his state
is as desperate, as that of the loosest Libertine, will it not sink within him
at the approaches of Death. The very mention of Hell make him Startle, fancy
himself already there, immagine that he smells the Brimstone and sees the
Flames flashing in his Face? and then what will become of all his hopes, will
not his first Reflections on the place of Torments, fill him with black and
melancholy Thoughts, and make his passage out of this Life very uneasy and
very uncomfortable.

Lastly, vain are the hopes of the Hypocrite, and all his fair pretentions to
the happiness of another Life must fail and come to nothing, because the
Punishments, of a peculiar Tophet, are ordained of old, and prepared for him in
the World to come.

A Hypocrite among the Turks would willing compound for the easy pains of a
Purgatory, for they believe that there are seven Caverns or Vaults in Hell, and
assign the lowest and hottest for all such double Dealers and Dissemblers; The
Jews tell us that at the general Resurrection, every body shall be forgiven,
but Men of Gibeon; those vile Hypocrites, who with their old clouted Shoes, and
ragged Apparel imposed upon their Governor Joshua, But if we suspect their
Authority, Christ himself assures us, He who cannot lie has told told us, that
Hypocrites have a place of their own, a Portion that does properly belong to
them, where there is nothing but weeping and gnashing of Teeth. He thunders out
woe after woe against them, no less than eight times in the 23d Chapter of St.
Matt. And if Pharo's Dream was doubled unto him, to show that the thing was
Established, and that God would surely bring it to pass; may we not very well
conclude, that the Repetition of those Woes against Hypocrites, bespeaks the
severity of their future Punishments, and that the everlasting Furnace shall be
above seven times hotter for them, than for any other Transgressors. And
indeed, it is but just with God to use them severely, who have not dealt truly
with Him. That they should receive some special Mark of his just Resentments
and Displeasure, that they should for ever lie down in their shame and cover
themselves with their own Confusion, that they and even all their better hopes
should unavoidably Perish.

And now as for the more particular hopes and expectations of our arbarous and
inhumane Enemies, indeed they promised themselves to do a very great and
glorious Work, to kill and take possession of all; To suppress our Religion,
and Establish their Idolatrous Worship, to wrest the Sword out of his Majesty's
Hands, to make themselves absolute Masters of this Country and set up a King
of their own; and when they were well fleshed and blooded, they made no doubt
of Transporting* their victorious Arms into England, of making that Kingdom
such another Shambles, and not leaving the Memorial of the English Name under
Heaven.

How far those Instruments of Cruelty, might have prevailed, to what a height
they might have swelled the Rivers of that Land too with blood, had not an over
ruling Providence interposed and stayed their hands, who in three Months had
turned this Island of Saints into a Wilderness of ravening Woles; Murdered and
destroyed an hundred and fifty thousand Souls, God knows.

But blessed be his holy Name; Their hopes were in agreat measure Bafled and
Defeated, and we have yet a Gracious King, a Nursing Father to the same Church,
they then made such Havoc of, and Persecuted with so much Rage and Violence.
That Vine which Gods own Right Hand has Planted, Flourishes in the Land, and
after that excellent way which they still call Heresy; we even now Worship the
God of our Fathers.

And for those great Incendiaries and Promoters of that unnatural Rebellion,
those Blood thirsty and Deceitful Men, who would not that the English Monarchs
should Reign over them; Few of them lived out half their Days, or went down to
their Graves in Peace, their Cruelties have been Repaid unto their own Bosoms,
as they have done, so God has Rewarded them.

And now if there be any Persons here present, who persist in the same Designs,
act under the same Disguises, and truly bear Witness, that they allow the Deeds
of their Fathers, what can become of all their Hopes, either in this World or
in that which is to come? God forbid that we should prescribe any Bounds to his
Infinite Goodness and Mercy, but without true and unfeigned Repentance, we may
without breach of Charity Conclude, That they who have been Saints only in
show, shall be saved only in appearance, that their Expectations are all mere
Notion; Their hopes a Golden Dream, and that they of all Men shall be most
Miserable.

But let us who have better Principles be persuaded to act honestly and
sincerely in all things, to let our Thoughts be always agreeable to our Words,
our words consistent with our actions, to retrieve again if possible, that
plainness and openness of Heart, which a few years ago seemed to be the best
part of our Tempers and Constitutions, to take care, that there be no secret
Hipocrisy lurking in our Hearts, nothing of Judas his design, mixed with our
concerns, for the poor of Jezebel's with our Fasts, of the Scribes and
Pharisees with our long Prayers.

An Hypocrite I told you signified an Actor, or a Player, and now must ad, that
the Play will shortly be done, and we must all take our leaves of the Stage for
ever. A time will certainly come, when our Masks and Veils shall be pulled off,
all our Habits and Disguises laid aside, and we shall have no more Cloaks for
our Sin, but shall appear in our own Shapes and Colors, the same wicked
Persons; we were behind the Curtain; and all our Iniquities shall be openly
exposed to the Eyes of God, Angels and Men.

It will then be strictly inquired, not how long we have Lived, but how Well,
not in what Pomp and Splendour, but in what Religion and Devotion; not what
Estates and Fortunes we have left behind us, but what Souls and Consciences we
have brought along with us, and happy then shall we be: If we are able to say
with good Hezekiah, Remember O Lord we beseech thee, that we have walked before
thee in Truth and with perfect Hearts; That so we may at the last hear the
Music of that blessed Euge. Well done Good and Faithful Servants, enter you
into the joy of your Master, Amen and Amen.

FINIS.

