A MESSAGE FROM THE KING OF SCOTLAND; TO The PARLIAMENT Convened at EDENBOROVGH.

AND Lieutenant Gen: Lesley's preparation to receive him, upon his landing at
Frith; and to conduct him to Edenborough, with a Convoy of 3000 Horse.

ALSO, A List of the Earls, Lords, and Knights, that are expelled the Kingdom
of Scotland, and not to come within the Verge of the Court.

Together, with the raising of every fourth man in Scotland; the number of the
Horse and foot, and their advance nearer to the Borders of England: With Col.
Hackers Regiment, and some other of the Parl. of Englands forces, marching into
Northumberland.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. 1650.

A MESSAGE from the KING of SCOTLAND, to the PARLIAMENT convened at EDENBOROUGH.
Honored Sir,
YOU were once the Object, whom I much honored and esteemed for the Truths
sake, that formerly remained in You, and was so faithfully promoted by you;
which makes me admire, that so great an Alchymist, as to extract honey out of
the Rock, should now suck poison out of a flower; by changing your former
principles of truth, and adhering to erroneous opinions, and new inventions of
men: I cannot compare you to a Be (unless for your sting) but to a Spider;
for sucking poison from that savoury doctrine of Reformation in Religion
(against which you spit so much of your venom:) However, I shall not return you
railing for railing, but in a spirit of meekness endeavor to convince you,
that so you may no longer be ensnared, by being wrapped up in those clouds of
darkness, but that you may (after so great a change) once more shine forth in
your native Country (as a bright Star from the highest Canopy) with splendor
and beauty; for the giving light to those, who are so wilfully blinded in the
ways of Truth and purity; for assuredly, all those who profess that discipline,
are such whom God does both honor and love; therefore be no more a Changeling
from Truth, but a stable pattern in the ways of holiness; that so you may
remain in safety under the present power and constitution, and likewise to rest
your self satisfied and obedient to those, who sit at the Helm of Magistracy.
Thus having given you a hint of your backsliding or falling off, I shall (at
present) insist no further on those circumstances; but acquaint you with such
Occurrences and Overtures, which daily run in the current of the great stream,
now ebbing and flowing between the titular King of Scots, and the Parliament
convened at Edenborough, viz.

The Parliament sit close, debate high, and great things are in consultation
among them, which for the most part seem (as yet) abortive; only their King is
daily expected (if intervenings at Sea retard not their expectation) from whom
they have received a Message, directed to the Lord Chancellor, intimating:

That he is resolved, wholly to cast himself upon them, and to sign and
subscribe to such things, as in honor and safety may be granted and assented
to; that he is very well satisfied in Conscience, of the lawfulness of the
Presbyterian Government, and taking of the solemn League and Covenant, being
resolved to give a toleration thereof to all those who have, or shall adhere
thereto; and that those obstacles which did most retard his good opinion
thereof, are now removed from him, and that he has given his Chaplains a free
discharge; being resolved to embrace such a retinue, as shall be acceptable and
approved of by them, etc. and therefore desires a blessing upon their
undertakings, in Unity, and Peace.

This Letter is very well resented by diverse, great in power both in Kirk and
State, and great provisions are making for his arrival; but others again, are
not very well satisfied therewith, and desire rather a fair correspondency with
the Parliament of England, than an inthroning of the said King; but many
conjecture, that those thoughts arise more from fear than love, by reason of
the alarm of the English Armies advance; some give out there is preparation
made to meet them, which many the rather believe, by reason the Scots continue
on their great great Levy, and (as we hear) have raised every fourth man, from
16 to 60, and that diverse regiments have already exercised and mustered.
Lieutenant General Lesley with 3000 horse and foot, have taken up their
quarters at the Seaport towns beyond Fryth, to attend the landing of their
young King, that they may conduct him safely to Edenborough; The rest of the
Army being about 5000, are advanced from Sterling, more nearer toward the
borders of England, to encourage their new levied forces (who seem very
unwilling to engage against England) to march Southward; where they List,
Exercise, and Train up their young soldiers daily. Yet notwithstanding these
warlike preparations, great are the discontents which daily arise amongst them,
and many of the commoners cry out, That a Scotch purse will not do the deed,
and therefore they pray hard, that their Covenanting-brethren in London, may
appear visible for their assistance.

The Ministers are very zealous for propagating the present work in hand,
stirring up the people, and bidding them not to doubt but that their endeavors
and undertakings, will be victoriously crowned from heaven; and as they have
seen the extirpation of malignancy, so they shall likewise behold the final
destruction of Heresy; but the truth is, Jockey is in a Scotch Mist, and
begins to lament the loss of their former interest in Berwick and Carlisle.

There was on the sixth instant, great stir about passing a Vote in Parliament,
the question was, whether they should make any further addresses to the King?
Thirty of the Members present, cried, No King, No King; but all the rest (being
about sixty) were for it, uttering great acclamations, for King and Covenant,
for King and Covenant; and thereupon adjourned till the next day, where the
first thing they insisted on, was another Letter to be sent to their King:
Wherein they desire his speedy coming to Edenbourgh, to sit in Council with
them, assuring him, that they will endeavor to the utmost of their power, to
settle him in his Throne, and restore him to his rights, etc. Yet
notwithstanding the passing of this Vote, they resolved that these ensuing
persons hereafter named, should be expelled that Kingdom, and be made incapable
of bearing any Office for the future, and not to come within the Verge of the
Court, without special warrant from the Parliamen, by reason of their great
actings in the last war.

A List of the Earls, Lords, and Knights, that are expelled the Kingdom of
Scotland, or not to come within the Verge of the Court at Edenbourgh, without
Warrant from the Parliament there convened.
William Duke of Hamilton. George Earl of Seaforth. George Earl of Landerdale.
William Earl of Dumfress. John Earl of Traquire. James Earl of Calendar.
Patrick Earl of Forth. John Lord Sinclare. John Lord Carnegy. Lord Napier.
James Lord Fitham. Sir George Monro. Sir John Charles. Sir John Lodhart. Col.
Thomas Daliel. Col. John Cockram.


These persons are forthwith to desert their King, and not to be admitted
personally with him into Scotland, till further Orders from the Parliament, and
satisfaction given to the Kirk and Council; This Vote of banishment is branded
with the title of Tyranny, by diverse sorts of persons, which causes great
murmurings from many, and especially upon the executing of Colonel Dalgely, and
Sibbet, who being brought to the place of execution, where their heads were to
be severed from their bodies; when they came upon the Scaffold, by their
deportment they seemed undanted, and Colonel Dalgely made a short speech to the
people, touching the lawfulness of his engagement for the King, that he died
faithful lover of his Country, and that he endeavored to gain righteousness,
and preserve loyalty; and having ended his Oration, he went to the Block,
saluted the Axe, and laying down his head, was presently beheaded: Colonel
Sibbet made also a Speech, setting forth the justness of his cause, and that he
died for loyalty, and being a friend to righteousness, etc. Which being ended,
he took his leave of some friends, and bade the Executioner do his Office;
which was accordingly performed.

Colonel Hackers Regiment is marched into Northumberland, and some others into
Westmerland, and Cumb^rland; a vigilant eye is kept fixed toward Scotland, by
the English Officers, who daily implore a blessing from heaven, upon their
undertakings; which will assuredly attend them in all their enterprises,
according to that sweet promise of Jeremiah; That God will answer those who
sincerely call upon him, and show great things to come; and own them, and the
justness of their cause, and strengthen both their hands and hearts: Which is
the unfeigned desire of

Carlisle, June 10. 1650. Your Christian friend, A. Rishton.

FINIS.

