To all the HIRELING PRIESTS IN ENGLAND.
GODS Indignation is greatly kindled against you, Oh! ye seed of evildoers;
How can you escape the damnation of Hell? How often have you perverted the
right way of the Lord? Gods sword is drawn against you, and the stroke of it is
near to fall upon you, you have long made your selves as fat Horses, with that
which you have got by deceit and fraudelity, that your eyes has stood out with
fatness this many years; but now the time of your calamity draws near, wherein
you shall be fed with Judgment and wrath from the Almighty, for the curse
shall enter into your houses, where your ill-gotten goods lies, and shall
destroy them with the stones thereof, and with the timber thereof, and as you
have laid upon your beds of ease long, so shall you be cast upon the bed of
endless torment, for your abominations has reached to Heaven, and has long
grieved the Most High, your wilful transgressions cannot be numbered, for as
troops of robbers wait for a man, so have you murdered in the way by consent,
for you have committed much lewdness, and have compelled others to do it also,
that would not; And how many widows houses have you devoured? Woe, woe, woe from
the Lord God is gone out against you, cursed shall you be when you go forth and
when you come in; Oh! how is Gods indignation kindled against you, ye
generation of vipers, who has fed your selves and not the flock; Oh! what will
you do when the Lord requires his flock at your hands? What a ravening and
tearing in England have you made for your bellies, which is your God, the like
cannot be paralleled by all the false prophets that ever was heard or read of;
Then when this would not satisfy you, you have thirsted after blood it self,
therefore shall your cup be filled with it, God will smite you with shame and
contempt, so that you shall become a reproach to all that fears him; The day of
the Lord shall come upon you as pain upon a woman in travel; and that light
within, which you have so much derided and cried against, shall be kindled as a
fire in your bowels, and shall never be quenched till it have consumed you root
and branch, for God will not much longer be mocked by you. Oh! you greedy dumb
dogs, who could never be satisfied, Hell and destruction has enlarged her self
to receive you, because you have provoked the Lord and rebelled against him
days without number, Oh! how have you caused his servants and messengers to be
shamefully entreated for declaring unto you his truth in most parts of the
Nation? nay, when some of the Rulers would have showed mercy unto them, you
have provoked them to wrath, therefore shall you have Judgment without mercy,
who has showed no mercy; The Lord has shaked his hand at your dishonest gain,
his Soul loathes your solemn assemblies, your sacrifices are abomination in his
sight, for your hands are full of blood, your iniquities are come up to Heaven,
the cry of the poor and the complaint of the needy, which you have grievously
oppressed, has the Lord heard; your sheeps covering which you have hid your
selves long under, shall now be ripped off, and your nakedness and shame shall
appear unto all men, the Lord will discover your secret parts when you shall
not be able to make a covering to hide you, the night of darkness is coming
over you, wherein you shall stumble and be snared and taken, and this is
because you have hated the true light, and caused others to hate it, your
calamities cannot be numbered. Oh! how sad is the cry that I have heard against
you, you have turned many from the right way of the Lord, to follow the
imaginations of your corrupt hearts, and when the true light did break forth to
have guided their feet into the way of peace, you have labored by all your
strength to keep all people from it, and said all manner of evil against it,
and for this cause will Gods Judgments be heavy upon you, you have often taken
the sheaf from the hungry, and has withheld water from the thirsty,
therefore shall a famine and a drought come upon you, till you be consumed, you
shall be like unto the grass that grows upon the house top, whereof the mower
cannot fill his hand, nor the gatherer of sheaves his bosom, you have been
shameful vine-dressers, your vineyards are overgrown with weeds, netles and
thistles in the sight of the whole Nation, therefore will the curse come upon
you, fear, the pit, and the snare will compass you, and it shall come to pass
that as many of you as are not slain with fear, shall fall in the pit, and as
many as escapes the pit shall fall into the snare; for from under Gods
Protection are you gone, and therefore will he suffer him that you have served
so long to give you your reward, your end will be much worse then ever was your
beginning, though it was Popery; Had you but in any measure stood in the
Counsel of God, and caused his people to have heard his word of faith in their
hearts, they had been turned from the evil of their ways long ere now, but you
have run and God never sent you, but the love of filthy lucre, so you were
never like to profit the people at all; therefore will the Lord smite you with
a sore blow, and lay all your honor in the dust, and cloth you with contempt
in the sight of all that fears him, nay you shall proceed not much further till
your folly shall be made manifest unto all men as theirs was who trod in your
steps in former ages; oh howl, howl and lament for the misery that is coming
upon you, you have often hated reproof time after time when the Lord would have
done good unto you and have had mercy upon you, for notwithstanding you were
placed in his vineyard, yet when he sent his servants to look for fruits, you
have beaten and shamefully entreated them, and now he having sent his Son you
have slain him, what do you think will the Lord of the vineyard do when he
comes to reckon with you? he will cast you out of his vineyard and will let it
out to others, who will yield him fruit in due season, woe, woe unto you, for you
have stood in the way of many and would neither enter into the Kingdom your
selves, nor suffer them that would, this have you often done, your long robes
(Pharisee like) which you have long gloried in, shall become ragged and torn,
and shall be unto you a torment, your powdered hair and sweet perfumes shall be
turned into stink, your wives Hoods and vailes, gold and silver Lace, and other
gaudy attire which you have ravened from your Parishes, (by which you are
maintained) and caused to be hung upon them, shall become like them which Gods
judgment came upon in Isaiah chap. 3. their honor shall fade as the flower and
go out as the snuff of a candle, and these are the words of the Lord which was
given in to me to write unto you when I was in weakness as to the outward, and
who warned me to warn you what he has intended against you; Therefore if there
be any one of you, that are not guilty of the things aforementioned, whose
hearts are not wholly hardened, sit down in sackcloth and repent while you have
a little time, least Gods controversy be sealed against you all, and you be
turned into the pit where there is no Redemption.

Written from the spirit of truth which is the words of truth, unto all the
false hirelings in England by AMB. RIGGE.

LONDON. Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1659.


