Of PERFECTION.

The great Mystery of Antichrist unfolded, by the rising of the sun of
righteousness; OR, The difference between the Work and Ministry of the
Messengers of God, and the Work and Ministry of the Messengers of Antichrist.

By a Labourer in the vineyard of the Lord, called of the world AMBROSE RIGGE.

THis is to all you Teachers, Professors, Priests and People, whether
Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist, or Seekers, (as they are called) or
under what name or form soever they be, or whatsoever they profess or plead for
from the Scripture, which was declared by the holy men of God, which had gifts
given them which was perfect from God, in which they walked whose ways was
perfect and upright before the Lord, and was justified in his sight, and
pleased him, walking by faith and in it; by which they had victory over the
world, and that which was imperfect: and they writ forth the Scripture from
that which was perfect by the inspiration of God, as they were moved of the
holy Ghost; which was and is profitable for doctrine, for correction and
instruction in righteousness, etc. that the man of God might be perfect,
thoroughly furnished unto every good work: and to this end, did the holy men of
God write forth a declaration in order of their life and power, faith and
victory, and how they came to have victory over the works of the devil, which
is all imperfect; and how it was the gift of God which was perfect which led
them to a perfect man in Christ Jesus: and how they came to tread upon serpents
and scorpions, and upon all the power of the enemy, and to be more then
conquerors through him who loved them.

Now they knowing, that after their decease grievous wolves would enter in,
which would seek to draw many from the gift of God which is perfect, the light
wherewith Christ Jesus the light of the world has lighted every man withal,
which is the gift of God, the covenant of the Father, which Moses, Abraham, and
all the Prophets and Apostles of God bare witness unto: now they knowing such
would enter in, whereby the worthy Name of God by which they was called would
be blasphemed and the ways and works of the devil would be pleaded for and
upheld, which stands altogether in imperfection; which they who walk therein,
cannot believe any other; who receives not the gift of God which is perfect.
Now this they writ forth, that all who came to be turned to the light, and in
it walk, which is the gift of God, might have a cloud of witnesses against them
who had stolen their words to plead for the devils kingdom, but hates the gift
of God, and turns his grace into wantonness, and hates that which would bring
you to witness the power of God, and the faith of God, which is perfect, which
overcomes the world: and so it is no wonder that you are left stumbling in the
dark, and blind, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God: and here
you wrest the Scriptures to your own destruction.

Now all you Professors before mentioned, who are out of the light, and walk not
in it, wherewith you are enlightened, which comes from the Son of God; do you
not all meet and agree in this, That no man shall be perfect while he is upon
earth? and do you not preach this, and plead for this? which is a doctrine well
pleasing to the devil; he will not contradict you in it, for it is that which
he would hear: nevertheless all your high talking, and several inventions and
images set up from the letter; yet here you are not separated, but are of one
mind, faith and belief; and so it is no marvel why there is so much pride,
covetousness, lying, swearing, drunkenness and gluttony, defrauding, cozening,
cheating, backbiting murder, adultery, theft, and all other evil that can be
named or invented, acted among such who are in this faith and this belief;
which in stead of giving victory over these things, leads into them, and gives
them the name of Failings; and brings David's words, and Paul's words, to cover
these abominations with. But now is the perfect day springing, which discovers
and makes manifest all your words and works to be evil, and not to be wrought
in God, notwithstanding all your talking of him, and calling him Lord and
Master; for his work is perfect, to destroy the works of the devil: And this is
the reason why people has been learning this sixteen hundred years and are yet
ever learning, but are never like to come to the knowledge of the Truth, if
they should learn sixteen hundred years longer; but shall live and die in their
sins, because they believe not the light wherewith they are enlightened, whereby
sin is seen and condemned in the flesh, and victory witnessed over it; and so
the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith, in which the power of
God, which is the Gospel, is received; which opens the prison-door, and makes
way for that which is pure and perfect to arise and come forth; and here the
perfect Law of God comes to be set up, to be the Schoolmaster unto Christ,
which teaches to deny all them who has gotten the Saints words, and has
transformed themselves as the Ministers of Christ, and thinks very much if they
be not called so; when as they have bent all their strength and power against
Christ, and has mustered up all their forces, (who will be under their
command) against the appearance of Christ: but their weapons is carnal, and
their captain does not lead them to salvation. but to condemnation; though he
may make fair promises and large pretenses to stand by them in the day of
battle, and to give them the honor, glory, and preferment of the world, if
they will serve him, and be under his command: and this is beautiful to the
eye, and sweet to the taste; so that many hearkens to him and are willing to
serve him, and be under his command: so some he sets on work on lying others on
swearing and cursed speaking others on pride, and covetousness, and
drunkenness; and others, who has not money to satisfy their lusts and his
will, he leads them to covet and steal that which is another man's, and so to
the Gallows; others that he cannot get into these things, he leads them to
wantonness and filthy pleasures, to talk idly, or jest foolishly, or to go a
gaming or sporting, to spend their time without the fear of God: others that he
cannot get in gross evils, he leads them into the Scriptures, to get a
profession, and a talk of them that witnessed the precious faith, whereby they
was made partakers of the precious promises, which was of right due to them:
but still he keeps them under his power and command* subject to his will* in
the fashions, and customs, and vanities of the world; so that there is very
little difference but in words and outward pretenses among them, whereby the
Devil is more transformed into an Angel of Light, and here the enemy of God
makes many believe they are well enough, they are Church Members, and they
themselves yielding their Members servants to sin, whereby they are captivated
a^ his will; And all these agree together, and with one mouth says, they shall
never be free from sin, while they be upon earth: and here he deceives
thousands, and devoureth ten thousands, and overthrows the true Faith which
gives victory over the world, and the Prince of it, and leads into the place of
Holiness within the vail: And here is his wiles and subtilties seen and known,
which he deceives the Nations with, who is and has been pleading for him, and
fulfilling his will, in which you Priests and Professors of what kind soever,
and people are found, who hates the Light wherewith you are enlightened, now are
you found fighting against the Lamb of God, that is come to take away sin and
destroy the works of the Devil, and to present his children perfect to his
Father without spot. And now does the Prince of the Air, which has ruled in
your hearts all this time break forth and show himself to the children of
Light, who follows the Lamb, even ready to destroy the man child, which is
ready to be brought forth, which must rule the Nations with a rod of Iron, and
leads you to set your selves in battle against him (though it be hard for you
to believe it) and the work of his Servants in all ages, and the Life that they
lived and the Gospel they preached, and the Testimony they gave of the Son.

1. You are against Noah* with whom Gods Covenant was, who was a just man and
perfect in his Generation, and walked with God, Genesis 6. 9. but you are of that
generation which walks not with God, but in the way that leads to the Chambers
of death.

2. You are against the command of God to Abraham, and so are of your father
the Devil, whose work ye do and plead for, who says and believes none can be
perfect upon earth; for God said to Abraham, Walk before me, and be thou
perfect, Genesis 17. 1.

3. You are of another mind then David was of, who commanded his son Solomon
to serve the Lord, with a perfect heart and with a willing mind, 1 Chr. 21. 9.

4. You are against Gods Testimony of Job, who said, He was a perfect and an
upright man, and one that feared God* and eschewed evil, Job 1. 18. and
contrary to Bildads Testimony of him, though he was compassed about with
troubles; yet he said, God would not cast away a perfect man, Job 18. 20. Job
33. 9.

5. You are not in the way of God which is perfect, but are pleading against
it, and any that shall be brought into it, Psalm 18. 30. And David witnessed
that God girded him with strength, and made his way perfect, Psalm. 18. 32. now
you who are in the crooked ways of darkness knows not the way of God which is
perfect, but has chosen your own ways which leads to the Chambers of death.

6. You are against the command of Christ unto his children, Mat. 5. 48. Who
said unto them Be ye perfect, as your father which is in heaven is perfect. Now
they did not Answer and say as you do, That they did believe that they should
never be so: but you are made manifest, whom you serve, and whose command you
obey, with that which is perfect, which is hid from your eyes.

7. Your Faith and Belief is against the coming of Christ, whose coming is to
do away, and destroy that which is imperfect, 1 Cor. 13. 10. who was made
manifest for the same purpose to destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8.
Now who are the Antichrists? but you Priests, and Professors, and People, who
are so wholly bent against the Coming, Command, and Work of Christ, that you
are so far from witnessing him come in the flesh, that you have bent all your
strength together to fight against him. Now if this be not that Spirit of
Antichrist, which John warned the little children of, who witnessed Christ in
them, a greater then Antichrist which was gone out in the world, let all who
are children of the true Light judge, John 4. 3. So they that witness Christ
come in their flesh now, are to be warned of such Spirits, not to believe every
Spirit, but try the Spirits; for many false Spirits are gone out into the
world, and speaks of the world, and the world hears them, and believes
them, and fights for them whose Kingdom is of the world, and persecuteth and
imprisoneth them that shall and does oppose these Spirits of Antichrist, which
goes under the name of Christ; and has gotten the words of Moses, Abraham, the
Prophets, and Apostles, yet are found out with the eternal Light of God, to be
fighting against his Son, and are such as he cried many woes against, Mat. 23.

8. You are also opposing the command of the Apostle, who said unto his
brethren, Be perfect, be of good comfort, 2 Cor. 13. 11. Now if you had been in
his days, you would have said it was impossible, you could never believe it, as
you do now. And so you put more confidence in the Devil, that he is able to
uphold his work in you as long as you live, then you can of God, that he will
destroy the Devils work in you; and so according to your Faith will it be unto
you: Now this is glad tidings to the Devil, that you have made a covenant with
Death, and an agreement with Hell; he will let you profess as much of the
Scriptures as you will, as long as you are of this belief, and yet in the end
will turn you into the Lake amongst the unbelievers.

9. You are seeking to destroy the gifts that was given to the Apostles, which
was for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry; which was
to that end, to bring them to a perfect man, to the Measure and Stature of the
fullness of Christ, and to the unity of the Faith in this, that afterward they
might not be tossed to and fro with the windy Doctrine of men, which was of a
contrary Faith, as you are now, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13, 14. Now your gift and work
of your Ministry, is contrary for the perfecting of the man of sin, and your
work and ministry is that none can be perfect, which is the work Faith and
Ministry of Antichrist, and brings all the conditions of the Saints, which they
passed through, before they grew up to a perfect man in Christ: These things you
bring to plead for the Devils Kingdom as long as you live, which they never
did: but your cloak is too narrow, it will not cover you, and here you are
found out the Antichrist, and your gift and ministry of him, to the building
up of his Kingdom, and the overthrowing of the true Faith in thousands, which
leads into the Kingdom which stands in righteousness all that walks in it.

10. Your preaching is contrary to the Apostle, and your wisdom is contrary to
his, who came not with entising words of man's wisdom, but in the demonstration
of the Spirit and of Power, and spoke the wisdom of God in a mystery among them
that was perfect, 1 Cor. 2. 6. but your wisdom and speaking is to make people
believe they shall never be perfect, and so are as far contrary to his, as
light is from darkness; therefore it is no marvel that people is begotten into
a contrary faith and belief, and their wisdom so earthly, carnal, sensual and
devilish: now if this be not the Doctrine of Devils, let all who are of an
upright heart judge.

11. You are against the end for which the Scripture was given forth, which was
for the perfecting of the Man of God, 2 Timothy 3. 17. And so are the Antichrists
the Scripture speaks of.

12. You are against the Prayer of the Apostle for the Saints, Heb. 13. 20, 21.
whose Prayer to God was that they might be made perfect in every good work: Now
your Prayers is, that he would give you grace, when as his grace has appeared
to you, and you have turned it into wantonness, and so tempts God, to give you
that which you would spend upon your lust: but your prayers are an abomination
to him, and he will not hear you, because you regard iniquity in your hearts,
and works it with your hands, and cannot believe that ever you shall be brought
out of it here: your prayers are out of the Faith, and so are not accepted; but
you are those that must depart from the Son* though you may prophecy in his
name, and preach his words in your synagogues, and make many long prayers to
him, as your forefathers did, yet your iniquities has made a separation
between him and you, and though you make many prayers, he will not hear,
because you have cast his perfect law behind your backs, and has wrought
despite again the Spirit of Grace.

13. You are against the prayer of Peter for them he spoke to, who prayed that
the God of all Grace, who had called them unto his eternal Glory by Christ
Jesus, after they had suffered a while, make them perfect, 1 Pet. 5. 10. And
the Apostle Paul said, Let as many as be perfect be thus minded, Phil. 3. 15.
but you being men of corrupt minds does withstand this, as Jannes and Jambres
withstood Moses, and to this Faith are Reprobates, and so has not victory over
the least evil that is in the world; and therefore are to be denied by them who
are not of the world, who keeps people ever learning, but are never able to
come to the knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3. and so are to be turned away from
and denied, according to the Apostles command.

14. You are against the offering of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit
offered himself to God, to purge their consciences from dead works, to serve
the living God, Heb. 9. 14. now this you do not believe that ever you shall be
brought from dead works, and so cannot be servants to God; for his servants you
are, to whom you do obey, whether it be of sin unto death, or of obedience unto
righteousness, Romans 6. 16.

15. Your pleading is against the one offering, which has perfected for ever
them that are sanctified, and so here you lies in the pollutions of the world,
children of disobedience, in whom the Prince of the air lodges, the Spirit
that now works in you, whom you believe and obey, which opposes the Spirit
of truth which the world cannot receive, which who does receive and obey, comes
to be sanctified, and so by one offering perfected, Heb. 10. 14. but this your
enmity is against, and so your many offerings day by day, and year by year,
does not make you that are the comers thereto perfect, but your consciences are
corrupt, and your preaching vain, and faith vain, and are yet in your sins, and
can never believe any other: now here have you made the blood of Christ of none
effect, which takes away sin, and purges the conscience from dead works in all
them that know it; and this is the cause of your (...) envy and rage against
them, who by the power of God are brought to witness the one offering, whereby
they are perfected from sin, and so from condemnation to do the will of God,
which is their sanctification.

From him who now suffers in outward bonds at Dorchester in the Country of
Dorset (for declaring against the Spirit of Antichrist which is now abroad in
the world) who is called among men, AMBROSE RIGGE.

Now all you aforementioned, who says and believes no man or woman shall be
made free from sin while they be upon earth: I ask you one question, Where
shall people be made clean, seeing as death leaves them, judgment finds them,
and no imperfect or unclean thing must enter into Gods Kingdom? Now I challenge
you all Priests, and Professors of what kind or sort soever, who are of this
Faith, Answer by plain grounds of Scripture, without adding or diminishing,
where or with what must people be made perfect, that people may no longer give
ear to lying vanities, but may strive to make their calling and election sure,
knowing that no other thing obtains the Crown of Life: And send your Answer to
any of those people, that are in scorn called Quakers; or to me in particular,
whose name after the flesh is

A. R.

FINIS.

