LIBERTAS, OR RELIEF TO THE ENGLISH CAPTIVES IN ALGIER.

Briefly discoursing how such as are in slavery may be soonest set at Liberty,
others preserved therein, and the Great Turk reduced to renew and keep the
Peace inviolate, to a greater enlargement of Trade and Privileges than ever
the English Nation hitherto enjoyed in Turkey.

Presented to the serious Consideration of the Honorable Court of Parliament.

BY HENRY ROBINSON, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by Rich. Cotes for John Sweeting, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the sign of the Angel, in Pope's Head Alley. 1642.

RELIEF FOR THE ENGLISH CAPTIVES IN ALGIER.
SUndry propositions have been made for redemption of our Captives in Algier;
Some take it to be a work of Charity to Ransom them, and questionless it
were so, but that their ransomes will so much more encourage and enable those
Pirates to take them slaves again, and twice as many more; Others conceive a
Fleet of twenty Ships at Sea for about five years together, would be their
utter ruin, by making prize of them if they stirred out, or rot and perish if
they keep at home: but how doubtful the success hereof may be, will appear
by sundry reasons.

First, because our Fleet cannot always so ride before Algier, but their ships
(observing all advantages) will pass both out and in, though with some hazard.

Secondly, being once but out of reach, they do not only out-saile us, but at
Sea, worse than in a wood, are hardly to be met withal.

Thirdly, it would be a long and chargeable piece of work, for what if we
should take five or ten of them in a year? the rest would likely take some of
ours in lieu thereof; and being above a hundred sail at present, to take but
ten a year, and more we are not likely, would prove a ten years task and
charge unto us.

Fourthly, the leave we have of the Grand Seignior, is only to take Pirates of
Algier, but how shall we distinguish the Pirates from others of Algier? For
scarce ever a ship of them, but is both Merchant, and a Pyrate, many times in
the selfsame voyage: I verily believe not one of them but desires to be so,
and wants only opportunity: Now since every ship seeks for convenience to
play the Pyrate, and yet unless taken in the fact, may still pretend to be a
Merchant-man, what good can our Fleet effect in so mild a way? To hinder them
from coming out of Port, you may not, as contrary to our Articles of Peace
with them, since they will all, though never so many, pretend a Merchants
voyage, without giving you leave to search their Cockets, meet with them where
or when you can at Sea, they are still Marchant-men, unless they have taken a
prize, and then too, for how can we hinder them in a Merchants voyage, to take
their enemies, whether Italians, French, Spaniards, Dutch, or any Nation else,
but English? So that the case stands thus; keep as many Fleetes as you will
abroad, you may not keep the Pirates from coming out of Port: meet with them
as often as you can at Sea, unless you light upon those very ships, which have
first preyed upon the English, three fourthes whereof will likely escape you,
our labor is all in vain; Nor can much be replied to this Objection, for
though the Grand Seignior give us leave to take the Algier Pirates, it is not
because he means really we shall take them, that may so much stead him in all
attempts, as hereafter appears more plainly, but because he thinks we
cannot; and if we could, and did, what ere our Capitulations be, his exposition
will be such as shall make us pay dear for taking them: So that whilst we have
estate in Turkey, every Pyrate taken, will be a Merchant-man, the taking
whereof, much more a number of them, would doubtless prove a breach of Peace,
especially being his own Interpreter, as is well known to the Merchants cost,
upon all occasions, and Ambassador, Nation, and whole effects, endangered no
less than if we had sacked Constantinople it self.

Fifthly, grant we might and could ruin at last this nest of Robbers, which in
likelihood, by reason of their Situation, we cannot be able for one or two
years space, to damnifie so much, as we might the Imperial seat it self,
and whole Territories besides on the Mediterranean Coast; Yet if after many
years charge and trouble it were effected, the rooting out this one Nation
might chance bring in Dominion of several others into those parts, and prove
more pestiferous to us in matter of our commerce for the future: So that
unless the Grand Seignior will give us leave to assault them all, Men of War
and Merchants, both by Sea and Land, as they do us at pleasure, whereby to
force them to a friendship, it may prove necessary for us to make open war
against him, and how by this course it may not only be effected, but that this
course is the most probable (submitting my self notwithstanding, to better
judgments) likelyest to be more beneficial in the end, and of less charge
and detriment in the atchieving, may happily thus be made appear.

The most considerable benefit redounding to this Kingdom by the Turkey Trade,
is the annual exportation of above twenty thousand Broad cloth, dyed and
dressed in their full manufacture for these latter years, what we bring home
in return thereof, is not so material, as Silk, Cotton wool, Cotton yarne,
Galls, Grograines, Grograine yarne, etc. all or most whereof we can have else
where, or be without in case of necessity, and for the most part, to further
these returns, about fifty thousand pounds per annum, used to be sent from
Legorne unto Aleppo, in Spanish Reals of eight, which otherwise might perhaps
have been brought for England in specie, and at worst by exchange, or in some
commodities or other; and it is worth notice, that though the Turkey company
have of late thus exported above twenty thousand colored clothes per annum,
yet it is certain, they cannot, as the case stands, continue the trade to
profit for above half that quantity in the future, unless the Venetian, and
French Cloth be yet farther beaten out, which (by the way) may very likely
take effect, if abstaining from sending false-made cloth, the Customs and
charges were taken off here in England, and we thereby enabled to under-sell
them.

This I conceive, is the true state of the Turkey trade; together with the
utmost benefit, (except the venting of a little Tin) to be put into the
balance against the inconveniences we suffer for this Trades sake, to the
dishonor of God, and the King, and prejudice of the Common weal, which is by
suffering some four or five thousand of his Majesty's loving Subjects to
remain in chains, and leaving the rest liable to be carried away Captives at
these Pirates pleasure, hazzarding the loss of their very Souls as well as
bodies; wherewith, questionless, God is much offended, and will one day take
account thereof, and the Kings Majesty no little dishonored by keeping Peace
with Infidels, upon such dis-advantages, and suffering his Subjects, not only
to give Merchandise for Merchandise, and money to boot, to our Countries
common prejudice, but when we shall have carried them our Commodities, and
moneys to their own houses, (a great convenience to those effeminate lazy
people) and laden with their Country Commodities for our returns, to suffer
both us, our Ships, and returns, as soon as we are out of Port, to be taken
Captive by Subjects of the same Prince; which, it is true, he therefore calls
Pirates, but only the better to delude Christians, for he can command them if
he please, and if he could not, might at least give us leave to right our
selves; the latter is unquestionable, and the other is proved since nothing
appears, but that he may as well hereafter, in that he did command them
heretofore, and they in obedience kept the Peace some years together, and
pretend even to this day, not to continue it, because we broke it first; which
perhaps may in part be true, but was in way of Pyracy, not countenanced by our
State, and in such cases Justice, and equity require only that restitution be
made, which we may proffer now on our part, and demand the like from them, that
cannot be declined, if they mean really: and this will yet appear more
plainly, even on the Grand Seigniors part too, in that he, or his Ministers by
him, every three years substituted, have the Hull or tenths of every Ship or
English prize is taken; And how prejudicial it is to this Commonwealth, to
lose so many Ships, the strength and safety of the Kingdom, so much money and
Merchandise, the wealth and riches of the Kingdom, and so many men all
Mariners, able to win and keep a Kingdom, were it but lawful for them,
needs no Rhetorique to express.

And since we speak of the Turkey trade, so famous not only over England, but
all parts of the known world besides, insomuch that the worthy Society has
rather reaped envy thereby than otherwise, being accused as Monopolizing so
rich and large a jurisdiction, it many not be amiss to rectify many men's
understandings, how they for the most part have shown themselves truer
Common-wealths-men than Brethren of their own Society, or respectors of
private profit.

Concerning Companies, and Corporations of Merchants, Trading for one place or
Country, and the necessity thereof in general, I have already been forward in
publishing my opinion, which for most part may be applied to this in
particular; but whereas it may well be expected that a Trade would not be long
continued without both gain unto the Merchants, and honor to the Kingdom, I
verily believe, it may easily be made appear, that this great Trade which sets
so many Manufactors aworke, maintains so many Mariners and Warlike Ships, if
a medium of the whole stock employed therein for these ten years past be
calculated, it will not prove to have produced five pound per centum profit
unto the Interessed, who yet never lost ship, either going or coming, through
Gods particular Patronage and Providence; But for the dishonor our King and
Country suffers, throughout those Territories of the Grand Seignior, where we
Traffic, nay, at the Imperial Seat it self, is both infamous and
intolerable, as the violating our Capitulations and Articles of Peace and
Commerce with them, infinite injustices done us, importing ten or twenty
thousand pounds sterling at a time, vilifying and injuring our Nation,
dis-respecting the Person of our Ambassador, who representing Soveraignety, by
Law of Nations is held as Sacred, and in fine, so scandalously entreating us,
as more honorable it is for us to have it lie concealed than published.

Thus then I hope it will be granted, our Trade with Turkey, upon these terms,
will not countervaile the disadvantages, and how it may be remedyed follows
now.

I think it will be confessed by most experienced men in Martial and Maritine
affairs, who are likewise well informed of ours, and the Grand Seigniors
strength at Sea, that we are able to send a Fleet into those parts, (and yet
not be disarmed at home) which by Gods assistance all the force of Turkey
neither will or can encounter and it will seem so much more probable by
relation of a fight made in the Archi-Pelago, anno 1633. between the Hector,
and William, and Ralph, two English Merchants ships, and at least fifty Turkish
galleys, the two ships it is true were sunk at last, and most of the men
slain, but first the ships were becalmed, and could not stir, and yet killed
above a thousand men upon the galleys, and so ruined the whole Fleet, as made
it altogether unserviceable: For the Algier Pirates, and those of Tunnis, both
men of war, sundry Merchants single ships have happened in midst of Fleetes,
and Squadrons, and to my knowledge, by relation of those very Mariners of best
repute, about the same year 1633. the ships Rainebow and Samuel, each of
them single in a Merchants voyage, light unawares in midst of seventeene
Turkish men of war, which had not the resolution to assault them; yet do I
know the time, when two or three, nay one Turks ship, has taken an English of
better strength, and surely may do it oftener, if God do but permit, and we
forbear to renew again the credit, which a long time we enjoyed by force, and
virtue of ancient acts and enterprises of puissance and valor: yet why they
should thus single assault one of our ships, and at other times let a single
ship pass by ten or twenty of theirs, without the least offense, this may
serve for another reason, in that they direct their fights and whole voyages by
a kind of sorcery, in putting two arrows together, whereby are meant the
Christians and the Turks, at certain times and places, which of themselves,
fight and vanquish one another; and so give omen to the Turks, for their
future government and good, or bad success accordingly.

But for this enterprise against the Turks, I conceive forty ships will do
the feate, and that perhaps within a year or two, and happily, not only get
restitution of our present Captives, but compel the Grand Seignior himself to
make a Peace with us upon better terms than ever: These forty sale of ships
may Ride at the Castle of Constantinople, all winds and weathers, interdicting
all Commerce betwixt that City, and all the Turks dominions in the white Sea,
which Coasting is above a thousand miles voyage Eastward, and near a thousand
Westward, and out of this Sea comes a great proportion of that Cities
provision, as Corn, Rice, and all manner of Pulse, Raisins, Lemmons, Pepper,
Cinnamon, Sugar, and all other Spices, Woollen cloth, Coffe, Flax, Turbants,
Indico, with all manner of Drugges, and other India Commodities: Now although
perhaps we are not so fully informed as we might be, how considerable these
provisions are to the relief of Constantinople, yet surely by the experience
we have of other parts in Europe, better known unto us, it will sound
consonant unto reason, that a City, so seated, and so populous as that, cannot
subsist, if the intercourse of the white Sea, from whence it may with most
convenience be furnished, should be suspended: yet I will seek to prove it by
another, or rather the same argument, though differently framed, which will
come as home, and perhaps be sooner granted, and that is this: All people,
especially multitudes, provide themselves of necessaries from such parts as are
nearest, and can furnish them with the best, best cheap; now that the white
Sea is able to minister to Constantinople a large quantity upon these terms,
by reason of its own fruitfulness, and that Cities situation, will not be
much controverted, or easily be made appear to reason, so that since the
Inhabitants of the white Sea coast, both have and do still plow and plant for
maintenance of that City, although it were possible, and that there were ground
enough upon the black Sea Coast, to yield sufficient provisions for
Constantinople, and people enough to manure that ground, both which are most
improbable, (for in such case that ground must have before lain waste, and
those people had no employment) yet this cannot be brought to pass, nor settled
in a year or two: so that though the cutting off the white Sea, do not quite
starve Constantinople, yet doubtless, it will bring them to a great strait,
and in a short time raise the price of all provisions and Merchandise, which
used to come from thence, so much as will easily cause a tumultuous and rude
multitude to rebel, and render themselves liable to become a booty, or else
importune the Grand Seignior to a Peace with us, especially when they
understand, and see we desire nothing but justice for the injuries we received,
and will then be as willing to entertain any honorable composition, and terms
of friendship as they themselves can wish.

Now though this should not fully take effect, I believe it will quickly be
acknowledged by men of reason, that to hinder the intercourse and commerce of
so many Kingdoms by Sea, for some thousand miles circuit, cannot be so
inconsiderable a thing as not to make them weary of it in a short time, and
that except the Castles of Costantinople, there is scarce any Town or Fort
upon the Turkish Coast, which this Fleet, with Gods assistance, were not able
to batter down to ground, and sack at pleasure; where, if they found no other
riches, may lade themselves with slaves, and sell for ready money in Italy and
Spain. The Town of Algier it self is very strong, yet with assistance of
those Moors, which are always at greatest enmity with them, is not thought
able long to withstand a parcel of this force, especially when they shall
consider the hazard in contracting with us, when making and keeping Peace,
they may prey upon all the world besides: And even at selfsame time, when
once it shall appear, as in likeli-hood it will, that fewer ships can do the
service at Constantinople, the rest may for Algier, and rove amongst the
Islands, and Turkish shore, where they cannot want bread and meat to furnish
the whole Fleet, and slaves to make money of, defraying their other charges.

And whereas it will be objected, how both the French and Venetians will be
glad to see, and continue us in this variance with the Grand Seigniour,
endeavoring to keep us from ever being reconciled again for advantagement of
their own Trade, although I conceive as before, that we had better never have
Peace with him upon such disadvantage and dishonor, yet I hope it may appear
by other arguments, how it is very probable the Turkey Trade will not be lost
for ever by these proceedings. For first, Marseils is worn out of shipping,
and almost all that little trade they drove of late, has been in English
Vessels. The use of the Venetian cloth is likewise much decreased, but we must
prevail with them to forbear the Trade so long as this enterprise is a foot,
which they may well condescend unto, in recompense of the benefit they receive
by our alliance, since of themselves they cannot put ten ships to Sea, and most
of the Woolls wherewith they make their Cloth is brought to them from Spain
in English Bottomes: Besides the trade and friendship of Venice, unless they
be also as desirous to continue it, does less import us, than that of any
other Christian state of note; for most evident it is, we are not only not
beholding to them for any trade, but that little we have by importation of
their Currants, may chance be found dammageable to this Kingdom, in that the
quantity we bring from thence, costs yearly seventy thousand pounds sterling,
paid all in ready money, which for this cause we send from Legorne thither, and
otherwise perhaps might bring in specie into England.

And in case the Turk should never be reconciled to us again, which his own
interest in commerce, need of our cloth, and damages we can do him, will
likely urge to, the State of Venice will questionless be willing to grant us a
Staple in their Gulf, from whence our cloth might be transported, as in
former times it was, to greater profit, by Turks, Jews, and Italians, to all
parts of Turkey: The like may most commodiously be done from Legorne, which out
of some experience had in those parts, I know is practiced at present, and make
no scruple, but may be perfected hereafter in such ample manner, as we shall
stand in need of.

But since this enterprise will not only be a matter of great expense, but
that by the Law of Nations, a War should not be made without preceding
intimation, it may be requisite that the Captives be first demanded by an
extraordinary Ambassador, or some Gentleman, sent express to the Grand
Seignior; which one way or other will be a notable advantage to us, for if it
take effect, it will prevent the charge and trouble of so great an expedition;
if not, the Merchants in the mean time, may in a fair way withdraw their
estates, which at present are above 300. thousand pounds, and the Ambassador
with the whole Nation retire themselves for England: in both which perhaps we
may come short, not only if we go on over-hastily, but also if we should omit
requiring restitution first in a fair way, for they questionless will have
notice, and even upon suspicion seek to keep beforehand by intercepting our
Ambassador, Nation, and whole Estates; Which considerations how ever weak, I
am bold humbly to present to their deep wisdoms that can best refine them.

FINIS.

