A SHORT DISCOURSE BETWEEN MONARCHICAL AND ARISTOCRATICAL Government.

Or a Sober persuasive of all true-hearted Englishmen, to a willing conjunction
with the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND In setting up the Government of a Commonwealth.

By a true Englishman, and Well-wisher to the good of this NATION.

Ad juga cur faciles populi cur saeva volentes Regna pati; Pereunt.

Quoniam non contenti certa liberate in dubiam imperii servitiique aleam imus.

1 SAMUEL 8. 6, 7. In asking a King, they have not rejected me, but thee, that I
should not reign over them.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock for Francis Tyton, and are to be sold at his
shop at the three Daggers near the Inner Temple, Fleetstreet. 1649.

A Short Discourse BETWEEN MONARCHICAL, AND ARISTOCRATICAL Government.
IT is not to be expected by any wise, or considerate person, to find an exact
Logical series, or Mathematical Demonstration in Public or Political
Transactions; In which, as there are commonly many unknown difficulties to be
waded through, so there are multitudes of emergencies (not possible to be be
foreseen) daily breaking forth, which give cause, as of altering men's thoughts,
so of changing, and shifting the Mediums, by which they should have been at
first effected. Nor can it be imagined, That the absolute order of Nature
should be strictly kept in these affairs, which only Prudence, and Providence
Govern.

The want of such like considerations as these, has been a great reason of the
discontents, and disaffections of the most spirits, concerning the management
of the great concernment of this Nation. Some have looked more after Modum,
then Rem, the circumstance, then the action; rather how things are done, then
what is done, thinking nothing well done, but what they have either been
predominant instruments in themselves, or else could Analitically resolve,
according to the rule of their own prejudiced apprehensions. It is to be
acknowledged, That of late (through the Apostasy of some, and the Indifferency
of others, and the change of many spirits by cunning, yet Malignant influences)
our affairs in this Nation, for the external, and circumstantial acting of
them, have not gone one so smoothly, or takingly unto every spirit; present
necessity, absolute convenience, and providence (which especially has had a
supremacy over them) putting us on many sudden overtures, and to leap over
many lesser things (which some think considerable) yea, has forced us to do
much at once, and to hasten on to these works, which at another time, and in
some other cases, would have admitted many steps and degrees, in the attaining
of them. Though it is no great disadvantage to a work, if it be done thoroughly,
that it is done suddenly, and expeditiously; yea, many times, more time and
cost is spent in a Ceremony, then by diligent prosecution of advantages, would
be to attain the thing it self. As in great men's houses, the paint and the
hangings, cost more then the house it self. But besides, the nature of some
affairs call for a doing them now or never; and men being remote from the
Actors, and so unacquainted with the present grounds, and reasons on which they
are acted, storm at that, which they themselves in the same case, and on the
same principles, would be most forward to attempt; not considering (until it
come to their own cases) That where men have to deal with humors, as well as
persons, with Forces, and Fictions, with general, and particular, Subordinate,
Divided, and Sub-divided Interests, some special liberty must be given, to act
according to present overtures, and some occult reasons pre-supposed, which
every eye cannot, nor may not look into.

These things premised; He that with a sober, and untainted judgment,
considers the late Transactions of the Parliament, and Army, with the King,
Their own members, and the changing of the former Government, into a
Commonwealth, has more reason to be astonished at what is done, then be
discontented at the way, and manner of doing them; no man being able to
imagine, That by any means what ever we should have been able to attain to the
condition we are now in, and especially not so suddenly, and with so much
advantage, to free our selves from such a yoke, that neither our fathers nor we
were able to bear; and certainly had not there bin something divine in it,
(which men care not to observe) and had not the finger of the Almighty wrought
it for us, we had been far from so much as a hope of recovery, and ere this day
had been reduced to a worse bondage then ever England yet saw: And if we will
consider what straits and extremities they have been often put unto, by the
falseness of some, and the folly of others, what varieties of difficulties they
have been encompassed about with, through the malice of the common enemy, and
the imprudence of their own friends, and subtle designs of many pretented
Patriots, we shall see cause enough to wonder where we are come, and by what a
miraculous strain of providence they have been carried on to this happy change:
And however things may be represented in the Glasses of Malignant and humorous
Spirits, yet if men will make use of a plain Optique, and not look through
their PASSIONS or ENGAGEMENTS, they will see no such Disproportion between the
first PRINCIPLE of this WAR, and the present actings of things, especially
(considering how we have been led into them) though the first Instruments could
not see the ultimate end at so great a distance of time, and through so many
mountains of difficulties that lay in their way: God himself also is (who loves
to nonplus the best of men) by his providence acting his own designs, beyond
the first motions and intentions of men.

As the first beginnings of all things are usually fair and modest, so were
they among us in the beginning of this War; and though our first principle was
fundamental, and large enough, when we took up Arms, viz. The Liberties of this
Nation, from that Tyrannical Power which was exercised by the late King, and
for the setting up a free Court of Justice in the Nation, in order to which,
care was taken to put the power of the Militia in the best hands we could find,
yet the hopes we then had of a sudden effecting it, and that by the first means
we could use, and the controversy being suddenly to be debated, and honest men
not so well acquainted with their own privileges, nor the ground of the
quarrel, the Parliament was constrained to express great respects to the King,
and to state the difference very tenderly, and put all the weight of
miscarriages on his Council, salving as much as they could his honor, yea made
many Engagements for advancing of his Grandeur and Majesty, which was carefully
kept and observed, as honestly intended, until that the necessity of affairs
grew on, and the King took advantage by all respects to harden his own heart,
and had quite changed his own condition from what it was when these Engagements
were made; yea, almost all the principles and spirits of men, both in
Parliament, City and Country, being altered, by the subtle Insinuations of the
King and his Agents, and not only a first but second War levied by the Kings
Commission against the Parliament, more dangerous then the former, though
miraculously past over: It was now time to take the advantage of providence,
and make use of that honest power yet left to prosecute our first principles to
the best end, and go through with that which we did but dally with before; and
seeing that the King was the only cause of the first and second War, and of
corrupting all interests and spirits which ever came nigh him, and that his
evil Council (on whom all was formerly laid) was sequestered from him, and yet
the same things and worse done by him, could imagine no other Expedient to
preserve the Nation, but by removing the prime cause of their misery; and
seeing the disease was grown desperate to apply a remedy proportionable. That
if any thing have been acted, that seems Heterodox to our first Intentions and
Engagements, it has been but to follow the King, who frustrated all our hopes,
and grew to be so dangerous and implacable an Enemy, that he left us no other
remedy but his death to give us any hope of recovery. And now you see that we
are like to attain our End, Liberty and Justice, though we could not at first
see the way how, and it is brought about by other mediums then we first intended
it; neither is any disparagement to us, that our Liberties are procured by such
a Royal Sacrifice. But it is in vain to repeat; Those which stumble so much at
that unparaleld, and most glorious act of Justice done on the late King, may be
desired to consider, what way else was left us to preserve the honest party of
this Nation, yea the whole Nation besides; and to prefer the life of our grand
Enemy before the good of a Nation, is foolish pity indeed: for that our Liberty
and his life were grown to be incompetible, and inconsistent, is most
demonstrative, seeing he was not so much as sensible of any miscarriages, nor
repented of a drop of blood shed so plentifully by his Commission, but grew so
hardened, that he would rather dye, then consent to these absolute and just
grounds of Liberty and Safety that the Parliament so often sent him, in order
to his advancement, and the security of the Kingdom. What ever had been done
besides, would have been but the skinning over the wound while it did inwardly
fester and gangrene, and have given our Enemies advantage to undo us by our own
respects, which they could not by their open hostility and force.

But I am sorry I have detained the Reader so long from a ready compliance with
this present Government, by repeating the miseries of the old: But it is good
sometimes to look back, that we may see what Mercies we enjoy at present. For
my part, I cannot but think that Scaffold sacred, and no other Sacrifice could
have been so expiatory before God, or men, for that Blood which has been shed
in this Nation, then His who was the only cause of it; And yet I cannot blame
those that think him to be above Law, should judge him to be above punishment:
And though, unto some tender spirits, it may seem hard, and of ill consequence,
yet, upon second thoughts, they will see it necessary, and just, and the fruits
answerable, if our new discontexts, as well as former pity, and indulgence, do
not frustrate it: And certainly our Ancestors, were they alive, would admire
their Childrens fortunes and happiness, who have had the opportunity to act
that, which they thought (but durst not speak) would be their greatest Mercy,
viz. To cast off that usurped Government, which they felt the Tyranny and
Oppression of so many years, without hope of Remedy. But if any thing of
Conscience should be in that, your dissent and nonacting may satisfy you, and
their acting against them, who held their Judgments well informed, and acted
accordingly in that great and impartial work of Justice: Let us therefore
forget these things which are impossible to be helped, and fall on to those
things which are possible, and necessary; and labor to be as conscientious in
avoiding ways of making new Divisions, as we are in remembering former
Miscarriages: We are now (through providence) on a new Foundation, and have
time to consider our own good, and want nothing to make us the happiest Nation
under the Sun, but the blessing of the Gospel, which yet we have, (and are like
to have it shine in greater splendour,) and a hearty and free compliance with
the Government now set up, by all honest and ingenuous men, who mean to share
in the fruits of Truth and Peace together.

And truly Prudence and Reason, that teaches men to make virtues of
necessities, may well make men ingenuous in improving advantages and
conveniences. I know there are many sorts of men to be dealt with in this
paranatick: Some who can only be persuaded by force and violence, as
Malignants and debauched spirits; and we can only secure their persons, hardly
ever gain their consents, they have drank so deeply of that cup of delusion:
Yet the remembrance of their former Compositions may possibly aw them, and
scrue them into obedience. I have better matter to deal withal in this
Discourse, viz. with honest hearts, which are either miscarryed through
deceitful pretenses, or discontented through mistaken apprehensions, or have
been at least disheartened through want of observance of Gods actings in these
affairs, and so sit at too great a distance from compliance with this present
Government: For it is most true, that as many men get their own ends through
pretense of Religion, so others weakly look on Religion through the disguizes
of cunning Politicians, which they converse withal. And it has been a great
misery to our Cause, That honest men have, either in the actings of things,
consul^ed too much with flesh and blood, or suffered themselves to be abused by
the specious insinuations of those men, who have had no reserve of honor and
respect, but what they could get by such stratagems. I dare not undertake to
plead for any person, or party, or to justify men in any thing; I am now
pleading for a common good, by a convenient Government, (though I know no
reason why men should dis-affect good things out of any prejudice to parties
and persons). I can love Gold, though in the Oar, and prize Diamonds, though
unfiled and unset: But to the thing. It is not only to be wished and desired,
but that which all honest men (who love the Interest of England, and desire to
see but any comfortable issue of these late sad Distractions) should be engaged
in, unanimously to close in with the present Overtures, and promote, by all
means and faithfulness, the Government set up by the Parliament, and laying
aside all particular animosities, and waving lesser differences, pass an Act of
Oblivion for all former miscarriages, whether real or supposed, and take the
advantage of advancing our good by the present opportunity, having cause to
fear, that if we neglect this, we shall never enjoy the like advantage for
Truth and Liberty.

And least men might pretend Conscience or Reason to countenance their
dis-affection to this Government of a Commonwealth, I shall humbly entreat
honest men to consider, That there is no such supernatural stamp, or Jus
Divinum, set on Monarchical Government, which should engage men's hearts unto it
so peculiarly, more then on any other, excepting only such a State which has
not form and order in it. What ever men's affections may be to one Government
more then another, I know not, but there is no Divine Character of respect more
on one then other; But God, who is a God of Order, has ordained Governments,
and delights to see his Creatures made happy by them, and therefore has left
them to choose what they think may be most fit for that end, and to call it by
what name they please; and that Government which is in one place called, (...),
an Ordinance of God, is in another called, (...), a creature, or institution of
man, the power it self being from God, the distinction and personal
administration from man; and if it were not so, no Government but one could be
lawful, or to be obeyed by any people as an Ordinance of God: And by
consequence, if Monarchy have this impression only from Heaven no Government
but that is to be accounted lawful, or obedience to it from any spiritual rule
but force and necessity, which not any that has his veins never so full of
royal blood will maintain. Those that take the divinity of Regal power from its
similitude and likeness it has unto God and his Supremacy, and oneness in the
Government of the World, plead rather for the Turkish, or Russian Monarchy,
then for Englands, they holding for a more exact likeness to God (in their
sense) ruling all by their own wills independently from any; whereas only that
Government has Gods heart in it specially which is founded in Righteousness,
and propagated by Justice, and does most bless a Nation with Truth and Peace
But if men will refer the judgment of Monarchy to what God says of it when it
was first mentioned to him by his own People, as desirous to be under it, it is
most observable (though I would not make it an argument) That no distinct Order
of Government had ever such a signal blur, and stamp of dislike from God, as
Monarchy, nor did ever any people receive a public check from Heaven for
choosing any Government, but King-ship; and it stands on record to this day,
that God was displeased but at the motion of the children of Israel to have a
King, as the Heathens, they being not content with the wisdom of God, who chose
another Government for them, as better, and more fit for honest and godly men,
he gave them a King, but in wrath. And if God were so displeased with them, but
for asking a King after the manner of the Heathens, which King God himself
should have a vote in the choice of, how will he be with us, who will have a
King which God has rejected.

But though many good hearts may think the jus divinum to be alike, yet they
may find many Obligations to Kingly Government in England which are sacred,
and may lie on their Consciences as an impediment to a full closing with this
Government, which they may in Reason be convinced is fit and necessary.

I confess there is nothing of more reverence in the eyes of any serious spirit
then solemn Oaths and Covenants, whereby men are obliged to God as well as men,
and have their Consciences to answer as well as Reason: Yet there may be too
scruplous a Conscience, and many times Conscience is made too great a pretense
and covert for inward malignity, and dislike of things themselves. Yet what
ever pretense men may make of their Obligation by Oath to another Government,
such Oaths cannot be binding now, when not only the persons, but the
Government it self is removed; the very Commands of God, which are affirmative,
bind not ad semper to all times and particular movements; and I hope no godly
man thinks any other Covenant to be everlasting, but the Covenant of Grace. We
all grant, that no Oath binds me when I am dead, neither can any Oath bind me
to dead persons, or things not in being; and what ever Oaths men have taken,
relating to the person of the late King, or that Government, cannot be in
force, but must needs be out of date, and unobliging, when the person is dead,
and the Government it self necessarily altered; especially when the matter
about which the Oath made is civil and changeable, and made not absolutely, but
conditionally, as the late Covenant was, we binding our selves to preserve his
Majesty's person, etc. in the Preservation of Religion and Liberty, which we
have found absolutely contrary, and inconsistent together. And let me say, it
were to be wished, that this tenderness of Conscience were in some of the
scruplers about this Government; formerly, when the Covenant and Ecclesiastical
Government was first urged, the matters of which were sacred, as well as the
Oath it self, and yet nothing would then serve, but force and violence,
banishment, with many such threats, to those that would not submit to it, the
matter and manner of which belonged properly to Conscience, and was
controverted by the best and ablest men, and yet a rational dissent by one side
entered, and the thing it self hardly determinable in some points: But I am for
union, and may not open old sores: It Is well the Cause is changed, and the
Trial come about to others, that they may know what Conscience means Yet it is
still to be desired, that men would consider, what sin against any man's
Conscience it can be, to join in with a Government, which is not only most
lawful in it self, but most necessary at present? or how they can in Conscience
(without some other Reason) maintain their engagements to a nonentity? or how
they can discharge their Conscience from one sin, by doing another? or make an
atonement for present disobedience to an Ordinance of God, (as every Government
in it self is) by former pretended Obligation to that which they have not at
present, or, it may be, never shall have opportunity to perform.

I know the Parliament will have regard to tender Consciences, and lay nothing
which may be a burden on them: But it will be very sad and ominous, that all
men's malignity and state-distempers should have such a plausible disguize as
Conscience; or that necessary and civil affairs, which are but reductively and
secondarily belonging to Conscience, should be simple, and absolutely destroyed
by such a plea, which is common to one as well as another. But I doubt not but
that the justness and honest fruits of this Government will end at men's hearts
to it, as their former Engagements, or rather dis-affections, have made men
conscientious against it.

And now seeing that there is no more divinity in one Government more then
another, and former Obligations dye with the things themselves, that our
Consciences (rightly informed) cannot be bound by them, let us consider our
conveniences, and reflect on Kingly power in this Nation, and the sad fruits
and effects of it, especially of late, and we shall see little reason of being
so endeared to it, much less to dote on it as we do. How nigh were all our
Liberties to give up the ghost under it? What bloody and cruel attempts have
there been made by it on the Souls, Estates, and persons of many thousands in
England and Ireland, but only to please the will or lust of one Tyrant? We
have felt too much of this, and I need not repeat; These have been the natural
offsprings of that Government, not only here, but in all Nations, no people
living in peace under it, but those which are quietly content either with no
Liberty, or but with only the shadow or name of it; I may affirm it by all
Histories universally, That Royalty and Liberty have never heartily embraced
each other, or have shined together in the same splendour or beauty, but one
has either quite extinguished, or eclipsed the others glory.

God himself (who best knew the nature of all Governments, and foresaw their
effects) makes Monarchy and Tyranny very near of kin, and as soon as ever
Israel would have a King, tells them what they must necessarily expect, as
inseparable adjuncts or effects of it, (2 Samuel 8. 11. 12, 13.) This shall be
the manner of the King which shall reign over you, he will take your sons and
appoint them for himself, for his Charets, and Horsemen, and some shall run
before his Charets; with many other expressions of like nature, all the fruits
of Tyranny which can be imagined, and all this inseparably annexed to it, by
the foresight of God himself. Yea, Liberty and Monarchy have been ever so
Incompetible, That in the best Histories of that Government, they have been not
only distinguished, but opposed; especially, those that look over the Roman
Histories (who had experience of both) will find, when Kingly Power began to
flourish, LIBERTY decayed, and so e contra. Tacitus Annal. 1. Vrbem Romam ab
initio Reges habuere, Libertatem and Consulatum, L. Brutus instituit. The
Romans had first KINGS, but L. Brutus brought in Liberty, and the Consulship:
So Livy Lib. 45. Non in Regno Populam Romanum, sed in Liberate esse; and the
same Author Lib. 1. Regem volebant Libertatis dulcedine nondum experta: None
love Kingly Government, or can desire to be under it, but those that never
tasted the sweets of Liberty. And shall we now strive to join those two
together in our expectations, which (I had almost said) God, and Nature have
divided, I am sure all Nations have had experience of inconsistency of? Have we
ventured so hard, for to gain our Liberties, and shall not we now take the
advantage of procuring them? Or do we think that slavery is any whit the more
amiable, because it has the name of Royalty annexed to it? If we be not yet
sensible of our condition, we may hereafter; when some have got their wills, we
shall have our eyes opened, though it be but to see our misery, when past
recovery.

Aristocracy has many more curbs, and bridles on it to restrain it from
Exorbitancy, then can be set on Monarchy, and is so less capable of doing
mischief to a Nation then the other. The distance of their place, the
remoteness of Princes from vulgar sight, the many screens they have between
them and the people, and that great reverence they get by their retiredness
from ordinary converse, give them unavoidable advantages of doing that more
secretly, and effectually, and with less guilt, then can be imagined to be done
by a Public State, who are more open to the view of the world, and are but
themselves in power, quam ain been se gesserint.

We have seen of late, how hard it has been but to make the people think the
King could offend, or was liable to any guilt, or charge, laying all on his
Council, while he was the Malignant Genius that led them; and yet being so much
out of sight, so far off from Popular view, went free for a long time from any
positive charge, and had gone to this day as an Innocent one, and one incapable
of Spot, or blame, had not God stirred up such a spirit of courage and Justice
in that remnant of faithful Patriots, who have Anatomized his wicked, and
Tyrannical practices before all the world, and done suitable justice on him for
it; And yet the old Maxims, received by Custom, and invented by his Parasites,
and Favorites, (That the King can do no wrong, That he is accountable to none
but God for his Actions) lie in the breast of most men, as Orthodox Law, and
Gospel, and will be soon embraced again, and reprinted in a larger Character,
if ever the same power be set up again, though never so contrary to Reason, or
Liberty; yea, the late King himself sealed the confirmation of them with his
own Blood, and therefore would not plead, or answer any thing to the High Court
of Justice, not so much because he thought the Authority of it to be illegal,
as that he thought himself above the judgment of any Authority on earth; and
would have doubtless refused to have answered to Lords and Commons, though in a
full house, and in one Judicature, if they should have laid such a Charge
against him; for in his former Declarations, he was so far from owning their
Authority, That he proclaimed both Houses (when in their full power and
grandeur) Traitors and Rebels, because they sat without his presence; and yet
we have thought ours but a limited, and bounded Monarchy.

And what hopes we can have of Kingly power in this Nation, which is founded on
such principles, and propagated on the same terms, let wise and honest men
judge.

Besides, when we have most solemnly considered Monarchy in its real use and
end, it will be found to be in effect but an Aristocracy, though far more
dangerous and mischievous; The same things are done, as to the good of the
Public, by States and Councels, which are done by Kings and Councels
together; and either the King must rule by his own will, and then he is a
professed Tyrant, or else by Counsel of his Parliament, and Public Senators,
and then it is the Council that rules the Kingdom, who can do it as well, and
with less hazard, without him; As being free from the Temptations of Majesty,
and the Courtship of Royal favors, whereby the best of men (ere they were
aware) have been corrupted, and the wisest Counselors suborned to act suitable
to the Regal interest, contrary to the good of the Commonwealth; whereas,
while they act in a Parity among themselves, as their judgments are most free
from being acted by Superior influences, so their Debates, and Results, must
needs be of more common and public concernment, they themselves, having an
equal share in that good, which is done unto the whole.

That if we do but cast up our accounts right, we shall find that Kings are but
mere chargeable Ceremonies, or Ciphers, of little use but to contract humors,
and promote personal designs destructive to the being, and well-being of
Commonwealths; for they neither are executioners of justice themselves, nay,
scarce (many times) Counselors, nor do any special or public work; and yet
for mere custom and formalities sake, we must have one man adored, having a
supreme power invested in him, and be maintained in the greatest State, and
Glory, merely to sit still and have the best, and wisest, and most faithful,
and gallant instruments bow down, and rejoice, but to kiss his hand. If any
King has ever yet been more then ordinarily active, or instrumental, it has
been to prosecute some design which would advance his Supremacy more
Independently against the Public Good, as the late King was in his Wars
against this Nation.

And what ever other Nations may experiment, if we have found any good by
Monarchy in this Nation, it is, that it has made us (I hope) know what Liberty
and Law is, and to prize them the more; Quae libertas ut laetior esset proximi
Regis superbia saceret, Which Liberty we should esteem more, had we but one
trial of the next KINGS Reign.

And as there is nothing more vertually, and really in Monarchical then what is
in Aristocratical Government, and nothing to be expected by the one, but what
may be done by the other with less fear of danger, and without such costly
formality: So Aristocracy, (or this Government of a Commonwealth the
Parliament have set up) is the most even, and just Government, that any men
have yet come to the knowledge of, it being a middle State between Popular
Anarchy, and Prerogative Tyranny, whereby men are freed from the necessary
exorbitancies of both, and seated securely in a uniform and equal condition
free from all extremes, in which the people are best represented, and by which
the Laws and dispatches of Justice, and other affairs have a quicker and easier
passage, with less noise, and Tumult, then if they should run down from the
high mountains of Prerogative and Majesty, in the dispensations of which, you
have little cognizance of justice, or reason, but of grace, and favor; Kings
and Princes seldom granting any thing, though never so just, but it is ever as
from grace, so with an expectation of something from the people to advance
their Prerogative, the doing of which may be a greater loss, and hazard, then
the former grant could be of concernment to them.

But in this other Government, as justice runs more smoothly, and clearer, and
is not painted with Royal colors, so the people have a more immediate way to
the redress of all their grievanc^s, and are not forced as to clime too high,
so not to go to far about, or through so many mercenary Favorites, or rooms of
State, or be scared with the sudden beams of supposed Majesty, but come to
their own Representatives that themselves have chosen, and who may be in the
same condition, and are to be tried by the same Laws themselves, which they for
the present judge others by. And it is observable, These few Nations which have
once got the opportunity (which some have ventured hard for with little
success) of casting off Kingly Power, have naturally, and out of choice, fallen
into this Government, as the middle, and best, and that which was most safe,
and suitable to Liberty and Justice; and how these Nations which have been under
it have flourished, I could mention (if it were needful) in multitudes of
testimonies; And not to go so far back unto the Roman State, that little time
it enjoyed it; Let us view these little spots of Land in Europe that live under
this Government, how do they lift up their heads in strength, and wealth, above
all their neighbors, to name no more but the Netherlands, and Venice; The
first, even on a sudden, even by it is Wars against Monarchy, enriching of it
self beyond many Kingdoms of ten times a larger continent; and the other
defending it self, yea, annoying one of the greatest Empires under the Sun. And
there is no reason why England should not flourish under it much more, who has
a more Natural defense of it self, then other places have, and more reason, and
advantage of setting it up, then any other people have yet had; and doubtless
the Climate, and Air, is not incompetible to it. Had other Nations but the
Liberty to speak, and the Freedom to choose as we have, we should soon hear
which way the Vote would go.

But let it be found out (as a Phoenix) That some Nations have had Liberty and
Justice under the Reign of some Kings, which were of singular tempers and
virtues; or, it may be, had not time enough, or opportunity, both to plot and
act designs together; yet when Government shall come to be hereditary, and Regal
Power advanced by succession, there must needs be unknown mischiefs propagated
together with it: And all men's liberties are cast away on a peradventure at the
best; for be he young or old, wise or unwise, virtuous or vicious, talis,
qualis, he must be entrusted with all the Liberties (it may be, of many
Nations,) and a necessity of bondage and misery, without remedy, successively
entailed on men and their posterity: All liberty of dissent or choice (which is
the birth right of rational and freemen) being utterly denied to them, and
destroyed by a titular plea of succession to that which, it may be, the person
is neither fit for the mannagement of, being a child, or weak, or worthy of,
through vice, or ill conversation.

And however other Nations may, out of hidden secrets of State, think Monarchy
best for them, and be willing to venture at succession, yet to us it would not
be only inconvenient, but mischievous; Having justly cut off the Fathers head
for a wicked and ill Government, to enthrone the Son, who was engaged in the
same quarrel, and has entertained the same principles, with an addition of
more malice and revenge; and what were it but to give that power to undo us,
which we (through the providence of God) have happily deprived his Father of?
For as we had no hopes of the late King, but were in continual danger of taking
advantages by us; so we cannot have any probable expectation from his Son, who
was engaged Body and Soul in his Fathers Interest, and trained up from his
cradle in blood, who, besides his Youth, (and so his unfitness to manage the
Affairs of such a State,) has a double portion of his Fathers Spirit of Pride
and Tyranny on him, besides his Mothers blessing, and is the perfect and
natural Heir to his Fathers Quarrel and Design, as to his Crown and Dignity.

But the great thing to be wondered at, is, That any which love Presbyterial
Government should dote on Monarchy, especially after the Reign of such a
person, and stand out against this Government which the Parliament have now set
up. Aristocracy in Church, and Monarchy in State, do not run so parallel in the
expressions, what ever they may do in the sense. Kingly Government has never
been yet very propitious, or benign to Presbytery; the most favor it has got
in any Kingdom, is but to have a Toleration, as in France, and in this Nation;
it is hardly a probationer: but Episcopacy has been that ancient Government,
which has been bred up with Monarchy, and has of late been its greatest
Darling, to maintain which, much of the Royal Interest has been engaged; the
late King making one of the grounds of his War to be the taking away of that
Government, which he thought to be so fundamental and sacred, that all Religion
was wrapped up in it, and to confirm his love unto it, dyed with a Bishop in his
arms. And such inseparable union is between Monarchy and Episcopacy, that King
James himself, as soon as ever he came out of Scotland into England, (and found
himself to be a King) made this State Maxim, No Bishop no King, which is to
this day unrepealed, and by experience confirmed, for they have both dyed
together as Twins in the bosom of each other; and if we do but look a little
back, we shall find, that Presbyterial Government never thrived well, no not in
Scotland, (the most fertile soil, and natural climate wherein it flourishes
most) until the King was removed at such a distance; and yet what attempts have
both King James and Charles made, but to overthrow it in Scotland, as being most
unsuitable to Kingly Government? and they have little cause to think, that
their Charles the Second will forget his Grandfathers and Fathers Legacy.

And now we have begun to mention Scotland, it may be some may bring in them as
a president to us, (as formerly to the Church, so now to the State,) who,
notwithstanding all their inconveniences, which they have found by Monarchy,
yet have thought fit to continue it, and that in the right line of Succession:
It Is well known, the Scots love the Name, but care little for the Company or
Power of a King; Neither is it much to be admired, that they should proclaim
King whom they never intend shall rule over them; for they well know how to
make use of the Name, though they mean not to subject to the Power: The Scots
are not a Nation of as much state and riches as other Kingdoms, but of as much
design as any, and they well foresee, that whose King soever he be, England
must maintain him, and bear the greatest burden, while they enjoy his small
Revenue in Scotland, and get places and pensions from him in England, so that
he must be their King, but our Tyrant: All that understand the Affairs of
Scotland, know, that were it not for the name of the King, the factions of
their Nobility and Gentry are so great, that Peace could never be kept among
themselves, and yet if they had a King really among them, it would impoverish
both Gentry and Nobility, who must contribute to maintain him, who in England
by pensions and places has set up them. But I would not too much open the
nakedness of that Nation, but wish them much good with their King, and his
hideous train of Malignants, which must necessarily follow him where ever he
himself is entertained with any respect or honor: Only they should have given
him title to their own Nation, and have left our Parliament to have chosen for
us, who are come to sufficient years of discretion, and have learnt to
understand both their King and them; but it seems it would profit them little
to have him King of Scotland, if he were not also of Great Britain. It is for
us to consult our own concernments, and not trouble our selves with examples:
If we chance to differ from other States, it is because they have not the same
advantages, nor we the same causes and grounds of following them. All that is
proposed by the Parliament, is, to reduce us into a Commonwealth, and if the
name do not offend, I know not why should the thing.

And as to that reverent plea of the Antiquity of Monarchy in this Nation, we
may answer with grief, it has been too long; and we have had time enough to
try and feel the sad effects of it; and Kingship may very well, after so long a
personal reign and advancement of it self, give way to a Commonwealth, that the
Nation may get some good, and enjoy some Liberty, after their long servitude to
it. Antiquity is an argument for nothing but truth and goodness, else error and
usurpation will plead its gray hairs, and make a demonstration of its divinity
with the best advantage.

And whereas many wise men object the danger of changes in States and
Governments, and the unknown consequences which may follow, it is confessed, and
therefore the Parliament has took time and deliberation, and tried all
expedients; and made the best essays for security of the Nation without it; But
that change cannot be dangerous, where the continuation of a former Government,
in such persons, has proved, and is, inevitably mischievous, as it is in our
cause; and yet we have not changed our Laws, or the Fundamentals of the former
Government, but only the persons and mal-administrators of it; that it is but a
change of persons and names, which have acted, and are like to act to our
destruction, and so hinder mischief from running in a blood: And if we will
with seriousness and observance look about us, we may discern a bright Star of
Providence leading us directly to it, and a harmony of wonders and mercies
accompanying it, and blessing on the Parliaments proceedings in it, that men
which shall oppose it, may well be said to fight against the very arm of the
Almighty, and slight many a glorious work which God has done by weak and
ordinary instruments. And whereas many men nourish their discontents against
it, by the present distempers they find in the Nation, and are apt to think,
and be made believe, That our condition is worse then it was in the time of the
late King, by reason of Taxes and Oppressions; They should consider the cause
may be in themselves, who give no better ground of security to the Parliament
of an honest and faithful compliance, but by their new discontents keep up our
fears, which makes them keep up an Army: and had they been wise men who thus
object, they would have considered, that we are not only framing a new
Government, but changing the old, and that we are not in in Republica Platonis,
but in face Romuli.

It Is easy to frame an Idea of a new Government, and as easy to live under it
in peace, had we all one mind; but not so easy (without much cost) to alter
an old one, where so many parties are engaged and disaffected, and so much
rubbish to be removed. Were we to begin the world again, and to choose for our
selves, having hearts, we should not need Swords, and then An AGREEMENT of the
PEOPLE (though not according to the Levellers Anarchical model) might be a
Foundation of PEACE; but as it is with us, Men must be awed with Swords, as
children are with rods, until they have learnt Reason, and come to be sensible
of their own good, and learn to distinguish between what is done for present
necessity to prevent farther misery, and what is done in times of Peace, by
absolute Prerogative and Tyranny. Me thinks to see what is done, and how
hopeful affairs look, should be enough to swallow up the present sense of
pressures, and allay the murmurings of men's spirits, whereby these oppressions
are like to be continued and made heavier; And though it cannot be denied but
the keeping up of the Army is a burden, yet, it is so necessary, That it is an
absolute preservative against more intolerable oppressions, that would not
only burden us, but utterly undo us. And if we all expect ease, let us
contribute to the procuring of it; if it seem hard by our purses, let us go a
nearer, and cheaper way by our compliances, and the entire union of our hearts
and affections in these ways which are lawful and necessary, for were it not
for our Classical discontents, and secret dislikes which we nourish against
persons, and things, all these Taxes and Impositions would soon be removed; and
we may well bear a little of the trouble, who are causes or instruments to
create it; And truly for us who have had such experiences of the sad and
doleful effects of Monarchical Government, it were almost worth the hazarding
the peace of one Generation, but to make an experiment of another Government,
and spend our time in War (if it must be so) to procure peace for our
Posterity, as our Ancestors have done in slavery, but to keep theirs.

I can only wish, That all honest men would reflect on their condition, and
what a perfect Dilemma is upon them, which cannot be avoided, that either they
must espouse the old quarrel they first fought against, and incorporate with
that Generation of Malignants which we have professed against, and God has
appeared against, and so recover their lost hopes, or else join in with the
Parliament and Army in this present Government, and diligently prosecute the
remainders of Peace and Liberty, which we are in so promising a way to obtain.
How much better is it to join in with our friends, though they have acted a
little faster, or somewhat beyond our model (seeing a surer foundation is laid,
though it be somewhat deep) then to give encouragement to our common enemy to
destroy both themselves and us together; and if we cannot meet in every line of
the Circumference, yet, it is safe to meet in the Center.

I can but speak for my self, Quem fugiam scio, I know whom to avoid: Two sorts
of men which are the utmost extremes, The old Malignants, and the new
Levellers; This last was begotten in the same womb, only there was a mixture of
seeds in the conception, and is designed as a reserve to effect that which
malignancy could not do; they both have one end, the destruction of this
Government, though the pretenses and ways of acting it are different; we have
yet sailed safe between these two rocks, and may (if we have hearts) prevent
the mischiefs of both, and see Liberty exactly stated, and justly restrained
with the Golden reins of Justice, Sobriety, and limited by Religion and
Conscience, and Justice sitting on the Throne, poysed with Truth, whose fresh
and Cristal streams shall glyde sweetly, and insensibly, yea, run by every man's
door to refresh all his enjoyments. Whereas while we grate on the distempers of
the times, and repine at former actings through inconsideration of our present
opportunity, and ignorance of the designs that are upon us under specious
pretenses, not making improvement of what is before us, we shall ere we are
aware, either be reduced back to Prerogative Tyranny, and be a thousand times
in worse bondage then we were, or run into Levelling Confusion; The Parliament
and Army have done their endeavor, if men will be miserable, and suffer
themselves to be deceived, they must blame none but themselves, if they be
miserable. God will go on with his work, and finish it in righteousness, and
will prepare hiding places for those which have faithfully opposed the common
Enemies of Religion and Liberty, while these men, who to please their own
discontents, or to gratify Malignant instruments, are contented to sell away
their birth right for a mess of pottage, and sacrifice their dear bought
advantages on their own humors.

I would only add this as my prayer and desire for any honest, zealous, abused
hearts, That they may never feel that misery, which, by their distance and
secret differences, they may bring on this Nation, which is in so fair and
hopeful a condition of enjoying that happiness, which all the Kingdoms, round
about us, will envy us for, if our own unreasonable distempers do not hinder.

-- Et sic liberavi animam meam.
FINIS.

