Innocence Vindicated. Or, a brief ANSWER To part of A Scandalous Paper,
Entitled A true Narrative of the Occasion and Causes of the late Lord General
Cromwell's anger against. Lieutenant Colonel JOYCE, etc. AND His proceedings
against him, to cashier him from the Army.

By Jo. Rix, once Lieutenant to the said Lt. Colonel Joyce.

Prove. 8. 17. He that is first in his own cause seems just, but his neighbor
comes and searches him.

Printed at London, by J. C. 1659.

Innocence Vindicated.
A Man's good name being as precious ointment, which once spilt causes diligent
gathering together again, but not accomplished without some loss, which is
easier to be dispensed withal then the whole; the which being my present Case,
I shall without further Apology, address my self to make answer to that part
of the premised Paper that concerns me, viz.

That in page 3. of the said Paper, line 28. the said Lieutenant Colonel Joyce
says, That upon his bearing Testimony in the public meetings of the Officers,
against the Armies Apostacy at that time, who were then concurring to make the
said Lord General Lord Protector, Endeavors were used to ruin him. To which
it is answered, That that could be no cause of his ruin, because the effects
of a thing ever follows after, and never go before the cause: and if no such
discourse as is premised was debated before, nor on foot when Lt. Colonel Joyce
was cashiered the Army, then he could bear no Testimony against the Armies
Apostacy, in that which was not, nor against their concurring to make the Lord
General Lord Protector, seeing no debate in order thereunto was amongst them;
neither could his bearing testimony (as falsely declared by him) be a cause of
his ruin, his being either in prison or cashiered some months before the
General was made Protector. And that there was no such discourse, much less a
concurring therein by the Officers of the Army, one month before the Protector
was so made, not one Officer that I can speak withal does remember, but declare
the contrary. My self also (until after Lt. Colonel Joyce was cashiered) being
in commission, was conversant in the Councils, and with the Officers, but never
heard one word of such a thing: therefore that which was not of one months
being, cannot be the cause of that which was some months before, and so no
cause of his mine. Next,

The Lt. Colonel says, That I was sent for from Portland, by General Cromwell,
as an effect of the Premises. This is also false: I never was sent for by
General Cromwell, for the cause premised, nor for any other, because 1. I was in
London near fourteen weeks before the Lt Colonel's Articles were exhibited to
the Court Martial. 2. The cause of my coming to London was as follows: I
being through the malignity of the said Lt. Colonel sequestered from my command,
came up upon my own account, to seek for Justice against the arbitrary and
unjust proceeding of the said Lt. Colonel George Joyce, who now the second time
had gotten eleven false Articles against me, I having been acquitted of six by
Judgment of a Court Martial, but the 17th of January before, and sent to my
command by an Order of the Lord General Cromwell: I say, in August following,
Eleven Articles being again by Lt. Colonel Joyce and his Emissaries, gotten
against me, and brought to London, lest the report of them should have rendered
me so great a Transgressor, as to have been accounted a favor in him to have
put me away privately, as some others have been served, when innocent, as to
matters of Fact; to prevent this (being first sequestered from my Command, by
him, as not fit to be longer trusted) I hasted to London, and applied my self
to the Court Martial for Justice; at which, my Lt. Colonel being filled with
fear, would have withdrawn my Articles: Nay, he entreated me to let them be
withdrawn: to which I replied, If he would declare in open Court, that all and
every part of them were false and scandalous, I would consent to it; but if
not, they should be judged of by the Court. The Court asked the Lt. Colonel
what he said to it; his answer was, That there was many Aggravations, but he
could not say they were all false: whereupon I humbly desired the Court to
proceed to Judgment; which accordingly was done Some of his Articles being as
follows: vizt For endeavoring to raise Forts against the Army and
Commonwealth, For Mutiny, for false Musters, and wronging Soldiers of their
pay, etc. which if proved, I should have counted it a favor to have had my
life given me: but through grace, I had so behaved my self both as a Christian,
and as a Soldier, that upon the Examination of the said eleven Articles, they
found me not guilty of any faults, disorders or offenses mentioned in the
Articles of War, but for misdemeanour, not mentioned in the Articles of War;
for which I had a mild Reproof, and was so acquitted by the Court Martial,
held the 29 and 30 day of August, 1653. Thus have I given a true account of my
coming to London, with the cause thereof, which was not as premised by Lt.
Colonel Joyce, whom I had now hopes would rather have printed his Repentance
for his unparalleled cruelty against me, without a cause; as also, his then
and since endeavors to wound me in the house of my Brethren, as well as
amongst all my acquaintance, where he had opportunity, with lies gilded over
with hypocrisy, which caused them that loved me to have hard thoughts against
me, as if I had done the wrong, that received so much from him, as declared in
the premises: yea, as if I had been a malicious envious person, as some its
possible (ignorantly) will say of me, for writing this paper, though nothing
less then necessity have put me upon it, I not wishing him any harm, but hoped
a change had been wrought in him; but contrary, now at last, to fill up his
cup, having printed lies and falsehoods against me, should I now keep silent,
every one would take me to be like himself. The wise Man says, An hypocrite
with his mouth destroys his neighbor, but through knowledge shall the Just
be delivered. But the next Charge is,

That I was not only sent for by General Cromwell, but by him encouraged to
prosecute my Lieutenant Colonel again. That I was not sent for, I have already
declared, with the true cause of my coming to London, and my being acquitted by
the Court Martial, from that false charge, which (if proved) would, by the
Articles of War, have taken away my life: I say, being acquitted then, Lt.
Colonel Joyce became a mournful suitor to me, with tears begging me to return
to my command: at which my heart was turned within me; and upon his desire of
forgiveness, I was not intended to meddle more or less with the Articles
against him, if not necessitated thereunto: upon which I went to General
Cromwell, acquainting him that I was acquitted by a Court Martial, and desiring
to know his Excellencies pleasure, as to my returning to my command: at which
the General said, where is Joyce 's Articles? I said, In the Advocates hand:
the General then said, I will have them prosecuted; saying, Lieutenant, you
shall fare never the worse for Joyce 's wickedness. This I do declare to the
best of my knowledge, to be the first, and all the encouragement I ever
received from General Cromwell. Now first, considering the evil intended toward
me by Lt. Colonel Joyce, with what expense he had put me to, without cause;
whether now was the greater evil in General Cromwell, to make such a promise, or
having made it, not to perform it, I never receiving a penny or penny's-worth
from him; and I having signed to the Articles, as a Witness when called, could
not do less then witness to what I knew to be truth; and my conscience bears me
testimony that I did it, to the best of my remembrance, without respect to any
Reward promised: and as for my prosecuting him, it is false; for Sergeant Tho.
Knight was his prosecutor: and whereas he says, I was encouraged again, whenas
before I could make nothing of it: I answer, That my evidences was before
offered to the Commissioners in the Country, but because I would not sign to
the Articles, as Prosecutor, the Commissioners were so much Lt Colonel Joyce's
friends, that they would not receive any testimony to the Articles against him:
and I did refuse to sign them as Prosecutor, because then my evidences would
not have been valid, being the chief Witness to make his false Musters appear,
and how he wronged the soldiers of their pay. I say, for that cause the
Commissioners would not receive evidence to the Articles against the Lieut.
Colonel, though Sergeant Knight offered to sign them as Prosecutor; no marvel
therefore, that the said Commissioners could make nothing of it, as premised by
Lt Colonel Joyce.

The next thing he charged upon me, is, That I should falsely swear, That I
should hear the Lt. Colonel say, in Adistors in Portland, about the death of
Lockyer, That he was sorry that Lockyer had not pistoled Cromwell. In answer to
this, I first offer a Query: 1. If the testimony of two honest Witnesses to one
thing shall be accounted false swearing, what testimony in our Age, shall be
accounted true swearing? And that there was so in this case, I do affirm, and
know the contrary cannot be proved. 2. I reply by way of Reason, why my
Evidences could not be false. 1. Because by my testimony the Court Martial
found Lt. Colonel Joyce a guilty person. 2. Because the Court Martial cast out
the Evidences of some persons, who by the means of Lt. Col. Joyce did swear
against me, as of persons forsworn; but did not do so to my Evidence against
Lt. Col. Joyce. 3. Because the Court Martial, which did consist of many
faithful men (as I judge) and many of them Lt. Colonel Joyce's great friends,
did upon the several Evidences by me produced, etc. judge him so guilty, as to
cashier him the Army.

And whereas the said Lt. Colonel declares, That when he could not be persuaded
out of his Commission, during his imprisonment, the which also he declares to
be an effect of his bearing Testimony against the Armies Apostasy, he still
placing that in the Van of his sufferings, which I am confident was in the
Rear, as has already been declared.

And whereas he said, That THEN Articles were drawn against him: that was also
false, his own conscience knowing that Articles were drawn up against him, and
proof offered thereunto, a month at least, before his being imprisoned; so no
effect of his being imprisoned, or refusing to lay down his Commission, as
declared by him, nor of his boasting that he bare testimony against the
Apostacy of the Army, in the matter premised, which was some months after. In
these things Lt. Colonel Joyce has verified the use of an old Proverb, viz.
That a Liar had need have a good memory, otherwise he will contradict himself.

Again, he says, That by the false and double swearing, etc. As to that of
false swearing, I have already made such answer, as I hope has given full
satisfaction to every impartial Reader, of my innocence from that great sin:
as also to believe, that if Lt. Col. Joyce had either been a true man, or a
wise man, he would not have published so false an accusation with so many known
lies in print.

But whereas he accuses me with double swearing, it is matter of sorrow in me,
to consider that his wicked actions should be so many, as that I should be
called upon to swear to more then one Article against him, it not being
reasonable to believe that I swear twice to one particular: and as for my
prosecuting him, it was Sergeant Tho Knight, as I have already declared: and as
for my being thereto encouraged, (as falsely suggested by him) has been replied
unto already, in order, as they stand in his paper.

Next, the Lt. Col. says, That in his own Conscience he was clear of any
crime, or offense, as his paper said, unstable by Law. Ah poor unstable soul!
did thou mourn for thy wickedness almost 6 years ago? had thou then so much
sense of guilt as to use both lawful and unlawful means to prevent thy coming
to a Trial, the innocent and righteous man being bold as a Lion? I say, what
wast thou afraid of, if thy conscience were clear, as thou now seem to have
the confidence to affirm? Sure it may be said to Lt. Colonel Joyce as it was to
Simon Magus, Thou art still in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of
iniquity; thy heart is not right in the sight of God: repent therefore of this
thy wickedness.

The next Charge is, That after this, I moved the General, then called
Protector, for his promised Preferment. 2. For my charges in prosecution. It Is
false that ever I made any motion to the Protector, in any business relating to
my self, after the Protector was made Protector, I not being free in my
judgment and conscience, to serve him either by Sea or Land. But I gather by
this Charge, that his design is, to render me to be a lover of the Protector as
Protector, and so unamiable as to the present Authority: but the contrary to
this, is known unto my acquaintance, whether Officers of the Army, or others,
that I have still upon all occasions born a sober Testimony against the
Government of this Nation to be by a single Person, as Lord Protector, or
otherwise: I having often jeoparded my life in the high places of the field, in
the service of the Commonwealth, first under his Excellency the Earl of Essex,
then some years in the Troop of the Right Honorable Colonel Nathaniel Rich,
and in the Troop and Regiment of Colonel Reynolds, as Corporal and
Quartermaster, and after that I was Lieutenant to a Militia Troop in Norfolk;
and lastly, some years Lieutenant to Lt. Colonel Joyce, the last service that I
was upon, being the reducement of the Island of Jersey. But secondly, Lt.
Colonel Joyce would be taken now for an enemy to the Protector, and therefore
his ruin sought, and thereby himself amiable to the present authority: but
sure he has not taken the right way to accomplish his desire of vindication,
and appear as he says, an honest man.

But whereas he falsely says, That I not only went to the Protector, but also
claimed my promised Preferment; The promise was, That I should fare never the
worse for Joyce 's wickedness, as is already declared: now for the word
Preferment, it was not in my promise from the General; but it does appear that
Lt. Colonel Joyce concludes, That if General Cromwell did perform his promise,
that then I must have some Preferment, or else this consequence will follow,
That I must needs fare the worse for Joyce's wickedness; which I must confess I
did do, to the great impairing of my Estate, he putting me to great expenses or
charges, as he calls it, but not as Prosecutor. But whilst Cromwell was General,
I did several times after Joyce was cashiered, and the Company reduced, wait
upon him, who still said, He would take care for me: but having only good
words, I resolved to wait no longer, having several invitations from others;
one from Lt. Colonel Mason, who being in Scotland, and sensible of my Estate,
sent for me to come to him, giving me some encouragement thereunto; which was
great refreshment at that time unto me. But another friend, whose name was John
Mouldam, then a Lieutenant of one of the States Ships, but a little before a
Chaplain of the same Ship, prevailed with me to take his place; which I
promised to do, and was accepted of by the Captain: but presently after this,
the Lord General was made Protector: I then upon the account of conscience
deserted that service at Sea, to which, as premised, I was engaged: presently
after taking the house where I now through mercy live, and the fifth of
February following, opened the shop that I now keep; where through the blessing
of GOD, I have ever since lived comfortably with my Family, and kept my soul
clean from that Apostacy the Army in general, and many precious souls in it,
as I judge, through many temptations fell into, and in whose return my soul
has much rejoiced.

But lastly, whereas he says, The Protector should say, That I had not dealt
like a Christian with Lt. Colonel Joyce; and that he thrust me out of his
Chamber, and bid me go, like a Knave as I was; I answer, That Captain
Horsington, who Lt. Colonel Joyce said he had these words from, has denied it
before witness, that ever he heard the words, or declared them; and there being
no other proof, judge whether Joyce be an honest-man or a -- to print such lies
as I do affirm they are.

Thus having discharged my duty, and declared the naked truth of things as
acted by me, whether relating to my own defense against his unrighteous
proceedings toward me, or for the discovering the falseness of those several
particulars laid to my charge by him, in his late printed Paper, knowing that
both of us one day must give an account for the deeds done in the flesh, be
they good, or be they evil, to GOD the righteous Judge of all men; it being the
desire of my soul to do nothing out of strife or vain glory: I shall only
recommend such as shall still abide dis-satisfied, as to the cause for which
Lt. Colonel Joyce was cashiered the Army, to the Judgment of the then
Court Martial, to justify their proceedings against him, upon the several
Articles exhibited by Sergeant Tho. Knight; as also of the verity of what I
have here declared. And if Lt. Colonel Joyce ever intends his Vindication, it
must either be by his discovering his not being guilty of those many Articles
to which Evidence was given against him, and so the injustice of the
Court Martial, in cashiering of him without a cause; or if guilty, his hearty
and unfeigned repentance, and return; through means of which, scarlet sins may
be made as white as Snow, and he thereby once more appear an honest man, as he
desires in his paper.

Thus leaving what is declared to the blessing of Him who is able to make these
lines effectual, for the true satisfaction of every sober man, that is
dis-satisfied with the integrity of him, who is a lover of Justice, and a
cordial well-wisher to the prosperous state of this Commonwealth,

Jo Rix.

Post script.
REader, whereas this paper is entitled Innocence Vindicated, it is not
without just cause, since two several meetings were appointed for Lt. Colonel
Joyce to prove what he had charged against his Lt. viz. false swearing, and
other evil behaviors, but could not make any such thing appear. This I thought
good to certify (being present at the said meetings) lest any should say, That
the Author of this Vindication has risen too early in his own praise.

Jer. Ives.
London, June 22. 1659.
Whereas Lt. Rix is charged by his late Lt. Colonel George Joyce, as guilty of
false swearing, in a payer lately printed by his Order; upon and after twice
hearing what could be alleged by the said Lt. Colonel by way of proof to the
said Charge, I do hereby declare, that what was urged by the said Lt. Colonel
did not evince to my conscience that the said Lt. Rix is guilty of that
detestable abomination.

Edw. Harrison.

Unto a crime of false swearing, imputed unto, and charged upon Lt. Rix, in a
certain printed paper, He may plead, Not guilty, and ought to be cleared,
notwithstanding any testimony that I did hear brought against him, at the
meeting, or elsewhere.

H. Den

FINIS.

