TAPEINOASIA: Or, A SERMON OF Walking humbly with God. Preached at Sergeants
Inn in Chancery Lane, BY Mr JOHN RIDLEY, Chaplain there. April 29. 1649.

(...),

Basil. Ad Zachcum Christus non venisset, nisi prius de sycamoro descendisset.

G. F. E. L. IMPRIMATUR.

John Downame.
May 8. 1649.
LONDON, Printed for John Martin, and J. Ridley; and are to be sold at the
Castle in Fleet Street, by Ram-alley. 1649.

TO THE Very Devout, and Practical Christian, Lady ELIZABETH FINCH.
Elect Lady,
THe Searcher of all hearts knows, with what fear I publish these mean
thoughts of mine, to the public Censure of this Super-fine Age But now, or
never, is the time, to crowd amongst them at the Press, with hope to pass
Invisible. My comfort is, that I begin in Humility, if I can digg low enough,
my foundation will hold. For, truly, so far as I know the deceitfulness of mine
own heart, I am confident, no man does, or can think meaner of this Sermon,
then I my self do. And, I had rather the world should say, that its a plain,
honest, good, pious Sermon; then that its an elaborate, polite, choice piece. I
write it not for Scholars, they need no such mean helps, but for pur-blind
Christians, who feel their way before them, with a staff; If they use it, and
find direction, I have mine end. Had I sought my self, I could have put it in
better clothes. That I dedicate it unto your Ladyship, (though Motives of
civil Conusance are not wanting) yet that of Religion prevailed with me;
knowing by some years Observation, that you are one of those, who desire to
Walk humbly with God. In which blessed way, I beseech God keep you, guide you
with his counsel here, and after that, receive you unto Glory: So prays

Your Ladyships in all spiritual employment, JOH: RIDLEY.

Oh, quam me nimium probasque, amasque
Quae vis Archetypas habere Nugas!
Mart.
A Sermon Preached at Serjeants-Inne April 29. 1649.
MICAH 6.8. -- And to walk humbly with thy God.


THe holy Prophet having rectified the Judgment of this people, in that
hereditary, and inveterate error of their Nation: That Sacrifice was the only,
and ultimate, worship of God. By giving a Negative answer to that Question, put
unto him by some pious votary, verse 6. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord:
and by a Positive declaring the Mind of God, what was good, and what God
required of man: First, In the duties of the second Table, (the reasons of
which Inversion I gave you the last Lords day) viz. to do justly, in
Commutative and Distributive Justice; and to love mercy, Spiritual, and
Corporal. In this remainder of the words, he declares what was good, and what
God requires of man: in the duties of the first Table, viz. And to walk humbly
with thy God. Which truly are Words that engrosse so much of Affection, that
they leave the less for Invention; words that have so much of Rapture, that
they are fitter for Contemplation, then Meditation. St. Peter at the
Transfiguration, was so ravished with the glory of the Company, and place; that
he spoke he knew not what. The Panegyrist to Gratian, was so taken with his
Imperial presence, that he was willing to give over in the beginning; with
Juvat haerere in tam dulci Cogitatione, and quasi functus Officio; lentius ago
Remigia. But this were wholly to defraud your expectation; you are come to hear
a Sermon. Therefore consider four things:

1. The term of Connection; And. 2. The matter of the Connection: To walk humbly
with God. 3. The Motive, or Engagement: the blessed Relation; Thy God. 4. The
Poyse, or Inforcement: 1. This is good. 2. This God requires of man. 3. God
has showed this to be his Will.

1. The term of Connection, And; a little word, but (...), etc. For it stands
here as a Merestone, like Jegar-Sahadutha, the heap of witness, Genesis 31.47.
between Morality, and Religion: to do justly, and to love mercy, are the bounds
of Morality; but to walk humbly with God, is the holy land, the territory of
Christianity, the Churches patrimony. And, takes hold both ways; it couples
Morality to Religion, and Religion to Morality: and millions of men are taken
in fallacies on both sides. Thus, some think it to be good, and all that God
requires; to pay every one their own, to be just in bargaining, buying, and
selling, borrowing, and lending; to bestow something on the poor: (and I would
to God in these days, wherein so much Perfection is talked of, we could find
men Just and Merciful.) Not to arraign these at the strictest bar, but to
weigh them in their own scales: Tell me then; Is it honesty to pay men, and not
Almighty God, their due? to dwell in Gods house, and pay no rent? to receive
blessings from his bountiful, almost prodigal hand, and not to walk humbly with
him? Tell me: Is it to love mercy, to instruct the Ignorant, cloth the Naked,
feed the Hungry? and in the mean time, to be cruel to thy own soul, to let it
starve, and dye, for want of walking humbly with God. To these I must say, Unum
deest, yet lackest thou one thing: up, for thou have a further journey to go,
even to Horeb, the Mount of God. Morality never brought any man to heaven, Male
vivitur si Deo non been Creditur, Aug. And, has not his full due till you
add, Walk humbly with thy God.

2. And couples Religion to Morality. Thus, some there be who think it good,
and all that God requires, to profess to the world, that they walk with God.
and so close to him, that they are beyond Ordinances, and Sacraments, who yet
forget to do justly, and love mercy. To these I must say, that when weighed,
they will be found too light: for, as Religion for the knowing part of it, is
the highest pitch of Consecrate Reason; so for the practique part, its the
highest Zenith of Consecrate honesty. Religion like a clock has its motions
within; i. e. Walking with God, but the Dyall is without, doing Justly, and
loving Mercy: like a pair of Compasses, one shauk is set fast on its Center, by
Walking with God; the other walks the circumference, and touches every line of
virtues Circle. St. Paul joined them, Act. 24.16. (...). Herein do I exercise
my self, to have always a conscience void of offense, toward God, and toward
men. Thus he taught the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 8.21. Providing for honest things,
not only in the sight of the Lord, but in the sight of men. If you join them
not; And, has not its full due.

2. The matter of the Connection: To walk humbly with God. The translations
vary, Paratus sis ambulare, Hier. Cave diligenter ut ambules, Vulg. make it
your especial care to do this; ut modeste ambules, Jun. Thus the Latin. The
Greek (...). Sept. to be ready to this good work, prompt to it, and active in
it; (...), Theod. Settle thy soul, compose thy Affections to this great Work.
But the Original is our Sun, we must set our Watch by that: (...) It may be
read two ways: First, Humble thy self to walk with God: or secondly, Walk
humbly with thy God; submittere se ubi cum Deo res est, In all addresses to
God, to remember humility, Grot.

The sum is, That here is an Invitement to two duties:

1. Preparatory, to an heavenly life, That we call Humiliation, which has
reference to sin, and corrupt nature; which lie in the way, and must be
removed, before we can walk humbly with God.

2. Executive, the exercise after that preparation; this we shall call
Humility: this we build on the latter sense; as the former on the first.

First, Humble thy self to walk. That this is Gods Method, and the Prophets
meaning, appears:

1. If you look upon the words in their Prophetical sense; so they are a
notable preparation to the Gospel which was to be revealed. This Prophet was
contemporary to Isaiah; and he is called by some, Evangelist. Isai. 2.5. O ye
house of Jacob; that is, O ye Jews, who stick so close to your descent from
Abraham and Jacob, and to your legal preeminencies; come ye, leave your former
course; and let us walk in the light of the Lord; that is, accept the tender of
the Gospel. Now the preparation to the Gospel, was Humiliation. John Baptist
was sent before, to prepare the way: he was a rough piece; rough in his
Apparel, rough in his Diet, rough in his Expressions: he tells of a fan, of
fire: he lays the ax to the radical corruptions and diseases of that time;
tells the Pharisees of their hypocrisy, the soldiers of their rapine and
violence; he calls for repentance, and fruits too: he proclaims his employment,
Luke 3.4. Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be
laid low: the crooked shall be made strait, and the rough ways made smoothe.
All these are typical figurative expressions of preparation to the Gospel.
There Is the Prophetical sense.

2. If you look upon the words in the Historical sense, and so you will find
them suitable to the whole tenor of the Scripture; everywhere informing us,
that we must humble our selves, before we can walk humbly with God. In
Naturals, God made something out of nothing; and out of that something, all
things; the evening, before the morning. In Legals, many washings and
lustrations, before oblation. In Religious, Genesis 35.2. Put away the strange
gods that are amongst you, and be clean, and change your garments: and then he
built an altar, verse. 7. Josh. 24.19, the people were in a zealous pang of
devotion; they would serve the Lord all in a hurry: Joshua tells them, that
they cannot serve the Lord; for he is a holy God, and a jealous; he will not
forgive your transgressions, nor your sins. And when they engaged the second
time, verse. 21. Nay, but we will serve the Lord; Joshua shows the necessity of
humbling and reforming, verse. 23. Now therefore, said he, put away the strange
gods. Dan. 4.27. Nebuchadnezzar must break off his sins by righteousness, and
his iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, (the very same duties this Prophet
requires, to do justly, and love mercy) before there can be a lengthening of
his tranquillity. And what should I more say? The time would fail to tell of
David, fitted to walk humbly with God by persecution, S. Paul by blindness,
Augustine by sickness, Nazianzen by shipwreck. In all ages of the Church, this
has been the course with God and good men; only in this last, men brush
through all, into the Adyta of Religion: Then they must (...), go leasurely into
it, pasti jejuniis, poludati Ciliciis, Cypr. there might you see one forlorn
company strewing the pavements, another going to the prisons, to beg pacem of
the Confessors there. But these ways are accounted, as Novatus impiously,
Paulina rudimenta. We are got beyond these; and we must judge of a Christian,
as of a Star, with allowance of his parallax. But, non sic a principio. In the
Historical sense, we find Humiliation before Humility.

3. In the Rational sense. Can we think it possible, or reasonable, that we
can, or ought to pass from Nature to Grace, from service of Sin to service of
God, from Pride to Humility, without Humiliation? He that dies Purple, must dye
two colors first: A true Christian must pass through many waters, before he
have his true tincture. (...); who can make a Christian as fast as they can a
statua? cast the figure all in a day. Nazianzen takes a similitude from his
gown he ware: First, Wool; then carded, then spun, then weaved, dressed and
dyed; and at last cut into small pieces, before a Coat made of it. So (...),
etc. It is meet thy soul be wrought over and over, pass through many
preparations, before thou can be fit to walk with God. Nemo putet nullius
Negotii esse, ut sis animo humili and demisso, nihil aeque laboriosum, Nyss.
Let no man think it a business of no business, to get an humble and demiss
heart and mind; there is nothing more laborious. Thou must be (...), The
stone-cutter of thine own heart. Have ye not seen poor laborers at that work
saw and saw; then add more sand, more water, more weight, yet make but small
proceeding? When you come by, and see them next, spiritualize their employment;
and think, Thus must I saw and pollish my naughty, hard, proud heart, before I
can be sit to be a pillar in the House of God; a Monument fastened in his
Temple of grace here, glory hereafter. Sicut in rudibus areis priusquam serere
incipias, Lact. as in Woodland, the trees must be felled, the briers and thorns
stocked up, the ground cleared, before it can become arable or pasture: so,
vitia prius detrahenda, priusquam semina virtutum injicienda; before the seeds
of any virtue and grace can with hope of an harvest be cast into the soul, the
vices of former conversation must be rooted up.

1. Without this Humiliation, there will be no sense of the slavery of walking
in the ways of sin, 2 Chronicles. 12.8. My wrath shall not be poured out on
Jerusalem by Shishak; nevertheless they shall be his servants, that they may
know my service, and the service of the kingdoms of the countries. The utmost
fury of sin shall not be poured on the soul by Satan; but God leaves some
remembrance of sins tyranny in every holy heart, that he may know Qualia
Qualibus, what, for what he has changed; Sins service, for Gods. Lucian could
not be gotten to return to serve the Statuary (...), mindful of the switch. My
soul has them in remembrance, and is humbled in me, Lam. 3.20.

2. Without this Humiliation, there is no Spiritual relish of the ways of God.
The Spouse smitten and wounded by the watchmen, robbed of her vail by the
keepers of the walls, Cant. 5.7. tells every one she met, that she was sick of
love. When their Judges, i.e. their Deliverers, or the Dispensers of their
Laws, were overthrown in stony places, and their bones lay scattered before the
graves mouth, as chips on the earth where one heweth wood; then they will hear
my words; for they are sweet, Psalm. 141.6. When a poor soul has been in Satan's
sieve well winnowed, like Jonah in the midst of the sea, the weeds of sin
wrapped about his head, the Law with its curse, as in his case, the earth with
her bars was about him for ever; when he has felt the stings of the fiery
serpent, has been at pits brink, even within the hearing of fearful yellings,
and mist of the bottomless pit, and by infinite mercy is brought to land,
delivered from going down to the pit, for he has found a ransom, Job 33.24.
snatched as a brand out of the fire, translated from Law to Gospel, from Curse
to a Crown, from a Slave to a Son: Then (I dare not say, Never till then; Deus
utitur jure suo, goes his own way) is he fitted to walk humbly with God. Then
Jonah will go and preach repentance; Saul enquire, Lord, what will thou have me
to do? When sin is forgiven, and infirmities healed, our life saved from
destruction; then for a Psalm that shall begin, Bless the Lord, O my soul; and
end so too, Bless the Lord, O my soul, Psalm. 103.1. ult. When the Red Sea
before, and the Egyptians behind, and Israel delivered; then sing ye to the
Lord; for he has triumphed gloriously, Exodus 15.2.

3. Without this Humiliation, no walking with God can be constant. Our vows of
New Obedience are kept no better, (not only because we keep not in mind the
occasion of making them, or because we enter the field in; our own strength;
but especially) because they are the resolutions of an unhumbled heart: we
think to stop the mouth of our conscience for impieties past, with purposes and
resolutions for the future. This People here, were guilty of Oppression and
Cruelty: the Prophet moves them to mend all, and, as a sure foundation, bids
them humble. We have done with the first sense, as preparatory in Humiliation
to true Humility; Humble thy self to walk with God.

2. We come to the second sense, the Executive part; so the words are a motion
to Humility. 1. Walk, that is, live, act, behave thy self: There is via morum,
as well as via pedum; of our manners, as of our feet: qua non passibus itur,
sed affectibus; in which we walk, not with paces of our body, but affections of
our mind. 1. There is a way Natural: We set out at our birth, every action a
step in this way; every hour we make some progress. Man walks in a vain
shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain, Psalm. 39. He brought down my strength
in the way, and shortened my days, Psalm. 102.23. At death, they rest in their
beds, Isai. 57.1. And the Metaphor holds; they are said to sit down with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Matthew. 8.11. In this life, we walk; at death, we
rest: at the resurrection we sit; a posture of fixedness, of quietness, of
gracefulness, and authority.

2. A Moral way. Jer. 10. Learn not the way of the heathen. So our Calling is
especially our Way, Prove. 3.6. In all thy ways, acknowledge him, and he shall
direct thy paths.

3. A Spiritual way; either the knowing part of it, Acts 19.9. spoke evil of
that way; verse 23. no small stir about that way, that is, the profession of
Religion: Or the Practick: Psalm. 25.4. Show me thy ways, O Lord, and I will
walk in thy paths. In which sometime we are said to walk with God: so Enoch
(Genesis 6.) walked with God, and was not; for God tool him. Sometime, before God:
So Abraham, Genesis 17.1. Walk before me: know that I am behind thee, to observe
thy gate. We are careful, when we know one that comes after us observes us.
Sometime, to walk after God, Deuteronomy. 13.4. Ye shall walk after the Lord your God;
that is, imitate God; be holy, merciful, just, as your God is. Caput Religionis
est assimilari illi quem colis, Lact. (...). Clem. Alex. (...). 55. To imitate
God is impossible, without serving him; or to serve him, without imitation. 2.
Humbly. The word, in all Languages, has its notation from the Ground.

1. Walk with God, as one mindful of your original, whence you came, and
whither you must go: get and keep thoughts of Mortality in your heart, that
dust I am, and to dust I must return; that I am Abraham's dust and ashes,
Isaiahs grass, and flower of the grass: the grass lasts not many months; but
the fresh green verdure of it, not half that time, Job 16.22. When a few years
are come, then shall I go the way whence I shall not return. St. Paul's
potsheard. But above all, Job's worm: Job 25.6. How much less man, that is a
worm; and the son of man, that is but a worm? Vermis in vita, lumbricus in
morte; greater in life, less in death, then Lumbricus, properly those small
worms that are bred out of the dust that is hardened on the loins of beasts:
Lumbricus, a Lumbis. Sometimes for Mites in cheese; good remembrancers at our
table. Or, worm, and but a worm: (...) and (...). The greatest men are but
greater worms; the least, lesser ones. Lord, what is man? Man is like a thing
of naught; his time passes away as a shadow. The truest Inscription we can
encircle the Medal of Man withal, is that of the Psalm, Universa vanitas est
omnis homo, Psalm. 39.5. (...).

2. Walk with God, as one mindful of this distance of Nature, widened by sin;
so look upon God as a terrible Judge, that will by no means clear the guilty; a
consuming fire, Heb. 12. ult. The Emperors (as we learn in Herodian) used to
have flaming coals of fire carried before them, to testify their devouring
power: But Gods wrath has consumed them; their fire's gone out: Purpuratos and
Purpuratas, Purpurea abripuit Mors: (...): The He Is and She Is in Purple, Purple
Death has taken them all away, even Tire and Sidon, the Region of Purple:
Clem. Alex. (...). 1. And look upon thy self, as dry stubble, fit fucl for
eternal consumings: Think thus; that for sin thou art a prisoner committed when
thou wast born: all thy life long, thou go up and down with thy keeper, thy
Conscience: thy life is given thee for no other end, but to sue out thy Pardon:
Thou know not how soon the grim Serejant will arrest thee, and bring thee to
Judgment, and then Eternity begins, (where millions of years, multiplied by
millions, will not make a minute.) Think of these two Heads; what thou art by
nature, a Worm; by sin, a condemned Malefactor, and be proud if thou can.

Walk humbly:

1. In all the passages of Gods providence to thee. In prosperity, walk humbly,
for tunc solatur te, then he comforts thee: In adversity walk humbly, for tunc
corrigit te, he corrects thee. In the day of adversity consider, Eccles. 7.14.
In youth walk humbly, Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, Eccl.
12.1. In middle Age, Take me not away in the midst of mine Age, Psalm. 102.24.
In old Age walk humbly, when the Harbingers are come, the Almond tree
flourishes, Forsake me not, O God, in my old age, when I am gray headed, Psalm.
71.18. Simihi Irascatur Deus, number ego illi redirascar? non utique, sed pavebo,
and Contremiscam and Veniam deprecabor; si arguet me, non redarguetur a me, sed
Justificabitur; Si Judicaverit me, non illum Judicabo, sed Adorabo; si
Dominatur, oportet me servire; si imperat, me parere, Ber. 38. in Cant. Thus
walk humbly in life; yea in death too, walk humbly: Reject all your prayers,
hearings, fastings, receivings, and take heaven as a gift, Christ as a gift,
such a gift, as the Giver no way bound to give, or the receiver, to receive. no
way likely to be helped, that there is so great want of outward Reverence in
our Religious addresses to our God: but (...). for jam nec mala nostra: nec
Remedia pati possumus, Live. we cannot endure our disease, nor the cure neither.

3. The Motive, or Engagement, Thy God; That made thee, brought thee out of the
land of Egypt, that delivered thee from Baalams curse, that honored thee with
Prophets, and with his Law, that has made many Covenants with thee. But, oh,
how Redemption heighteneth this Relation! That has redeemed thee by the blood
of his Son, called thee by his grace, given thee many tokens of his Love, Word,
Worship, Sacraments, Spirit, that has engaged all to give himself to thee for
all eternity. Say not, He is my Father, therefore I may walk boldly with him;
but, My father, therefore walk humbly: Say not, He spares me, therefore
approves my Impiety; but say, he waits for my Repentance. Take heed of that
profane speech, heri feci Impunis, yesterday I sinned and was not punished,
hodie facio, to day, I Will do it again, and cras faciam, and to morrow too.

Thy God. This appropriating quality of faith is not so new, as the
Pontificians would make it, (...), Chrysostom.

Thy, takes away all scruples of the Impossibility, Isai. 33.4. The sinners in
Zion are afraid, who amongst us can dwell with devouring fire; sin cannot, but
humbled sinners may.

Secondly, All scruples of Gods unwillingness. Thy, i. e. Reconciled God, who
has set out a way: His Son, a light; his Word, a guide; his Spirit inwardly,
his Ministers (like Statuae Mercuriales) outwardly, the examples of his
servants that were undefiled in the way.

Thirdly, Of any danger, Isai. 35.8. There shall be an high way, and a way,
etc. No Lion shall be there, etc.

Fourthly, Of wanting our Reward, si tam bonus, es Deus te sequentibus, oh quam
es te Consequentibus! If the Colony be such, what is the City? Nyss. If Rebecca
be so rich in Jewels at the espousals, how at the Marriage? si adeo dulcescit
promulsis, oh quantum caena! Fulg.

4. The Poyse, or the Inforcement:

1. This is good. Yea, the Good thing that mankind so seeks after. Its good in
it self, sure no higher honor, no greater perfection, no such pleasure, as to
walk humbly with Him, who is the Infinite and eternal Good. 2. Its good for
me. The best course I can take. Henoch walked with God, and he was not, for God
took him, Genesis 5.24. by it, he became Candidatus Immortalitatis, a probationer
of eternity, in tempore non suo, before his time. The time would fail, to speak
of Abraham, Caleb, Moses, David, Psalm. 17. ult. As for me, I Will behold thy face
in righteousness, and when I awake up after thy likeness, I shall be satisfied
with it. He thought is his best course to be a holy man, and to walk humbly
with God. So did Asaph, Psalm. 73. Mihi bonum est adhaerere Deo, It is good for
me to hold me fast by God.

2. This God requires. Of Adam God required a Reverential submission, and
walking humbly, and of the Angels in heaven, they both of them practiced it; of
us poor Mortals, miserable sinners, surely much more. It is not then an
Arbitrary, but a necessary duty. God requires it, That you should walk humbly
with your God.

3. This God has showed cleatly to be his Will, by Prophets, by his Son, by
his Apostles, by the Ministry in all Ages. The Word is nigh thee, even in thy
mouth, and in thy heart, and this is the Word of Faith which we preach, Romans
10.8.

Sedenti super solium, and Agno, sit gloria and Honor in aeternum. Amen.
FINIS.

