OBSERVATIONS UPON Some particular PERSONS and PASSAGES, in a Book lately made
public; ENTITLED, A COMPLETE HISTORY of the LIVES and REIGNS OF MARY Queen
of SCOTLAND, AND OF HER SON JAMES, The Sixth of Scotland, and the First of
England, France and Ireland. Written by a Lover of the Truth.

Mat. 7. 5. First cast out the beam out of thine own eye, and then shall thou
see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye. Ecclus. 4. 25, 26. In
no wise speak against the truth, but be abashed of the error of thine
ignorance. Be not ashamed to confess thy sins, and force not the course of a
river. LONDON, Printed for GA. BEDELL and THO. COLLINS, at the Middle Temple
Gate, Fleet Street, 1656.

THere is one Mr. Sanderson, who has lately written a book which he calls a
Complete History of Mary Queen of Scotland, and James (her son) the sixth of
Scotland, and first of England: In which, he has compiled, not a History, but
a Libel against all the good men and good actions of those times, and with most
servile flattery, praised and exalted the bad, both men and matters. His whole
book is a rapsody of notes and scattered papers, from other men, collected
without either order or method; being exceedingly defective both in time, place
and nominations: and written in so unseemly and disjoynted a style, that you
may easily perceive he has taken up other men's words, without understanding
their matter; and unless it be where he rails on persons of honor (which he
does plainly, and often, though sometimes very falsely) his language is dark,
harsh, and unintelligible. But that you may the better know what ware you are
like to have out of this man's shop, I shall give you his character, and trace
him from his parent. His father was a Gentleman, though poor, (but that I take
to be no sin, though this man does, and how he can clear himself from that
offense, I know not) he was of kin to Sir Walter Raleigh, and in the time of
his prosperity and greatness was his servant, and entrusted with receiving
great sums of money for him, out of his Office of Wines, and other his places,
by which he became in arrears to Sr. Walter Raleigh, in diverse great sums:
which after his troubles (being a prisoner in the Tower) Sr. Walter sent unto
Sanderson for; But he was so far from paying them (presuming that Raleigh was
there friendlesse) that he pretended Sr. Walter Raleigh should owe him 2000 li.
Whereupon Sir Walter in great anger, commenced a suit against Sanderson, which
was managed by his servant and solicitor, John Shelbury; And Sanderson being
overthrown and found in arrears to Sir Walter Raleigh, in very great sums, was
cast into prison, and there dyed a poor contemptible beggar. And hence
originally sprang all the spleen and malice of this man to Sir Walter Raleigh.
For this man himself, he lived, for ought I could ever hear, at first very
obscurely, and (as I conjecture by some passages in his book) studied Hiraldry,
for he often brings in many impertinent digressions to show his skill that way.
But afterward, he tells us he was servant to the Lord Ross, in his Spanish
Embassy; a fit servant, no doubt, for such a Master: For what that Lord was, I
shall not need to mention, it being so notoriously known to most men yet
living. After this he tells us, he was at the siege of Breda, under the Earl of
Oxford; to whom in his book he was pleased to give the title of a deboyst Lord;
with many other unhandsome Epithites. But I cannot learn that this man had ever
any relation to the Court (more then at large) until he became Secretary to the
Earl of Holland, when he was Chancellor of Cambridg, where he behaved himself
so corruptly, that he was with great disgrace and scorn, turned out of his
place, for taking Bribes of diverse Scholars to make them Doctors, and
Batchelors of Divinity, when the King came to an entertainment at Cambridg: So
that for a long time after, these men were by every boy called, Sandersons
Doctors. A pretty while after this, he married the late Queens Landresse, and
so might perchance creep again into her chamber below stairs; but for any other
employment in Court, after his Secretary-ship, I could never hear he had any:
And now you may guess what liquor you are like to draw out of a vessel thus
seasoned.

I shall proceed to examine some particulars in his book, wherein I shall
absolutely decline saying any thing concerning the Queen of Scots, or that part
of the Story, both the errors, and excellencies of that Lady, and the
inevitable causes of her deplorable destiny, being sufficiently known to all.
Only I shall observe, that in some passages of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, he
gives a harsher censure upon Essex, and his offenses, then any writer
heretofore. As likewise in fol. 128. he seems to intimate out of some
discourse between Davison the Secretary, and Queen Elizabeth, That she would
have had the Queen of Scots poisoned, by Paulet and Drury her keepers; which
they refused. But is it likely Kings should want fit ministers for such
mischiefs, when common men can hire them daily? I think not; and if they
refused, others might easily have bin had; But this is a scandal raised upon
that excellent Princess, which I never heard, or read of before. There is no
Innocence so clear, which this man's pen will not slubber: For what need she
have gone so foully to work to take away her life, whom the whole Parliament of
Eng. petitioned her to execute? which this Author confeseth, fol. 117. and I
hope it is no secret, that her death proceeded even from the Scots themselves;
yea even from those whom K. James sent to solicit for her: Witness that speech
of the Master of Gray, tua non mordet. As for her Son, King James, truly I
believe none will deny him to be a Learned Prince, and of great experience,
which the troubles and vexations he had endured in his youth, by his own
undutiful and headstrong Scots subjects, had well taught him. But it cannot be
denied, that he failed even in that which he most boasted of, his King craft;
for he never treated with any Prince, or State in Christendom, that he was not
overreached; he spent more in frivilous Embassies, then would have raised an
army to have settled his Children in their inheritance: and being wooed, and
courted to have been head of all the Protestant Princes in Christendom, (which
would have empowered him to give the Law to all this part of the world) he
refused; and inclined to their enemies, whereby (as much as in him lay) he
ruined the one, and advanced the other.

And whereas his accession to this Kingdom has been thought by some the
greatest happiness that ever befell the Nations, it has proved (by what secret
predetermination of the allseeing God no man knows) the greatest misfortune
to both. For after a miserable and wasting civil war, we see his posterity
(deserving Princes in their own persons) overthrown, and cast out of their
inheritance, and (according to humane reason) very unlikely to repossesse it.

And for his own haereditary Kingdom (who were a people famous in war, and
high in reputation,) they are become the most despicable conquered people, upon
the face of the whole earth. They who within this twenty years looked upon
themselves as conquerors of this nation; they who in the last two Kings Reigns
had all the power, riches, offices, marriages, wealth and greatness, within
their command in both Kingdoms, are now ruined at home, both in Kirk and
State. The former (unto which by fair or foul play, they endeavored to model
all the Reformed Churches of the West) has now, no where a being: And the
latter subjugated to a foreign power. All their great and Ancient Families (of
which they so much boasted) even plucked up by the roots, and those few
remaining, so poor, as they can not show their faces. This is the Lords doing,
and it is mavelous in our eyes; but according to humane judgment, much of
this may be attributed to the greatness, power, and prodigality of that
nation, in their access to England, (whereby they became insolent and proud,
apted thereby for any undertaking; and perchance, for some falsehoods and
treacheries, even to their own native Princes;) to King James his dying in
distaste with the Parliament; to his often deserting the Protestant cause, both
at home and abroad: And to his leaving the Crown poor, and in debt, whereby his
Successor was often put to his shifts, and forced to open the purs-strings of
his Subjects, whereby he shut their hearts toward him, and encouraged them to
demand such things, as nothing but extreme poverty and necessity, could enforce
a Prince to grant.

But enough of this, I shall only now take notice of such aspersions as this
Author is pleased to bestow on particular persons of honor and worth, as if he
meant throughout his whole book, to make it his business to rail at good men,
and defend the bad.

And first we light upon Cobham, and Raleighs Treason: where in the character
of Raleigh, he allows him a grand enemy to the Spaniard, and opposer of the
peace; yet immediately after, believes him a conspirer with the Spaniard; but
tells us not in what particular he should have served him. Fol. 284. he tells
us that the seventh of November. 1603 was the day of Raleighs arraignment, and
the Jury called to the Bar, being a Middlesex Jury, against whose persons he
did not except. It Is true, he did not, for he knew not any one of their faces;
and being confident of his own innocence, only wished they might have honesty,
and understanding; both which they wanted. But there was appointed for him
another Jury, the foreman of which was Sir Michal Stanhope, the next, Sir
Edward Darcy, the next, Sir William Killegrew, all men of honor, and near
servants to the late Queen Elizabeth; But these being found not for their turn,
they were all changed over night, and those others put in their places. The
arraignment is in Print, therefore I shall not trouble my self with the
particulars of it. I shall only demand why Cobham was not brought face to face
to accuse Raleigh, being under the same roof with him, in so much, that King
James himself taking notice of it, said, that if Cobham could have said any
thing against Raleigh, they would have brought him from Constantinople to have
accused him. And I would fain know, what it was that ever Cobham accused
Raleigh of; for yet I never could. Likewise, whether ever any man was condemned
by a single witness, and he not present neither. And it is certain, that
letter of Cobhams under his own hand written the night before his trial,
wherein upon his salvation he clears Raleigh from all manner of Treasons,
against the King or State, is yet extant, and was produced at a Committee of
Parliament, by Mr. Carew Raleigh. But you may perceive the spleen of this
Author to Raleigh, in that he says, he tired the Court and Jury with
impertinencies, when as all other men present at his arraignment, thought never
man spoke better for himself; nay diverse which came thither his enemies, went
away with pity, and commiseration of his injuries and misfortunes; and even
Cook the Attorney himself, being retired into a garden to take some air, when
his man brought him word that the Jury had condemned Raleigh of Treason,
answered, surely thou art mistaken; for I my self accused him but of misprision
of Treason; and this relation upon the word of a Christian, I have received
from Sir Edward Cook's own mouth.

And since we are now fallen upon this business, we will take it all together,
and see what he says concerning Raleighs last voyage, and death, though it
happened 14 years after. Fol. 459 and Anno. 1617 he tells us, that Sir Walter
Raleigh, wearied with long imprisonment, and having there spent his time well
in the History of the World, made his petition more passable to the K. whose
love to learning, granted him now at last his liberty, and not long after gave
him leave to wander after a design, to the Western world, where be had been in
several Climats before. Whereas it is well known, King James forbad Sir Walter
Raleighs book, for some passages in it which offended the Spaniard, and for
being two plain with the faults of Princes in his Preface. Sir William St.
John's, and Sir Edward Villiers, the (...) of Buckinghams half-Brother, procured
Sir Walter Raleighs liberty, and had 1500 li. for their labor, and for 700 li.
more, offered him his full pardon, and liberty not to go his Voyage, if he
pleased; both which he refused; and the rather, because he was told by the Lord
Chancellor Verulam (who was no fool, nor no ill Lawyer) That his commission
from the King under the great seal of England (wherein the King made him
General of his forces by Land and Sea, and gave him Marshal law over his
people) was as good a pardon for all former offenses, as the law of England
could afford him.

And for the aspersions which he lays upon his Voyage; as that it was a trick
only to get his liberty, and that he knew of no Mine; If so, Raleigh was a mad
man to hazard his life in such a long Sea journey, and to expend above 10000
li. of his own estate (as it is well known upon oath he did) when he might have
avoided that trouble and stayed at home for the disbursing 700 li. But it is
most certain, that Raleigh did really and truly believe in the mine, and so did
Kemish too, upon good and just grounds, having had a true trial of the ore, and
not with false and Chemical tricks, as this trifling liar would intimate.

But for the particulars of these passages, and the true cause of the failing
of that Voyage, I shall refer you to Sir Walter Raleighs own Apology, now in
print, and to be had every where; upon the verity of which he took his death.
And for this Authors base aspersion, and surmise upon the death of Kemish, it
was so well known to all those who were in the ship, how, and in what manner he
killed himself, (first shooting himself with a Pistol, and then stabbing
himself with a knife, to dispatch, lest he should be prevented upon the noise
of the Pistol, his Cabin door being locked on the in side,) that there can be
nothing more plain and evident, then that he killed himself: But this unworthy
Author will seek scandals from every thing. So he says, he set out this Voyage
with other men's money; when it is well known (though he had many adventures)
that he received 8000 li. from the Countess of Bedford in ready money, which
he had lent her; that he sold a house and land at Micham in Surry, for 2500 li.
all which money, and more, he spent every farthing in this Voyage; for ten
ships (and he had no less) with their men, ammunition, and victuals, would not
be set out with the adventures of a few fifty, and hundred pounds alone.

This Author likewise says; That Raleigh had but a mean fortune, which he
meant to advantage by this Voyage. He may thank K. James for the meannesse of
his fortune, who took away Sherborne from him for want of a word, after he had
been 7 years in the Tovver, and gave it to his favorite, Summerset; But when
K. James came into England, Raleigh was Lord Warden of the Stanneries, Lord
Leivetenant of Devonshire and Cornwall, Captain of the Guard, and Governor of
Jersey; he had a long lease of the Office of Wines; he had most of the Earl of
Desmonds estate in Ireland; he had the daughter and heir of Basset to his
ward, to marry to his son; her estate vvorth 3000 li. per. an. who was taken
from him, and married to Mr. Henry Haward, who dyed suddenly at the table;
and she after married to the Earl of Newcastle, who professed he would never
have married her, if young Walter Raleigh had been alive; conceiving her before
God to be his wife, for they were married as much as children could be; he
had likewise Sherborn, which was lately valued by the State at 5000 li.
per-an. and this was no beggarly estate, all which he lost for his supposed
treason: And it is certain that many years after, he and Cobham being
prisoners, upon the suit of Q. Ann (being thereunto pressed by Sr. W. R.)
Cobham was re-examined before some of the Lords of the Council at the Tovver,
and did clear Sir W. R. from all treasons whatsoever.

It Is likewise true, that the whole design and intention of his Voyage, was by
K. James (under Raleighs own hand) delivered to Gondomare, and thereupon there
was 300 Spaniards sent to St. Thomae, which made that resistance there that
was: and Raleigh found his own letter, under his own hand, in the Governor of
St. Thomas Closet, which letter he brought back, and showed it to the Lords of
the Counsel.

Now whereas he says, They had matter enough to take away his life in this his
last business, why did the Lords of the Council then, for a whole year
together examine him at the Tower every week, to pick out what they could to
condemn him? and yet, when all was done, they were fain to tell the King, that
if he would take away his life, he must take advantage of his former
condemnation, which was accordingly done.

The next scandalous passage we meet with, is fol. 365. concerning Will. Earl
of Pembrook, and Philip Earl of Montgomerie his brother, who he says were men
of considerable descents, though of no fame in their merits; when all men know
William Pembrook was a man of Honor, Valor, and Learning; and as well beloved
as any man in this Nation. But he leaves not the other brother so, but farther
says, though the King was no quarreller, yet he hated a coward. (Strange! that
the King should hate that in his favorite, which was so predominant in
himself) and turned Montgomery out of his affection, for being switcht by a
mean Gentleman (Ramsey) a Scot, at a public horse-race. T^ough this favorite
was urged to revenge, and backed by the English, forty to one, to defend him:
he basely put it up to his death, and the dishonor of a Gentleman. That this
passage in the main parts of it is true, cannot be denied; but aggravated with
these circumstances, most slanderous and base, and in every part of it most
unfit to be left to posterity in Print, being a particular and malicious blot
upon a noble family, and no way fit to be recorded by a Chronicler: and it is
most notoriously false that the King deserted Montgomery for this action; for
though he were then in fancy with Carr, yet after this he gave Montgomery
greater gifts, and was kinder to him then ever he had been before in all his
life; and the rather, for putting up this injury, lest it should have bred a
national quarrel (which it had like to have done) and which King James dreaded
above all things in the world; for it is certain there was a sword put into
Montgomeries hand (being in an hunting posture without weapon) to revenge
himself; and he sought for Ramsey all over the field, but he was conveyed out
of the way by the Scots; and Mr. Pinchback by name, said to Montgomery, My
Lord, let us break our fast with them here (meaning the Scots) and sup with
them at London. For which speech King James ever hated Pinchback to his dying
day. Ramsey was committed close prisoner to the Tower, and there lay until he
had made all possible submissions that could be invented; and it is well known
that King James was always kind to Montgomery to the very last, as this Author
himself confesses in another place of his book, fol. 592 therefore a false and
malicious suggestion, merely brought in to brand Montgomery with a lasting
disgrace.

The next business we shall take notice of, is, the poisoning of Overbury,
wherein he strives all he can to extenuate that foul murder, both in Summerset
and his Wife; and magnifying the justice which was done therein, forgets that
Summerset and his Wife, who were principals, and drew in all the rest (for
money and rewards) were pardoned, and only the poor accessaries hanged. And
what an unworthy character does he give of that poor unfortunate Gentleman
Overbury, saying, That he was of an impudent and Thrasonical disposition, that
he had little in him that was solid, for religion or moral virtue, and that he
was naught, and corrupt, making him the baud to Summersets lust with Essex his
Wife; and making him brag of that employment? when as all men that ever I met
with, have ever held Overbury to have been a sober, religious, and learned
Gentleman, and so it appears by what has come out in public of his writing;
besides, he does in this disparage Summerset, whom he would defend, by making
him choose so weak, and vicious a person, for his most intimate friend, and
indeed his governor. Happily Overbury might have some tincture of pride in him,
(as indeed who would not, that had the power and interest of such a favorite
at his command; that commanded the King himself, and often was known to
threaten him if he denied what he desired?) But that he should be his baud to
Essex his Wife, is most unlikely, when all the world knows he was her greatest
enemy, and that his hatred to her, and the House of the Hawards was his ruin.
How does this passage agree with that which follows after, wherein this Author
says (in the relation of this Ladies Divorce from Essex) that she was a pure
Virgin, and so delivered in upon oath from the inspection of diverse Ladies? But
this Author often forgets and contradicts himself: Happily Overbury had hindered,
or thwarted this Gentleman in some illegal projects (of which they say, he had
always store) which he had offered to Summerset, and therefore he is not only
contented his body should have been poisoned whilst alive, but he will (as far
as in him lies, if any would believe such a fellow) murder his fame too, after
his death.

I shall next only mind you of a letter which he sets down fol. 421 of
Summersets to the King, wherein there is this passage, speaking concerning his
estate, which he desired the King to spare. And I may say further, that the Law
has not bin so severe upon the ruin of innocent posterity, nor yet cancelled
nor cut off the merits of Ancestors, before the politic hand of State had
contrived it into these several forms, as fitted to their ends and government.
And yet this man (Summerset) could beg all the lands of Raleigh, could beg
the 10000 li. fine of the Earl of Northumberlands, and could enjoy the greatest
part of the forfeited Lands of the Earl of Westmorland, without any scruple.
But we are always blind in our own affairs.

And in fol. 429 I take notice of another scandal which he throws upon his
quondam Master, Henry Rich, Baron Kensington, and Earl of Holland, scoffing at
him for imitating the Earl of Carlisle, in his expensive ways, and calling him
the natural son of the then Earl of Warwick; which why he should do, I can not
imagine, for certainly, the Lady Rich was the then lawful wife of the Lord
Rich, after Earl of Warwick, and if any of her children were to be styled
natural, it were those which she had by the Earl of Devonshire, not these by
Rich: For as this Author says in another place, King James told Devonshire,
that he had gotten a fair Wife, with a foul soul; But no doubt this Author had
a pick at Holland, for turning him out of his service, as is mentioned before.

I omit his slight character of Abbot Archbishop of Canterbury, scoffing at his
judgment in the business of Essex his Divorce, calling him Puritan, and a
fomentor of factions: His despising our Nation in the expedition of the
Palatinate, branding them with the fag end of an old Ballad; saying, they went
abroad to fight, and so came home again; as if they had only danced a morice
thither; when it is well known, they defended Manheinu, and Frankendale nobly,
and Hydelburge with so much honor, that Sir Gerard Herbert (Commander in
chief there) lost his life at push of Pike.

How contemptuously does he speak of the Earls, Oxford, and Essex, terming them
young men, apprehending no danger, and so ignorant, they knew not how to avoid
any? How improbably does he cast the compiling of the History of the Council of
Trent upon a Protestant, thereby to vilify the work, as partial? fol. 471 And
how does he throughout his whole book, contemn and vilify, both the
Reformers, and Reformation of Religion?

I shall now only give you an Item, of some few of his mistakes. He tells us
that King Hen. 8 was a Lutheran, when all Story assures us, he lived and dyed a
Papist. It Is true, he put down Monasteries for his own profit, and he declyned
the Popes Supremacy for his own pleasure; and for defending of these, he put
Sir Thomas Moor, and Bishop Fisher to death, with many others: But at the same
time, he put multitudes to death, for not subscribing and submitting to the six
Articles, which were all of them rank Popery.

He tells us, fol. 487 that all our marriages with Spain have been unfortunate
to this Crown; and then ravels into the story of the Black Prince, as if he had
married in Spain; but if he will read our English Chronicles, he shall find, to
speak the truth, (though I love not the nation) that the Spanish wives were
good; and that it was the French wives which proved so unfortunate to our
Kings. Such was Elenor, Wife to Hen. 2, who set all his Sons together by the
ears with him. Such was Isabel, Wife to Ed. 2, who for the love of Mortimer,
suffered her husband to be miserably, and cruelly murdered. And such was
Margaret, Wife to Hen. 6, who by her pride, perverseness, and evil government,
was one of the chief causes in the ruin of that meek and gentle Prince; whom
she lived to see murdered in the Tovver, and her only Son, the Prince,
stabbed to death at Tewxbury field, and her self sent home poor and miserable,
to her more poor and beggarly Father, in Provence: I need name no more.

Another mistake he has concerning the Duke of Buckinghams talking with
Yelverton in the Tower; which surely the Duke never did: But that Sir William
Balfore should tell him so, as being then Lieutenant of the Tower, can not be,
for Balfore came in to be Lieutenant, after Sir George More, which was long
after this time.

Another such mistake he has in point of time, relating the public combat,
which should have bin between the Lord Rey, and David Ramsey, which he says,
was in the time of King James; when in truth, it was in the Reign of King
Charles, and after the Marquis Hamiltons expedition into Germany.

Speaking of the troubles of the Earl of Middlesex, he tells us, that to his
knowledge the Duke bought Chelsey house; for the truth of this, I refer my self
to the Widow Countess of Middlesex, now living, who has told me many times,
that the Duke had Chelsey for nothing, and that her husband never received one
penny for it.

In another story, he inverts the same just upon Middlesex; saying, that he
bought Copthall of the Countess of Winchelsey, when I my self know very well,
that the Lady gave Copthall, furniture and all, to Middlesex and the Duke of
Lenox, to be made Countess; and Middlesex indeed bought out the Dukes estate;
but his mistakes, ignorances, and wilful errors, are infinite, both in the
language, and the matter. I shall therefore conclude with that wholesome advice,
which once that Grave and Learned Lord Chancellor Elsemore, gave to Sir Edmond
Scony, presenting him with a book, in hope he would have given him something,
(being then very poor, his father yet alive) which book, the Chancellor having
read over, says to Sir Edmond: Sir Edmond Scony, you gave me a book, for which
I will give you [I humbly thank your Lordship, cries Sir Edmond] I will give
you good counsel; Read more, and write less, Sir Edmond; for indeed it is a
very foolish book: So say I, Read more, and write less, Mr. Sanderson; for
indeed it is not only a very foolish, but a very false, and scandalous book,
far fitter for the fire, then for the Press.

FINIS.

