To the Supreme Authority of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND Assembled in
Parliament;
The Case of Lievt. Coll. Rosworme.
1. IN the infancy of the late Troubles he approved himself cordial and
faithful to the Parliament, and did them eminent service in defending the Town
of Manchester against the Earl of Darby, and the Kings Forces, which he
successfully performed to the wonder both of friends and foes.

2. He prosecuted that success to the utter subduing of the Enemy in all that
County.

3. In all the passages of his Service he cannot be touched in the least degree
with Free Quarter, plunder, or any one act of unfaithfulness and injustice.

4. He has refused great Offers of Money and Preferments from the Enemy, and
resolutely opposed all ways used to corrupt his fidelity.

5. He has upon all occasions readily performed all Requests and Commands,
tending to the advancement of the Public Service and Safety.

6. The Town of Manchester, for his remarkable and faithful Service, did settle
upon him an Annuity of 60 li. per annum, for his and his wives life, which was
paid the two first years, but since that time they have neglected payment
thereof, and now lastly for these 2 years together wherein he has not received
one penny notwithstanding the recommendation of the House in an Order Dated,
Sept. 4. 1644. And the special request of the Council of State, in a Letter
Dat. July 7. 1649. Nor can he recover it at Law, not being a free Denizon.

This business has been examined by a Committee of the Council of State, and
found true; and they further find, that the sum of 776 li. and 15 s. is due
unto him for his Arrears, of which the Council of State to supply his
necessities have paid him 30 li.

He has attended above two years for relief, which has cost him above two
hundred pound, which he has taken up on Credit, and is brought to so low a
condition, that he, his wife and children had perished, if they had not been
relieved by strangers. Which he takes the more to heart, that he upon many
grounds observes, that his relief is retarded and obstructed, by the malicious
underminings of some masked Enemies of the Commonwealth, whose treachery he
has most clearly manifested in a little Naration, Printed in August 1649. Whom
if they dare to appear with an Accusation, he desires to Answer.

There has been a Report on his behalf from the Council of State ever since 1
December. 1649. for his Relief.

His humble Suit is, That you will further the speedy reporting of the
business, and his Relief, as you shall find just.

