A TREATISE OF HUMILITY

Published by E. D. Parson (sequestered.)

1 PET. 5. ver. 5. Be clothed with Humility: for God resists the proud, and
gives grace to the humble.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Johnson at the Golden Key in S. Paul's Churchyard.
1654.

To the Reader.
IN every age and nation, the sins that provoke God to wrath are many, and the
Seers or Remembrancers (so are Gods Ministers called, and so they are) do sigh
and mourn for them, yea and forewarn and cry out against them, as in Ezekiel. 9.4.
The sins of this our age and nation, which have provoked the Lord our God to
pour out the vialls of his wrath upon us, though not easily numbered or named,
yet that one only sin of Pride is so high, so presumptuous, and so general,
that even for this sin alone all the judgments which we have already felt, or
do hereafter fear, are most due and just.

Blessed be the Lord our God, who has hitherto in mercy, as a father,
chastised us for our amendment; and not in fury, as a Judge, utterly consumed
us.

And as we acknowledge his justice and mercy in punishing us, so we take notice
of his wisdom in choosing such instruments to punish us, men of mean and low
rank and of common parts and abilities. By these he does admonish all the
honorable, valiant, learned, and wise men of this nation; and as it were write
our sin in the character of our punishment; and in the low condition of these
instruments of his anger and displeasure, the rod of his wrath, he would abate
and punish our great pride.

As Remembrancers, we have a double office on which we attend. The one, to call
and cry unto God night and day, with humble prayers and tears, to be merciful
to his people, and to spare those which he has redeemed with his precious
blood, and not to be angry with them for ever. The other, to call and cry unto
the whole nation, the proud and bold punishers with their vizours or forms of
godliness, as well as the punished, to humble themselves, to repent, to fast,
weep and mourn for our many and great wickednesses, especially for our Pride.

It may please God that, by his blessing, this little book may prove as a
sovereigne poultise or medicine to assuage the swelling tumor of pride in the
hearts of all them that will humble themselves so far as to read it. David's
stone and sling which slew proud Goliath, and by that means overthrew the pride
and gallantry of a great army, gives some encouragement to me, that even the
pride of the Army, of the City, of the whole nation, may be in some measure
lessened and abated by this small book: wherein the reader will find all the
kinds and degrees of our pride plainly described, sadly lamented sharply
reproved; and thereby the necessity and excellency of the heavenly grace and
sweet virtue of Humility, affectionately persuaded unto, and commended.

The God of power, wisdom and mercy vouchsafe to give his blessing to this
weak means, as prays

Thine in Christ Jesus, W. B.

The Contents.
Chap. I. OF the excellency of the virtue of Humility, and of the need we have
thereof. page 1 Chap. II. That Humility is the foundation of all virtue. page 6
Chap. III. Wherein it is declared more particularly how Humility is the
foundation of all virtues, and this is done by discoursing of the chief of
them. page 10 Chap. IIII. Of the particular necessity which they have of this
virtue, who profess to procure the salvation of their neighbors souls. page
17 Chap. V. Of the first degree of Humility, which is for a man to think meanly
of himself. page 32 Chap. VI. Of the knowledge of a man's self, which is the
root, and the necessary and only means for the obtaining of Humility. page 36
Chap. VII. Of a most principal means for a man's knowing himself, and obteining
Humility, which is the consideration of his sins. page 41 Chap. VIII. How we
are to exercise our selves in the knowledge of what we are, that so we may not
be dejected or dismayed. page 46 Chap. IX. Of the great benefit and profit
which grows by this exercise of a man's knowing himself. page 52 Chap. X. That
the knowledge of ones self does not cause dismay, but rather gives courage and
strength. page 58 Chap. XI. Of other great benefits and advantages which grow
by the exercise of a man's knowledge of himself. page 62 Chap. XII. How much it
concerns us to be exercised in the knowledge of our selves. page 65 Chap.
XIII. Of the second degree of Humility: and here it is declared wherein this
degree consists. page 74 Chap. XIV. Of some degrees and steps whereby a man may
rise to the perfection of this second degree of Humility. page 82 Chap. XV. Of
the fourth step, which is to desire to be disesteemed and despised, and to be
glad thereof. page 89 Chap. XVI. That the perfection of Humility, and of all
other virtues, consists in performing the acts thereof with delight and
cheerfulness; and how much this imports toward our perseverance in virtue.
page 93 Chap. XVII. Of some means for the obtaining of this second degree of
Humility, and particularly of the example of Christ our Lord. page 98 Chap.
XVIII. Of some humane considerations, and reasons whereby we are to help our
selves for being humble. page 104 Chap. XIX. Of other humane reasons which will
help us to be humble. page 109 Chap. XX. That the certain way for a man to be
valued, and esteemed even by men, is to give himself to virtue and humility.
page 116 Chap. XXI. That Humility is the means to obtain inward peace of mind,
and that without it this cannot be had. page 123 Chap. XXII. Of another kind of
means more efficacious for the obtaining the virtue of Humility, which is the
exercise thereof. page 132 Chap. XXIII. That we must take heed of speaking any
such words as may redound to our own praise. page 141 Chap. XXIV. In what
manner we are to make a particular examination of our consciences, concerning
the virtue of Humility. page 146 Chap. XXV. How it may be compatible with
Humility, to be willing to be accounted of and esteemed by men. page 157 Chap.
XXVI. Of the third degree of Humility. page 166 Chap. XXVII. It is declared
wherein the third degree of Humility consists. page 174 Chap. XXVIII. The
foresaid truth is more declared. page 179 Chap. XXIX. The third degree of
Humility is further declared, and how it grows from thence, that the true
humble man esteems himself to be the least and worst of all. page 184 Chap.
XXX. How good and holy men may with truth esteem themselves less then others,
yea, and affirm themselves to be the greatest sinners of the world. page 192
Chap. XXXI. That this third degree of Humility is a good means to overcome all
temptations, and to obtain the perfection of all the virtues. page 202 Chap.
XXXII. That Humility is not contrary to Magnanimity, but rather that it is the
foundation and cause thereof. page 207 Chap. XXXIII. Of the great benefits and
advantages which are in this third degree of Humility. page 216 Chap. XXXIV. Of
the great mercies and favors which God shows to the humble, and why he exalts
them so high. page 224 Chap. XXXV. How much it imports us to betake our selves
to Humility, to supply thereby whatsoever is wanting to us in virtue and
perfection, and to the end that God may not humble us by punishing us. page 229
A TREATISE OF THE VIRTUE OF HVMILITY.
CHAP: I. Of the excellency of the virtue of Humility, and of the need we have
thereof.
LEarn of me, says Jesus Christ our Savior, for I am meek and lowly in heart,
and you shall find rest unto your souls; Mat. 11.29. The whole life of Christ
our Lord on earth, was led for our instruction, and he was the Master, and
teacher of all the virtues, but especially of this of Humility, which he
desired chiefly, that we should learn. And this consideration alone, may well
serve to make us understand, both the great excellency of this virtue, and the
great need also which we have thereof, since the Son of God himself came down
from Heaven to earth, to teach us the practice, and to make himself our
instructor therein; and that, not only by word of mouth, but much more
particularly, by his actions. For indeed his whole life was an example, and
lively pattern of Humility.

Saint Basil discoursing of the whole life of Christ our Lord even from his
birth, observes and shows, how all his actions served to teach us this virtue
in most particular manner. He would needs (says he) be born of a mother who
was poor in a poor open stable, and be laid in a manger, and be wrapped in
miserable clouts; be would needs be circumcised like a sinner, and fly into
Egypt like a poor weak creature, and be baptized amongst Publicans and sinners,
like one of them. And afterward in the course of his life, when they had a mind
to do him honor, and take him up for their King, he hid himself: but when they
put dishonor, and affronts upon him, he then presented himself to them: when
he was honored and admired by men, yea and even by persons who were possessed
with the devil, he commanded them to hold their peace; but when they thought
fit to reproach and scorn him, he held his peace. And near the end of his life,
that he might leave us this virtue by his last Will and Testament, he confirmed
it by that so admirable example of washing his Disciples feet, as a so by
undergoing that so ignominious death of the Cross. Saint Bernard says, The
Son of God abased and diminished him elf, by taking our nature upon him, and he
would have his whole life to be a pattern of Humility, so to teach us by
actions, that which he would also teach us by words: A strange manner of
instruction. But why Lord must so high a Majesty be abased so low? To the end
that from henceforth there may not so much as one man be found, who shall once
adventure to be proud, and to exalt himself upon the earth. It was ever a
strange boldness, or rather a kind of madness, for a man to be proud, but now
(says he) when the Majesty of God has humbled and abased it self, it is an
intolerable shame, and an unspeakable kind of absurdity, that this little
wretched worm man, should have a mind to be honored and esteemed: That the Son
of God, who is equal to the Father, should take the form of a servant upon
him, and vouchsafe to be dishonored, and abased, and that I who am but dust
and ashes. should procure to be valued and admired.

With much reason, did the Savior of the world declare that he is the master
of this virtue of Humility, and that we were to learn it of him, for neither
Plato, nor Socrates, nor Arisiotle, did ever teach men this virtue. For when
those heathen Philosophers, were treating of those other virtues of fortitude,
of temperance, of wisdom, and of Justice, they were so far off the while from
being humble therein, that they pretended even by those very works, and by all
their virtuous actions, to be esteemed, and recommended to posterity. It is
true, that thee was a Diogenes, and some others like him, who professed to
contemn the world, and to despise themselves, by using mean clothes, and
certain other poverties and abstinencies, but even in this, they were extremely
proud, and procured even by that means, to be observed and esteemed, whilst
others were despised by them: as was wisely noted by Plato in Diogenes. For one
day, when Plato had invited certain Philosophers, and amongst them Diogenes to
his house, he had his rooms well furnished, and his carpets laid, and such
other preparations made, as might be fit for such guests. But as soon as
Diogenes entered in, he began to foul those fair carpets with his durty feet,
which Plato observing, asked him what he meant. Calco Platonis fastum, says
Diogenes; I am trampling says he, upon Platos pride. But Plato made him this
good answer, calcas sed alio fastu, thou tramplest indeed, but with another
kind of pride, insinuating thereby, that the pride wherewith he trod upon
Platos carpets, was greater then Platos pride in possessing them.

The Philosophers did never reach to that contempt of themselves, wherein
Christian humility consists, nay they did not so much as know humility, even by
name, for this is that virtue which was properly, and only taught by Christ our
Lord. Saint Augustine observes, how that divine sermon made by our Savior in
the Mount, began with this virtue; Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs
is the kingdom of Heaven. For both Saint Augustine, and others affirm, that by
poor in spirit, such as be humble are understood. So that the Redeemer of the
world, begins his preaching with this, he continues it with this, and he ends
it with this. This was he teaching us all his life, and this does he desire
that we should learn of him; He said not (as Saint Augustine observes.) Learn of
me to create heaven and earth, learn of me to do wonderful things, and to work
miracles, to cure the sick, to cast out devils, and to revive the dead, but
learn of me to be meek and humble of heart. For better is the humble man who
serves God, than he who works miracles. That other way is plain and safe, but
this is full of stumbling blocks and dangers.

The necessity which we have of this virtue of humility is so great, that
without it, a man cannot make one step into spiritual life. Saint Augustine
says, it is necessary that all our actions be very well accompanied, and
fenced by humility, both in the beginning, in the middle, and in the end
thereof: for if we be negligent never so little, and suffer vain complacence,
and self-pleasing to enter in, the wind of pride carries all away. And it will
help-us little, that the work it self be very good nay rather in good works, we
have most cause to fear the vice of vain glory, and pride. For other vices have
relation to sins, and wicked objects, as envy, luxuriousnes, and wrath, which
carry a kind of ill superscription upon them, to the end, that we may take heed
thereof; Whereas pride is ever treading as it were, upon the heels of good
works, that so it may destroy them: A man goes prosperously sailing with his
heart raised up toward heaven, because at the beginning of the action, he had
addressed it to the glory of God, and behold, when suddenly there comes a wind
of vanity, and casts him upon a rock, by procuring to make him desire to please
men, and to be honored and esteemed by them, taking some vain contentment
therein, and therewith the whole business sinks: And so both Saint Gregory,
and Saint Bernard say very well. He who assembles any other virtues without
humility, is like a man who carries a little dust or ashes against the wind, in
which case the wind will be sure to scatter, and carry it all away.

CHAP. II. That Humility is the foundation of all virtue.
SAint Ciprian says, Humility is the foundation of holiness. Saint Hierom
calls humility the first and principal grace of a Christian. Saint Bernard
says, Humility is the foundation and preserver of all other virtues, they all
say that humility is the ground and foundation of all holiness, virtue, and
grace. Saint Gregory in one place, calls it the mistress, and mother of all
virtue; and he says also in another place, that it is the root, and very
offspring of virtue. This metaphor, and comparison of the root, is very proper,
and does very well declare the properties and conditions of humility. For first
he says, that as the root sustains and supports the flouer, and when the root
is plucked up, the flouer does instantly dry, and with, so every virtue
whatsoever is instantly lost, if it grows not up, and continues not in the root
of humility. But as the root which lies under ground, and is trampled and
trodden upon, has no beauty or odor in it, and yet the tree receives life
from thence, just so the humble man is buried, and dis-esteemed, and disgraced,
and seems to carry no luster nor brightness in himself, but is cast aside into a
corner, and forgotten; and yet this very thing is that, which conserves him,
and makes him thrive. But withal, as to the end that the tree may be able to
grow, and continue, and bear much fruit, it is necessary that the root lie
deep, and how much the more deep it is, and more covered with earth, so much
the more fruit will the tree yield, and so much the longer will it continue,
according to that of the Prophet I^y, It shall send the root downward, and make
the fruit grow upward; so the fructifying of a soul in all virtue, and the
conserving it self therein consists in laying a low root of humility. How much
the more humble you are, so much the more will you profit and grow in virtue,
and perfection. To conclude, as pride is the beginning and root of all sin,
according to the wise man, so humility is the foundation and root of all virtue.

But some man will say perhaps, how can you affirm that humility is the
foundation of all virtue, and of all spiritual building, when commonly we are
taught by spiritual men, that faith is the foundation, according to that of
Saint Paul, Other foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, Jesus Christ
the righteous, that is faith in Jesus Christ. To this Aquinas answers well. Two
things are necessary for the well founding of a house, first it is necessary to
open the ground well, and cast out all that which is loose, till at length you
arrive to that which is firm, that so you may build afterward upon it, and when
this is done, you begin to lay the first stone, which with the rest then laid,
is the principal foundation of the building After this manner says Aquinas, do
humility, and faith behave themselves one toward another, in the spiritual
building of virtue. Humility is that which opens the soil, and the Office
thereof is to dig deep into the earth, to cast out all that which is loose,
which signifies the weakness of man's power. So that you must not lay your
foundation upon your own strength; for all this is no better then sand; all
this is to be cast out; distrusting your selves; and still you must be digging
on, till you come to the firm stone, and the living rock, which is Christ our
Lord. This indeed is the principal foundation: but yet notwithstanding,
because for the settling of this foundation, there is need also of that other,
humility is also called a foundation; And so he, who by means of humility, will
open the soil well, and dig deep into the knowledge of himself, and cast out
all the sand of his own estimation, and confidence in himself, will arrive to
that true foundation, which is Christ our Lord, and this man will raise a good
building, which will not be driven down, though the winds blow, and the waters
beat, because it is founded upon the firm rock. But on the other side, if he
build without humility, the building will instantly sink down, because it is
founded upon sand.

They are not true virtues, but apparent only and false, which are not founded
upon humility. And so Saint Augustine says, 1 Cor: 13. That in those Romans,
and ancient Philosophers, there was no true virtue, not only because they
wanted charity, (which gives life, and being to all virtue, and without which,
there is no true and perfect virtue,) but besides, because they wanted also the
foundation of humility: and in their fortitude; temperance, wisdom, and
justice, they desired to be esteemed, and to be talked of when they were dead;
and so their virtues were but certain empty things, and without substance, and
indeed they were but shadows, and shows of virtue. And so, as they were not
perfect, and true, but only apparent, he says, that God rewards the Romans
for them with temporal blessings of this life, which are also blessings but of
appearance. If therefore you meant to build up true virtue, in your souls,
procure first to say a deep foundation of humility therein. If you desire
(says he) to be truly great, and to erect a high building of virtue in your
hearts, you must open the ground very low. As much more high as a man means to
raise this building, so much the lower must he lay his foundation. For there is
no high without low; and after the proportion or rate, that you will dig deep,
and lay the foundation of humility low; so much the higher will you be able to
raise the Tower of Evangelicall perfection, which you have begun. Aquinas
amongst other grave sentences, which are remembered to have been his, said thus
of Humility. He who goes on with desire to be honored, he who flies from being
contemned, and if he be, is troubled at it, is far from perfection, though be
should work wonders, for in fine his virtue has no foundation.

CHAP. III. Wherein it is declared more partieularly how humility is the
foundation of all virtues, and this is done by discoursing of the chief of them.
TO the end, that it may the better be seen, how true this sentence of the
Saints is. That humility is the foundation of all, the virtues, and how
necessary this foundation is for them all, we will briefly discourse upon the
chief of them. And to begin with the Theological virtues, Humility is
necessary toward faith. For faith supposes a submisse and humble
understanding, subduing, (as the Apostle Saint Paul says,) our understanding
to the obedience of the faith of Christ our Lord. And so a proud understanding
gives difficulty and impediment, against the receiving of the says, and Christ
our redeemer declared as much to the Pharisees in this manner, How will you be
able to believe, who receive glory from one another, and seek not for that
glory, which is of God alone? Joh: 5.44. And not only is humility necessary for
the first receiving of faith, but for the conservation also thereof. And it is
generally the Doctrine of the Doctors and Saints, that pride is the beginning
of all heresies, when a man esteems his opinion and judgment so much, that he
prefers it before the common voice of the Saints, and of the Church, and so he
comes to fall upon heresies. And so the Apostle says, 2 Timothy: 3. I give you to
understand that in the latter days, there will be dangerous times, for men
will be great l^vers of themselves, covetous, puffed up, and proud, and he
imputes heresies to puffing up, and pride, as St: Augustine declares very well.

The virtue also of hope, is conserved, and maintained by humility, because the
humble man finds, and feels his necessity, and knows that of himself he can do
nothing, and so he resorts to God more earnestly, and places all his hope in
him.

Charity also and the love of God, is quickened and kindled by humility,
because the humble man knows, that whatsoever he has, comes to him from the
hand of God, and that himself is very far from deserving it; and by this
consideration he is much inflamed toward the love of God. What is man (said
the holy Job,) that thou should remember him, and set thy heart upon him,
and vouchsafe him so many benefits and favors? I to be so wicked toward thee,
and thou to be so good toward me, I to be so carnest in offending thee day by
day, and thou in doing me favors every hour. This is one of the most
principal motives whereof the Saints have ever been wont to serve themselves,
that so they might be much inflamed with the love of God. For when they most
considered their own indignity and misery, they found themselves most obliged
to serve God, who was pleased to place his eyes upon so great baseness, (so said
the blessed Virgin.) My soul does magnify our Lord, because he vouch safed to
look upon the baseness of his slave, or handmaid: As for the charity of men
toward their neighbors, it is casily to be seen, how necessary humility is.
For one of those things which is most wont to cool and lessen our love to our
Neighbors, is to judge of their faults, and to hold them to be full of
imperfections, and defects. But the humble man is very far from this, for his
eyes are ever cast in upon his own errors, and he never considers any thing in
others but their virtues; and so he holds all other men to be good, and himself
only to be imperfect, and faulty, and unworthy to live amongst his brethren.
And from hence is wont to grow a great estimation, respect, and love to them
all. Besides, the humble man is not troubled that all men should be preferred
before him, and that much account is made of them, and so himself alone is
forgotten, or that things of greater moment are recommended to the care of
others, and the least and meanest to him.

No envy has any place amongst humble men, for envy springs from pride, and
therefore if there be humility, there will be no envy or contention, or any
thing which may weaken a man's love to his neighbors.

From humility also grows patience, which is necessary to all men in this life.
For the humble man acknowledges his faults and sins, and considers himself to
be worthy of any punishment, and no affliction comes to him, which he esteems
to be less than it should have been, in respect of his faults, and so he holds
his peace, and knows not how to complain, but rather says with the Prophet
Micha, I will suffer willingly that punishment which God shall send me, because
I have sinned against him. And so, as the proud man is ever complaining, and
still thinks that men do him wrong, though they do him right, and that they
treat him not as he deserves; so the man who is humble, though indeed you do
him wrong, perceives it not, and judges it not to be such, nor does he imagine
that you ever give him any offense, nay rather it seems to him, that you let
him live at a great ease, and howsoever you proceed with him, he is very well
satisfied, that you treat him better then he deserves.

Humility is also a mighty means toward patience. And therefore the wise man
advising him who means to serve Almighty God, to prepare himself to suffer
temptations, and disgusts, and to arm himself with patience, assigns him for
the means thereof, that he should be humble. Carry thy heart abased, and then
suffer. Receive all that in good part which comes upon thee, though it be very
contrary to thy sense and endure it though it put thee to pain. But how shall
this be done? What kind of armor is that, which you mean to put upon me, to
the end that I may not feel affliction; or if I feel it, that I may be able to
support it? Possess humility, and so you shall have patience.

From humility does also spring that kind of peace which is so much desired by
all, and which is so necessary for such as are Religious. So says Christ our
Savior. Be meek and humble, and you shall possess great rest and peace, both
within your selves, and with your brethren. And as amongst the proud there are
ever contentions, and disputes, and brauls, (says the wise man) so amongst
such as are humble, there can be no contention or strife, except only that holy
strife and contention, who may be the inseriour and may give all kind of honor
and advantage to his Neighbor. These are good contentions, and strifes, which
as they grow from true humility, and fraternal charity, so they also strengthen
and conserve the same.

That Humility is also necessary for the preserving of chastity, we have many
examples, in the histories of the primitive times, where we read of ugly, and
abominable falls of Men, who had already spent many of their years in a
religious solitary, and penitential life, all which proceeded from want of
humility, and from confiding and presuming on themselves; which God is wont to
punish, by permitting men to fall into those other sins. Humility is also so
great an ornament to chastity, that Saint Bernard says, I dare adventure to
say, that even the virginity of the blessed Virgin Mary, would not have been
pleasing to God, without humility. Finally for the virtue of obedience, it is a
clear truth, that both he cannot be truly obedient, who is not humble, and that
he who is humble, must needs be obedient. The humble Man may be commanded to do
any thing, but so may not he, who is not humble. The humble Man frames no
contrary judgments, but conforms himself in all things to his superior, and not
only in the work, but even in the will and understanding also; nor makes he any
contradiction, or resistance.

If now we will come to speak of prayer, upon which the very life of a
religious, and spiritual man relies, if it be not accompanied with humility,
it is of no worth; Whereas prayer with humility pierces heaven. The prayer of
him who humbles himself, does penetrate heaven, says the wise man; and he will
not give over till he obtain all that which he desires at the hands of God.
That holy and humble Judith, being shut up in her Oratory, clad with
sackcloath, and covered with ashes, and prostrate upon the earth, cries out in
these words. The prayer of the humble, and meek of heart was ever pleasing to
thee O Lord. God beheld the prayer of the humble, and despised not their
Petitions. Never think that the humble man shall be driven away, or depart out
of countenance, he shall obtain what he asks, God will hear his prayer. Do but
consider how highly that humble prayer of the Publican in the Gospel pleased
God; he who presumed not so much as to lift up his eyes to heaven, but
disposing himself far of, into a corner of the Temple, and knocking his breast
with humble acknowledgment of himself, said; O Lord have mercy upon me, for I
am a grievous sinner. I tell you of a truth (says Jesus Christ our redeemer)
that this man went justified out of the Temple, and that proud Pharisee, who
held himself for a Saint, went condemned. In this very manner might we
discourse of the rest of the virtues, and therefore if you desire to go the
next way, for the getting of them all, and to learn a short and compendious
document, for the speedy obtaining of perfection, this is it; Be humble.

CHAP: IIII. Of the particular necessity which they have of this virtue, who
profess to procure the salvation of their neighbors souls.
BY how much thou art greater, see thou humble thy self (says the wise man) so
much the more, and thou shall find grace in the sight of God. We who make
profession to gain souls to God, may say (for our confusion) that God has
called us to a very high state; since our office is to serve the Church, in
certain ministeries, which are very eminent, and high, even the same, to which
God chose the Apostles; namely, the preaching of the Gospel, the administration
of the Sacraments, and the dispensation of his body and blood, so that we may
say with Saint Paul, God has given us the ministry of reconciliation. He calls
the preaching of the Gospel, and the dispensation of the Sacraments, by which
grace is communicated, the ministry of reconciliation. God has made us his
servants, his Ambassadors, (as his Apostles were the first) of that chief
Bishop Jesus Christ tongues and instruments of the holy Ghost. God exhorting,
and persuading men by us. Our Lord is pleased to speak to souls by our tongues,
by these tongues of flesh, will our Lord move the hearts of men, for this have
we therefore more need than others, of the virtue of Humility, and that upon
two reasons, first, because by how much the more high our Office, and vocation
is, so much more hazard shall we run, and so much the greater will be the
combat of vanity and pride. The highest hills (as St: Hierome says) are
assaulted by the highest winds. We are employed in very high Ministeries, and
for this are we respected and esteemed over the world. We are held to be
Saints, and even for other Apostles upon earth, and that all our conversation
is sanctity, (so by all means it ought to be, and woe unto us if it be not) and
that our study is to make them also Saints, with whom we converse? Here is need
of a great foundation of Humility, that so high a building as this, may not be
driven down to the ground. We had need have great strength of virtue, that we
may be able to bear the weight of honor, with all the circumstances thereof. A
hard task it is, to walk in the midst of honors, and that yet no part thereof
should fasten it self to the heart. It is not every bodies case, to have a head
that can be safe so high. O how many have grown giddy, and fallen down from
that high state wherein they were, for want of the foundation of Humility? how
many who seemed Eagles, towering up in the exercise of several virtues, have
through pride, become as blind as Bats.

For this do we therefore stand in particular need to be very well grounded in
this virtue, for if we be not, we shall run great hazard of being giddy, and
of falling into the sin of pride; yea and that the greatest of all others,
spiritual pride. Bonaventure declaring this, says; That there are two kinds
of pride, one which concerns temporal things, and this is called carnal
pride, and another which concerns things spiritual, and this is called
spiritual pride, and so says, that this second is a greater pride, and a
greater sin than the former, The reason hereof is clear, for as he says, the
proud man is a thief, and commits robbery, ^^or he runs away with the goods of
another, against the will of the owner; by having stolen the honor and glory
which is proper to God, and which he will not give away, but reserve to
himself. My glory I will not give to another (says he by the Prophet Isay) and
this does the proud man steal from God, and he runs away with it, and applies
it to himself. Now when a man grows proud of any natural advantage, as of
nobility, of agility, and strength of body, of quicknes of understanding, of
learning, or the like, this man is a robber, but yet the theft is not so great.
For though it be true, that all these blessings are of God, they are yet but as
the chafe of his house; but he who shall grow proud of his spiritual gifts,
as namely of sanctity, or of the fruit which is gathered by gaining souls, this
is a great thief, a robber of the honor of God, and who steals those jewels
which he esteems the most rich, and of the greatest price, and value, and which
indeed were set at so high a rate, that he thought his own blood and life, well
employed upon the purchase thereof. For this reason, a certain holy Father
being full of care, and fear lest he should fall into pride, was wont to say
thus to God. O Lord if thou give me any thing, keep it for me; who dare not
trust my self with it, for I am no better then a thief, and am still running
away with thy goods. And now let us also walk on with the same fear, since we
have much more reason to be afraid, and are far from being so humble as he was.
Let us not fall into this so dangerous pride, let us not run away with those
goods of God, which he has put with so much confidence into our hands. Let no
part thereof stick to us, let us artribute nothing to our selves, but return
the whole back to God. It was not without great mystery, that Christ our
Savior when he appeared to his Disciples upon the day of his glorious
Ascension, reproved them first for their incredulity, and hardness of heart,
and commanded them afterward to go and preach the Gospel throughout the whole
world, and gave them power to work many, and mighty miracles. For he gives us
thereby to understand, that he who is to be exalted to the doing of great
things, has need to be humbled first, and to be abased in himself, and to have
a true knowledge of his own faculties, and miseries, that so though afterward
he come to great perfection, he may yet remain still entire in the knowledge of
himself, and stick fast to the understanding of his own baseness, without
attributing any other thing to himself then unworthiness. Theodoret to this
purpose notes, that God resolving to choose Moses for their Captain, and
conductor of his People, and to work by his means, such wondrous and admirable
things, as he resolved to let the world see, thought fit for the cause
aforesaid, that first, that very hand wherewith he was to divide the Red Sea,
and effect other things so very strange, being first put into his bosom,
should be then drawn forth, and seen by himself to be full of leprosy.

A second reason, for which we stand in more particular necessity of Humility,
is to the end, that we may gather fruit in those very ministeries wherein we
are employed, so that Humility is necessary for us, not only in regard of our
own improvement, lest otherwise we should grow vain and proud, and so cast away
our selves; but besides, for the gaining of our neighhours, and the bringing
forth fruit in their souls. One of the most principal means toward this end is
Humility, and that we distrust our selves, and that we rely not upon our own
industry, or prudence, or other parts, but that we place all our confidence in
God, and ascribe, and refer all to him, according to that of the wise man: Put
your confidence in God with your whole heart, and rely not upon your own
prudence. And the reason hereof is (as afterward I shall declare more at large)
because when through distrust of our selves, we place all our confidence in
God, we ascribe it all to him, and put the whole business to his account,
whereby we oblige him much, to take care thereof. O Lord dispatch thine own
business, the conversion of souls is thine, and not ours, alas what power can we
have to save fouls? But now when we are confident in the means we use, and in
the discourses which we are able to make, we bring our selves to be parties to
the business, and attribute much to our selves, and all that we do, we take from
Almighty God. They are like two balances, for look how much the one rises, so
much the other will be sure to fall, as much as we attribute to our selves, so
much we take from God, and run away with the glory, and honor which is only
his, and thus he comes to permit, that no effect is wrought. And I pray God
that this be not sometimes the cause, why we do our Neighbors no more good.

We read of many Preachers in former times, and remember some of our own time,
who though they were not very learned men, no nor very eloquent, yet by their
Preaching, Catechizing, and private communications in an humble and low way,
have converted, quickened, inflamed, and strengthened many of their flock, not
in the persuading words of humane wisdom, but in the manifestation of spirit,
and truth, as Saint Paul says, They were distrustful of themselves, and
placed all their confidence in God, and so God gave strength, and spirit to
their words which seemed even to d^rt burning slames into the hearts of their
hearers. And now I know not whether the reason why we produce not at this day,
so great fruit, be not because we stick much closer to the opinion of our own
prudence, and because we rest, and rely much upon our own means of persuasion,
and our learning, and discourse, and our polite, and elegant manner of
declaring our minds, and we go gusting, and delighting our selves much with our
selves. O well then says God, when you conceive that you have said the best
thing, and delivered the most convincing reasons, and remain content, and
jolly, with conceit that you have done great matters, you shall then effect
least of all. And that shall be fulfilled in you, which the Prophet Isay said,
give them a barren womb, and dry breasts; I will take order that thou shall be
a barren Mother, and thou shall have no more thereof but the name, I will give
you dry breasts, such as no child shall hang upon, nor any thing stick by them
which thou say, for this does he deserve, who will needs usurp the goods of
God, and attribute that to himself, which is proper, and only due to his divine
Majesty, I say not, but whatsoever Men shall preach, must be very well studied,
and considered, but yet this is not all, for it must also be very well wept
upon, and very well recommended to God, and when you shall have made your head
ache with studying it, and ruminating upon it, you must say, We have but done
what we ought, and we are unprofitable servants, what am I able to effect, I
have made a little noise of words, like a piece which shoots powder without a
bullet, but if the heart be wounded, it is thou O Lord who must do it. The
Kings heart is in Gods hand, and he inclines it to whatsoever he will. It is
thou O Lord who art to move, and wound the heart, alas what are we able to do
to them? What proportion can our words, and all our humane means carry, to an
end so high, and so supernatural, as it is to convert souls? No such matter.
But how comes it then to pass, that we are so vain, and so well pleased with
our selves, when we think some good is done, and that our business succeeds
well, as if we were the men who had done the deed, shall peradventure (says
the Prophet Isay to God) the Hatchet or the saw brag against him who uses it,
and works with it, and say I am he who have cut, and who have sawed that wood:
This were, as if a cudgel should look big, and admire it self, because a man
lifts it up, whereas the thing in it self is but wood, which cannot once stir,
if men stir it not. Now we are just thus, in respect of any spiritual, and
supernatural end of the conversion of souls. We are like so many wands, who
cannot once stir, if God stirs not, and therefore we must ascribe all to him, as
having nothing to brag of in our selves.

God does so much esteem, that we rely not upon our own strength, or humane
diligence, and that we should take nothing to our selves, but ascribe all to
him, and give him the glory of all, that St: Paul says, that for this reason,
Christ our Lord would not make choice of eloquent and learned men, for the
conversion of the world, by the Preaching of the Gospel but of poor Fishermen,
who were ignorant and rude, God made choice of ignorant and gross People to
confound the wise of the world, he chose the poor and weak to confound the
mighty and strong, he chose the mean and base, who seemed to be nothing in the
eyes of flesh and blood, to subdue Kings and Emperors, and all the Grandes of
the earth. But know you why, says Saint Paul, to the end, that man may not, go
bragging in the sight of God, nor take occasion of ascribing any thing to
himself, but give all the glory of all to God. If the preachers of the Gospel
were very rich and powerful, and went with great troops, and strong hand to
preach Gods word over the world, they might perhaps impute men's conversion to
the force of their arms. If God had chosen the great learned men, and the most
excellent Orrators of the world, who by their learning, and eloquence, might
convince the Philosophers, a man might have attributed the conversion of
mankind to curiosity of speech, and subtilty of arguments, in diminution of the
credit, and reputation of the virtue and power of Christ our Lord. But it must
not be after this manner, says St. Paul, God was not pleased, that this great
business should be carried by eloquence of speech, or humane wisdom, lest the
estimation of the power, and efficacy of the cross, and passion of Christ our
Lord should suffer pre judice thereby, St: Augustine says, our Lord Jesus
Christ resolving to humble the necks of the proud, did not by means of Orators
gain Fishermen, but by means of Fishermen gained both Orators, and Emperors.
Cyprian was a great Orator, but Saint Peter the Fisherman was before him, by
means of whom was converted, not only the Orator, but even the Emperor.

The holy Scripture is full of examples, to show that God is wont to choose weak
means, and instruments for the doing of mighty things, to teach us this truth,
and to the end, it might remain deeply fixed in our hearts, that we have
nothing whereof to glory, or to ascribe to our selves, but absolutely all to
God. This are we also taught by that illustrious victory of Judith, which she
being a weak woman, obtained against an Army of above a hundred and forty
thousand men. This are we also taught, by that poor little shepherd David, who
being but a boy, and with no other weapon but his sling, beat down that Giant
Goliath, and triumphed over the Philistines. To the end, that the whole world
(says he) may know that there is a God in Israel, and that all men may
understand, that God has no need either of sword, or lance for the obtaining
of Victory, (for battles in fine are his, and victory is his) and that men may
be sure of this, he gives it when he will, without arms.

This was also the mystery of Gideon, who had drawn two and thirty thousand men
together against the Midianites, who were more the^ a hundred and thirty
thousand men, and God said thus to him, Gideon thou have great store of People
with thee, but Midian shall not be delivered up into thy hands. Consider what a
strange discourse of God this is, thou shall not overcome, because thou have
much People with thee. If he had said thou caust not overcome them because they
are so many, and thou have so few, it seems that the discourse had been
rational; but you are deceived, and understand not the business, this had been
a good reason for men to alledg, but that other was proper to God alone, you
cannot overcome says God, because you are many, but why so? To the end that
Israel may not glorify it self against me, and so steal the victory from me,
and become vain and proud, as conceiving that it was conquered by the strength
thereof. God carried the matter so, as that there only remained three hundred
men with Gideon, and commanded that he should then present battle to the Enemy,
and with them he gave Gideon the victory, yea, and they had not so much as need
to put themselves in arms, or to take their swords into their hands, but with
the only sound of the Trumpets which they carried in one of their hands, and
with the noise of breaking certain pots, and with the brightness of the flaming
torches which they carried in the other, God struck the enemy with such a
terror, and amazement, that they overwhelmed and killed one another, and the
rest put themselves to flight, as thinking that the whole world was coming upon
them, then the others could not say that they had overcome by their own
strength, and this was that which God desired, namely, that they might be
forced to acknowledge him the only giver of victory. If then, even in temporal,
and humane things, wherein our own diligences, and means, carry some kind of
proportion toward the end as our arms, and forces do toward the obtaining of
victory, God will not yet permit, that we attribute any thing to our selves,
but that we must ascribe the victory of a battle, and indeed the good success
of all affairs to him, if even in natural things, neither he who plants, nor
he who waters is any thing, and it is not the gardner who can make any plant
grow, nor make any tree give fruit, but only God, what shall we say of
spiritual and supernatural things, of the conversion of souls, of a man's own
profit and increase in virtue, wherein our means, endeavors, and diligences
remain so short, and so far behind, as that they carry no proportion at all
with so high an end? The Apostle Saint Paul says, God only is he who can give
increase, and spiritual fruit, God only is he who can strike the hearts of men
with amazement, and mighty fear, God only is he who can make men abhor sin, and
forsake wickedness of life. And as for us, we can only make a little noise
with the trumpet of the Gospel, and if we shall break these earthen pots of our
bodies with mortification, and if men may be able to see the light of a very
exemplar life shine in us, we shall indeed have done our parts, but yet still
it is only God who must give us the victory.

Let us gather, and draw two things from hence, that so we may exercise our
functions with much comfort, and with the profit both of our selves, and our
neighbors.

The first is that whereof we have already spoken, to distrust our selves, to
place all our confidence in God, and to attribute the whole fruit and good
success of all things to him. St: Chrysostom says, Let us not wax proud, but
let us confess our selves to be unprofitable, that so we may grow to be
profitable, and useful and Saint Ambrose says, if you will produce much fruit
amongst your neighbors, observe the rule which we are taught by the Apostle St.
Peter, He who speaks, let him make account, that God put these words into his
mouth, he who works, let him make account that it is God who works by him, and
let him give the honor and glory of it all to him. Let us not ascribe any
thing to our selves, nor run away with strange conceit, nor take any vain
contentment in the act.

The second thing which we are to fetch from hence, is that we be not
disanimated or dejected when we consider our own wretchedness, and misery. Of
this we have also great need, for who observing himself to be called to so high
an Office, and to so supernatural an end, as it is to convert souls, to draw
them out of sin, out of heresies, out of infidelity, who I say considering
this, will not faint under the thought, and say, O Jesus how great a
disproportion is this? Such an employment fits not well with me, who am the
most needy and miserable creature of all others. But yet in this you are
deceived, for even for this very reason, this enterprise is fit for you, Moses
could not believe that he was ever to perform so great a work, as to draw the
people of Israel out of the captivity of Egypt, and he excused himself thus to
God who was desirous to send him: What am I that I should go treat with the
King, and procure him to let the people of Israel depart out of Egypt? send him
O Lord whom you are to send, for as for me I am a stammerer, and unfit for the
employment. This is that (says God) which serves my turn, it is not thou shall
do it, I will be with thee, and I will teach thee what thou art to say. The
same happened also to the Prophet Jeremy, whom God sent to preach to the world,
but he began to excuse himself thus. A. A. A. do you not see O Lord, that I can
hardly pronounce my words, but am a very child, and how then will you have me
undertake so great an enterprise as this? Even for this very reason, he will
use thee, and thou art just the man he seeks and perhaps if thou were endued
with many parts, God would not have chosen thee to this end, but now thou shall
have no color to ste^^^ the praise, and attribute any thing to thy self, and
by such weak instruments, is he desirous to do great things.

The holy Evangelists recount that the Apostles coming from preaching, and
Christ our Lord observing the fruit which they had gathered, and the wonderful
things which they had wrought, did highly rejoice in the Holy Ghost, and gave
great thanks, and glorified his eternal Father. I give thee thanks O eternal
Father, Lord of Heaven and earth, for that thou have hidden these things from
the wise and prudent of the world, and have revealed and communicated them to
thy little ones, and by their means do work so great wonders. Blessed and
praised be thou O Lord for ever, because thou have been pleased to do thus. O
happy little ones, happy humble souls, for these are they whom God exalts, and
by whom he works wonders, and whom he takes for his instruments in doing great
things, in working great conversions, and gathering great fruit of souls,
therefore let no man be discouraged or dismayed. Be not afraid little flock, be
not disanimated, or put out of heart, because thou see thy self very little,
and least of all others, for it has been pleasing to your heavenly Father, to
give you power over the hearts and souls of men. I will be with you (said
Christ our Savior) I will assist you unto the end of the world, let us then
hold for certain, that Jesus will ever be our succor, as himself promised to
our Fathers the blessed-Apostles, and that we shall ever have him for our
conductor, and Captain, and therefore let us not grow weary, or be discouraged
in this so great affair of helping souls, to which God has called us.

CHAP. V. Of the first degree of Humility, which is for a man to think meanly
of himself.
LAurentius Justinianus says, that no man knows well what humility is, but he
who has received the gift of being humble from God. It is really a very hard
thing to be known. A man says, he deceives himself in nothing more, then in
thinking that he knows what true Humility is. Do you think it consists in
saying, I am a miserable sinful creature, I am proud, etc. If it consisted in
this, the thing were easy enough, and we should all be humble, for we all say
of our selves, that we are this, and we are that, and I pray God that we may
all speak as we think, and that we may not say it with the mouth alone, and by
way of complement, do you think that Humility consists in wearing poor, and
mean clothes, or in employing our selves about object, and contemptible things?
It consists not in this, for herein may be much pride, and as man may desire to
be much esteemed, and valued even for this, and to hold himself to be better,
and more humble then others, which is the height of pride. True it is, that
these exterior things do help toward true humility, if they be used as they
ought, (whereof I shall say more afterward,) but yet in fine Humility does not
consist in this. Saint Hierome says, many follow the appearance, and shadow of
Humility, few the truth. An easy thing it is, to carry the head bowed down,
the eyes low, the speech submisse, and soft, to sigh often, and at every word
to be calling themselves miserable and sinful creatures, but yet if you touch
these very men with any little word, though it be but very lightly, you shall
instantly be able to see how far they are from true Humility. Let all feigned
words be laid aside, away with Hipocrisies, and exterior shows, for the true
humble man (says he) is showed by his sufferance, and patience. This is that
touchstone, whereby true Humility is discerned.

Saint Bernard descends more particularly to declare, wherein this virtue
consists, and gives us this definition thereof. Humility is a virtue, whereby a
man most truly discerning, and observing his own defects, and miseries, holds
himself in small account. Humility consists not in exterior things or words,
but in the very root of the heart, in a man's thinking most basely of himself,
and both in holding himself, and in desiring to be held by others, in very mean
account, and so as that this must rise out of a most profound knowledge of
himself.

To declare, and as it were anatomise this truth, the ancient Fathers set down
many degrees of Humility. Aquinas assigns twelve degrees of this virtue.
Saint Anselm speaks of seven. Bonaventure reduces them to three, and we will
now follow this last, both for brevities sake, and to the end, that restraining
this Doctrine to fewer points, we may the more easily keep them before our
eyes, and so procure to put them in execution. The first degree therefore of
Humility (says Bonaventure) is, that a man think meanly of himself, and have
himself in small account, and the necessary, and only means to this, is the
knowledge of a man's self. These two things be they, which the definition of
Humility, assigned by Saint Bernard comprehends, and so it only reaches to the
first degree. Namely that Humllity is a virtue, whereby a man holds himself in
mean account.

This is then the first, and this says St: Bernard, is wrought in man, by his
having a true knowledge of himself, and of his miseries, and defects. For this
cause, some are wont to put the knowledge of a man's self, for the first degree
of Humility, and they do it with great reason. But yet, for as much as we
reduce all the degrees to three, with Bonaventure, we put for the first degree,
the holding of a man's self in small account, and we put the knowledge of a man's
self, for the necessary means whereby to attain this degree of Humility, but
yet in substance all is one. We all agree in this, that the knowledge of a man's
self, is the beginning, and foundation, whereby Humility is to be obtained, and
the thinking of our selves as we deserve. For how can we think of a man as he
deserves, if we know him not. This cannot be, it is therefore necessary, first
that we know what any man is, and then we may esteem, or honor him more or
less, according to what we know of him. So that still you must first know what
you are, and afterward according to what you are, you may esteem your selves,
and you shall have good leave to do so, for if you esteem your selves for what
you are, you will be very humble, for you will esteem your selves very little,
but if you esteem your selves more then you deserve, that will be pride. Saint
Isidore says, Superhus dictus est, quia super vult videre quam est. Therefore
is a man called proud, be cause he holds himself, and desires to be held by
others, for more then he is, and this is one of the reasons which some assign,
why God loves Humility so much, because he is a great lover of truth; and
Humility is ttuth, and pride is a deceit, and a lie, for you are not that which
you think of your selves, and which you desire that others should think you to
be. If therefore you resolve to walk in truth, and in Humility, esteem your
selves for what you are. Me thinks I ask no great matter of you, in desiring
that you will esteem your selves for what you are, and not for what you are
not. For it is a very unreasonable thing for any man to esteem himself for more
then he is, And it would not only be a great deceit, but a great danger
withal, so any man to be deceived in himself, esteeming himself for other,
then indeed he is.

CHAP. VI. Of the knowledge of a man's self, which is the root, and the necessary
and only means for the obtaining of Humility.
LEt us begin to sound, and dig deep into our selves, and into the knowledge of
our weakness and misery, that so we may discover this most rich treasure, (says
St. Hierome.) In the very dung of your baseness, and of your infirmities, and
sins, you shall find that precious pearl of Humility. Let us begin with our
corporal being, and let that be the first pressing of the spade, as St.
Bernard says. Set these things ever before thine eyes, what thou were, what
thou art, and what thou art to be. Have ever before thine eyes, what thou wast
before thou were engendered, which was a certain thing so stinking, and so
filthy, as that we may not give it the true name. What art thou now? Thou art a
vessel full of dung: what art thou to be shortly; but the food of worms? We
have here matter enough to meditate upon, and to dig into. O base, and vile
condition of humane nature. Look upon the trees, and plants, and thou shall
find that they produce beautiful leaves, and flowers, and fruits, but man
proceeds out of himself nits, lice, and worms. The plants, and trees yield out
of themselves Oil, Balsamum, and wine, and odours also of much sweetness; and
a man utters a thousand uncleanesses, of so abominable savor, as makes ones
stomach turn to think of it, and much more to name it. But in fine, such as the
tree is, such is the fruit like to be, for an ill tree can bear no good fruit.

Verily, the Fathers do with much reason, and with great propriety, compare the
body of (...) to a dunghill overcast with snow, which on the outside appears
beautiful, and fair, but within is full of uglines, and uncleanesse. The
blessed St. Bernard said, If you put your selves to consider what you vent by
your eyes, your ears, your mouth, your nostrils, and the other sinks of your
body, there is not in the whole world, any other so filthy dunghill, nor which
utters such abomination as this. O how well said the holy Job? What is man but
rottenness it self, and a very fountain of worms, I have said to rottenness
thou art my Father, and to the worms I have said you are my mother, and my
brethren. Such a thing as this is man, a very running stream of rottenesse, and
a wide sack full of worms, Well then, of what shall we now be proud? Of what
will dust, and ashes take occasion to brag? At least from hence, we shall be
able to discover no color for being proud, but enough for being humble, and to
despise our selves. And therefore Saint Gregory says, It will help us to
conserve Humility, if we remember our own deformity, it will keep very safe
under these ashes.

Let us pass yet a little further on, and dig yet deeper, and press the spade
yet lower into the ground. Consider what you were before God created you, and
you shall find that you were just nothing, and that you could never have been
delivered out of that dark depth of being nothing, if God through his great
mercy and goodness, had not taken you out from thence, and placed you amongst
his creatures, giving you that real, and true being, which you now enjoy. So
that, for as much as is on our parts, we are nothing, and we are to hold our
selves but equal to those things which are not, and we must ascribe to God,
that advantage which now we have above them. This is that which Saint Paul
says, If any man think he is any thing, he is deceived, for of himself he is
nothing: We have here discovered a great deep mine, whereby to enrich our
selves with Humility. Yea, and there is yet more in this, for even now after we
ate created, and have received our being, it is not we who hold it, and can
contain it in our selves. It is not, as when the archirect has built a house,
which sustains it self when he has left it, without needing him any more who
made it. It is not so in our case, but now after we are created, we have still
as great need of God, in every moment of our lives, to the end that we may not
loose the being which we have already, as we had, whilst we were nothing, that
we might grow to be. He is ever sustaining, and holding us up, with his hand of
power, that so we may not again fall down, into that profound pit of being
nothing, out of which he took us before. And so says David: Thou O Lord did
frame me, and thou did place thy hand upon me; and this hand of thine O Lord,
holds me still fast on foot, and conserves me, that so I may not again return
to my former nothing. We are ever so depending, and so hanging upon this
hand-fast of God, that if once this should fail us, and that he should take off
that hand, but for any one moment of our lives, in the same very moment we were
dispatched, and we should loose our being, and so return to our nothing, as
when the Sun is once hidden, the earth is dark.

For this reason says the holy Scripture. All Nations in the sight of God, are
as if they were not, and as nothing, and they are mere emptines it self before
him: This is that which we all are saying every minute, namely, that we are
nothing but yet I doubt that we say it only with our mouths, for I know not
whether we understand what we say. O that we understood and felt it, as the
Prophet understood, and felt it, when he said thus to God, I O Lord am as
nothing in thy fight: Really, for my part I am nothing, for I had no being, and
the being which now. I have, was not had by me of my self, but thou O Lord
did give it me, and to thee must I ascribe it all, and I have nothing whereof
to brag, or glory in my self, for I had nothing at all to do therein; and thou
O Lord art ever conserving me in being, and holding me still fast on foot, and
thou art still giving me strength wherewith to work, all being, all strength,
all power to work, comes to us from thy hand, for on our part we can do
nothing, and we are worth nothing, and in fine, are nothing, so that now of
what shall we be able to wax proud? Will it be perhaps of the nothing which we
see, we have? We said a while ago, of what do thou grow proud, O thou who art
but dust and ashes, but now we may say of what do thou grow proud, O thou who
art nothing, which is less then dust and ashes? What occasion, or even color
can a thing of nothing take, for looking big, and growing proud, and holding it
self in some account? Infalliby none at all.

CHAP: VII. Of a most principal means for a man's knowing himself, and obteining
Humility, which is the consideration of his sins.
LEt us yet go farther on, and dig, and sound deeper in the knowledge of our
selves. Let us use the spade once again. But what is there any thing yet
deeper, does any thing lie lower then nothing? yes there does, and much lower.
What, the sin which you have added to it, O what a deep pit is this? it is much
deeper then nothing, for sinning is much worse then not being, and it were
better for a man not to be, then to have sinned, and so said Christ our Lord of
Judas, who meant to sell him, it had been better for him that he had not been
born. There is not a place so low, so distant, and so despised in the eyes of
God, amongst all those things which either are, or are not, as that man who
lives in sin, without repentance, he is dis-inherited of Heaven, the enemy of
God, and sentenced for all eternity to Hellfire, and though now, through the
goodness of our Lord, your consciences are not charged with the allowance of any
known sin; yet as for the knowledge of our nothing, ye called to mind that time,
wherein we had no being, so for the knowing of our baseness, and misery, we are
now to call that time to mind, when we were in sin. Consider in how wretched
estate you were, when in the sight of God you were ungratious, ugly, his
enemies, the children of wrath, obnoxious to eternal torments, and then
despise your selves thoroughly, and abase your selves into the lowest and
profoundest place that possibly you can, for you may safely believe, that how
much soever you humble, and despise your selves, you will never be able to
arrive to that depth of contempt, which he deserves, who has offended that
infinite goodness, which is God. This business has no bottom at al, it is a most
profound, and infinite depth, for till we shall be able to see in heaven, how
good God is, we shall never be able to know perfectly, how great an il sin is,
which is committed against God, and how great a punishment he deserves who
commits it.

O that we would continue in this meditation and dig on, and still sound deeper
into this mine of our sins, and miseries, how humble would we then be; in how
small account would we hold our selves; and how easily would we admit to be
dis-esteemed and contemned by all. He who has been a traitor to God, what
contempt will he not endure for his love? He who gave God away for a fancy or
toy, or for some pleasure of an instant: he who offended his Creator, and his
Lord, and deserved to remain for ever in hell; what dishonors, what affronts, or
injuries will not he be glad to receive, and accept them as gentle chastisements
for those offenses, which he has committed against the majesty of God; as
said the Prophet David. Before that scourge came wherewith God humbled and
afflicted me, I had given him cause to inflict it; I had already sinned, and
therefore now I am silent, nor dare I complain, for all is much less than my
sins deserved. Thou have not punished me O Lord, according to my offenses, for
whatsoever we are possibly able to suffer in this life, is merely nothing in
comparison of that which any one of all our sins, has deserved. Will you
perhaps conceive, that he deserves not to be dishonored, and despised, who has
dishonored, and despised God? do you not think it to be reason, that he be
lightly esteemed, who set light by God? Will you not confess, that that will,
which durst offend the Creator of the world, should never from thence forward,
do any one thing which it pretends, or desires, in punishment of so vast a
presumption.

It serves also for a spur toward good works, and to keep a man from being
negligent; and to make him walk on with fear and humility, in the sight of
God; begging pardon and mercy of him, as we are advised to do by the wise man.
Blessed is that man, who always fears. And be not without fear, even concerning
those sins, of which you have repented. This consideration of our sins, is a
very efficatious means to make us put little value upon our selves, and to be
ever humble, and to live, as it were, even under ground; for there is much to
be gotten and dug up from thence.]

If besides we would stay, and consider the defects and wounds, which original
sin has caused in us, how copious would that matter be which we might find
therein, for our humiliation? How is our nature perverted and corrupted by sin!
For as a stone is inclined by the natural weight thereof, to fall downward; just
so, by the corruption of original sin, we have a most active inclination to
love honor, and profit, and satisfaction of our sense; and we are extremely
awake toward all those temporal things, which concern us; but stark dead,
toward those others, which are spiritual and divine. That, commands in us,
which in all reason, were to obey; and that obeys, which should command. And to
conclude, under the outside, and posture of men the appetites of beasts ly
concealed; and we have hearts which grow grovelling toward the ground; the
heart of man is wicked, and inscrutable, and who can arrive to the malice
thereof? The deeper you dig into this well, the greater abominations will you
discover therein, as was showed in that figure to Ezekiel.

And if now we will apply our selves, to consider our present defects, we shall
find our selves very full of them; for these grow ever out of our own store.
How slippery are our tongues, and how il guarded are our hearts? How inconstant
are we in our good purposes, and how earnest for our own interest and contents?
How desirous are we to fulfill our appetites? How full are we of self love? How
strong in the abetting of our own judgment and will? How lively do we still find
our passions? how entire our bad inclinations? and how easily do we permit our
selves to be transported by them. St. Gregory says very well, upon those words
of Job. Will thou break a leaf driven too and fro? Job 13.25. that a man is,
with much reason, compared to the leaf of a tree. For as a leaf is turned, and
tossed with every wind, so is man by the wind both of his passions and
temptations. Sometimes he is troubled with anger sometimes he is dissolved with
vain mirth; sometimes he is transported by the appetite of avarice, sometimes of
ambition, and sometimes of lust, sometimes he is hoysed up by pride, and sometimes
cast down by inordinate fear. And so said the Prophet Isaiah. As the leaves of
trees are shaken, and carried away by the wind, s^ are we assaulted and subdued
by temptations. We have no hability, or strength in virtue, nor in executing
our good purposes, but indeed we have enough, for which we may humble and
confound our selves, and that not only by the consideration of our miseries,
and sins, but by the weighing also of those works, which seem in our eyes to be
very good. For if we will consider, and examine them well, we shall find
occasion and matter enough, for which to humble our selves, by reason of the
faults and imperfections, which commonly we mingle with them; according to that
of the same Prophet; We are become as one unclean, and all our justice is like
some filthy and polluted rag. But of this we have spoken else where, and so there
will be no need to enlarge our selves now herein.

CHAP: VIII. How we are to exercise our selves in the knowledge of what we are,
that so we may not be dejected or dismayed.
OUr misery is so great, and we have so much reason to humble our selves, and
we have so hourly experience thereof: that we seem to stand in more need of
being animated and encouraged, to the end that we be not dejected and dismayed,
considering our selves to be so full of imperfections and faults, then to be
exhorted to the consideration thereof. And this is so very true, that holy
writers, and instructors of men in the way of holiness, teach us; that we must
dig, and sound into the knowledge of our miseries, and frailties, in such sort,
as we stop not there, for fear lest the soul should sink down by distrust into
despair, in regard we see so great misery in our selves, and so great
inconstancy in our good purposes, but that we must then pass on, toward the
knowledge of the goodness of God, and place our whole confidence in him: that so
the sorrow of having sinned, may not, as Saint Paul says, be so great, as to
cause dejection, and despair, lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up
with overmuch sorrow, 2 Cor: 2.7. But it is to be a well tempered sorrow, and
mingled with the hope of pardon casting our eyes upon the mercy of God in,
Christ Jesus, and not fixing them wholly upon the only consideration of our
sins, and the deformity, and grievousnes thereof; and so they say, that we must
not dwell upon the consideration of our own poverty, and weakness, lest so we
be dismayed, but only that we may thereby find reason to distrust our selves,
observing that on our part, we have no leaning place on which to rest, and then
instantly to look up to God, and trust in him, and thus we shall not only not
remain discouraged, but we shall rather be animated, and revived thereby,
because that which serves to make us distrust when we behold our selves, will
serve to strengthen our hope when we look up to God: and the more we know our
own weakness, and the more we be distrustful of our selves by looking up to
God, and relying on him, and by placing all our confidence in him we shall find
our selves the more strong, and full of courage in all things.

But the Fathers do here advertise us of a point which imports very much,
namely, that as we must not dwell upon the knowledge of our infirmities, and
miseries, lest we fall upon distrust, and despair, but pass on to the knowledge
of the goodness, the mercy, and liberality of God in Christ, and place our whole
confidence in him: so also must we dwell as little here, but turn our eyes
quickly in again upon our selves, and upon our own miseries, and frailties. For
if we stick upon the knowledge of the goodness, the mercy, and liberality of
God, and forget what we are in our selves, we shall run much hazard of
presumption, and pride, and we shall grow to be too secure of our selves, and
to be over-bold, and not so humble, and careful as were fit, which is a
dangerous course, and has been the foundation, and root of many fearful, and
great ruins, O how many men, who were very spiritual, and who seemed to be
exalted, as high as Heaven in the exercise of prayer, and contemplation, have
cast themselves down headlong by this precipice? O how many who seemed to be
Saints, have come by this means, to have most wretched falls? Because they
forgot themselves; because they made themselves too sure, through the favors
which they had received from God? They grew to be full of confidence, as if
there had already been no more danger for them, and so they came miserably to
destruction.

We have books which are full of such accidents. Saint Basil says, that the
cause of that miserable fall of King David, both into adultery, and murder, was
the presumption which once he had, when he was visited by the hand of God, with
abundance of consolation, so far as that he presumed to say, I shall never be
moved, or altered from this state: Psalm: 30. Well, stay a while, God will a
little take off his hand: these extraordinary favors, and graces shall cease,
and you shall see what will happen. Thou turned away thy face from me, and I
was troubled. God leaves you in your poverty, and then you will be like your
self; and you shall know to your cost, whou you are once fallen, that which you
would not know whilst you were visited, and favored by Almighty God: And Saint
Basil also says, that the cause of the fall, and denial of the Apostle Saint
Peter, was the confiding, and presuming vainly in himself. Because he said with
arrogance, and presumption, that though all men should be scandalized yet would
not he be scandalized, but would rather dye with Christ; For this did God
permit, that he, should fall; that so he might be humbled, and know himself. We
must never give way that our eyes may wander from our selves, nor ever be
secure in this life: but considering what we are, we must go ever on, with
great care of our selves, and with great care, and fear, lest the enemy whom we
carry still about us, put some trick upon us, and provide some snare, into
which he may procure us to fall.

So that as we must not stay upon the knowledge of our own misery, and weakness,
but pass instantly on to the knowledge of the goodness of God, so neither must
we stay upon the knowledge of God, and his mercies, and favors, but return
with speed again, to cast our eyes down upon our selves. This is that Jacobs
ladder, whereof one end is fastened to the earth, in our knowledge of our
selves, and the other reaches up to the very height of Heaven. By this ladder
must you ascend, and descend, as the Angels ascended, and descended by that
other. Rise up by the knowledge of the goodness of God, but stay not there, lest
you grow into presumption, but descend to the knowledge of your selves: yet
stay not also there, lest you fall into despair; but still return again to the
knowledge of God, that so you may have confidence in him. In fine, the business
consists, in that you be still ascending, and descending, by this ladder.

We read of a certain devout Woman that did use this exercise, to free her fell
from several temptations which the devil brought against her, as she her self
related, when the devil would tempt her by way of confusion, desiring to make
her believe that her whole (...) was nothing but sin, error, and abuses then
she would raise her self up, but yet sill with Humility, by the consideration
of the mercies of God: and she would be saying to this effect, I confess O my
creator, that my whole life has been led in darkness, but yet I will hide my
self in the wounds of Christ Jesus crucified, and I will bath my self in his
blood: and so my wickedness shall be consumed, and I will rejoice in my Creator,
and my Lord, Thou shall wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow. And so also,
when the devil would offer to put her up to pride, by tentations of a contrary
kind, seeking to make her think that she was perfect, and pleasing to God, and
that there was no cause why she should any longer afflict her self, and lament
her sins: then would she humble her self, and make the devil this answer. O
wretched creature that I am. Saint John Baptist was sanctified in his mothers
womb, and yet notwithstanding all that was continually exercised about
repentance. And I have committed so many defects, and have never lamented them,
no nor even considered them as they deserved. With this the devil not liking to
endure so great Humility on the one side, nor so great confidence in the other,
(as we may imagine) said thus to her. Be thou accursed, and he also who has
taught thee this, for I know not how to make entrance here, since if I abase
thee by confusion, thou raisest thy self up as high as Heaven, by the
considetation of the mercy of God: and if I raise thee up toward presumption,
thou abasest thy self by the consideration of thy sins, as low as hell by way of
Humility.

Now after this very manner, are we to use this exercise, and so shall we on
the one side, be full of circumspection, and fear, and on the other, full of
courage, and joy. Fearful in regard of our selves, and joyful through our hope
in God. These are those two lessons, which God gives daily to his elect, the
one to make them see their defects, and the other to make them see the goodness
of God, who takes them from us with so much love.

CHAP. IX. Of the great benefit, and profit, which grows by this exercise of a
man's knowing himself.
TO the end ha^ we may yet be more animated to this exercise of the knowledge
of our selves, we will go on declaring some great benefits, and advantages
which are contained therein. One of the chief thereof, has been showed
already, namely, that this is the foundation, and root of Humility, and the
necessary means both for the purchase, and preservation thereof One of those
ancient Fathers being asked how a man might do to obtain true humility, made
this answer. If he consider only his own sins, sounding, and digging deep into
the knowledge of himself, this man shall obtain true humility. This alone were
sufficient to make us attend much to this exercise, since it imports us so very
much toward the obtaining of this virtue. But yet we may pass further on, and
say, that the humble knowledge of our selves, is a more certain way toward the
knowledge of God, then the profound study of all sciences. And the reason which
Saint Bernard gives is, that this is the most high science of all others, and
of the greatest benefit. For from hence a man comes to the knowledge of God,
which is given us to be understood, as Bonaventure says, by the mystery of
that in the holy Gospel which Christ our Savior wrought, upon the person of
the man who was born blind. For by laying dust upon his eyes, he gave him both
corporal sight wherewith to see himself, and spiritual sight also, wherewith to
know, and adore God. So to us who are born blind through the ignorance both of
God, and of our selves, God gives sight by laying dirt upon our eyes where of
we were made, to the end, that considering our selves who are but as a little
dirt, we may receive that sight whereby first we may see, and know our selves,
and from thence may arrive to know God. And the more any man knows his own
baseness, he shall the more discern the greatness, and majesty of God. For one
contrary, and one extreme put by the other, will make that other appear the
more. White laid upon black, appears the more fresh and clear. And so since
man is the most extreme baseness, and God the most high excellency, they are
two contrary extremes; and from hence it is, that the more a man knows himself,
in whom he finds, that there is no goodness at al, but only nothing, and sin;
the more he finds the goodness, and mercy, and liberality of God, who vouchsafes
to love us, and as it were, to converse with so great a baseness as ours is.

From hence grows the soul to be greatly kindled, and inflamed toward the love
of God, for it never gives over marvelling, and giving thanks to God, for that
man being so miserable, and so wicked, God indures him upon the earth, and
daily also does him many favors. For it happens often, that we cannot so much
as endure our selves, and that yet the goodness, and mercy of God toward us is
such, as that not only he endures us, but he is pleased to say of us: My
delight is to be with the Sons of men. What did thou find O Lord in the sons
of men, that thou should say, my delights are to converse with them.

For this did the Saints so much frequent the exercise of the knowledge of
themselves, that so they might acquire a greater knowledge of God, and a
greater love to his divine Majesty. This was that exercise, and prayer, which
Saint Augustine used. O my God, which art ever the same, and never changest;
let me know my self, and let me know thee. And this was the prayer of another,
wherein he spent whole days, and nights; Who art thou O Lord, and who am I. By
this way came the Saints to a very high knowledge of God, and this is a very
plain and certain way: and the more you dig down into the knowledge of your
selves, the higher shall you rise, and the more shall you grow in the knowledge
of God, and of his infinite mercy, and goodness. As also on the other side, the
higher you rise, and the more you grow in the knowledge of God, the lower you
will descend, and the more you will profit in the knowledge of your selves. For
the light which comes to you from Heaven, will show you such sluttish corners
in your souls, as will make you ashamed of that which, in the eyes of the
world, will seem very fair, and good. Bonaventure says, that as when the sun
beams enter into any room, every moat of the air will show it self. So the soul
being illustrated by the knowledge of God, and by the beams of that true sun of
justice, the very least things will instantly be seen, and so the soul comes to
hold that for faulty, which he who enjoyes not so great light, will esteem to
be good.

This is the reason why all holy men are so humble, and hold themselves in so
small account, and the more holy, and perfect they are, they are the more
humble, and the account wherein they hold themselves, is so much the less. For
still, as they have more light, and greater knowledge of God, they know
themselves better, and see that of their own stock, they cannot brag, but only
of nothing, and of sin. And how much soever they know themselves, and how many
faults soever they see in their own souls, they still believe, that there are
many more which they see not, and conceive that the least part thereof, is that
which they can come to know, and after this rate do they esteem themselves. For
as they believe that God is more good then they are able to comprehend so also
do they believe, that themselves are more wicked then they can understand. And
as, how much soever we conceive, or know of God, we cannot perfectly comprehend
him, but still there will be more, and much more to be conceived, and known; so
how much soever we know our selves, and how much soever we humble, and despise
our selves, we shall never be able to descend so low, as to arrive to the depth
of our misery. And this is no aggraration, but a clear truth. For since man
has nothing of his own store, but nothing, and sin, who will ever be able to
humble and abase himself so much, as those two titles deserve.

We read of a devout Woman who desired light of God to know her self, and she
discerned so much deformity, and misery in her condition, that she was not able
to endure it, and then she prayed thus to God. O Lord not so much, for I shall
faint under the hurden. And of another, who begged of God many times that he
would make him see, and know himself, God opened his eyes a little, and it had
like to have cost him dear. For he saw himself so ugly, and so abominable, that
he uttered loud cries, and said: O Lord I beseech thee, even for thy mercies
sake, to take this spectacle from before mine eyes, for I can look no longer
upon this figure.

From hence grows also, that holy kind of hate, and detestation of themselves,
in the servants of God, whereof I spoke before. For how much more they know the
immense goodness of God; and love him more, so much the more do they abhor
themselves, as having been opposites, and enemies of God, according to that of
Joh. Why have thou set me as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden to my
self. Job: 7.20. They see that in themselves they have the root of all
mischief, which is the wicked, and perverse inclination of our flesh, and upon
this knowledge, they raise themselves up against themselves, and abhor
themselves. Do you not think it reason to abhor him, who made you forsake, and
sell so great a good as God is, for a little vain contentment, or carnal
delight? Do you not think it reason for you to hate him, who made you loose
eternal glory, and deserve Hell for even, him who wrought you so much hurt, and
still persists in doing it, do you not think that you have cause to detest?
Well now, this person is your self, an opposite, and enemy of God, an opposite
and enemy of your own salvation.

CHAP. X. That the knowledge of ones self, does not canse dismay, but rather
gives conrage, and strength.
THere is another great benefit, which grows from the exercise of knowing a
man's self; that not only it causes no dismay, or base fear, as perhaps some
might doubt, but rather a great heart, and courage, toward all those things
which are good. And the reason of this is, that when a man knows himself, he
sees that here is no color why he should rely upon himself, but that
distrusting himself, he must put all his confidence in God, in whom he finds
himself strong, and able for all things. Hence it is, that these are the men
who are apt to attempt, and undertake great things, and these are they who go
through with them. For in regard they ascribe all to God, and nothing to
themselves, God takes the business in hand, and makes it his, and holds it upon
his own account; and then he is wont to do mighty things, and even wonders, by
the means of weak instruments. To show the riches, and treasures of his
mercies, God will do wonderful things, by instruments who are miserable and
weak. He uses to put the treasures of his mercy into the poorest vessels, for
thus does his glory shine most. This is that which God said to St: Paul, when
being even tired with temptations, he cried out, and begged, that he might be
delivered from them; and God made him this answer. My grace shall be sufficient
for thee, how great soever thy temptations and miseries may be, and then does
the power of God prove it self to be more strong, and perfect, when the
weakness, and infirmity is more apparent. For as the Physician gains more
honor, when the sickness which he cures is more dangerous, so when there is
more weakness in us, our delivery brings more glory to Gods arm, and power; and
so does Saint Augustine and Saint Ambrose, expound this place. So that when a
man knows and distrusts himself, and puts all his confidence in God, then does
his Majesty come and help; and when on the other side, a man puts considence in
himself, and in his own diligences, and means, he is forsaken by Almighty God.
This says Saint Basil, is the cause why when we desire to make our prayers
best, and to have most devotion in certain principal times, and occasions, it
sals out many times, that we have less; because we put our considence in our
own means, and in our own diligences, and preparations. And at other times, we
are prevented with great benedictions, and sweetness, when we look for them
least, to the end, that we may know, that this is an effect of the grace, and
mercy of our Lord, and of no diligence, or merit of ours. So that a man's
knowing his misery, and frailty, causes no cowardice, or dismay, but rather
gives courage, and strength, in regard that it makes him distrust himself, and
place all his confidence in God. And this is also that which ^e Apostle says,
When I am weak then am I strong. 2 Cor. 12.10. That is, when I am humbled, then
I am exalted. For thus do hoth Saint Augustine, and Saint Ambrose declare it.
When I humble and abase my self, and know that I am good for nothing, then am I
exalted and raised up. Whilst I know, and see my infirmity, and misery,
fastening my self upon God, I find my self more strong, and more full of courage,
for he is all my confidence, and strength.

Hereby you may understand, that it is not Humility, nor any thing which
springs from thence, when there com to us sometimes certain dismays, and
dejections, concerning our little progress in grace, and when we fear that we
shall never obtain such or such a virtue, and never overcom such an il condition
or inclination; or that we shall not be fit for this or that office, and
ministry in which we are or may be employed. This may seem to be humility, but
many times it is not so, but rather springs from pride. For such a one casts
his eyes upon himself, as if by his own strength, and diligences, he were to go
through with that business; whereas he ought to cast them upon God, in whom we
are to be full of confidence and courage; and say, The Lord is my light, and my
salvation, whom then shall I fear; the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom
then shall I be afraid. If whole armies shall rise against me, my heart shall nor
be afraid. If they shall bid me battle yet will I hope in God. Psalm. 27. Though I
walk in the midst of the very shadow of death, and arrive even at the very
gates of hell, yet my heart shall not fear, because thou O Lord art with me.
Psalm. 23. With what variety of words, does the holy Prophet express the self
same thing, and indeed we have the Psalms full of this, to signify the
abundance of pious affections, and of the confidence which he had, and which we
ought to have in God. In my God, I will pass over a wall, how high soever it may
be. Nothing shall be able to put it self between me, and home. God can conquer
giants, by grasshoppers. In my God, I will tread lions and dragons under my feet.
By the grace and favor of our Lord, we shall be strong. He teaches my hands to
fight, and mine arms shall break even a bow of steel.

CHAP: XI. Of other great benefits and advantages, which grow, by the exercise
of a men's knowledge of himself.
ONe of the principal means, which, for our parts, we are able to employ, to
the end that our Lord may show us favor, and communicate great graces and
gifts to us is, that we humble our selves, and know our own frailty and misery.
And so said the Apostle St. Paul, I will gladly glory in my infirmities, and
weaknesses, that so the power of Christ may dwell in me. And St. Ambrose upon
those words, I am pleased in my infirmities, says, If a Christian be to glory,
it is to be in his own poverty, and misery, whereby he may increase and
prosper, in the sight of God, St. Augustine brings that of the Prophet, to this
purpose. Thou O God, sentest a gracious rain upon thine inheritance: and
refreshedst it when it was weary. When, think you, that God will give the
voluntary and sweet rain of his gifts, and graces to his inheritance, which is
the soul of man? When the same soul shall understand her own infirmity, and
misery, then will he perfect it, and the voluntary and sweet shower of his gifts
and graces, shall fall down upon it. And as here amongst us, the more our poor
beggars discover their wretchedness, and their sores, to rich and charitable
men, the more they move them to pity, and the more aims they receive at their
hands, so the more a man knows, and humbles himself, and confesses his misery,
the more does he invite, and incline the mercy of God, to take pity, and
compassion on him, and to communicate the gifts of his grace with the more
abundance. For he gives strength to the weak, and to to them who are, as if
they were not, but he multiplies courage, and strength.

To declare in few words, the great benefits, and advantages of this exercise,
I say that the true knowledge of a man's self, is the universal remedy of all
inconveniences. And so in the questions which we use to ask in spiritual
conferences, whence such or such a thing uses to grow, and what may be the
remedy thereof, we may in effect answer in them all, that they proceed from
want of a man's knowing himself, and that the remedy thereof would be to know,
and humble himself as he ought. For if you ask whence it grows that I judge of
my Brethren, I say from the want of knowing my self. For if I would diligently
watch over my self, and duly examine mine own heart, I should find so much for
me to do, and so many miseries to bewail, that I would not mark the faults of
others. If you ask from whence it comes, that sometimes I speak sharp, and
unmortified words to my Brethren, that also grows from the want of knowing my
self. For if I knew my self well, and held my self for the worst of the
company, and looked upon every other man as if he were my superior, I should
not be so bold, as to use such language to them. If you ask from whence grow
those excuses, and those complaints, and those murmurings, as why they do not
give me this or that, or why they treat me in such a fashion; it is clear that
it rises from the same root. If you ask from whence it comes, that a man is so
much troubled, and dejected, when he finds himself molested, by variety of
temptations, or grows melancholy, and is discouraged, when he falls often into
any defect; this also grows from want of a man's knowing himself. For if you
were truly humble, and considered well the malice of your hearts, you would not
be troubled, or dismayed at this, but you would rather be in wonder, that you
commit no worse things, how you came not to have more dangerous faults and you
would be giving great thanks, and prais to God, for holding you so fast in his
hand, that so you fall not into those things, into which infallibly you would
have fallen, if he had nor held you up. For from a very source, and sink of
vice, what sin is that which would not flow? From such a filthy dunghill what
should we expect, but an odious and abominable stink, and from such a tree,
such fruit, upon those words of the Prophet. He remembers that we are but
dust, Saint Anselme says, what wonder is it, if dust be blown away by wind. If
also you desire a means whereby you may come to show much charity toward your
Brethren, and that you may be obedient, and patient, and very penitent, you may
here find the remedy of all.

CHAP. XII. How much it concerns us to be exercised in the knowledge of our
selves.
IT will appear by what is said, how much it concerns us to be exercised in the
knowledge of our selves. Thales Male sius, one of the seven wise men of Greece,
being asked which of all natural things, was the hardest to be known, made this
answer, A man's self. Because the love which a man bears himself, is so great,
that it distracts, and hinders this knowledge, and from hence grew that saying,
which was so much celebrated amongst the ancients. Nosce te ipsum, know thy
self. And another said, Tecum habita, dwell with thy self. But let us leave
these strangers, and come home to others of our own communion, who are bettter
masters of this science. The blessed Saint Augustine, and Saint Bernard say,
that the science of a man's knowing himself, is the most profitable, and most
high that ever was invented, or found. Men, says Saint Augustine, are wont to
esteem much the knowledge of the Heavens, and of the earth by Astrology, and
Cosmography, and to know the motions of the sky, and the course of the
planets. With their proprieties, and influences; but yet the knowledge of a
man's self, is the most high and profitable science of them all. Other sciences
blow a man, and puff him up, as Saint Paul says; but we are humbled, and
edified by this. And so the Fathers, end all spiritual conductors, do greatly
charge us, to employ our selves in prayer, upon this exercise: and they reprove
the error of some, who pass too lightly over the consideration of their own
delects; and detain themselves in thinking upon other devout things, because
they find consolation in them, but none in the consideration of their defects,
and faults, because they take no pleasure in looking into themselves; and in
this they are like such as are deformed, who because they are so, dare not look
upon themselves in a glass.

Saint Bernard speaking to Man, in the person of God, says thus. O man, if
thou did see and know thy self, thou would be displeasing to thy self, and
thou would be pleasing to me: but now because thou do not see, and know
thy self, thou art pleasing to thy self, and art displeasing to me. Take heed
that there come not once a time, when thou shall neither be pleasing to God,
nor to thy self; not to God, because thou have sinned; nor to thy self, because
thou art damned by thy self, through thine own fault.

Saint Gregory treating of this, says, there are some, who as soon as they
begin to serve God, and to take virtue a little into their consideration, think
presently, that they are holy, and good; and do so place their eyes upon the
good they do, that they forget their miseries, and sins past, yea and
sometimes, their present sins too; for they are so very busy about gazing upon
the good they do, that they attend not, nay and see not, the il which sometimes
they commit. But such as indeed are good, and the elect of God, proceed alter a
very different manner. For whereas indeed they are full of virtue, and good
works, they are yet ever looking upon the ill they do, and are considering, and
ruminating upon their in perfections, and defects And we shall quickly see what
become of both these kinds of men. For they who are most considering their
sins, secure their good deeds, and conserve the great virtues which they
possess, remaining ever in Humility; and on the contrary side, those others,
who are looking so earnestly upon their good deeds, loose them, because they
grow vain, and proud thereof. So that good men serve themselves of their very
sins, and draw good, and spiritual profit from thence, whereas ill men draw
hurt, and loss, even from their good deeds, because they make ill use thereof.
As it happens in the case of corporal food, which though in it self it be
healthful and good, yet if a man eat of it without rule or measure, it will
make him sick. And so on the other side, if the very poison of vipers be taken,
with a certain composition, and proportion, it will become a treacle, and give
him health. When therefore they shall bring the good things which you have done
to your memory, to the end, that you may esteem, and value your self. Saint
Gregory advises you, to oppose your ill deeds against them, and to call your
former sins to mind. So did Saint Paul, to the end, that his great virtues
might not blow him up, as also his having been rapt into the third Heaven, and
made capable of those high revelations, which were imparted to him. Alas says
he, I have been a blasphemer, and a persecutor of the servants of God, and of
the name of Christ; alas I am not worthy to be called an Apostle, because I
have persecuted the Church of God. This is a very good counterpoise, and a very
good countermine, against this temptation.

Upon those words, which the Archangel Gabriel spoke to the prophet Daniel, O
son of man observe, what I intend to say to thee. S. Jerome says, that those
holy prophets, Daniel, Ezekiel, and Zacharias, through the high and continual
revelations, which they had, seemed already, as it were, to converse amongst
the Quires of Angels; and to the end that they might not exalt themselves above
themselves, and grow idle headed, and proud, upon that occasion, as conceiving
that they were grown to be of a kind of Superior and Angelical nature, the
Angel lets them know on the part of God, that they must remember their humane
nature and frailty; and he calls them sons of men, that so they might understand
themselves to be frail men, and miserable creatures like the rest; and that so
they might be humble, and esteem themselves but as they were. And we have many
examples in histories both ecclesiastical and profane, both of Saints and
other illustrious persons, Kings Emperors, and Prelates, who used this means,
and ever kept some about them, who might bring them to remembrance from time to
time, that they were but men; so to conserve them in humility, and to keep
them from growing vain and proud.

It is recounted of Franciscui Borgia, that whilst he was yet Duke of Gandia,
an holy man gave him this counsel, that if he had a mind to profit much in the
service of God, no day might pass, wherein he would not think seriously of
somewhat, which might put him to confusion, and a mean opinion of himself. And
he took this counsel so much to heart, that from the time that he used the
exercise of mental prayer, he employed every day, the two first hours thereof,
upon this knowledge, and contempt of himself. And besides, whatsoever he heard,
and read, and saw, it all served him toward this abasing, and confusion. Let
us therefore observe this counsel, and practice it. Let no one day pass,
wherein we spend not some time of prayer, and consider not somewhat which may
tend to our confusion and contempt: and let us not grow weary, nor give over
this exercise, til we find that our soul has even drunk up, a profound and
cordial desire to be disesteemed and despised: and til we may feel our selves
to be greatly ashamed, to appear with so much baseness and misery as ours is,
before the high presence and majesty of almighty God.

We have very much need of all this, for our pride, and inclination to be
honored, and esteemed, is so great, that if we walk not continually in this
exercise, we shall find our selves every hour to be listed up above our selves,
as cork swimming upon the water, for no cork is so light and vain as we. We
must ever be repressing, and beating down that swelling and pride which heaves
us up, and we must look toward the feet of our deformity, and baseness, that so
the wheel of our vanity, and pride may be broken in pieces. Let us remember the
parable of the Figtree, which is mentioned in the holy Gospel, and which the
owner thereof has a mind to pluck up by the roots; because in three years it
had born no fruit; but the gardener moved that it might be suffered to grow a
year longer, and said that he would dig about it, and that if then, it gave no
fruit, it might afterward be rooted up. Dig you in like manner, about the dry,
and barrain Fig Tree of your souls, and let the dung, and miseries of your sins
be cast round about it, since you have such store thereof, and so you shall be
also fertile, and bear fruit.

To the end, that we may be the more animated to use this exercise, and that no
man take occasion to give it over through any vain apprehensions. We are to
understand two things. The first, that no man must think this exercise belongs
only to beginners, because it also concerns Proficients, and most perfect men;
since we see that they, and even St. Paul himself did use it. In the second
place it is fit for us to understand, that this exercise is no afflictive, or
melancholy kind of thing, nor causes trouble or disquiet, but rather brings
with it great peace, and rest, yea, and great contentment, and joy, for any man
to consider, and know himself, how many defects or faults soever he commit, and
how perfectly soever he understand; that because he is so wicked, he deserves
that al men should despise, and hate him. For when this knowledge of our selves
grows from true Humility, that pain comes accompanied with such a kind of
swavity, and contentment, that a man would be sorry to be without it. Other
pains and troubles which some feel, when they consider their faults and
imperfections, are temptations of the devil, who on the one side, procures by
this means, to make us think that we are truly humble; and on the other, would
be content to make us distrust the goodness of God, and to be disheartened, and
dismayed in his service. Indeed if we were still to pause upon the knowledge of
our own misery, and weakness, we should have occasion enough to be afflicted and
sad, yea and to be discouraged, and dismayed, but we must not stay there, but
pass on to the consideration of the goodness, and mercy, and liberality of God,
and how much he loves us, and what he suffered for us, and in this are we to
place all our hope. And so, that which would be an occasion of dismay, and
sorrow, by looking upon our selves, serves to animate and encourage us, and is
an occasion of greater comfort and joy, when we lift up our eyes toward God. A
man beholds himself, and sees nothing but cause of grief, but looking up to
God, he confides in his goodness without fear of being forsaken, notwithstanding
the many faults, and imperfections, and miseries which he discerns in himself.
For the goodness and mercy of God, upon which he has placed his eyes, and his
heart, does infinitely exceed, and out strip all that which can be ill in us.
And with this consideration, being rooted in the very strings of the heart, a
man unties himself from himself, as from some broken reed, and ever goes
resting upon God, and confiding in him, according to that of the Prophet
Daniel. Not confiding in our selves, nor in any merit, or good work of ours, do
we presume to lift up our eyes to thee O Lord, and to beg favor at thy hands
but by putting our confidence in thy great mercy.

CHAP: XIII. Of the second degree of Humility, and here it is declared, wherein
this degree consists.
THe second degree of Humility, says Bonaventure, is when a man desires to be
held by others in small account. Desires to be unknown, and dis-esteemed, and
that no body may have you in account. If we were well grounded in the first
degree of Humility, we should already have made most of our way toward the
second. If really we esteemed our selves little, it would not seem very hard to
us, that others should also esteem little of us; yea and we would be glad
thereof. Will you see that this is true, says he? All men are naturally glad,
when others conform themselves to our opinion, and think the fame that we
think. Well then, if this be so, why are we not glad, when others have us in
small account? Do you not know why? Because we esteem highly of our selves, and
we are not of their opinion. Bonaventure upon these words of Job, (as they are
read according to the vulgar latin: I have sin^^d, and transgressed truly: and
I have not received as I was worthy; chap: 33.27. says, many with their
tongues speak ill of themselves and say that they are this, and that, but they
believe not what they say, for when others say the same, yea, an less then
that, they cannot endure it. And these men when they speak ill of themselves,
say it nor with truth, nor do they feel it so in their hearts, as Job did when
he said: I have sinned, and really transgressed, and offended God, and he has
not punished me, according to my great demerit. Job said this with truth of
heart, but these men says Saint Gregory do humble themselves only in
appearance, and with the tongue. Whereas in their heart they have no Humility.
They will needs seem to be humble, whereas they have no mind to be so indeed:
for if in earnest they desired it, they would not be offended so much, when
they were reprehended, and admonished of any fault by others, and they would
not excuse themselves, nor be troubled so much as we see they are.

Cassianus recounts, that a certain religious man came once to visit the devout
Father Serapion, who in habit, jesture, and words, seemed to be of great
humility, and contempt of himself, and never made an end of speaking ill of
himself, and of saying that he was so great a sinner, and so wicked a man, that
he was not worthy to breath in the common air, nor to tread upon the earth, and
much less would he consent that they should wash his feet, or do him any
service. Wise Serapion, after he had dined, began to treat of some spiritual
things, as he had been accustomed, and applied also some little thing to his
guest, and gave him this good advice with great mildnes and love; Namely, that
fince he was young and strong, he should be careful to keep at home, and labor
with his hands for his food, according to the rule of Saint Paul, and not to go
idly up and and down to the houses of others. The young man was so much
troubled at this admonition, and advise, that he could not possibly dissemble
it, but showed it evidently by his countenance, Then said Serapion, what is
this my son, that till now you have been speaking so much ill of your self, and
so many things of dishon our and affront to you; and that now, upon an
admonition, so easy as this which contains no injury, or affront at all, but
rather much love, and charity, you have been so much offended and altered, that
you could not hide it? Did you hope perhaps, by means of that ill which you
said of your self, to hear that sentence of the wiseman out of my mouth. This
man is just and humble, since he speaks ill of himself? Did you pretend that we
should praise you, and hold you for a Saint. Ah, says Saint Gregory, how many
times is this that very thing, to which we pretend by our hypocrisies, and
counterfeit Humilities? but that which would fain seem humility is great pride.
For we humble our selves many times, to the end that we may be praised by men,
and beheld for humble and good. And if you will not grant me this, I must ask
you why you say that of your self, which you will not have others to believe?
If you speak it from your heart, and if you walk in the way of truth, you must
desire that others may believe it too, and may hold you for such as you said;
and if you desire not this, you show plainly that you pretend not thereby to be
humbled, but to be valued and esteemed. This is that, which the wiseman says:
There are some who humble themselves after a counterfeit manner, and their
heart is full of deceit, and pride. For what greater deceit can there be, then
by means of humility, to be honored, and esteemed by men; and what greater
pride, then to pretend to be held humble? To pretend to the praise of humility,
is not (says Saint Bernard) the virtue of humility, but the perversion, and
subversion thereof. For what greater perversion can there be then this? What
thing can be more unreasonable, then to desire to seem to be the better for
that, for which you seem worse? What things more unworthy and absurd, then to
desire to seem good, and to be held for such, even for the ill which you have
said of your self, Saint Ambrose reprehending this, says thus. Many have the
appearance of Humility, but yet they have not the virtue of humility, many seem
exteriorly to seek it, but interiorly they contradict it.

This pride, and inclination of ours, to b^ esteemed, and valued, is so great,
that we seek a thousand inventions, and ways, how to compass it. Sometimes we
do it directly, and sometimes indirectly; but we are ever procuring to bring
the water to this mil. Saint Gregory says, that it is the property of proud
men, when they conceive themselves to have said, or done any thing well, to
desire such as saw, or heard it, to tell them the faults thereof; their
intention yet being to be praised. They seem indeed to humble themselves
exteriorly, because they desire men to tell them their faults, but this is no
humility, but pride, for their design thereby is to be praised. At other times
you shall have a man speak il of somewhat, which he has done, and declare that
he is not pleased with it, that so he may come to know what the other thinks,
and he would fain hear it excused, and that the other should say, no certainly
it was very well said, or done; and you have no reason at all to be disquieted
with your self, upon that occasion. This I say, is that which he sought. A
certain grave Father, who was a very spiritual man, was wont to call this a
pride, of by hook or by crook; because by this devise, or engine, one man
fetches praise out of the mouth of another. A man makes an end of his Sermon,
and is very well content, and satisfied with himself, and entreats another to
tell him his faults: But to what end serve these hypocrisies, and fictions: for
you believe not that there were any faults, nor pretend any other thing, but
that he should praise your sermon, and that he should jump with your own
opinion; and that is indeed the thing which you are glad to hear; For if by
accident, he tell you plainly of any fault, you are not pleased, but rather you
will defend it, and sometimes it happens, that you will judge him who told you of
it; as not having so good an understanding, and note in things of that nature,
because he held that for a fault, which you conceive to have been well said.
All this is pride, and desire of praise, which you pretend to satisfy, by this
counterfeit Humility. At other times, when we are not able to conceal the
fault, we confess it very clearly, to the end, that since we have lost a
point? of honor by making the fault, we may recover it again by confessing it
after an humble manner. At other times, says Bonaventure, we exaggerate our
own faults, and say more then is true, to the end, that others seeing that it
is neither possible, nor credible, to have been so much as was said, they may
think that there was no fault committed at al, that so they may cast the
accusation upon the account of our humility; So that by exaggerating, and
declaring more then is true, we would conceal the fault which in truth is that
which we intend. By a thousand devises, and tricks, do we procure to hide, and
disguise our pride, under the cloak of Humility.

And thus, by the way you shall see, as St: Bernard says, how precious a thing
humility, and how base and hateful pride is. See how sublime and glorious a
thing humility is, since even pride desires to serve it self thereof, and to be
cloaked therewith, and see also how base, and shameful a thing pride is, since
it dares not so much as appear with the face discovered; but overshadowed, and
disguised by the veil of humility. For you would be extremely ashamed, and hold
your selves for greatly affronted, it the other should understand that you
pretend, and desire to be esteemed, and praised: and therefore it is, that you
procure to cover your pride, with the appearance of humility. But now, why will
you indeed be that, which you are so ashamed to seem to be. If you would be so
out of countenance, that others should know you desire to be esteemed, and
praised, why are you not much more ashamed to desire it. For the defect and ill
thereof, consists in the act it self, of your desiring it, and not in their
knowing that you desire it. And if you be ashamed that men should know it; why
are you not ashamed that it should be seen, and known by Almighty God. Thine
eyes O Lord see how imperfect I am. All this come upon us, for not being well
rooted in the first degree of humility, which keeps us so far from the second.
We must undertake this business from, the first grounds thereof; for first it is
necessary for us to understand our own misery, and our nothing, and from this
kind of profound knowledge of our selves, is to grow a base conceit in us, and
a despising, and contemning of what we are, which is the first degree of
humility, and from thence we must get up to the second. So that it suffices not
that you speak ill of your self, yea even though you speak it sincerely, and
from your heart, but you must procure to arrive so far, as that you may be
glad, that others think that of you, which you think, and say of your self; and
that they disesteem, and despise you. Saint John Climacus says, he is no
humble man who is content to abase, and speak ill of himself, (for what man is
he, who cannot be content to bear with himself) but that man is humble, who can
easily be glad to be ill entreated, and despised by others. It is well, that a
man should ever be speaking ill of himself, and confessing that he is proud,
and slothful, and impatient, and careless, and the like; but it were better
that he kept his patience, til he were told as much by others. If you desire
that others may think so of you, and hold you in no other estimation, or
account then this, and that you are truly glad thereof, when the occasion is
offered, this indeed is true Humility.

CHAP. XIV. Of some degrees, and steps, whereby a man may rise to the
perfection of this second degree of Humility.
IN regard that this second degree of humility is the most practical, and
difficult part of the exercise of this virtue, we will divide it as some have
done before us: and we will set forth four degrees, or steps thereof, that so
by little and little, and as it were by measured paces, we may rise up to that
perfection of humility, which this second degree exacts. The first step is, not
to desire to be honored, nor esteemed by men, but rather to fly from all that,
which has any touch of honor and estimation. Our books are full of the examples
of Saints, who were so very far from desi^ing to be esteemed or honored by the
world, as that they fled from honors, and dignities, and from all those
occasions which might bring estimation with them in the sight of men, as from
the most capital enemy which they could have. Christ our Redeemer, and our
Master, gave us the first example of this, when he fled upon his notice, that
they meant to chose him for their King; after that illustrious miracle of
having fed five thousand men with five loaves, and two fishes; when yet himself
ran no hazard in any state of life, how high soever it might be, but only to
give us example And for the self same reason, when he was pleased to manifest
the glory of his most sacred body, to his three Disciples, in his admirable
transfiguration, he commanded them not to speak of it to any, til after his
death, and glorious resurrection, and giving sight to those blind men, and
working of other miracles, he commanded them to be silent. And all this was done
to give us an exple of flying from honor, and the estimation of men, in regard
of our great danger to grow vain, and so to perish thereby.

Gerson brings that to this purpose, which the Poets sain of the Giant Antheus
son of the earth: Who fighting with Hercules, recovered new strength, every
time that he was cast down to the ground, and so he could not be overcome; but
Hercules observing this, lifted him up on high, and so cut off his head. This
says Gerson, does the devil pretend to do with us. He seeks to hoise us up
with honor, estimation, and praise, that so he may cut our throats, and, then
cast us down more low, then we rose high, And therefore the true humble man
casts himself down to the earth, in the knowledge of himself, and fears, and
flies from being puffed up, and praised.

The second degree, as Saint Anselmus says, is this, to suffer with patience,
whenever any occasion is offered, whereby you may seem to be disparaged, or
despised, and to b^a^ it w^l. We do not say in this place, that you should
desire inju^ies, and affronts; and that you should go in search thereof, and
rejoice therein, when you find them. That point is more high, and perfect, and
hereafter we shall treat thereof, but that which now we say is, that when any
thing shall present it self, which may seem to point at your disadvantage, you
bear it at least with patience, if you cannot do it with joy. According to that
of the wiseman. All that which offers itself, contrary to your sensuality, and
desire, receive it in good part, though it trouble, you, and suffer it with
humility, and patience. This is a great means, both for the obtaining of
Humility, and preserving it. For at honor, and the estimation of men, ^s a
means to make us proud, and vain, and therefore did the Sts. fly so far from
it, so all that which tends to our disestimation, and contempt, is a very great
means both for the getting of humility, and growing in it.

Laurentius Justinianus was wont to say, that Humility is like a stream, or
brook, which in winter carries much water, and little in summer, and so
humility grows less and less in prosperity, and greater in adversity.

Many are the occasions, and they are offered us daily, for the exercise of
humility, if we would use attention, and care in profiting thereby. As thus,
that which pleases others shall be effected, that which contents thee shall not
be done, that which others say shall be esteemed, that which thou say, shall
stand for nothing. Others shall ask, and receive, thou shall beg, and shall not
obtain; others shall be great in the mouths of men, and shall make no account of
thee: and affairs shall be communicated to others, and thou shall be held unfit
for them. Let every man take account of himself, and go discoursing of those
particular occasions, which may or use to offer themselves, and observe how he
proceeds therein. Observe how you like it, when another commands you
resolutely, and after an imperious manner. Observe how you take it, when they
admonish you, or reprove you for any fault Observe what you think, when you
conceive that your superior deals not confidently, but looks upon you with a
kind of wary, or jealous eye. Saint Dorotheus advises, that whenever any of
these occasions is offered us, to receive it as a remedy, and medicine,
wherewith to cure, and heal our pride; and to pray God for him who ministers
the occasion, as for the Physician of our souls, and to be fully persuaded,
that whosoever abhors these things abhors humility.

The third step which we are to mount, is, that we rejoice not, and take no
c^^ntment when men do esteem and praise us. This is more hard then the last
step, as Saint Augustine says. Though it be an easy thing to want praise when
it is not given; yet for a man to be glad to be esteemed, and praised, and not
to take contentment therein, when it is offered, is very hard. Saint Gregory
handles this point very well, upon those words of Job. If I saw the sun when it
shined, and when the moon went brightly on, and if my heart rejoiced in secret,
he says that Job spoke thus, because he did not joy, or take vain contentment
in the praises, and estimation of men. For this is to behold the sun when it
shines, and the moon when it is bright, for a man to consider the praise,
opinion, and fame, which he has amongst men, and takes delight, and gust
therein. He says therefore, that there is this difference between the humble,
and the proud, that the proud rejoice when they are praised, though it be not
true, which is said of them, and they rejoice because they keep no account at
all, concerning that which indeed they are in themselves, and in the sight of
God, but they only pretend to be valued, and esteemed by men: and so they joy,
and and even look big with it, as men who have attained to the end which they
aspire. But now the true humble man of heart, when he finds that they esteem,
and praise, and speak well of him, then shrinks he up, and is the more
confounded in himself, according to that of the Prophet. When they exalted me,
then did I humble my self the more, and walked on with the more confusion, and
fear. And that with reason. For he fears lest he should be the more punished by
Almighty God, for wanting that for which he was praised, or if perhaps he want
it not, yet he fears lest these praises should prove to his whole reward; and
that so they will come and say to him; Thou have already received the reward of
thy good works.

So that, whereas proud men take occasion to look big, and grow vain upon the
praises of men, from thence do such as are humble, take occasion to abase and
confound themselves so much the more. And this says Saint Gregory, is that
which the wiseman affirms; As silver is tried in the melter, and gold in the
furnace, so is a man tried by the mouth of him, by whom he is praised.

Gold and silver if it be not right, is consumed by the fire, but if it be
good, it is purified, and clarified thereby. Just so, says the wiseman, is a
man proved by praise. For when a man is esteemed, and praised, if he exalt
himself, and grow vain through those praises, his gold and silver is not good,
because the furnace of the tongue consumes it. But he, who hearing his praises,
takes occasion from thence to be the more confounded, and humbled, is most
perfect silver, and gold, because that fire of praise did not consume it: but
rather it remained more purified, and perfected thereby, since the man was more
confounded and humbled.

Take you therefore this for a sign, whether you profit in the virtue of
humility, or no, since the Holy Ghost delivers it for such. Consider whether
you be sorry when they esteem and praise you or rather whether you be not
content, and glad. We read of Franciscus de Borgia, that no one thing troubled
him so much, as when he found himself to be honoed for a Saint, and servant of
God. And being asked once, why he afflicted himself so much for this, (himself
not desiring it, nor procuring it) he made answer, that he feared the account
which he was to give to God When he found himself to be so far another man,
from that which he was conceived to be, which is that which we said before of
Saint Gregory. After this manner are we to be very deeply grounded in the
knowledge of our selves, that so the wind of praise, and estimation of men, may
not blow us up, and draw us out of our nothing. But we must rather be the more
ashamed thereof, and confounded thereby, considering how false those praises
are, and that we have no such virtue in us, as may deserve them; and that we be
not such as the world conceives, and publishes, and as indeed we ought to be.

CHAP. XV. Of the fourth step: which is to desire to be disesteemed, and
despised, and to be glad thereof.
THe fourth step for arriving to the perfection of humility, is for a man to
desire to be despised, and disesteemed, and be glad of dishonors, injuries, and
contempt. Saint Bernard says, The man who is truly humble, desires to be held
by others, in small account, and not to be accounted humble, but unworthy, and
mean, and to be glad thereof. This is the perfection of the second degree of
humility. And for this reason, humility is compared to Nard, which is a small
and odoriferous herb, according to that of the Canticles. My spikenard sends
forth the smell thereof. Cant: 1.12. For then does the Odor of this Nard of
humility, extend, and impart itself to others, when not only you put little
esteem upon your self, but when you also desire, and like well, that you be
despised and disesteemed by others. Saint Bernard notes that there are two
kinds of humility. One is when a man considering himself and perceiving his
misery and baseness, is convinced by the truth, and holds himself in no esteem,
and resolves that he is worthy to be despised, and dishonored by all men. He
says, that the former humility, namely, that of the understanding, was not in
Christ our Lord; for it was not possible for him to think that he deserved to
be held in mean account, and much less to be dishonored, and despised. Because
he understood himself perfectly well; and knew that he was true God, and equal
to his Father: But the second kind of humility was in him, namely, that of the
heart, and will. For in regard of the great love which he bare us, he was
pleased to abuse, and disauthorise himself, and to seem vile, and contemptible
in the eyes of men. And he says. Learn of me, for I am meek, and humble of
heart. But as for us, we are to have both these humilities, because the first
without the second, is deceitful and false. To desire to seem, and to be held
for other then that which really you are, is falsehood, and deceit. He who
really is humble, and indeed thinks basely, and disesteems, and despises
himself, is also to be glad, that others may despise, and disesteem him. This
is that which we are to learn of Christ our Lord. Consider how cordially, and
with how ardent desire and will, he embraced dishonor and contempt for love of
us. For he was not satisfied with abasing, and emptying himself, by making
himself man, and taking the form of a servant upon him, he who was, and is the
Lord of Heaven and earth; but he would needs assume the form, and habit of a
sinner. As says the Apostle, God sent his Son in the habit, and similitude of
a sinful man. He took not sin, because sin could not be in him, but he took the
mark, and sign of sinners, for he would be circumcised as a sinner, and
baptized amongst Publicans and sinners, as if he had been one of them, and
would be less esteemed then Barrabas, and judged to be a worse man, and more
unworthy of life then he. To conclude, the desire which he had to suffer
affronts, and scorns, and reproach, for love of us, was so very great, that he
thought the hour to stay very long, wherein al inebriated, and sick with love,
he might remain naked like another Noah, to be scorned by men. With baptism
(says he) am I to be baptized, (which was a baptism of blood) and how am I in
pain, till I may be able to put it in execution, with desire have I desired
that the hour may once arrive, wherein there shall be nothing for me but
buffets, and spurns, as to any slave. For he knew that they would spit upon his
face as a blasphemer; and cloth him with white as a fool, and with purple as a
counterfeit King, and above all, that they would load him with scourges, which
was the punishment of malefactors and murdering thieves; and finally with the
torment of the Cross, in the company of murderers; which then was the most
ignominious; and reproachful manner of death, that could be found in the world.
This is that which Christ our Redeemer desired with so great desire. As says
the Prophet in his name; I was expecting reproach, and affronts, as one would
expect somewhat which were very pleasing to him, and were to give him much
delight. And the Prophet Jeremy says, he desired, and thirsted after this
hour; that he might as a man may say, even have his belly full of reproaches,
and affronts, and scorns, as of things to which he carried an extreme appetite,
and of which he was very greedy, and indeed they were most savory to him, for
the love of us.

But now if the Son of God, desired dishonor and contempt, with so great
appetite, and received them with so much contentment, and gust for the love of
us, he having no way deserved them; me thinks it should be no such strange
matter for us, who have so well deserved all kind of dishonor, and contempt, to
desire for love of him, to be held for no other then what we are, and to
rejoice in suffering those disgraces, and affronts which we deserve: as Saint
Paul did when he said; For which reason I rejoice in my infirmities, and
injuries, and affronts, and necessities, and persecutions, and all kind of
difficulties for Christ our Lord. And writing to the Philippians, and treating
of his imprisonment, he desires them to bear him company in the joy he had, to
see himself in chains for Christ our Lord. He had such an abundance of joy in
the persecutions, and afflictions which he suffered, that he had to spare for
his friends, and therefore he invited them to partake thereof with him. This is
that milk which the blessed Apostles sucked from the breast of Christ. And so we
read thus of them; They were full of joy, and rejoicing, when they were carried
Prisoners before their Presidents, and into their Synagogues, and esteemed it
for a great favor, and honor at the hands of God; to be thought worthy to
suffer affronts, and injuries for the name of Christ. Herein they were imitated
by other Saints, as for example, by Saint Ignatius the Martyr, who when they
were carrying him to be martyred at Rome, with many scorns, and reproaches, was
full of joy, and said. It is but now that I begin to be a Disciple of Christ.

CHAP. XVI. That the perfection of Humility, and of all other virtues, consists
in performing the act, thereof, with delight, and cheerfulness, and how much
this imports toward our perseverance in virtue.
IT is the common Doctrine of the Philosophers, that the perfection of virtue
consists in performing the acts thereof, with delight, and cheerfulnes. For
treating of the signs, whereby it may be known, whether a man have obtained
the habit of any virtue: they say they are these; when a man works according to
that virtue, Prompte, Faciliter, and delectabiliter: with promptitude, with
facility, and with delight. He who has acquired the habit of any art, or
science, performs the works thereof with extreme promptitude, and facility; And
we see, that he who is skilful upon any Instrument, and has gotten the habit
thereof, plays with extreme promptitude, and facility: and has no need to
provide himself, nor to think much of the matter, for even though he think of
other things he will yet play well. Now in the self same manner, he who has
acquired the habit of virtue, performs the acts thereof. And therefore if you
will know, whether you have acquired the virtue of humility, look first wheher
you perform the works thereof with promptitude, and facility, for if you feel
difficulty, or repugnance in the occasions which present themselves to you, it
is a sign that you have not yet acquired the perfection of that virtue. And
if, for the bearing them well, you have need of preventions, and consideration,
I confess it is a good way for the obtaining the perfection of that virtue,
but still it is a sign that you have not obtained it yet. As he who is to play
upon the Lute, must think where to place one finger, and where another, and
calling to mind the rules which he was taught, does well toward his learning to
play; but withal, it is a sign that as yet, he has not gotten the habit of
that Instrument; For he who has got it, needs not call this or that to mind, to
the end that he may play well. And so said Aristotle. He who has perfectly
acquired the habit of any art, finds it so easy to perform the acts thereof,
that he has no need of cogitation, or deliberation how to do them, for the
doing them well. And so the Philosophers come to say, that the virtue of a man
is known by his sudden, and inconsiderate acts, a man's virtue is not known by
the acts which he performs, upon great deliberation, but by such as do come
from him at unawares.

Yea, and the Philosophers say yet more then this, Plutarch treating how it may
be known, when a man has obtained a virtue, gives two signs thereof; and one
of them which the great Philosopher Zeno left in writing, is by his Dreams. If
even when you are in your dreams, as you are sleeping, you have no ill
impulses, or unclean imaginations; or when, if you have them, you take no
delight, or contentment in them, but the contrary: and when you resist the
temptation, and delight thereof, even in your Dreams, as if you were awake;
this is a sign that the vertueis well rooted in your souls, and that not only
your will is subject to reason, but even your sensual appetite, and imagination.
Just so, as when Coach-horses are well taught, though the Coachman lay the rains
on their necks, and perhaps sleep himself, yet they go on their way without
making any fault. So says the Philosopher: They who have perfectly obtained
any virtue, and have totally subdued the effects, and brutal appetites which
repugne to it, go on their right way, even when they sleep. Saint Augustine
does also teach us this Doctrine thus. Some servants of God carry so great an
affection to virtue, and to the keeping of Gods Comman dements, and so great
detestation against vice, and are so accustomed, and injured to the resistance
of temptations, when they are awake, as that they resist them also even when
they sleep. In this sort do some declare that place of Saint Paul: Sive
vigilemus, sive dormiamus, simul cum illo vivamus: which imports not only that
both living and dying, we must ever live with Christ, which is the common
exposition: but moreover, that the zealous servants of God, must ever live with
Christ, and that not only waking, but even sleeping also, and dreaming.

The Philosophers go yet further, and say, that the third condition or sign,
whereby it may be known, if a man have perfectly obtained any virtue, is when
he performs the the works thereof delelectabiliter, with delight, and gust, for
this is the principal sign wherein the perfection of virtue consists. If
therefore you will see whether you have obtained the virtue of humility,
examine your selves by that rule, which we delivered in the last Chapter; and
see whether you be as glad of any dishonor, and affront, as worldly men use to
be of honor, and estimation.

But besides, that all this is necessary for arriving to the perfection of any
virtue, there is yet another thing of very great importance, toward the
continuing, and persevering therein. For in fine, til we arrive to perform the
actions of virtue, with gust and joy, it will be a thing of much difficulty, to
continue in virtue. Saint Dorotheus says, that this was the common Doctrine of
those ancient Fathers. Those ancient Fathers were wont to say, and they held it
for a most certain truth, that whatsoever was not performed with gust and joy,
could not last any long time. It may well happen, that for some fit, you will
keep silence, and live with modesty and recollection, but yet, til this flow
from the very interior of the heart, and till by the good custom which you
use, you make it grow as it were to be connatural to you, and so you come to
perform it with sweetness and delight, you will not continue long therein, but
it will pass, as being affected, and forced. Et nullum violentum perpetuum.
Nothing forced, or violent, can long continne. For this reason it imports so
much, to exercise the acts of any virtue with such constancy, as thereby to
root it in the soul, which must even drink it up in such sort, that it may
fall, even as it were of it self, upon the virtue, and they may seem to be acts
of our own nature, for so we shall perform them with joy and gust. By these
means we may obtain a kind of security, that we shall continue, and persevere
therein. This is that, which the Prophet says, Blessed is that man, whose whole
contentment, joy, and gladness is in the law of the Lord, and who make it his
delights, and entertainments; for that man will yield the fruit of good works,
like a tree which is planted by the River side.

CHAP. XVII. Of some means for the obtaining of this second degree of Humility,
and particularly of the example of Christ our Lord.
THey ordinarily use to assign two several ways, or means, for the obtaining
of moral virtues. The one is of reasons, and considerations, which may
convince, and animate us thereunto; and the other is exercise of the acts of
that virtue, whereby we may acquire the habits thereof To begin with the first
kind of means, one of the most principal, and efficatious considerations,
whereof we may help our selves toward being humble, or rather the most
principal, and most efficatious of them all, is the example of Christ our Lord,
our Master, and our Redeemer, whereof though we have already said somewhat,
there will ever be enough to add. The whole life of Christ our Lord, was a most
perfect Original of Humility, from the very time of his birth, to that other of
his expiring upon the Cross. But yet to this purpose, St: Augustine does
particularly ponder the example which he gave us, by washing the feet of his
Disciples, upon that Thursday of the last supper, when he was even upon the
very brim of his passion, and death, Christ our Lord says Saint Augustine, was
not content with having given us the examples of his whole life past, nor yet
with them also, which he was shortly to give in his passion, the same being
then so close at hand, and wherein he was to appear according to the Prophet
Isaiah, the very last, or lowest of men: and as the royal Prophet David says
the very reproach, and scorn of men, yea the very outcast of the world: But our
Lord Jesus knowing, that his hour was now at hand, wherein he was to pass out
of this World, to his Father, he carried a great love to his Disciples, and was
resolved that he would express it now toward the end of his life. And supper
being ended, he rises from the Table, he puts off his upper garment, he girds a
towel to himself, he puts water into a basen, he prostrates himself at the feet
of his Disciples, yea and of Judas too: he washes them with those divine hands
of his, and he wipes them with the towel wherewith he was girt. O unspeakable
mystery! What is this O Lord, which thou art doing? says the Apostle Saint
Peter, Thou, O Lord, to wash my feet? The Disciples undestood not then what he
did, says our Lord, You understand not now what I am doing; but yet ere long,
I will declare it to you. He returns to the Table, and declares the mystery
thus at large. You call me Master, and Lord, and you say well, for so I am. If
then I being your Master, and your Lord, have humbled my self, and have washed
your feet, you are also to do the like to one another. I have given you an
example, to the end, that you may learn of me, and do as I have done. This is
the mystery, that you learn to humble your selves, as I have humbled my self.
The importance of this virtue of humility is on the one side so great, and so
is the difficulty also on the other, that our Lord was not content with so many
examples, as he had already given us, and ha^^ then so near at hand to give;
but that, as on^ who well knew our weakness, and who perfectly understood the
malignity of that peccant humor, whereof our nature was sick, he would needs
give us this strong Physic against it, and put it amongst the chief Legacies
of his last Will, and Testament, that so it might remain the more deeply
imprinted in all our hearts.

Upon those words of Christ our Lord; Learn of me, for I am meek, and humble of
heart: Saint Augustine exclaims thus: O sovereign Doctrine, O Master, and Lord
of all men, into whom death entered by means of pride, what is it O Lord which
thou will have us come and learn of thee? That I am meek, and humble of heart.
This is that which you are to learn of me. In this are the treasures of the
wisdom, and knowledge of the Father summed up, which have been hidden in thee,
that thou tell us, for the highest point, that we must come and learn of thee
that: Thou art meek, and humble of heart: it is so high, and great a thing, for
a man to make himself little, that unless thou who art so great, had made
thy self little, no man could have learnt it of thee? yea says Saint
Augustine, so great, and so hard a thing it is, for a man to humble himself,
and make himself little, that if God himself had not humbled himself, and
become little, men would never have been brought to humble themselves. For
there is nothing so deeply conveyed into their very bowels, and so
incorporated, as it were, into their hearts, as this desire of being honored,
and esteemed, and therefore was all this necessary, to the end, that we might
grow to be humble; for such Physic did the infirmity of our pride require; and
such a wound, such a cure. But if such a receipt as this, for God to have made
himself man, and to have humbled himself so much for our sakes, will not
recover us, and cure our pride, I know not says Saint Augustine what will ever
be able to do it. If to see the Majesty of our Lord so abased, and humbled,
will not suffice to make us ashamed of desiring to be honored and esteemed and
that hereupon we yet will not grow to a thirst of being despised, and abased
with him, and for the love of him, I know not what will ever serve the turn.
Holy Guericus being amazed and convinced by the great example of our Lords
humility, exclaims and expresses, that which it is reason that we should also
say, and draw from hence. Thou have overcome O Lord, thou have overcome my
pride, thine example has bound me hand and foot: behold I render, and deliver
up my self into thy hands for an everlasting slave.

It is also an admirable conceit which the glorious Saint Bernard brings to
this purpose, The Son of God (says he) saw two creatures, and both were
generous, noble, and capable of that blessed state to which they had been
created by Almighty God, and they both lost themselves, because they would
needs be like him. God created the Angels, and instantly Lucifer had a mind to
be like Almighty God. And then he carried others after him, and God cast them
instantly down to Hell, and so of Angels, they became devils. God also created
man, and instantly the devil struck him with his own leaprosie, and poison.
They fell gluttonoully upon what he told them, namely that they should be as
God, and then they broke the divine commandment, and so became like the devil.
The Prophet Elisus said to his servant Giezi after he took the presents of the
leprous Naaman. Thou have taken the goods of Naaman, and behold his leaprosie
shall also stick to thee, and to all thy descendents for ever. This was the
judgment of God against man, that since he would needs have the riches of
Lucifer, which was his pride, he should also have his leaprosie, which was the
punishment thereof. You see therefore here, that man was also undone, and made
like the devil, because he would needs be like God. And what might now be fit
for Son of God to do, finding his eternal Father to be so jealous, and careful
to maintain his own honor. I see says he, that by my occasions my Father
loses his creatures. The Angels would needs be as I am, they overthrevv
themselves, man would also be so, and he was also overthrovvn. They al have
envy at me, and would fain be such as I am. Well then, behold says the Son of
God, I will go in such a form, that whosoever vvil from henceforth become
like me, shall not lose but gain, and for this came the Son of God from Heaven,
and made himself man. Otherefore let such a bounty and mercy be blessed, and
praised, and glorified, which moved Almighty God to condescend to that so great
desire which we had to be like him; for now we may be as God, not according to
falsehood, and with a lie, and according to what the devil said, but according
to truth, and not now with pride, and malice, but with much sanctity, and
humility. Upon those words, Unto us a child is born. The same Saint says,
since God being so great, made himself little for us, let us procure to humble
our selves, and make our selves also little, that so it may not be to no
purpose for us, that the great God made himself so little as to become a child
for us. Because if you become not like this little child, you shall not enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven.

CHAP. XVIII. Of some humane considerations, and reasons whereby we are to help
our selves for being humble.
FRom the very beginning of this Treatise, we have been declaring many
considerations, and reasons, which may help and animate us much toward the
getting of the virtue of humility: showing that it is the root and foundation
of all the virtues, the short way to acquire them, the means to conserve them,
and that in fine, if we possess this, we shall be masters of them all. But
yet, that it may appear that we mean not to carry it all, by the only way of
spirit, it will not be amiss, that we deliver some humane considerations; and
reasons, which may be more proportionable, and connatural to our weakness, to
the end, that being so convinced not only by way of spirit, and of perfection,
but even of natural reason also, we may have both more courage, and more
affection to the contempt of honor and estimation of the world, and to proceed
in the way of humility, for all this will be needful, for the acquiring of a
thing so hard as this, and so it will be well that we help our selves of it.

Let it therefore be the first, that we put our selves to consider, and examine
at good leisure, and with attention what thing this honor and estimation of
men is, which makes so continual War against us, and gives us all so much to
do. Let us see what weight and bulk it has, that so we may esteem it no better
then it deserves, and may animate our selves to despise it, and not continue in
so much error as now we find our selves subject to. Seneca said very well, that
there are many things which we hold to be great, not because indeed they are
great, but because our poornes, and wretchedness is such, that the small seems
great, and the little much to us, and he brings the example of that weight
which is ordinarily carried by Ants: which in respect of their Body is very
great, being yet very small in it self; and just so it is with the honor, and
estimation of the World. If you deny it, I would ask whether you be indeed
either the better or the worse, because they esteem you not? Infallibly you are
not. Saint Augustine says, Neither is the ill man made good by being esteemed
and praised, nor the good man made il by being discommended and reproached.
Think of Augustine what thou will, that which I desire, is that my conscience
may not reproach me in the sight of God. This is that which imports, the rest
is foolery, for it neither gives, nor takes away. This is that which another
says, What is a man the better for being praised by another. And as much as
any man is in the sight of God, so much indeed he is, and no more. As was said
by the Apostle Saint Pau^. For not he that commends himself is approved, but
whom the Lord commends. 2 Cor: 10.18. Saint Augastine brings a good
comparison to this purpose. Pride and estimation of the world, is not greatness,
but swelling, and wind. And as when any part is swelled, it seems, but is not
truly great, so proud men, who are valued and esteemed by the world, seem as if
they were great, but they are not so; because that is not greatness, but
swelling. There are certain sickly men, who sometimes are thought to be upon
recovery, because they seem to look fat, and well, but that fatnes is not sound
and good, but it is rather sickly and swelling. So says Saint Augustine, is
the applause and estimation of the World, it may puff you up, but it cannot
make you great. If then it be so, that the opinion and estimation of the World
is not any thing of greatness in it self, but rather of sickness, and swelling,
why do we go up and down like Camelions, sucking in wind with our mouths open,
that so we may be the more swellen, and sick? It is better for a man to be in
health, though he seem sick, then to be sick and seem sound; so also is it
better to be good, though he seem wicked, then to be wicked, and be held for
good. For what good will it do you to be held virtuous, and spiritual, if
indeed you be not so. Saint Hierome upon these words. His works shall praise
him in the gates. Not the vain praises of men, but your good works must needs
defend and praise you, when you appear in judgment before Almighty God.

Saint Gregory recounts how in the Monastery of Hiconia, there was a certain
Monk who was generally in the opinion of being a Saint, and especially for
being very abstinent, and full of penance also otherwise. But the hour of his
death being come, he defired that all the Monks might be called to him. For
their parts they were very glad of it, as conceiving that they were to hear
from him, some matter of much edification, but he trembled, and was full of
anguish, and found himself compelled from within, to declare his true state to
them. And so he made them know that he was damned, because all his life had
been but hypocrifie. For when they thought he fasted, and did much penance, he
eat secretly when they saw him not, and for this says he, am I now delivered
over to a terrible, and furious Beast, whose tail has wreathed it self about,
and tied my feet, and his head is already entering now into my mouth, to fetch
out, and carry away my soul with him for ever. And with these words he expired
to the great amazement of them all. And now, what was this miserable creature
the better for having been reputed a Saint.

Saint Anthanasius compares proud men, who go in search of honor, to children
to hunt butterflies. Others compare them to spiders, who destroy and defeat
themselves in making their webs, for the hunting of flies. According to that of
Isa. They weave the spiders web, Isa: 59.5. For so the proud man ever
disimbowels himself, and casts up as it were his very maw, that he may obtain a
little humane praise. We read in the life of a certain honorable Person, that
he ever both carried, and showed a most particular hatred, and detestation
against this opinion, and estimation of the world, for he said that it was the
cause of great mischiefs, and the impediment of many blessings. And so they
hear him cry thus out sometimes, with much earnestnes, and many sighs. O
opinion, O opinion and estimation of the world, how many mischiefs have thou
wrought already, how many workest thou now, and how many will thou continue to
work.

CHAP. XIX. Of other humane reasons which will help us to be humble.
SAint Chrysostom upon those words of St. Paul. Not to think of himself more
highly then he ought to think, but to think soberly. Romans 12.3. goes proving
very expressly, that the proud and arrogant person, is not only wicked and
sinful, but a stark fool withal. To prove this, he brings that of Isaiah. The
fool speak foolish things, and by the follies which he utters, you shall
understand him indeed to be a fool. Well then, let us observe the follies which
are uttered by the arrogant, and proud man and we shall quickly see what a fool
he is. What is that, which the first. proud creature uttered, which was Lucifer
I will mount up to heaven, I will place and exalt my throne above the clouds,
and being there, above the stars, I will be like the most High. What could be
more foolishly, and dis-jointedly conceived. And in the tenth Chapter, he sets
down very arrogant and foolish words of Assure, King of the Assirians,
vvherevvith he glorified himself in that, with his powerful hand he had
conquered, and subdued all the Kings of the earth. As when a man takes the
poor little Birds out of a nest, which are bred up by the elder Birds, and as
a man who goes to gather the eggs which are not defended, so have I (says
he) conquered all the earth with the same facility, nor was there any one who
durst so much as stir, yea, or so much as open his mouth against me, either in
earnest or in jest. What greater folly can there be then this, says Saint
Chrisostom? And there he also brings in diverse other speeches of proud men,
which discover very sufficiently what fools they are, so that if you hear, and
mark their words, you will not easily discern whether they be words of a proud
man, or of some other who is a mere sot, so absurd, and dis-jointed they are.
And so we daily see that as fools move us to laughter, with what they say and
do, so do also proud men in their conversation, by the arrogant words which
they utter, redouning to their own praise, and by the gestures which they use,
and by the state and foolish gravity wherewith they walk, and by the high
account which forsooth, they will needs have men make both of their persons,
and of all that which is theirs, and by the estimation wherein they hold
themselves. And Saint Chrysostom adds, that the stupidity, or folly of proud
men, is worse, and worthy of greater reproach and shame, then that which is
natural; for this carries no fault, or sin with it, but the other does. From
whence also follows another difference between these two follies, that they who
are natural fools, cause pity, and move all men to be sorry, and compassionate
of their misery; Whereas the folly of proud men moves not others to compassion
and pity, but to laughter and scorn.

But in the mean time, proud men are sots, and so we must proceed with them as
such. For as we must condescend, and seem to that which fools say, that so we
may have peace with them, (though indeed the thing be not so, or at least
though we understand it not after that manner) (but yet still we will not
contradict them, because in fine, they are fools) just so do we proceed with
proud men. And indeed this humor, and madness reign, so much in the World at
this day, that now we can hardly converse with men, but we must be fain to
smooth them, and to say that which is not so, no nor is so conceived by us.
For the other takes so much delight to understand, that his stories give
contentment, and seem so well to others, that there is no better way to oblige
him, and to gain his good will then by praising him. And this says the Wiseman,
is one of the vanities and follies which he saw in the world, namely, That
wicked men were praised as good; because they were in high place, I saw the
wicked buried, who while they lived were in the holy place, and they were
praised in the City, (so the vulgar Latin has it) as for righteous works:
this also is vanity. What greater vanity, and madness can there be, then to
praise men, when they think there is no cause for it, yea and to do as many
times is done, when some praise others, for that which they did ill, or at
least for what they thought was ill done. And the jest is, that they have
already told others what they really think of you, but yet with you, because
forsooth you must be kept contented, they stick not for the most part to lie.
At other times they are fain to seek out by ways, that so they may be able
without lying to speak well of that, which indeed they do not like, and the
matter is, because they must treat you, and condescend to you as they would, to
some stupid for or fool. The while, that other conceives that you are of the
same humor with him, and that you are also glad when you are dealt with after
the same manner, and that the best morsel of the meat which he can be able to
give yo, after you have preached, or performed some such thing, is to tell you
that you discharged it excellently well, and that all the World was highly
pleased with you, and he treats you thus, to keep you in contentment, or else
to gain your good opinion, and affection, whereof perhaps he has need; but
that for which this serves indeed is to make you a veryer fool then you were
before, because he praises you for what you said, or did ill, and so you are
the more animated, and confirmed in committing the same errors another time.
Men dare not now a days speak what they think, because they know that truth is
grown troublesome. Truth procures hatred. And they know that he who is mad, and
frantic refuses to take Physic, and spits in the Doctors face, when he
desires to cure him: so does the proud man resist admonition, and reformation,
and therefore men will not tell such a one that which will discontent him, but
they think it the shorter way to make him think they like that, which yet
indeed they mislike, and the other believes all, and is well pleased with it:
Whereby also we may see the truth of that which we delivered in the last
Chapter, namely, how great a vanity, and madness it is, to make any account of
the praises of men, since we see that in this age, all is complement, deceit,
flattery, and lies. For even they are able to derive, and interret the word
after this manner, Complimento cumploy miento, that is to say, I comply, and I
lie, and the cause why I lie, is that I may comply.

Bu prou men says, Saint Chrisostom are abhorred by all. First by Almighty God
as the Wiseman says: Every arrogant man is a very abomination in the sight of
God, Prove: 16.5. And of seven things which God abhors, he places pride for the
first. And not only are they abhorred by God, but by men also. As they who have
ill lungs, have so unsavery breath, that there is no enduring of it, so also
have proud men.

But now even this very World, gives them here the pay of their pride, for it
punishes them in that very thing, to which they most pretend, and all proves
with them the contrary way. They pretend to be valued, and esteemed by all,
and they are held by all to be sots, and fools. They pretend to be beloved by all, and indeed they are abhorred by all. By their betters, because these men
make themselves their equals, by their equals, because these men make
themselves their betters; by their inferiors, because these men depresse them
more then they should. Even the domestics, and servants speak il of their
master, and endure him not. Where pride is, there is reproach. And on the other
side, the humble man is valued, and esteemed, affected, and beloved by all. As
children who for their goodness, their innocence, their simplicity of heart are
beloved, so says Saint Gregory are the humble For that clearnes and plainnes
of theispeech, and that conversing without doublenes or deceit, even robs men
of their very hearts. Humility is a loadstone which draws all men's affections
to it: and it seems that all men if they could, would take this humble man
into their very hearts.

To the end, that we may at length be fully persuaded that it is a mere
madness to go desiring, and procuring the estimation, and opinion of men. Saint
Bernard makes a very good dilemma, and concludes thus. Either it is madness in
the Son of God, to abase and empty himself so far, as to choose contempt, and
dishonor for himself, or else it is extreme madness in us, to be in so great
desire of the honor, and estimation of the World. It was not folly, or madness
in the Son of God, neither could it be, though the World thought it was as
Saint Paul says. To the blind and proud Gentiles, and Jews, Christ our Lord
seems to be a folly, or madness: but unto us who have the light of Faith, he is
infinite wisdom, and love. Now if his were infinite wisdom, it will follovv
that ours is stupidity, and folly; and that we are very sots in making such
account as we do of the opinions estimation, and honor of the World.

CHAP. XX. That the certain way for a man to be valued, and esteemed even by
men, is to give himself to virtue, and humility.
IF vvithal that which we have said, you vvil not yet forsake these sumes,
and abate that edg and desire of honor, and estimation, but will still be
saying, that in fine it is a great point, to hold a good opinion, and
estimation amongst men, and that this imports very much, even for the
edification of your Neighbors, and for many other things, and that the Wiseman
counsels us to have a care thereof. Have a care of thy good name. I say let it
be so, in the name of God; I am content that you have care to keep the good
name you have, and that you be esteemed, and held in good opinion by the World.
But yet I give you to understand withal, that if you desire it, as you say you
do, you err, even in order to that for which you desire it, and that you shall
never obtain that end by this means, but the direct contrary. The safe and
certain way vvherby you shall infallibly come to be much valued and esteemed
by men, is virtue, and humility, as Saint Chrysostom says. Procure every one
of you in particular, to be a good religious man, and to be the meanest, and
humblest of all the rest, and that you may appear to be so by your manner of
living; and in the occasions which shall present themselves, so you shall be
valued and esteemed by all men. This is indeed the honor of a religious man,
who has forsaken the World, and professes himself to be a Citizen of Heaven.
And on the contrary side, for him to desire to be valued and esteemed by men,
is a dishonor and affront to him, for which men would justly despise him.
Because this man began to build, and could not finish it. And so it is with
such as desire, and pretend to be valued, and esteemed by men, which indeed is
to return to the World with the heart. For this estimation is the most truly,
and properly belonging to the World, and that which you forsook, and from
which you fled, when you made that holy vow at your Baptism.

Will you clearly see how shameful, and reproachful a thing it is, for such
men to affect the estimation of the World, who profes to aspire toward
perfection? Let such a desire come but once so to light, as that others may
discern that you desire it, and you will quickly find how much your self will
be confounded, and out of countenance, that any such thing should be conceived
of you. We have a very good example of this, in the holy Gospel. The
Evangelists relate, that the Apostles went once with Christ our Lord, but yet
at such distance from him, that they might think he heard them not, and so they
went discoursing and arguing amongst themselves. Which of them was to be the
chief, and best man amongst them. But when they were al come home to Capernaum,
he asked them what that wa^, about which they had been discoursing upon the
wa^. And the holy Gospel faith, that the poor men were so ashamed, and out of
countenance to see their pretention, and ambition discovered, that they had not
one word to say. But they held their peace. Mark: 9.35. For by the way they had
disputed among themselves, who should be the greatest. But then did the Savior
of the World take them in hand, and say. You must know, O you my Disciples,
that amongst wordly men, and them who live according to the custom of the
world, they who govern and command, will be esteemed, and honored as great
Persons. But in my school it is directly otherwise; for the greatest there is
to be the least and must be a servant to all the rest. If any man desire to be
first, the same shall be last of all, and servant of all: Mark 9.35. By nothing
can you loose more then if once it come o be found, that you desire and pretend
to be valued and esteemed by men, and that you are standing upon puntilios, and
spend your thoughts upon such toys as these. And so John Climacus says very
well. That vain glory has many times been an occasion of ignominy to the
owners, for it has made them set upon things whereby they have proclaimed
their vanity, and ambition, and so came to infamy, and confusion. Bonaventure
adds, that pride blinds the understanding in such sort, that many times, the
more pride you have, the less you know it: and so as being blind, a proud man
says, and does such things, as that if himself could see them well, he then
would not for the World either say, or do them, even though there were no such
thing as God, or virtue, but merely for that reputation, and honors sake, which
is so eagerly pursued. How many times does it happen, that a man is troubled,
and complains, because they made no reckoning of him, in such an occasion, or
that they preferred some other before him in such a business; he conceiving that
it belonged to him, and that it will redound to his dishonor, and diminnution,
and that it will lie as a note upon him, and that others will discover it, and
reflect upon it, and under this color, he gives them to understand the
exception which he takes, and the trouble which he sustains, by means whereof
in very deed, he remains more noted, and disesteemed, because he is held now
for proudand for a man that stands upon certain points of honor, which amongst
humble, and good Christians, is a most abominable kind of thing. Whereas if he
would have passed it over, and neglected himself, and given way, that superiors
might do their will, he might have gained much honor, and been much esteemed
for it.

So that though there were no such thing as a way of spirit, but that men were
only to live in a course of prudence, and discretion, yea and even according to
the very Laws of the World, the true and certain way for a man to be valued,
esteemed, affected, and beloved by men, is to addict himself seriously to
acquire virtue, and humility. Even among the Gentiles, it is recounted of
Agesilaus who was the chief of the Lacedemoniaus, and accounted a Wise man
amongst them, that being asked by Socrates, how a man should do to make all
others esteem, and conceive well of him, made this answer. If you shall procure
to be such, as you desire to seem. And afterward, the same man being asked
concerning the same thing, answered thus. If you speak ever well, and do
better. And it is related of another Philosophet, that he had a great friend
who in every occasion spoke all good of him, and telling him one day, that he
owned him much, because wheresoever he chanced to be, he praised him much, and
spoke much of his virtues, the Philosopher answered him thus. I pay you well for
your pains, by living in such sort, as that you may not lie, in any of those
things which you have said of me.

But now we say not, for all this, that we must give our selves to virtue, and
humility, to the end that we may be valued, and esteemed by men, for that were
pride, and a perverse error. That which we say is, that if we procure to be
humble indeed, and at the heart, we shall be valued, and esteemed much, whether
we will or no: nay, and the more we fly from honor, and estimation, and the
more we shall desire to be despised, it will follow us the faster, just as the
shadow does the body. Saint Hierome treating of the devout matron Paula, says.
Flying from honor, and estimation, she was more honored and esteemed. For as
the shadow whilst a man flies from it, follows him, and on the contrary side,
if he follows the shadow it flies from him, and the faster he runs from it, the
more it flies, and so, as that he can never overtake it; just so it is, in the
point of honor, and estimation.

This was taught us by Christ our Lord in the holy Gospel, when he discoursed
of the way men were to hold in public meetings. When you shall be invited
(says he) sit not down in the highest place, lest perhaps a guest of greater
quality then your self may have been desired; and when he arrives, they wish
you to quit that place, and then you descend to the lowest with much confusion,
and shame. But that which you are to do, is to sit down in the lowest place,
that so when he comes who invited you, he may cause you to ascend higher, and
thus you shall receive honor before all the company. Which in substance is the
same thing, that the Holy Ghost had said before, by the mouth of the Wiseman:
Prove: 25.6, 7. Put not forth thy self in the presence of the King; and stand
not in the place of great men. For better it is that it be said unto thee, come
up hither: then that thou should be put lower in the presence of the Prince,
whom thine eyes have seen. But the parable concludes with saying. For every
man who exalts himself shall be humbled, and he who humbles himself shall be
exalted. Here you see, how the humble man who chooses the lowest, and meanest
place, is valued, and esteemed, not only before God, but before men also; and
on the other side, the proud man, who seeks the best, and highest seat, is
undervalued, and despised. Saint Augustine exclaims, and says. O holy
Humility, how unlike art thou to pride. Pride O my Brethren, cast Lucifer down
out of Heaven: but humility brought the Son of God from thence, to become man.
Pride cast Adam out of Paradise: but humility carried the good thief in
thi^^^^^ Pride divided and confounded the tongues of the Giants: but humility
united al them which were divided. Pride transformed Nabucadonosor into a
beast; but humility made Joseph Lord of Egypt, and Prince of the People of
Israel. Pride drowned Pharao, but humility raised, and exalted Moses.

CHAP: XXI. That Humility is the means to obtain inward peace of mind, and that
without it, this cannot be had.
LEarn of me, for I am meek, and humble of heart, and you shall find rest unto
your souls. One of the chief, and most efficatious reasons which we can bring
for the animating our selves to despise honor, and to procure to be humbled, is
that which Christ our Redeemer propounds to us, in these words, namely, that it
is a most excellent means, for the obtaining of interior quietness, and peace to
the soul, a thing so much desired by all spiritual men, and which Saint Paul
sets down for one of the fruits of the Holy Ghost. Gal: 5.22. But the fruit of
the spirit is love, joy, peace, etc. That we may the better understand this
quietness, and peace, which the humble man enjoyes, it will be well, that we
consider the disquiet, and restlesnes, which the proud man ever carries in his
heart, for one contrary is the better known by the other. The holy scripture is
full of sentences, which declare that wicked men have not peace. There is no
peace says the Lord unto the wicked, Isa. 48.22.

For they have healed the hurt of the Daughter of my People slightly, saying,
peace, peace, when there is no peace, Jer: 8.11. Wasting and destruction are in
their paths. Isa. 59.7, 8. The way of peace they know not. They know not what
kind of thing peace is, and though sometimes they may exteriorly seem to have
peace, yet that is not true peace; for there within, in their very heart, they
have a War, which their conscience is ever making against them. Behold for
peace I had great bitterness. Isa: 38.17. Wicked men ever live with
bitterness, and sadness of heart.

But proud men are subject after a particular manner to great unquietnes, and
want of peace. And the express reason here of we may very well collect, out of
Saint Augustine who says, that instantly envy grows out of pride, whose
Daughter it is: and that it is never to be so und, without the company of this
hateful issue. Which two sins of pride, and envy, make the devil to be that
very devil which he is. Now then, by this we may understand what mischief these
two sins are likely to work, in the heart of man: since they are bad enough to
make the devil a devil. He who on the one side, shall be full of pride, and of
the desire of honor, and estimation, and sees that things succeeds not
according to his design; and on the other side, is also full of envy, which is
the Daughter of pride, and is ever in company thereof, when he shall see that
others are more esteemed, and preferred before him, will certainly be full of
bitterness, and restlesnes: for there is nothing which so wounds the poor man,
nor reaches so near to his very heart, as those things aforesaid.

The holy Scripture paints this unto us, to the life, in the person of that
proud Aman. He was the favorite of King Asuerus, above all the Princes Grandes
of his Dominions. He had a great abundance of temporal goods, and riches, and
was so highly valued, and esteemed by all, that now it seemed that there was
nothing left for him to desire.

And yet nevertheless, it gave him so great pain, that one single man, and he
a mean person, who sat usually at the gate of the Palace, made no reckoning of
him, nor did him reverence, nor rose up, nor stirred from his place whilst he
was passing by, that he esteemed nor all the possessed at a rush, in comparison
of the distemper, and pain to which he was put thereby. This himself confessed,
by way of complaint to his Wife, and friends, whilst in discourse he was
speaking to them of his prosperity, and power otherwise. Est: 5.13. Yet all
this avails me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the
Kings gate. That so we may see the restlesnesse of a proud man, and the high
waves, and storms which toss his heart. (According to that of the Prophet. The
wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest.) Isac 57.20. Like a Sea
which is angry and fierce, so high goes the heart of a proud and wicked man.
And now the rage which grew in the heart of Aman, upon that occasion, was so
great, that he disdained to lay hold upon Mardochaeus, who was but a poor
particular man, unless knowing him to be a Jew by Nation, he might also
procure warrants from the King, by Virtue whereof, all that race of men, who
were to be found in his Dominions might be put to death. He commanded also a
very high gibet to be erected in a Court of his own house, whereupon he meant
that Mardochaeus should be hanged. But his dream fell out far otherwise, and
the Jews proved to be the men, who executed upon their enemies, the sentence
which had been given against them: and Aman himself was hanged upon the very
gallows, which he had prepared for Mardocheus.

But first, there happened a sound mortification to him, and it was this. He
going one morning very early to the Court, in order to the revenge which he had
designed, and to obtain a Warrant from the King for the executing thereof, it
happened that the night before, the King not having been able to fleep, commanded
them to bring the History, and Chronicles of his Times, and when by course of
reading, they were come to those particulars of what Mardocheus had done in
service of the King, by discovery of a certain treason, which some of his own
servants had plotted against him, he inquired what reward had been given that
man, for that service; and they told him none at all. The King then asked who
was without, and whether yet men were come to make their Court. They told him
that Aman was there, and so he was bidden to enter. The King then asked him
this question. What will it be fit to do for that man, to whom the King desires
to do honor. Now Aman conceiving that himself was to be the man, to whom that
honor was to be done, made this answer: The man whom the King desires to honor,
should be clad in the Kings Princely robes, and set upon the Kings own Horse,
with the Crown Royal upon his head: and one of the prime men of the Court
should go before him, leading the Horse in his hand, and proclaiming, thus in
the public places of the City. Thus is he to be honored whom the King will
honor. Well then, said the King, go thou to that Mardochoeus, who keeps about
the Court gate, and do all that to him, which thou have said to me, and besure
thou fail in no one circumstance. Think now what wound of anguish, that
wicked, and proud heart would feel, but in fine, he durst not fail in executing
the Order to a hair. It seemed to be beyond imagination, to think of a greater
mortification then this was for him, but yet instantly after followed that
other, of his being hanged upon that very gibbet which he had caused to be
provided for Mardochaeus. This is the pay which the world is wont to give to
such as serve it.

And now let us consider, from whence all this catastrophe grew: Because
forsooth, Mardochaeus would not rise up, and do him reverence when he passed
by. For such a foolery as this, is able to keep proud men so unquiet, and
restles, that they shall ever be wounded by it, and made sad at the heart. And
so we see it, at this day in worldly men, and so much more do we see it, as the
men are in more eminent place. For all such things as these, are as so many
needles points to them, which gall, and transpeirce them from side to side, nor
is there any sharper lance which they can feel, nor do they ever want their
part of this, how much soever they are extolled, and whatsoever they possess,
but they ever have their hearts as bitter as gall, and they ever walk up and
down the World with perpetual unquietnes, and want of rest.

From hence we may understand, another particular which we experiment very
often, namely, that although it be true, that there is a sickness of melancholy,
yet many times it happens that a man's being melancholy and sad, is not the
humor of melancholy, or any corporal infirmity, but it is the very humor of
pride, which is a sickness of the soul. You are melancholy and sad, because you
are forgotten and cast aside, into some corner, and because they make no
account of you. You are melancholy and sad, because you performed not such or
such a thing with so much credit, and reputation, as you fancied to your self;
but rather you conceive that you are disgraced. The business proved not as you
desired; that Sermon, that disputation, those conclusions; but you rather think
that you have lost opinion and credit by it, and therefore you are melancholy
and sad, yea and when you are to do any of these public things, the-very fear
of the success and whether you shall gain or loose honor by it, makes you
afflicted and greived. These are some of those things, which make the prond man
melancholy, and sad. But now the humble of heart, who desire no honor, or
estimation, and contents himself with a mean place, is free from all this
restlesness, and disquiet, and enjoyes great peace, according to the words of
Christ our Lord, from whom that Saint took this saying of his. If there be
peace in this World, the humble of heart possesses it. And therefore though
there were no way of spirit or perfection to be looked after, but only our own
interest, and the keeping our hearts in peace, and quietness, even for this and
this alone, we were to procure humility; for thus we should come to live,
whereas the other is but to lead a kind of dying life.

Saint Augustine to this purpose recounts a certain thing of himself, whereby
he says, that our Lord gave him to understand the blindness and misery, wherein
he was. As I went one day (says he) full of affliction, and care in thought of
a certain Oration which I was to recite before the Emperor, in his praise,
whereof the greatest part was to be false: and my self procuring to be praised
for my pains, even by them who knew that it would be false (that men may see
how far the vanity, and folly, and madness of the World, extends it self) as I
went I say with much thought hereof, and was full of trouble, and care, how the
business might succeed, and having as it were even a kind of fever upon me of
consuming thoughts, it happened, that in one of the streets of Milan, there was a
poor beggar, who after he had gotten well to eat, and drink, was playing tricks,
and taking his pleasure, and in fine, was very merry and jolly. But when I saw
this, I fell to sigh, and represent to my friends who were present there, to
what misery our madness has made us subject. Since in all our troubles, and
namely in those wherein we found our selves at that time (carrying a great
burden of infelicity upon our backs, and being wounded with the vexation of a
thousand inordinate appetites, and daily adding one burden to another) we did
not so much as procure to seek any other thing than only some secure kind of
contentment, and joy, wherein that poor beggar had outstripped us already, who
perhaps should never be able to overtake him therein. For that, which he had
now obtained by means of a little alms, namely the joy of temporal felicity, I
still went seeking, and hunting out with so much solicitude and care. It is
true, says Saint Augustine, that the poor man had no true joy, but it is also
true, that the contentment which I sought, was more false then this; and in
fine he then was merry, and I said, he was secure, and I full of cares and
fears. And if any man should ask me now, whether I had rather be glad or
grieved, I should quickly make answer, that I had rather be glad; and if he
should ask me yet again, whether I had rather be that beggar, or my self, I
should then rather choose to be my self, though I were then full of afflictions
but yet for ought I know, I should have no reason to make this choice. For I
ask what cause I can allege. For my being more learned gave me then no
contentment at all; but only desired to give contentment to others, by my
knowledge, and yet that, not by way of instructing them, but without doubt,
(says he) that poor man was more happy then I, not only because he was merry
and jolly, when I was full of cogirations, and cares, which drew even my very
bowels out of my body: but because he had gotten his Wine by lawful means,
whereas I was hunting after vain glory by the way of telling lies.

CHAP. XXII. Of another kind of means more efficatious for the obtaining the
virtue of Humility, which is the exercise thereof.
WE have already spoken of the first kind of means which are usually assigned
for the obtaining of virtue, which is, certain reasons, and considerations,
both divine and humane. But yet the inclination which we have to this vice of
pride is so very great, by reason that the desire of Divinity (Eritis sicut
dii) remains so rooted in our hearts from our first parents; that no
considerations at all, are sufficient to make us take our last leave, of the
impulse and edge which we have to be honored, and esteemed, It seems that that
happens to us herein, which ours to others who are full of fear. For how many
reasons soever you give to persuade such persons, that they have no cause to
fear such or such a thing, they yet make this answer, I see well that all you
say is true, and I would fain not fear, but yet I cannot obtain it of my self.
For just so, some say in our case, I well perceive that al those reasons which
you have brought against the opinion and estimation of the World, are good and
true, and they convince that all is but mere vanity and Wind, but yet with all
this, I cannot by any means Win so much of my self, as not to make some account
thereof. I would fain do it if I could, but me thinks I know not how those kind
of things, transports, and disquiers me strangely. Well then, as no reasons and
considerations, are sufficient to free the fearful man from fear, but that
besides this, we must entreat him to put his hand to work, and bid him draw
near, to feel, and touch those things, which seemed to him to be bugbears and
sprights; and advise him to go sometime by night, and alone to the same places
where he thought he saw them, that so he might find by experience, that there
was nothing indeed, but that all was his imagination, and apprehension, that so
by this means he may loose his fear: so also for the making us give over the
desire of opinion, and estimation of the World, the Saints affirm, that no
reasons or considerations are sufficient: but that we must also use the means
of action, and of the exercise of Humility, for this is the principal, and most
efficatious means, which we for our parts, can employ, toward the obtaining of
this virtue.

Saint Basil says, that as Sciences and arts are acquired by practice, so also
are the moral virtues. That a man may be a good Musician, a good Rethorition, a
good Philosopher, and a good Workman in any kind, let him exercise himself
herein, and he will grow perfect. And so also, for obtaining the habit of
Humility, and all the rest of the moral virtues, we must exercise our selves in
the acts thereof, and by this means we shall possess them. And if any man will
tell me, that for the composing and moderating our passions, and the affections
of the mind, and for the obtaining also of virtue, the considerations, and
reasons, the documents, and counsels of holy Scripture are sufficient, he is
deceived as Saint Basil says. This would be like him who should learn to build
a house, or coin money, and would never exercise himself therein, but that all
should pass in hearing the documents, and rules of art, in which case it is
certain, that he would never prove a good Workman. And as little will he grow
to possess humility, or any other virtue, who will not exercise himself
therein. And in confirmation hereof, the Saint brings that of the Apostle Saint
Paul. For not the hearers of the Law are just before God, but the doers of the
Law shall be justified. Rom: 2.13. It is not enough for this purpose to hear
many documents, and reasons, but they must be put in execution. For practice
conduces more to this business then all the speculation in the World. And though
it be most true, that al virtue, and every thing which is good, must come to us
from the hand of God, and that we cannot compass it by our own strength; yet
the same Lord who is to give it, is pleased that we should help our selves, by
our own endeavors.

Saint Augustine upon those words of Christ our Lord. If I then your Lord and
Master have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another feet, Joh:
13.14. says that this is that, which Christ our Lord intended to teach us by
this example of washing his Disciples feet: This is that O blessed Peter, which
thou did not know when thou would not consent that Christ should wash thy
feet. He promised that thou should know it afterward, and now, that afterward
is come, and now thou shall understand it. And it is, that if we will obtain
the virtue of humility, we must exercise our selves in the exterior acts
thereof. For I have given you an example, to the end that you may do as I have
done. Since the omnipotent, and sovereign Lord humbled himself: since the Son
of God abased, and employed himself in mean, and lowly exercises, washing the
feet of his Disciples, serving his blessed Mother, and the holy Joseph, and
being subject and obedient to them in whatsoever they commanded; let us learn
of them, and exercise our selves in humble and mean employments, and thus we
shall come to obtain the virtue of Humility. This is also that which Saint
Bernard says. The humiliation of the extericur man, is the way and means, to
obtain the virtue of Humility; as patience is, for the obtaining peace, and
reading or study for the obtaining knowledge. And therefore if you will obtain
the virtue of Humility donot fly from the exercise of humiliation: for if you
say, that either you cannot, or will not humble or abase your selves, as little
have you a mind to obtain the virtue of humility St. Augustine proves it very
well, and gives the reason, why this exercise of humiliation, is so useful,
important, and necessary, for the obtaining of true humility of heart. The
interior and exterior man are so interlaced and united together, and the one
depends so much upon the other, that when the heart is humbled and abased, the
heart is stirred up toward the love of humility. That humbling my self before
my Brother, and kissing his feet, has somewhat in it; that poor and mean coat,
that low and base Office, has I know not what, which goes ingenering, and
breeding Humility in the heart, and if it be there already, it conserves and
increases it. And thus Saint Dorotheus answers this question, how a man with a
poor and mean coat, which belongs to the body, may come to obtain the virtue of
humility, which inhabits the soul? It is certain says he, that the body in
many cases, gives a good, or ill disposition to the soul. And so we see the
soul has one kind of disposition, when the body is well, and another when it
is sick, one when it is full fed, and another when it is very hungry. Now in
the self same manner, the soul vests it self with one kind of inclination, when
a man is seated upon a throne, or upon a Horse richly adorned, and with
another, when he sits upon the ground, or is riding upon a jade; and one kind
of inclination it has, when he is set out in sumptuous clothes, and another
when he is but covered with a poor coat.

Saint Basil also noted this very well; and says, that as a gallant and
shining attire, lists up the hearts of Worldly men, and ingenders in them,
certain sumes of vanity of proper estimation and pride, so does a poor and mean
habit awake in the heart of religious men, and of the servants of God, an
inclination to Humility, and it breeds a disesteem of ones self; and it makes
men endure better, to be despised. And the Saint adds further, That as Worldly
men desire rich, and glorious clothes, that so they may be the better known,
and the more honored, and esteemed thereby; so the good servants of God, and
such as are truly humble, desire to be poor and meanly clad, that so they may
be valued the lesle: and especially because they conceive themselves to find
much help therein, toward the conservation, and augmentation in true humility.
Amongst all the exterior humiliations, that of poor and mean clothing is one
of the chief, and for this, we find it to have been so much used, by such as
are truly humble.

It will also appear by another reason, that toward the purchase of humility
of heart, or any other interior virtue, the exterior exercise of the same
virtue does profit much, because the vvil is much more moved thereby, then by
bare desires. For it is clear that present object moves us more, then the
absent, as we see that we are moved more by seeing things, then by hearing of
them; and from hence the Proverb came, That which the eyes see not, the heart
rues not. So that the exterior thing which is put in practice moves the will
much more, because the object is there present, then mere apprehensions, and
interior desires do, where the object is not present, but only in the conceit
and imagination. One great affront well endured with a good Will, shall breed
more of the virtue of patience in your soul, then four affronts will do, when
you have but the only desire without the deed. And the spending of one day in
exercising some mean and low Office, and the wearing some poor and mean
apparel, some one day, will help your soul more to the virtue of Humility, then
many days of mere desires will do. We have experience every day, that a man
has repugnance to perform one of the ordinary mortifications which we use; and
within two or three days after he has begun to do them, he finds no
difficulty therein at all, and yet before he did them, he had conceived many
purposes, and desires thereof, and yet still they were not strong enough to
overcome the difficulty, And to this we may add, that which is said by the
School Divines, that when the interior act is accompanied by the exterior, it
is commonly more efficatious and intense. So that, it helps much in all
respects, toward the obtaining of the virtue of humility, to employ our selves
exteriourly about objects which are mean and base.

And because virtue is conserved, and augmented by the same means, whereby it
is obtained, therefore as the exterior exercise of Humility is necessary for
the obtaining the virtue of Humility, it will also be necessary for the custody
and increase thereof; whereupon it will follow, that this exercise is very
important for all, not only for beginners, but for others also, who are great
proficients, as we also said when we were treating of mortification. For it is
a good rule that is given by one in these words. It will greatly help that We
perform those offices with all possible devotion, wherein Humility and charity
are exercised most. And in another place he says. Temptations are to be
prevented by their contraries, as when there is opinion, that such a one is
inclined to pride, he must be exercised in such mean things, as may be likely
to help him toward Humility, and so in other ill inclinations. And yet in
another place. As for mean and base employments, men ought readily to accept of
those wherein they find most repugnance, whenever they shall be so ordained.
So that finally I say, that these two things, Humility, and Humiliation must
help one another, and from the interior humility which consists in despising
himself, and desiring to be held by others in small account, exterior
humiliation is to grow, that the man may exteriourly show himself to be the
same, that interiourly he took himself to be. Namely, that as the humble man is
interiourly contemptible in his own eyes, and holds himself to be unworthy of
all honor, so he must treat himself also exteriourly; that the exterior works
which he performs, may visibly declare the interior humility, which is in his
heart. Choose you the lowest place, as Christ our Lord advised; despise not to
treat with Persons who are poor, and mean, be glad of the most inferior
employments; and this very exterior humiliation which springs from the
interior, will give increase to that very Pountain also, from which it springs.

CHAP. XXIII. That we must take heed of speaking any such words, as may redound
to our own praise.
THe Saints, and Masters of spiritual life Saint Basil, Saint Gregory, Saint
Bernard, and others also, advise us to take heed, with great care, of speaking
any words, which may redound to our own estimation or praise, according to that
which the holy Tobias counseled his Son. Never suffer pride to have dominion
either over thy heart, or over thy words. Saint Bernard ponders that of Saint
Paul, very well to this purpose. But now I forbear, lest any man should think
of me above that which he sees me to be, or that he hears of me. The Apostle
had formerly spoken great things of humself, and so it was fit at that time
that he should do, for the good of hearers, and for the greater glory of God;
and he might yet have said greater things since he had been rapt up into the
third Heaven, where he had seen, and understood more, then the tongue could
speak, but I forbear says he, to speak thereof, lest otherwise any man should
think more then he sees, and hears of me.

Saint Bernard says, O how well he said. I forbear that for this time. The
proud or arrogant man, forbears not such things, for he suffers no occasion to
pass, wherein he may magnify himself: yea, and sometimes he adds, and says
more then is, that so he may be esteemed the more. Only the man who is truly
humble, lets these occasions pass: and to the end he may be sure, that they
shall not ascribe more to him, then that which is true, he conceals that which
is true. The Saint descends more particularly into this subject, and says: you
must not say any thing, whereby you may seem more learned, or to be a man of
piety, and prayer. And generally, you must take heed of saying any thing, which
may redound in any kind, to your own praise, for it is very dangerous, though
you could say it with much truth, and though it may be matter of edification,
and though you may think it to be a good end, and for the profit of another,
yet it suffices that it is to your own praise, to keep you from speaking it.
You must ever walk with great care concerning this, lest otherwise by this
means, you loose the good which perhaps you did.

Boniventure says, you must never speak Word which may give others to
understand that you have eminent parts, or that you were formerly of some
account in the World. It looks very ill favouredly in a religious man, to value
himself by the Nobility, and riches of his friends, for all these pedegrees,
and states, are no better then a little Wind: and as one asked, do you know for
what Nobility is good? the other answered very well, To be despised, as Wealth
is. Saint Basil says, he who is born by another new birth, and has
contracted a spiritual, and divine kindred with God, and received a power to
become his Son, grows ashamed of that other carnal kindred, and lays it
utterly aside. Whosoever the man be, Words of praise, sound ill out of his own
mouth. And so the Proverb says. A man's praise in his own mouth is little
worth. Prove: 27.2. And the Wiseman says better. Let another man praise thee,
and not thine own mouth: a stranger and not thine own lips. But in the mouth of
a religious man, they do much worse, as being so contrary to that which he
professes, and so be grows to be slightly thought of; and disesteemed by means
of that very thing, whereby he meant to be honored. Saint Ambrose upon those
words of the Prophet. Behold O Lord, my humility, and deliver me, says, that
although a man be sick, and poor, and of mean condition, yet if he grow not
proud not prefer himself before any other, By humility he makes himself to be
esteemed, and beloved. So that humility supplies all defects; and on the other
side, though a man be very rich, and noble, and powerful: though he be very
learned, and excel in abilities, and good parts, yet if withal, he boast
thereof, and look big upon it. By this, he lessons and abases himself, and
grows to be disesteemed, and despised, because he grows to be held proud.

The History of devout Arsenius recounts, that although he had been so
illustrious in the World, and so eminent in learning, for he had been the
instructor, or Master, of the Sons of the Emperor Theodosius, and of Arcadias
and Honorius, who also came both to be Emperors, yet no word was ever heard to
fall from him, which might favor of greatness, or which gave to understand,
that he had learning, but he converst, and lived amongst his Brethren, with so
great humility, and simplicity of heart, as if he had never known any thing;
and he would also ask questions of others, concerning the most ordinary things
of spiritual life, affirming that in the su^lime science, he deserved not to be
their Disciple. And it is related of the Blessed Saint Hieroine, that he was of
most noble extraction, and yet we find not in al^ his works, that he has so
much as insinuated any thing thereof.

Bonaventure gives a very good reason against this vanity, and it is this. Know
that there can hardly be any good thing in you, worthy of praise, which breaks
not, and shines not out to others, so that they may understand, and know it;
and if you use silence, and conceal it, you shall gain more upon them, and be
more worthy of praise, both for the virtue it self, and for your hiding it; but
if you will needs become the publisher thereof, and will needs serve it out in
a full dish, they will make sport at it; And whereas before they were edified,
and you esteemed, they now grow to vilify, and despise you. Virtue is in this,
like musk, which the more you hide it, the stronger smell it gives, but if you
carry it open, it looses his sent.

CHAP. XXIV. In what manner we are to make a particular examination of our
consciences, concerning the virtue of Humility.
THe particular examination, as we have said already in the proper place, is to
be of some one only thing: for thus will this means be more efficatious, and
have greater force then if we carried over many things together, and it is
therefore called particular because it concerns one only thing. And this is of
so great importance, that ordinarily it is necessary to take many times one
vice, which we would avoid, and one virtue which we would obtain, into parts,
that so, by little and little, we may be able to compass that which we desire.
So is it therefore in this virtue. If you will make your particular examination,
about rooting up the pride of your heart, and of obtaining the virtue of
Humility, you must not take it in hand, after a kind of general way. For
humility, and pride, embrace many particulars, and if you take it but so in
gross, as to say I will be proud in nothing, but humble in all things, it is
too much to examine your selves upon, at once, and it will be more, if you do
it upon two or three virtues at once and thu, in fine you will do nothing. But
you are to take it into parts, and to go on by little and little Consider in
what you are chiefly wont to sail, concerning Humility, or in exercising of
pride, and begin there, and having ended with one particular thing, take
another to heart, and then another, and thus by little and little, you will go
rooting up the whole vice of pride out of your souls, and planting the virtue
of Humility in place thereof. Let us therefore now go parting, and dividing
these things, that so you may the better, and with the more profit, make this
particular examination, concerning this virtue which is so necessary.

The first shall be not to speak a word which may redound to our own estimation
and praise. For the appetite of honor and estimation, is so natural to us, and
we carry it so rooted in our hearts: that, even as it were without thinking, or
reflecting upon it, our tongues tun voluntarily to say somewhat, which either
directly, or indirectly may redound to our own praise. The mouth is wont to
speak, out of the abundance of the heart. As soon as any occasion is offered,
whereby honor may be gained, we instantly come in for our parts: as by saying,
I was in place; I was partly the cause: If I had been absent. I was interessed
in that from the beginning, etc.

And the while, I dare warrant you that if the thing had not brought honor
with it, you would have been content, to hold your peace, though you had been
present, yea and partly had been the cause thereof. Of this kind, there are
other words, which many times we observe not, till they be past: and therefore
it will be very well done, to make a particular examination upon this point:
that so by care, and good custom, we may take away this other ill one, which
is so connatural to us.

The second may be that, which Saint Basil advises us; namely, that we be nor
willing to hear any other praise, or speak well of us, for in this, there is
also great danger. Saint Ambrose says, that when the devil cannot beat us down
by pusillanimitie, and dismay, he procures to blow us up by presumption and
pride, and when he cannot overthrow us, by the way of affronts, he procures
that we may be honored and praised, and so to be undone by that means. Saint
Hierome says, Keep your selves safe from these Sirens, for they inchant men,
and put them out of their wits. The music of the praises of men, is so
delightful and so sweet to our ears, that there are no Sirens, which can so
inchant men, nor put them so out of their Wits, and therefore we had need to
stop our ears, and make our selves deaf to them. Saint John Climacus advises
us, when men praise us, to call our sins to mind, for so shall we find our
selves to be unworthy of the praises they give, and so shall we draw more
Humility, and confusion from thence. This may therefore be the second thing,
upon which you may particularly examine your selves: Namely, that you rejoice
not to be well spoken of, and praised by others. And to this we may also join,
the being glad when others are well spoken of, and praised, which is a point of
very great importance. And whenever you find either any feeling or motion of
envy for the praise of others, or else of any complacence or vain contentment
in that others speak well of you; be sure to set it down for a fault.

The third thing upon which we may make a particular examination of our selves,
is concerning the not doing of any thing, to the end that we may be seen, or
esteemed by men. And this is that, which Christ our Lord advises us, in the
holy Gospel. Mat: 6.1. Take heed that ye do not your alms, (or righteousness as
some copies have it) before men, to be seen of them, otherwise ye have no
reward of your Father which is in Heaven. This is a very profitable
examination, and it may be divided into many parts. First it may be made, upon
the not doing of any thing for humane respects. Secondly, upon the doing things
merely for the love of God. And thirdly, upon the doing them perfectly well, as
one who does them in the presence of God, and as one who serves not men but
God. And this diligence is to be used by us, till the works be performed by us
in such sort, as we may rather seem to be loving God in them, then to be
working of them.

The fourth point upon, which we may carry our particular examination, is not
to excuse our selves. For this also grows from pride, when committing a fault,
and being told of it, we instantly make our excuse, and without even marking
it, we make one excuse sometimes upon another, yea and we will yet give another
excuse, for having formerly excused our selves, Saint Gregory up on these words
of Job, If as a man, I have hidden my sin, ponders these words very well: Quasi
homo as a man, and says: that it is the property of a man, to desire to cover,
and excuse his sin, because it comes to us by descent, from our first parents.
As soon as the first man had sinned, he went instantly to hide himself amongst
the trees of Paradise, and God reproving him for his disobedience, he thus
excused himself presently upon his wife, O Lord, that Woman, whom thou gave
me for my companion, made me eat of the forbidden fruit. And the Woman excused
her self in like manner, upon the Serpent. The Serpent deceived me, and I did
eat thereof. God examined them about their sin, to the end that knowing it, and
confessing it, they might obtain pardon for it: and so Saint Gregory says,
that he did not examine the Serpent, because he meant not to pardon the
serpent. But they, instead of humbling themselves, and acknowledging their sin,
toward the obtaining of pardon, increase and aggravate it, by their excuses:
yea and by desiring, after a sort, thus to cast the fault upon God. The Woman
whom thou gave me O Lord, was the cause. As if he had said; If thou had not
given her me for a companion, no part of this had been done. The Serpent which
thou did create, and suffer to enter into Paradise, deceived me, and if thou
had not suffered it to enter there, I had not sinned, S. Greg: says, that
they having heard from the Devils mouth, that they should be like God, since
they could not become like him in the point of his Divinity, they endeavored
to make him like them, in the point of their sin; and so they made it greater
by defending it, then they had done by committing it. And now, as being
children of such parents, and in fine, as being men, we still remain with this
infirmity, and with this defect, and ill custom, and when we are reproved for
any sault, we instantly have a mind to cover it with an excuse, as under bows
and leaves: yea and sometimes, a man is not content to excuse himself, but he
must needs be casting the fault upon others. One compares such as excuse
themselves to he Hedg-hoge, which when she perceives that they go about to take
her, she shrinks in her head and feet with extreme speed, and remains as a
boul, being circled on every side, as it were with thorns; so that a man cannot
touch her, without pricking himself first. So that you shall sooner see your
own blood, then her body. In this manner says he, be they who are wont to
excuse themselves; for if you will but touch them, by telling them the faults
which they made, they instantly defend themselves, like the hedg-hog, and some
times they prick and gaul you, and give you also to understand, that you as
well deserve reproof. At other times, they will be telling you, that there is a
rule, which forbids one to find fault with another, and that there be some who
make greater faults, which yet men are content to dissemble; and in fine, do
but touch the hedg-hogg, and you shall ee whether he will prick you or no. All this business grows from our great pride, who would not have our faults known,
nor be held for defective, and it troubles us more, that they be understood and
for the estimation which we think we loose thereby, then for having committed
them; and so we procure to conceal and hide them, the most we can. Nay there
are some so unmortified in this kind, that even before you say any thing, they
prevent you, and excuse themselves, and give reasons for that which they think
you may object; and they say, If I did this, it was for this reason, and if I
did that, it was for that: and the like. But who in the mean time pricks you
now, that you must skip so high. The goad of pride it is, which you carry so
deeply rooted in your hearts. This is that which pricks you, and which makes
you leap even before your time. It will therefore be well done by him who finds
this old and ill custom in himself, to examine himself particularly thereof;
till at length, he may come to part with all desire of covering his faults, but
rather since he committed them, let him be glad to be held faulty, in shame and
punishment thereof, yea and though you have made no fault, and yet they
reprehend you as if you had, yet do not you always excuse your selves.

The fifth, is also very good for a man to examine himself upon, namely, the
restraining, and cutting of all thoughts of pride. A man is so proud and vain,
that many idle, and presumptuous thoughts, will be rushing in upon him, and he
will imagine himself to be in some high Office, and performing of some great
function. Already you fancy your selves to be preaching in the places where you
were born, with great allowance, and liking, and you imagine that you produce
great fruit. Already do you conceive that you are reading, or disputing against
such conclusions, with great applause of the hearers; and such things as these.
All this grows from our great pride, which lies sprouting, and breaking out
into these thoughts. And therefore it will be very well done, to make a
particular examination upon the clipping, and cutting of these thoughts, which
are so haughty and vain. And so will it be fit so to stop, and instantly to cut
off all impure thoughts, and rash judgments, or any other vice, whereby we may
find our selves to be molested.

The sixth point shall be, to carry a particular examination upon your selves,
whether you esteem of all men as your. Superiors. according to that rule, that
we must animate our selves toward Humility, by procuring, and desiring to give
the advantage to others, esteeming them all from our very souls, as if they
were our superiors, and exteriourly bearing them that respect, and reverence,
which the condition, or state of every one of them shall bear with plainnes,
and religious simplicity of heart: and this is also taken from the Apostle. And
howsoever there is to be a difference amongst men, according to the distinction
of their persons, and states, yet for as much as may concern the interior, and
true Humility of our souls, every one of us must hold himself for the least,
and lowest, and must hold all others for his superiors, and betters. This shall
therefore be a very good, and profitable examination: but yet so, as that it be
not only speculative, but that in the exercise, and practice thereof, we
procure to carry our selves so toward all, with such Humility, and respect, as
if they were indeed our superiors. For if you esteem that other man as your
superior, you will not be talking to him with such liberty and harshnes, and
much less in words, which may mortify, and offend him, nor will you so easily
pass your judgment rashly upon him, nor be disgusted that he should treat you;
or speak to you in this or that manner, and so you are to set down, and note al
these things for faults, when you examine your self thereupon.

The seventh thing whereof we may particularly examine our selves, upon this
subject, is whether we make good use of all those occasions which offer
themselves toward the getting of Humility. Are you wont to be troubled when
another speaks some little word to you, which you would not hear, or when they
command any things in too resolute, and imperious manner, or when you think
they make not so much account of you as of others? Examine your selves whether
you make good use of these, as also those other occasions, which sometimes
represent themselves redounding to your disestimation. This is one of the most
proper, and most profitable examinations, which we can use toward the
obtaining of the virtue of Humility. For besides that, we shall thus go
providing our selves, for all those things which may daily occur, and whereof
we may stand in need; we may, by means of this examination, go increasing, and
rising up by those three degrees of virtue, which we set down before. First,
you may examine whether or no you carry all these things with patience.
Secondly, whether you carry them with so much promptitude and facility, as that
they put you to no trouble. And thirdly, whether you carry them with joy, and
with taking pleasure in the contempt of your self, for in this we showed
before, that the perfection of humility does consist.

The eighth point upon which a man may particularly examine himself, either in
this subject, or tohers like it, is to make some acts or exercises, as well
interior as exterior of humility, or any other virtue, about which he
examines himself, meditating upon it, so many times in the morning, and so many
in the evening beginning with fewer acts, and so rising up to more, till at
length he get the habit and custom of that virtue. And now the enemies being
divided after this manner and we taking every one of them by himself they will
the more easily be overcome, and the victory which is desired, will be the more
speedily obtained.

CHAP: XXV. How it may be compatible with Humility, to be willing to be
accounted of, and esteemed by men.
THere is a doubt, wont to be propounded concerning Humility, the solution
whereof does much import, that so we may know how to carry, and conduct our
selves therein. We ordinarily say, and it is the general Doctrine of the
Saints, that we must desire to be abased, disesteemed, and despised, that men
may hold us in no account. But then instantly it comes to be considered on the
other side, how we shall be able to gather fruit, by the good of our Neighbors,
if they difesteem, and despise us: for to that end it is necessary, that we
have a kind of credit with them, and that they may hold us in good opinion and
estimation: and therefore it may seem, that it shall not be ill, but good that
we desire to be valued, and esteemed by men. Saint Basil, Saint Gregory, and
Saint Bernard treat upon this doubt very well, and say, that although it be
true, that we must fly from the honor, and estimation of the World, by reason
of the great danger which is therein, and that, for as much as is on our part,
and for that which may concern our selves, we must ever desire to be
disesteemed, and despised, yet for some good end of the greater service of God,
the honor and estimation of the World, may lawfully, and piously be desired.
And Saint Bernard says also, that for as much as concerns our part, we must
wish that men may think, and esteem of us, as we think and esteem of our
selves, that so they may value us as our selves do, but yet he says withal,
that it is not fit many times, that others should be sure thereof, and so
therefore that we may sometimes even lawfully, and virtuously procure that they
may not know our faults, lest so themselves may receive hurt thereby, through
the hindrance of their own spiritual good. But in the mean time, it will be
necessary that we understand this point very well, and that we walk therein,
with great caution, and with much spirit, because such truths as this, instead
of doing good, do many times much hurt to some, who know not how to make right
use thereof. The Saints themselves declare this Doctrine very well, that so we
may not take occasion of error from thence. Saint Gregory says. Sometimes,
even holy men are glad that they have good opinion, and estimation amongst men;
but this happens when they find that it is a necessary means, for the doing
good, and giving help to their Neighbors souls, And this (says Saint Gregory)
is not to rejoice at his own credit or estimation, but for the fruit and good
of his Neighbors; Which is a very different case. It is one thing for a man to
love humane honor, and estimation for it self, and to dwell as it were
therein, for his own respect, and contentment, that so he may grow great, and
be celebrated amongst men, and this is naught; but another thing it is, when
this is liked for some good end, as for the good of our Neighbors, and to give
help to souls, and this is not ill but good, and thus we may well desire
opinion, and estimation of the World, and that they may have us in good
conceir, for the greater glory of God, and because it may be necessary for the
edification of our Neighbors and for the benefit of their souls. For thus a
man shall not rejoice in his own honor, and estimation, but in the spiritual
good of others, and the greater glory of Almighty God. And as he who for his
health desires to take a purge, which he naturally abhors, may well say, that
to admit and like the purge, is to love his health, so he who admits, and likes
humane honor, which otherwise he despises, (only because in that case it is a
necessary, or at least a profitable means for the service of God, and the good
of souls) may affirm with truth, that he desires and likes nothing in it, but
the glory of Almighty God.

But let us now consider, how we may know whether a man delight in honor and
estimation, for the mere glory of God, and the good of his Neigbours, or else
for his own sake, and for the affection which he bears to his own honor: for
this indeed is a nice point, wherein the whole difficulty of this business
consists. Saint Gregory answered thus: Our being glad of honor and estimation,
is to be so merely for God, that when it is not necessary for his greater
glory, and the good of souls, not only we are not to rejoce therein, but to be
troubled at it. So that our desire and heart, for as much as may depend on us,
is ever to be inclined to dishonor, and contempt; and therefore when any
occasion thereof is presented, we must embrace it with our whole hearts, and be
glad of it as men, who have met with what they wished for. And as for honor
and estimation, we are only to desire it, and be glad thereof, so far forth as
it may be necessary for the edification, and further good of our Neighbors
souls, and for the greater honor, and glory of Almighty God. By this you shall
therefore know, if you be glad of honor, and estimation, for the good of
souls, and the glory of God, or else for your own honor and same: If when any
occasion of humility, and contempt is offered, you embrace it in good earnest,
and with the heart; and if you rejoice thereat, it is then a good sign; that
when such a Sermon, or such another employment has succeeded well, and that
you are valued and esteemed for it, you rejoice not for your own honor, and
estimation, but merely for the glory of God, and the good of souls which grows
thereby. But when on the other side some occasion of humility, and of being
held in small account is offered, you reject it, or you carry it not well; and
if when it is not necessary for the good of others, you will yet be glad of
estimation, and praise of men, and procure also to have it, this indeed is a
sign, that you are glad also in those other things, as for a thing which has
relation to your self, and your own estimation and honor, and not merely for
the glory of God, and the good of souls.

So that it is true, that the honor and estimation of men, is not ill but
good, if we use it rightly, and it may lawfully, and virtuously be desired. Yea
even a man's praising himself, may be holy and good, if it be done as it ought.
And so we see that Saint Paul writing to them of Corinthus, began to praise and
recount great things of himself, relating the high favors which our Lord had
imparted to him, and saying; That he had labored more then the rest of the
Apostles: yea, and he began to tell them of his Revelations, and rapture,
whereby he had been carried up to the third Heaven. But all this he did,
because it was convenient, yea and necessary for the glory of God, and good of
them to whom he wrote, that so they might grow to hold, and value him for an
Apostle of Christ, and embrace his Doctrine, and take benefit thereby: and he
spoke these things of himself, with a heart, which did not only despise honor,
but love dishonor for the love of Christ our Lord, and when his honor was not
necessary for the good of others, he knew very well how to empty and abase
himself, saying. That he was not worthy to be called an Apostle, because he had
persecuted the Church of God, and stiling himself blasphemous, and abortive,
and the greatest of sinners; and when the occasions of dishonor, and contempt
were presented to him, therein was his contentment, and joy. Such hearts as
these, we may well trustwith receiving honor, and with saying sometimes such
things as may conduce toward it; because they will never do it, but when it
may be necessary for the greater glory of God, yea and even then, they do it so
much without the sticking of any part, thereof to themselves, as if they had
not done it at all: for they love not their own honor, but the honor of
Almighty God, and the good of souls.

But because it is a matter of much difficulty, to receive honor, and not to
grow proud by it, nor to take any vain contentment, or complasence therein:
therefore the Saints through their fear of the great danger which lurks in
estimation, and dignity, and high place, fled as far as they could from it, and
they procured to busy themselves in mean, and contemptible employments,
because they saw that they profited thereby in Humility, which was the most
secure way for them. One said very well, I am not a religious man, if I take
not dishonor, with the same both inward and outward joy, wherewith I take
honor. For if I joy in that honor which others allow me, when I preach, or
perform any other office of charity to them, for their good, (whereby yet I put
my soul to run some hazard, through the danger of vanity) much more ought I joy
in mine own good, and in the salvation of mine own soul, which I preserve with
more security, when I am scorned; and it is evident, that we are more obliged
to joy in our own good, and profit, then in that of others, because charity well
ordered begins at home. If then you joy in the good of your Neighbor, when the
sermon, or other employment has succeeded well, and when you are esteemed, and
praised for it, why should you not be glad of your own good, when you having
done what was in you, are yet undervalued for your pain, for this is better,
and more safe for you? If you be glad when you have a great talent, wherewith
to do great things, for the good of others, why are yonnot glad of your own
good, and for your being left in contempt, because God gave you no such talent?
If you be glad when you have much health, and strength, wherewith to labor
hard for the good of others, why should you not be glad; when God is pleased
that you should be sick, and weak, and be fit for nothing, but to be laid in a
corner, and without use: for this is your profit, and this will help you more
toward humility, and in this shall you please God more, then if you were a
great Preacher, or a Wise, and active States. man, since his Will is so.

Hereby it may be seen, how much deceived they are, who have lodged their eyes
upon honor, and the estimation of the World under color, forsooth, that is
necessary for the doing good to others: and under this pretense, they desire
high place, and honorable employments, and all that which looks like greatness:
and so they fly from all that which is mean and poor: for they make themselves
believe, that they were to be disauthorised thereby. But in this is another
deceit, and a very great one, that by the very thing, whereby a man pretends to
gain authority, he loses it, and by that whereby he thought to loose it, he
shall gain it.

But now laying this last reason, which is the chief aside, and to consider
the thing in question, by the way of prudence, and humane reason, you cannot
employ a more efficatious means to gain authority, and opinion amongst your
Neighbors, and to do good to souls, then to exercise your selves in these
things which seem poor and base, (such as are, to Catechnize Children in a low
way of short questions, and answers, to teach, or to see them taught the first
principies of good Religion, and manners, daily to visit the sick, the poor and
ignorant, and humbly, and kindly to instruct, comfort, and quicken them, as
occasion is offered.) And to do these things so much the more, by how much the
more your parts are greater. The reason of this is, because the World does so
hugely esteem of honor, and estimation, and of things which are high, in order
to that end, as that the thing of the whole World, which it admires most, is
the man who despises that, and to see that one who might be used in high and
honorable employments, does choose to pass his hours, in things that are poor
and mean: and thus they grow to frame a great conceit, and estimation of the
sauctity of such Persons, and accept of that Doctrine which they teach, as if
it came immediately to them from Heaven.

This is that kind of Authority, whereof men have need, that so they may be
able to do good to souls: this is the estimation and opinion, which follows
humble men, and belongs to Saints, and Evangelical Preachers, and this in a
word, is that which we are to procure. For as for those other Authorities, and
reputations, and punctilios, which carry a smack, and savor of the World with
them, they do great hurt, and they disedifie our Neighbors very much.

Upon those words of Saint John, I seek not mine own glory; there is one that
seeks, and judges. John 8.50. A Doctor says thus very well: Since our
Heavenly Father procures, and seeks our honor, and our glory, our selves have
no need to take care thereof. Take you care to humble your selves, and to be
such as you ought, and as for any such estimation and authority, whereof you
think you may have need, for the good of souls, leave you that to God, for even
whereby you shall most humble and abase your selves, thereby will God raise you
most, and indue you with another manner of estimation in the World, then that
which you would ever be able to obtain for your selves, by these other humane
diligences, and devises.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the third degree of Humility.
THe third degree of Humility, is when a man possessing great virtues, and
gifts of God, and being in great honor, and estimation, grows not as all proud
thereby, nor attributes any thing to himself, but refers, and ascribes it all
to the true fountain thereof, which is God, from whom every good and perfect
gift proceeds. This third degree of Humility, (says Bonaventure) belongs to
high, and perfect men: and by how much higher they are, so much the more low do
they humble themselves. That a man who is imperfect, and faulty, should know,
and esteem himself for such, is no great matter. It is commendable, and good,
but it is no wonderful thing, any more then it is, for the son of a Plough man,
not to desire to be held for the Kings son; or a poor man for poor, or a sick
man for sick, and that others may hold them for such as they know themselves to
be: but that a rich man should account himself poor, and the great man make
himself little, and so conform himself to mean persons, this indeed deserves to
be accounted strange. He says, that it is not to be wondered at, that a man who
is imperfect and faulty, should hold himself for imperfect, and faulty: nay
rather it were to be wondered at, if being as he is, he should hold himself to
be perfect, and good: for it is as if being full of leaprousie, he should take
himself to be found. But that he who is mightily advanced in virtue and
possesses many gifts of God, and is really very great in his divine presence,
should yet hold himself for little, this indeed is great Humility, and worth
the wondering at. Saint Bernard says. A great and rare virtue it is, that a man
should do great things, and yet not hold himself for great; that others should
evidently see his sanctity, and yet that it should lie bid from him; that he
should be admirable in the eyes of others, and contemptible in his own. I
esteem this more, (siath he) then all the other virtues, which he can have.

This Humility was found after a most perfect manner, in the most Blessed
Virgin, who knowing that she was chosen for the Mother of God, did acknowledge
her self, with most profound humility, to be his servant, and slave. Behold the
handmaid of the Lord, (says Saint Bernard) God having chosen her to so great
an honor, and for so high a dignity, as to be his Mother, she calls her self
his slave; and being celebrated by the mouth of Saint Elizabeth, for blessed
amongst all Women she ascribed not to her self any glory, for all these
greatnesses which were in her: but she gave them all back again to God,
exalting, and admiring him for them, and her self remaining the while, most
unshaken, and entire in her own most profound Humility, said: My soul does
magnify the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior: for he has
regarded the lowlines of his Handmaid. This is the very Humility of Heaven, the
saints possess this humility. And this (says St: Gregory) is that which St:
John saw, in the Apocalipse, of those four and twenty Elders, who being
prostrate before the throne of God, adored him, taking the Crowns off from
their heads, and casting them down at the foot of the throne. And the Saint
says, that the casting off their crowns, at the foot of the throne of God,
signifies the not atributing their victories to themselves, but the ascribing
all to God, who gave them strength, and power to overcom. It is reason, O Lord,
that we give the honor and glory of all to thee, and that we take off the
crowns from our heads, and that we cast them at thy feet, because al is thine,
and by thy will it is made: and if we have any thing good, it is because thou
would have it so. This is then the 3d: degree of Humility, when a man
ascribes not these gifts, and graces to himself, which he has received of God:
but to ascribe them, and refer them al to him as to the author and giver of all
good gifts.

But some man may say, if Humility consists in this, we al are humble; for who
is there who knows not, that al good coms to us from God, and that of our
selves we have nothing but misery, and sin. Who is he that will not say, if God
should take his hand off from me, I were the most miserable man of the whole
world. On our part we have nothing but destruction and sin says the Prophet
Hosea. All the favor, and all the good coms to us from the liberality of God,
and this is Catholic doctrine: and so it may seem that we al have this
Humility; for we al believe this truth, whereof the holy Scripture is full. The
Apostle St: James, in his Canonical Epistle, says, Al good and perfect gifts,
com to us from above, from the Father of lights. And the Apostle St: Paul
says, that we cannot work, nor speak, nor desire, nor think, nor begin, nor
finish any thing, which may serve for our salvation, without God, from whom al
our sufficiency proceeds. And by what more clear comparison could it be given
us to understand all this, than by that which Christ our Lord himself declares?
Will you see, says he, the little, or indeed the nothing which you can do
without me, the vine branch cannot give fruit of it self, unless it be united
to the vine; so no man can perform any good work of himself, unless he be
united with me. I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abides in me, and
I in him, the same brings forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing.
Joh. 15.5. What is more fruitful than the branch, united to the vine? and what
more unprofitable, and useless, than the branch parted from the vine? For what
is it good? God interrogates the Prophet Ezekiel: What O Son of man shall be
done with the branch of vine? It is not timber which is fit for any Carpenters
work nor yet for any stake, or pin where upon any thing may be hanged against a
wall. The branch severed from the vine, is fit for nothing, but the fire. Now
just so, are we, if we be nor united to the true vine, which is Christ our
Lord. If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered,
and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned. Joh:
15.6. We are good for nothing but the fire: and if we be any thing, it is by
the grace of God, as St: Paul says: By the grace of God I am what I am. 1 Cor:
15.10. It seems we are al fully satisfied with the truth of this: That all the
good we have is of God, and that we are to ascribe no good to our selves, but
al to God, to whom the honor and glory of al, is due. It seems, I say, that
this is not very difficult, to such as believe in Christ; and therefore that it
should not be set down, for the last, and most perfect degree of Humility,
since it is so clearly a point of Faith.

It seems so indeed, at the first sight, if we look superficially upon it; but
indeed it is not easy, but very hard. Cassian says, that to such as are but
beginners, it seems to be but an easy thing, to attribute nothing to a man's
self, and not to rest or rely upon his own industry, and diligence, but to
refer and ascribe al to God; but indeed it is very hard. For since we also
contribute somewhat on our part, toward good works, as St: Paul says, because
we also work and concur jointly with God, we grow tacitly, and even as it were
without finding it, to confide in our selves; and a secret presumption and
pride steals upon us, which makes us think, that this or that was done by our
diligence and care; and so by degrees, we grow vain, and look big, and ascribe
the works which we do to our selves: as if we had performed them by our own
strength; and as if they had been wholly ours. This is not so easy a business
as we conceive. And it may suffice for us, that the saints set this down, for
the most perfect degree of Humility, and they say this is the Humility of the
great ones; that we may so understand, that there is more difficulty, and
perfection therein, than one would think. For a man to receive great gifts of
God, and to do great things, and to give God all the glory of al as he ought;
without attributing any thing to himself, and not to take any vain contentment
therein, is a point of great perfection. To be honored and praised for a saint,
and that no part of such honor, and estimation should stick at al to the heart,
any more than if he had done nothing, is a very hard thing, and there are few
who attain to it, and there is need of much virtue for the performance thereof.

St: Chrysostom says, that to converse in the midst of honor, and not to be
at al touched thereby, is like conversing much with beautiful women, and yet
never to look upon them with unchaste eyes. It is a difficult, and a dangerous
thing, and a man had need of much virtue therein: For a man to climb so high,
and not to be giddy, he had need be Master of a good head; All men have not a
head, wherewith to walk on high: The Angels of Heaven, Luifer, and his Consorts
had it not; and so they grew giddy, and proud, and fell down into the
bottomless pit of Hell. For this they say was the sin of Angels, that when God
created them so beautiful, and had enriched them with so many, both natural,
and supernatural gifts, they remained not in God, nor gave him the glory of
all, but would needs subsist in themselves; and yet not as conceiving, that of
themselves they had these things (for they knew well, that they all came from
God, and that they depended upon him, since they knew they were his creatures)
but, as the Prophet Ezekiel says, They grew proud in their beauty, and
glorified themselves in those gifts, which they had received of God, and took
delight in them, as if they had possessed them of themselves, and did not
ascribe, or refer them all to God, giving him the honor and glory thereof: but
they grew proud, and they exalted and contented themselves vainly in
themselves: So that, although with their understanding, they knew that the
glory thereof was due to God, yet they robbed him of it, and took it to
themselves, with their will. By this time you see, that this degree of
Humility, is not so easy, as it seemed, since the Angels found it so hard,
that they fell from that height wherein God had placed them, because they knew
not how to conserve themselves therein. And now if the Angels had not heads
wherewith to walk so high, but that they grew giddy, and fell down, much more
reason have we to fear, lest we may fail, when we are raised and exalted,
because we men are so miserable creatures, that as the Prophet David says, We
vanish even like smoke: As smoke, the higher it goes, the more it scatters, and
dissolves it self: So man, who is so miserable and so proud, the more he is
honored, and raised up to high estate, the more idle and intoxicated he grows.

O how aptly, and how well did Christ our Lord admonish us of this. The holy
Gospel relates, that having sent his seventy two Disciples to preach, they
returned to him full of joy, and being, as it were proud of their mission, they
said thus to him, Lord we have done wonderful things, yea, and the very Devils
themselves have obeyed us in thy Name. But the Savior of the World answered
them thus with great severity, Luke 10.18. I beheld Satan as Lightning fall
from Heaven. Take heed of vain contentment in your selves; know that Lucifer
fell down from Heaven, because in that high state wherein he was created he was
vainly pleased with himself, and with those gifts and graces which he had
received, and did not ascribe all to the honor and glory of Almighty God, as
he ought, but would needs take it to himself. Take heed the like happen not to
you; grow not vain by reason of the great and vvonderfull things which you do
in my Name, and take no vain contentment in them. And now these words may
also suit with us. Take heed you wax not proud, in that great things are done
by you, for the good of others, and many souls are gained by you means. Take
heed you have no contentment in the applause and opinion of men, and in the
much account they make of you. Be sure you take nothing to your selves, and
suffer not the love of honor and estimation, to stick at all to your hearts,
for this is that which cast Lucifer down to hell, and that which of an Angel,
made him a Devil. You may see (says Sr. Augustine) how detestable a thing
Pride is, since it makes Angels Devils; and on the other side, how excellent a
thing Humility is, since it makes men become like Angels.

CHAP. XXVII. It is declared wherein the third degree of Humility consists.
WE have not yet sufficiently declared wherein the third degree of Humility
consists; and therefore it will be fit to go on, that so we may the better put
it in practice, this being the thing at which we aim. The Saints affirm, That
this third degree of Humility consists in knowing how to distin guish between
the gold of the Graces and benefits which comes to us from God, and the dross
or misery wherewith we abound in our selves, and then to give every one his
due: to God, that which is his, and to our selves that which is ours; and that
this be done by execution, and practice, wherein the life of this whole business
consists: So that Humility does not consist in knowing speculatively, that of
our selves, we are good for nothing, and can effect nothing, and that all good
things come to us from God, and that it is he who works the willing, the
beginning, and the ending in us, through his free and gracious will, as St.
Paul declares; for only to know this speculatively is a very easy thing, and
all true Christians know and believe it; but to know and exercise it, in the
way of practice, and to be so grounded and settled in it as if we saw it with
our eyes, and touched, and took it into our hands; this (as Saint Ambrose
says) is a most particular grace and high favor of Almighty God: to prove
this, he brings that passage of Saint Paul, We have not received the spirit of
this World, but the Spirit of God, to the end that we may know and feel the
gifts which we have received from his hand. For a man to acknowledge, and even
feel the graces which he has received from God, so purely, as to esteem them
as merely another, and to have been imparted, and to be enjoyed by the mere
liberality and mercy of Almighty God, is a most particular favor and gift of
his: And the wise Solomon says, That this is supreme Wisdom, To understand and
know practically, that to be continent, is not a thing which we are able to
compass by our own strength; and that no industry or endeavor of our own, is
able to obtain it; but that it is the gift of God, and that we must have it
from his hand, is a point of su. pream wisdom: So that in this which S Paul
says, is a particular grace, and gift of God, and which Solomon calls supreme
Wisdom, consists this third degree of Humility. What have we, which we have
not received; it was none of ours, for of our selves we have no good thing; and
if we have received it, and that if it were another, and none of ours, Why do
we glory, as if we had not received it, and as if it were properly our own.

This was the humility of the Saints, who with being enriched by the gifts, and
graces of Almighty God, and with his having raised them up to the very top of
perfection, and thereby to honor and estimation, even in this world, have
notwithstanding held themselves for vile and base in their own eyes, and their
souls remained so deeply fixed in the knowledge of their own means, and misery,
as if they had possessed no such graces at all. There stuck not the least
vanity to their hearts, nor any air at al of that honor, and estimation,
which the world gave them; for they knew well, how to distinguish between their
own, and that of others, and so they looked upon all those gifts, graces,
honor, and estimation, as things extrinsecal to themselves, and received from
the hand of God; and to him they ascribed, and gave all the glory, and praise
thereof, themselves remaining still entire in the knowledge of their own
unworthines, considering that of themselves, they could neither have, nor do
any good thing. And from thence it also came, that though the whole World
exalted them, they would never yet exalt themselves, nor esteem themelves one
jot the more for that, nor did any little breach thereof stick to their hearts.
But it seemed to them that these praises were not uttered, as concerning them,
but some other, to whom they belonged; namely God, in whom and in whose glory
they placed all their contentment, and joy. And thus it is affirmed with much
reason, that this is the Humility of great and perfect men. First, because it
already presupposes great virtue, and great gifts of God, which only makes one
great in his sight, and secondly, because in it self, for a man to be truly
great in the sight of God, and very eminent in virtue, and perfection, and for
that reason to be highly valued, and esteemed, both before God and man, and yet
in the mdist of all this, to hold himself for little and base in his own eyes,
is a great and admirable perfection. And this is that which Saint Chrysostom
and Saint Bernard do so much wonder at in the Apostles, and others, who with
being so great Saints, and so richly full of graces from God, and his Majesty
working such wonders and miracles by their means, so far as even to raise the
dead to life, and being so highly esteemed for these things, by the whole
world, they yet nevertheless remained so sixed in their unworthines and
baseness, as if they had had nothing in them, and as if it had been some other,
and not they who wrought those great things and as if all that honor, and
estimation, and praise, were belonging to others, and as if they had been
imparted to others, and not to them. Saint Bearnard says, it is not much that
a man in poverty and baseness, should be content to humble himself, for that
which indeed he is, helps him to know, and disesteem himself, but that a man
should be generally honored, and esteemed for an admirable man, and for a
Saint, and yet remain so well grounded in the truth of his own baseness, and of
his nothing, as if no part of those other things, were in him; this indeed is a
rare and excellent virtue, and a point of most high perfection. In such men
says Saint Bernard does the light shine before men, according to the
Commandment of our Lord, not for the glorifying of themselves, but of their
Father who is in Heaven. These are those true imitators of Saint Paul, and of
the Preachers of the Gospel, who publish not themselves, but Jesus Christ.
These are those good and faithful servants who seek no advantage of their own,
nor ascribe any thing to themselves, but all and that most faithfully to God,
to whom they give the glory of all. And so shall they be sure to hear from the
mouth of our Lord, those words of the Gospel: Rejoice thou, O good and
faithful servant, for because thou have been faithful in little, I will
appoint, and place thee over much.

CHAP. XXVIII. The foresaid truth is more declared.
WE have said that the third degree of Humility, is when a man having great
virtues, and gifts of God, and withal being in great honor and estimation
with the World, grows not proud thereof; but attributes, and ascribes all to
the fountain thereof, which is God, giving him the glory of all, himelf
remaining the while, in his own un worthiness, and baseness, as if he did
nothing, nor had nothing. But now we say not, for all this, that we do not also
work, or that we have not a part in those good works which we do, for this were
a great ignorance and error.

Nay rather, this is that very thing, which makes this degree of Humility so
very hard to be obtained: for on the one side, we are to use all our
diligences, and to employ all the means we can to obtain virtue, and to resist
temptations, and to procure that all things may succeed well, as if these
things alone were able to effect it; and on the other side, when all this is
done, we are to distrust our elves as much, and we hold our selves for as
unprofitable, as if God had done nothing at all, and we must place our whole
confidence in God, as the holy ospel teaches: When you have done all those
things which are commanded you, (he speaks not of some, but of all) say that
you are unprofitable servants; and to say this right, you will have need of
some virtue, and not a little. Cassianus says, That he who comes to know well
that he is an unprofitable servant, and that all his own endeavors and
diligences, are not able to obtain any one good things, but that all is to flow
from the gracious gifts of Almighty god, this man will not grow proud when he
prevails in any thing, which he obtained not by his own labor, but by the
grace and goodness of God. Which is also the same that Saint Paul says. What
have thou, which thou have not received.

Saint Augustine brings a very good comparison, to declare this truth and
says: That without the grace of God, we are no more but merely a body without
a soul. So that as a body which is dead, cannot move, or stir it self, so we,
without the grace of God, cannot perform the works of life, or value in the
sight of God. So that as that body were a mad kind of thing, which should
assume the acts of living, and moving to it self, and not ascribe it to the
soul which dwells in it, and gives it life; so were that soul to be stark blind,
which does attribute the good works which it does, to it self, and not to God,
who infused into it the spirit of life, which is his grace; to the end that so
he might be able to perform them. And in another place he says, that as our
corporal eyes, though they be never so sharp sighted, yet if they be not
assisted by the light of the Sun, can discern nothing; so a man, how much
soever he may be justified, cannot so much as continue to live well, if he be
not enabled by the light of Gods grace. If our Lord keep not the City says the
Prophet David, in vain does he watch who keeps it. O says the Saint, that men
would at length know themselves, and now at length, understand themselves as to
confess that they have nothing in themselves, whereof to glory, but only in
Almighty God. O that God would send us some beam of light from heaven, whereby
we might apprehend, and understand our own darkness: and that there is no good,
nor being, nor strength in any thing which ever was created, but only so far
forth, as our Lord has been graciously pleased to give it, and is still
pleased to continue it. Now in this does the third degree of humility consist,
saving that no poor words of ours can arrive to express the profunditie, and
great perfection which is therein, notwithstanding all that which we can say,
sometimes after one manner and sometimes after another: and not only is the
practice hereof hard, but even the speculation also.

This is that annihilation of a man's self, which is so often repeated, and
recommended by the masters of spiritual life. this is that holding, and
coufessing a man's self for unworthy, and unprofitable to all purposes. Which is
set down, for the most perfect degree of Humility. This is that distrust of a
man's self, and that being still depending upon God, which is so recommended to
us in holy Scripture. This is that holding himself in no account at all,
whereof we are ever talking, and hearing; but O that we might find it once for
all in our very hearts. That we might understand, and feel in very truth, and
practically, as a man who sees things with his eyes, and touches, and feels
them with his hands, that, for as much as is on our part we neither have any
thing but misery, nor can do any thing but commit sin, and that all the good
which we effect, or work, we neither exercise it, nor have it of our selves,
but only of God; and that the honor and glory of all is his.

And if with having said all this, you yet understand not fully the perfection
of this degree of humility, do not wonder at it; for this is a very high piece
of Divinity; and therefore it is not strange, though it be not so easily
understood. A certain Doctor says very well, that it happens in all arts, and
sciences, that every body arrives to know such things as are common and plain,
but as for such others as are curious, and choice, they are not to be reached
by every hand, but by such only as are eminent in that science, or art. And
just so it is in our case; for the ordinary, and usual things belonging to any
virtue, are understood by all the World; but such as are extraordinary, and
choice, and nice, and high, can only be comprehended by such as are eminent,
and fully possessed of that virtue. And this is that which Laurentius
Justitinianus says, namely; That no man knows well what humility is, but he
who has received the gift of being humble from God. And from hence it also
grows, that in regard the Saints were endued with such a most profound
Humility, that they thought, and said such things of themselves that we who
fall so far short of them, cannot understand exactly what they say: but their
speeches seem exaggerations, as namely that they were the greatest sinners of
the whole world, and the like, where of I will speak ere long. But if we cannot
say or think such things as they, no nor even understand them, it is because we
have not arrived to so great Humility, as theirs was, and so we understand not
the curious, and subtle parts of this faculty. Procure you to be humble, and
to grow up in this science, and to profit therein more and more, and then you
will understand how such things as those, may be said with truth.

CHAP: XXIX. The third degree of Humility is further declared, and how it grows
from thence, that the true humble man esteems himself to be the least, and
worst of all.
TO the end that we may yet better undestand this third degree of Humility,
and may ground our selves well therein; it will be necessary for us to go
back, and take up the matter nearer the fountain. And as according to what we
said before, all our natural being, and all the natural operations which we
have, we have from God, because we were nothing, and then we had no power
either to move our selves, or to see, or hear, or taste, or understand, or will
but God who gave us our natural being, gave us these faculties, and powers, and
we must ascribe our being, as also these namral operations to him; so in the
self same manner, and with much greater reason must we say; in the case of a
supernatural being, and of the works of grace, and that so much more, as these
are greater, and more excellent than those. We have not our supernatural being
of our selves, but of God. In sine it is a being of savor and grace, and
therefore it is so called, because out of his mere goodness, he added that, to
our natural being. Ephesians. 2, 3. We were born in sin, we were the children of
wrath, and the enemies of God, who drew us out of that darkness, into his
admirable light, as the Apostle Saint Peter says: 1 Pet: 2.9. Of enemies, God
made us friends, of slaves, Sons, from being nothing worth, he brought us to be
acceptable in his own eyes. And the cause why God did all this, was not for any
respect either of our merits past, or services to come; but only for his own
bounty, and mercy, and through the merits of Jesus Christ, our only Lord and
Savior, as Saint Paul says, Being justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ. Now then, as we were not able to get out of
that nothing, wherein we were, into the natural being which now we have, nor
were able to perform the acts of life, nor see, nor hear, nor feel, but all
this was the gracious gift of God, and to him we must ascribe it all, without
taking the glory of it to our selves, so could we never have gone out of that
darkness of sin, wherein we were, and in which we were conceived and born, if
God of his infinite goodness and mercy, had not drawn us out from thence, nor
could we now perform the works of spiritual life, if he gave us not his grace
to that end. For the virtue and worth of good works, grows not from that part
thereof, which they have from us, but from what they have from the grace of
our Lord, just so as the legal value which curtant money has, it has not from
it self, but from the stamp or coin. And therefore we must not ascribe any
glory at all to our selves, but all to God, from whom both our natural, and
supernatural being is derived; carrying ever that of St: Paul both in our
mouths, and in our hearts. I am whatsoever I am, by the mere grace of God.

But now, as according to what we said God, not only drew us out of our
nothing, and gave us that being which now we have, but after we are created,
and have received, our being, we do not subsist in our selves, but God is ever
sustaining, upholding, and conserving us, with his hand of power, that so we
may nor fall into that former profound Abisse of nothing, from whence he took us
before; in the same manner is it also, in the case of our supernatural being;
for not only did God show us the favor to bring us out of the darkness of sin,
wherein we were, into the admirable light of his grace; but he is ever
conserving, and holding us up with his hand, that so we may not return to fall.
And this, to such a proportion, as that if God should take off his hand of
custody from us, but for one instant, and should give the Devil leave to tempt
us at his pleasure; we should return both to our former, and to greater sins:
said the Prophet David. Thou O Lord, art ever at my side holding me up, that I
may not be plucked down; it is thy work O Lord, to have raised me up from sin;
thine to have kept me from returning to sin again. If I rose up, it was because
thou gave me thy hand; and if now I be on foot, it is because thou hold me
from dropping down.

Since therefore, as we showed it before to be sufficient to make us hold our
selves for nothing, because on our part, we are nothing, we were nothing, and
we should be nothing, if God were not ever conserving us: so this is also
sufficient to make us ever keep our selves in the account of being wicked
sinners, because, for as much as is on our part, we are sinners, we were
sinners, and we would be sinners, if God were not still upholding us, with his
holy hand. Albertus Magnus says, that whosoever would obtain Humility, must
plant the root thereof in his heart, which consists in that he know his own
weakness, and misery, and understand, and weigh not only how vile and wretched
he is now, but how vile and wretched he may be, yea, and would be even very
now, if God with his powerful hand, did not keep him, and sin asunder: and did
not remove the occasions, and assist, and strengthen him in temptations. Into
how many sins had I fallen, if thou O Lord through thy infinite mercy, had
not kept me up? how many occasions of my sinning have thou prevented, which
were sufficient to have pulled me down, as they pulled down the Prophet David:
if thou, knowing my weakness, if thou I say had not hindered them? How many
timeshast thou tied the devils hands, to the end that he might not rempt me at
his pleasure, and if he would tempt me, that yet he should not be able to
overcome me? How often might I have said those words of the Prophet, with much
truth. If thou O Lord had not helped me, this soul of mine had already been
little less, then in the very bottom of Hell. How often have I been
assaulted, and even almost tripped up, toward falling: and thou O Lord did
hold me, and did apply thy sweet and strong hand, that I might take no hurt.
Psalm: 94.18. If I said that my foot slipped thy mercy O Lord came to help me. O
how often should we have been lost, if God, through his infinite mercy, and
goodness, had not preserved us? This is then the account wherein we are to hold
our selves: because this we are, and this we possess on our parts, and this we
were, and this we should also be again, if God took off his hand, and custody
from us.

From hence it came, that the Saints despised, humbled, and confounded
themselves so far, that they were not content to esteem little of themselves,
and to hold that they were wicked, and sinful men; but they thought themselves
the meanest of all others, yea and the most unvvorthy, and sinful men in the
World. The same did the holy Apostle Saint Paul affirm, touching himself: Our
Lord Jesus Christ came into this World to save sinners, of whom I am the first,
or chief. And so he advises us to procure. to obtain this Humility, that we
hold our selves for inferior, and less then all others, and that we acknowledge
them all for our superiors, and betters. Saint Augustine says, The Apostle
deceives us not, when he says, That we must hold our selves for the least of
all, and that we must esteem all others to be our superiors, and betters: Phil.
2 3. Rom: 12.10. and he commands not hereby, that we should use any words of
flattery, or courtship toward them. The Saints did not say with counterfeit
humility, and telling a lie, that they were the greatest sinners in the world:
but merely according to truth, because they thought so in their very hearts,
and so they also give us in charge, that we think, and say the same, and this
not by complement, or with fiction.

Saint Bernard ponders very well to this purpose, that saying of our blessed
Savior. Luk: 14.10. When you shall be invited, sit you down in thelast, and
lowest place. He said not, that you should choose a middle place, or that you
should sit amongst the lowest; or in the last place but one: but he will only
have you sit in the very lowest place of all. Not only are you not, to prefer
your selves before any, but not so much as to presume to compare, or equal your
selves with any other: but you are only to remain in the last place, without
any equal in your baseness, esteeming your selves to be the most miserable
sinners of the whole World. It puts you, says he, to no danger, if perhaps you
should humble your selves too much, and put your selves under the feet of all;
but the preferring your selves before any one alone, may put you to a great
deal of prejudice. And he brings this ordinary comparison. As when you pass by
a low gate, the stooping too much with your head, can do you no hurt, but if
you stoop never so little less then the gate requires, you may do your selves
so much hurt, as to break your head; so it is also in the foul. For to abase
and humble your selves too much, cannot be hurtful, but to forbear to humble
yourselves though it be but a little to prefer, or even equal your selves to
any one, it is a dangerous thing. What know thou (O man) whether that one
whom thou take, not only to be worse than thou (for perhaps it seems to thee
now, that thou art grown to live well) but that he is a wicked man, and the
greatest sinner in the whole World may not prove perhaps a better man, than
either they or thou, yea and that he is so already in the sight of God. Who
knows whether God will nor change hands, as Jacob did, and that the lots will
be also changed; and that thou will come to be the forsaken, and the other
chosen? How do you know what God has wrought in that heart since yesterday,
yea and in this last minute. In one instant, is God able to make Apostles of a
Publican, and a Persecutor, as he did of Saint Matthew, and Saint Paul. Of
sinners more stony and hard than a Diamond, can God make sons for himself. How
mightily did that Pharise find himself deceived, when he judged Saint Mary
Magdalen for wicked, and when Christ our Lord reproved him, and gave him to
understand that she whom he held for a public sinner, was better than he. And
so Aquinus sets this down for one of the twelve degrees of Humility. To say and
think of himself, that he is the worst man of the whole World. It is not enough
to say so with the tongue, but it must be felt with the very heart. Think not
that thou have profited at all, if thou hold not thy sell for the vvorst of men.

CHAP. XXX. How good, and holy men, may with truth esteem themselves less then
others yea and affirm themselves to be the greatest sinners of the world.
IT will not be matter of curiosity, but of much profit, to declare how good,
and holy men, may with truth esteem themselves esse then all; and also affirm
that they are the greatest sinners of the whole world; For we have said that we
must procure to arrive thus far Some of the Saints refuse to answer the
question, how this may be; and content themselves with believing of themselves,
that they are so in their hearts Saint Dorotheus relates, that the holy Hosimus
being one day speaking of Humility, and saying so of himself; a certain
Philosopher was there, who asked him how he could hold himself to be so great a
sinner, since he knew himself to live so uprightly, and holily. To which the
holy man made this answer, I say that this which I have said is true, and that
I speak as I think; and therefore ask me no more questions. But Saint
Augustine, Aquinas, and other Saints give an answer to this question, and they
do it diverse ways. That of Saint Augustine, and Aquinas is, that a man placing
his eyes upon his own defects, and considering in his Neighbors the secret
gifts which he has, or at least may have of God; every one may with truth
affirm of himself, that he is the vilest, and greatest sinner of the whole
World; for he knows his own defects, and know not another man's graces or gifts.
Obut say you, I see that he commits many sins, which I commit not. But yet how
do you know, what God has wrought in his heart, since that time. In a moment,
may God have secretly imparted some gist and favor to that man, which may have
made him excel you, as it happened to that Pharise, and that Publican of the
Gospel, who went into the Temple to pray. Verily I say to you, (said Christ our
Lord) that the Publican who was held for so wicked, returned justified out of
the Temple, and the Pharise who was held for good, went out condemned. This
alone might serve to fright us, and to make us not presume, I say not, to
prefer our selves before, but even not to compare our selves with any, and to
make us keep our selves in the lowest place of all: which certainly is most
secure. And for him who is truly humble, and from the heart, it is a most easy
thing to hold himself in the lowest, and least account of all others. For the
truly humble man considers in other men the goodness and virtue which they have,
and in himself he observes but his own defects; and he is so busy, and earnest
about the knowledge and redress thereof, that he has no leisure to lift up his
eyes toward the faults of others, as conceiving himself to have enough of his
own to lament: and so he holds all other men for good, and himself for wicked.
And by how much the more holy any man is, so much the more easy is this to
him; for after the rate, or the increase of his other virtues, the knowing,
despising, and humbling himself, does also increase, for all these things go
together. And still the more light he has from Heaven, and the more knowledge
of the goodness, and Majesty of Almighty God, the more profound understanding
will he come to have of his own misery, and of his nothing, because, Abyssus
abyssum invocat: Psalm: 42.9. That depth of the knowledge of the goodness, and
greatness of God, calls up, and discovers that other profound depth of our
misery, and makes us able to discern the infinite little moats, and grains of
dust of our imperfections. And if we hold our selves in any account, it is
certainly, because we have small knowledge of God, and little light from Heaven.
The beams of the sun of Justice, have not yet entered in by our window, and so
we do not only not see the moats which are our less defects, and
imperfections, but we are so short sighted, or rather indeed so very blind,
that we scarce discern our greater sins.

To this it may be added, that God loves humility in us so much, and it is so
very pleasing to him, that we should hold our selves in no account, and
conserve our selves therein; that, in order to this end, he is wont many times
in the case of his great servants, to whom he imparts many high benefits, and
savours, to disguise his gifts, and to communicate them in such a secret, and
strange manner, that even the man himself who receives them, does not thoroughly
comprehend them, and thinks they are nothing. Saint Hierome says: All that
beakty of the Tabernacle was covered with the skins of Beasts. And so uses
God to conceal, and cover the beauty of men's virtues, and of his own graees,
and benefits; by permitting variety of temptations, yea and sometimes of some
errors and im perfections, that so they may be the more safely conserved, as
burning Coals under ashes might be.

Saint John Climacus says, that as the Devil procures to lay our virtues, and
good works before our eyes, that so we may grow proud because he desires our
ruin, so on the contrary side, our Lord God, because he desires our greater
good, gives more particular light to his servants, that so they may see their
own faults, and imperfections, and he covers, and disguises his gists and
graces to them, that even the man himself who receives them, may not be able
expressly to understand them. And this is the common Doctrine of the Saints:
Saint Bernard says, To conserve Humility in the servants of God, his divine
goodness disposes things in such fort, as that the more a man profits, the
less he conceives himself to profit: and when he is arrived to the highest
degree of virtue, Almighty God permits him to be subject to some such
imperfection, as concerns the first degree; to the end that he may conceive
himself not to have fully obtained so much as that; and of the same does Saint
Gregory speak in many places.

For this, do some very well compare Humility, and say that it respects other
virtues, as the Sun does other Stars; and that, for this reason, as when the
Sun appears, other Stars lie hidden, and are concealed; so when Humility is in
the soul, other virtues are not seen, and the humble man conceives that he has
no solid virtue at all. Saint Gregory says. Their virtues being manifest to
all men, only themselves see them not. The holy Scripture recounts of Moses.
that when he came from speaking with God, he carried a great brightness in his
face, which the children of Israel saw, but for his part, he saw it not. So the
humble man, sees no virtues in himself. all that which he sees, seems faults,
and imperfections to him yea and he further believes, that the least part of
his miseries is that which he knows, and that he is ignoraht of the greater,
and now in the midst of this, it will be eafie for him to esteem himself below
all, and for the greatest sinner of the whole World.

It is most certain, (to the end that we may conceal nothing) that as there are
many several ways, whereby God is wont to conduct his Elect, so he leads many
by this way, whereof we have spoken, namely, of concealing his gifts from
them, so that them selves may not see them, nor conceive that they have them;
but he manifests them to others, and makes them know them, to the end, that
they may esteem his servants, and be pleased in them. And so says the Apostle
Saint Paul: We have not received the spirit of this World, but the Spirit of
God; that we may know the gifts and graces, which we receive from his hand. And
the most holy Virgin Mary did very well both know, and acknowledge the great
graces, and gifts, which she possessed, and had received from Almighty God: as
she faith in her Canticle. My souldoth magnify and exalt our Lord, because he
who is omnipotent, has wrought mighty things in me. And this is not only not
contrary to humility, and perfection, but it is accompanied with an humility so
very much elevated, and so high, that for this reason the Saints are wont to
style it, the humility of great, and perfect men.

But yet here, there is a great error, and danges, whereof we are advertised by
the Saints, and it is when some think of themselves, that they have more graces
of God, than indeed they have. In which error was that miserable Creature, to
whom God commanded this to be said in the Apocalipse; Thou sa is it that thou art
rich, and that thou have need of nothing, but thou do not understand thine
own case, for thou art miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. In the same
error, was that Pharise who gtave God thanks, that he was not like others,
believing of himself, that he had what indeed he had not: and that therefore he
was better then other men: And sometimes, this kind of pride steals in upon us,
so secretly, and with such disguise, that almost before we know where we are,
we grow very full of our selves, and of our own estimation. And for this, it is
an excellent remedy, that we ever carry our eyes open, toward the virtues of
others, and shut up toward our own, and so to live ever in a holy kind of
fear, whereby we our selves will be more safe, and the gifts of God better kept.

But yet in fine, forasmuch as our Lord is not tied to this, he conducts his
servants by several ways. Sometimes as the Apostle Saint Paul says: he will
do his servants the particular favor, of making them know the gifts which they
have received from his hand. And in this case, it seems that the thing in
question has more difficulty, namely, how these Saints, and spiritual men, who
know and see in themselves, so great gifts which they have received from God,
can with truth esteem themselves below all; and affirm of themselves with all,
that they are the greatest sinners of the whole World. When our Lord conducts a
man by that other way of hiding his gifts, that so he sees no virtue in
himself, but all his faults and imperfections: the difficulty is not so great,
but in these others, how can it be? Notwithstanding all this, it may be very
well. Be you humble like to that holy Father, and you shall know how. His
companion pressing to understand, how he could think and say so of himself with
truth; he made this answer. Really I understand it as I speak it, and I
believe, that if God had stewed those mercies, and imparted those graces to any
murdering thief, or to the greatest sinner in the whole World which he has
vouchsafed to me, he would have been much better, and more grateful than I. And
on the other side, I conceive, and believe, that if our Lord should take off
his hand from me, and not hold me fast, I should commit greater sins, and
should prove the most wicked man in the whole World. And for this reason he
says, I am the greatest sinner and the most ungratef of all men. And this is a
very good answer, and a very profound humility, and it carried Doctrine in it,
of admirable instruction. This knowledge and consideration, is that which made
the Saints dive down so low under the carth, and cast themselves at the feet of
all men, and really esteem themselves for the greatest sinners of the whole
World, for they had that root of Humility which is the knowledge of their own
misery and frailty, well planted, and deeply rooted in their hearts: and they
knevv very well how to penetrate and ponder both what they were, and what
they had of themselves; and this made it easy for them to believe, that if God
should not hold them fast, but once take off his hand, from their heads, they
would have proved the greatest finners of the World; and so they held
themselves, for such. And as for those gifts and graces which they had
received from God, they beheld them not, as any thing of their own, but as the
goods of another, and only lent to them. And not only did the having of all
these gifts, not distract, or hinder them from remaining entire in their
poorness, and baseness, or from esteeming themselves below all others, but it
rather helped them on toward that end, because they thought they profited not
thereby, as they ought to have done. So that which way soever, we turn our
eyes, whether we cast them inward, upon what we have of our solves, or
wherther we cast of God; we shall find occasion enough to be humbled; and to
esteem our selves below al.

Saint Gregory, to this purpose, ponders those words which David said to Saul,
after he might have killed him in the Cave into which Saul had entered. And when
David spared his life, and let him go, he yet went after him, saying. Whom do
thou persecute O King of Israel? thou persecutest a dead dog, and a
singleflea, as I am; The Saint poinders it thus very well, David was already
anointed for King, and had understood from the Prophet Samuel who anointed him,
that God would take the Kingdom from Saul; and give it him, and yet neverthe
less; he humbles and lessens himself before him, though he knew that God had
preferred him, and that in the sight of God, he was a better man than Saul.
Whereby we may learn, to esteem our selves less, than them, of whom we know
not, in what condition or degree they stand, in the presence of Almighty God.

CHAP: XXXI. That this third degree of Humility is a good means to overcome all
temptations, and to obtain the perfection of all the virtues.
CAssianus says, that it was a tradition of those ancient Fathers, and as it
were the first principle amongst them, that a man could not obtain purity of
heart, and the perfection of virtue, if first he did not conceive and know,
that all his industry diligence, and labor, would not be sufficient for that
purpose, without the especial favor and help of God, who is the prime Author,
and giver of all good things. And he says moreover, that this knowledge of his
must not be only speculative, and because we have heard it or read it, or
because it is a Doctrine of Faith; but we must know it practically, and by
experience, and be so convinced, so resolved, and settled in this truth, as if
we saw it with our eyes, and touched it with our hands: and this is literally
the third degree of Humility, whereof now we treat. And of this kind of
Humility it is, that the authorities of holy Scripture speak, and which promise
so great, and even innumerable blessings, to such as are humble. And for this
reason the Saints assign it for the last, and most perfect degree of Humility
and say, that it is the foundation of all virtue, and the preparation, or
disposition for receiving all kind of graces, and gifts from God. And Cassianus
prosecuting this point more in particular, says concerning chastity, that no
endeavor of ours, will serve for the obtaining thereof, till we certainly
understand, that it is not to be had, but from the liberality and mercy of
Almighty God. And Saint Augustine agrees very well herewith. For the first and
chief means, which he delivers for the acquiring and conserving the gift of
chastity, is humility; that so we may not think, that our own diligences will
suffice for this: for if we rely and rest upon them, we deserve to loose it.
But we must know, that it is the gift of God, and that it must come to us from
above, and that we must place our whose confidence in him. And so one of those
old Fathers said, that a man would be tempted with carnal thoughts, till he
come to know very well, that chastity is the gift of our Lord: and no
acquisition of our own. Palladius confirms this, by the example of Abbat
Moses, who having been a man of a strange corporal strength, as also of a most
vicious mind, was converted afterward to God, with his whole heart. At the
first, he was grievously tempted, especially concerning imputity; and by the
advice of those Fathers, he employed his best means to overcome it. He prayed
so long, as that he passed six years in prayer, yea and spent the greatest part
of the whole nights in prayer, remaining still upon his feet. He used much
handy labor, he eat nothing but bread; and that in small quantity: he went
carrying water to the old Monks in their Cells, and used many other greater
wortifications, and austerities. But yet, with all this, he came not to be free
from his temptations; but was even set on fire by them; and was sometimes in
danger to fall, and to forsake his purity. Being then in this trouble, the holy
Abbat Isidorus came to him: nd told him on the part of God, that for that time
forward, his temptations should cease in the name of Jesus Christ our Lord; and
so they did, and never set upon him more. And the Saint, by way of declaring
the cause, adds this; that till then, God had not given complete Victory to
Abbat Moses, lest he should have grown vain and proud; as con^eiving that he
had conquered by his own strength: and therefore that God had, till then,
permitted it for his greater good. Moses had not yet obtained the gift of
distrusting himself and now to the end that he might obtain it, and not grow
proud by confiding in himself, God left him so long a time, and he obtained not
by so many, and so great endeavors, the complete victory over this passion,
which others by diligence had obtained.

The like did Palladius relate to have happened to the Abbat Pacon; for even
whilst he was seventy years old; he was very much molested by unclean
temptations: and he says, that the other affirmed it to him, with an Oath,
that after he was fifty years old, the combat had been so usual, and so very
fierce, as that there had not passed either one day or night, in all that time,
wherein he had not been tempted to that sin. He did very extraordinary things
to free himself from these temptations: but they did not serve the turn. And
lamenting one day, and even half fearing, that our Lord had sorsaken him, he
heard a voice which interiourly said thus to him: know that the cause why God
has permitted this sharp assault to be made against thee, has been to the
end, that thou might know thy own poverty, and misery, and the little or
nothing which thou have of thy self; and therefore see that thou humble thy
self hereafter, and confide not in thy self at all; but in all things have
recourse for help to me. And he says, that he was so comforted by this
instruction, that he never felt that temptation again. In fine, the Will of our
Lord is, that we put all our confidence in him, and that we distrust our selves
with all our own diliences and means.

This is the Doctrine not only of Saint Augustine, Cassian, and those ancient
Fathers, but of the Author, and book of Wisdom himself; and that in those very
terms, whereby we have expressed it here. For the wise man, in the book of
Wisdom, sets expressly down, both the Theory, and the practice of this point in
these words. When I knew (says he) that I could not be continent, Wis. 8.21.
(so the vulgar Latin reads) but by the gift of God. Now continent is here
the general word, which comprehends not only the containing, or restraining
that passion which is against chastity, but all the other passions also, which
rebel against reason. And that other place also of Eccles. No weight of Gold,
is able to go in balance with a continent soul. No precious thing, is so much
worth as the person, who is continent. He means that kind of man, who entirely
contains all his affections, and appetites, that they may not pass beyond the
bounds of reason And now, says Solomon, knowing that I could not contain these
passions, and powers, both of my body and soul, within the moderation of virtue
and truth, without the especial gift of God: but that sometimes they would
exceed (the knowledge whereof is a high point of Wisdom) I had recourse to our
Lord, and begged this gift of him, with my whole heart: So that, in fine, this
is the only means, whereby a man may become continent: and may be able to
continue continent, to restrain and govern our passions, and bind over all
temptations, and the perfection of all Virtues. And so the Prophet understood
it rightly, when he said. Except the Lord build the house, their labor is but
lost that build it. Except the Lord keeps the City, the watchman waketh but
in vain. Psa. 127.1, 2. It is he who must give us all good things, and when he
has given them, must conserve them to us; or else all our labor will be lost.

CHAP: XXXII. That Humility is not contrary to Magnanimity, but rather that it
is the foundation, and cause thereof.
AQuinas treating of the virtue of magnanimity, makes this question. On the one
side the Saints say, yea and the holy Scripture also says, that Humility is
very necessary for us, and withal, that magnanimity is also necessary;
especially so such, as exercise high Ministries, and live in high place. Now
these two virtues seem to be contrary in themselves, because magnanimity is a
greatness of mind to attempt, and enterprise great, and excellent things, which
in themselves may be worthy of honor, and both the one and the other seem to
be contrary to Humility. For as for the first, which is to enterprise great
things, this seems not to sure well, with this virtue, because one of the
degrees of Humility, which the Saints assign, is, To confess, and hold himself
unworthy, and unprofitable for all things; and now for a man to attempt that
for which he is not fit, seems to be presumption, and pride. And as for the
second point, which is to enterprise things of honor, it seems also to be
contrary, because the true humble man, must be very farfrom desiring honor and
estimation. To this Aquinas answers very well and says, that although in
appearance, and by the exterior sound of the Words, these two virtues may
seem to be contrary, betvveen themselves: yet in effect and truth, one virtue
cannot be contrary to another; and in particular, he says concerning these
two virtues of Humility, and magnanimity, that if we will attentively cast
our eyes upon the truth, and substance of the thing, we shall not only find
that they are not contrary, but that they are direct Sisters, and depend much
upon one another. And this he declares very well, because as for the first,
which is to enterprise and attempt great things, which is proper to the
magnanimous persons, it is not only not contrary to the humble man; but rather
is very proper to him, and he who is the one, may very well do the other. If
confiding in our own diligence, and strength, we should undertake great things,
it might be presumption, and pride, because we may not undertake things either
great or small, in the confidence of our own strength, for as much as of our
selves, we are not able to have one good thought, as Saint Paul says. But the
firm foundation of this virtue of magnanimity, to attempt and enterprise great
things is to be by distrusting our selves, and all humane endeavors, and to
put our whole confidence in God; and this does Humility also, and therefore do
the Saints call it, the foundation of all the virtues, as we said before,
because it opens the soil, and sounds deep into the very bottom, and takes out
all the sand and loose stuff, till at length it arrive to that living rock,
which is Christ our Lord, that so we may build thereupon.

Saint Bernard upon that place of the Canticles. Who is this which rises up
from the desert, aboundning in delights, and leaning upon her beloved, goes
declaring how all our virtue, our strength, and all our good works, are to
rely, and rest upon our Beloved. And he brings for an example, that of Saint
Paul to the Corinthians 1 Cor. 15.10. By the grace of God I am what I am, and
his grace which was bestowed upon me, was not in vain: but I labored more
abundantly than they all. The Apostle begins to recount his labors, and how
much he had done in the preaching of the Gospel, and the service of the Church,
till at length he came to say, that he had labored more than the rest of the
Apostles. St Bernard says. Take heed what you say O holy Apostle. To the end
that you may be able to say this, yea and to the end that you may not loose it:
rely upon your Beloved. Now he replies upon his Beloved. Not I, but the grace
of God in me: Phil. 4.13. And writing to the Philip. he says, I can do all
things, and then instantly he leans upon his Beloved, through Christ which
strengthens me. In God we shall be able to do all things, by his grace we
shall be of power to do all things.

This must be the foundation of our magnanimity, and of our greatness of mind.
And this is that, which the Prophet Esaias says: Isa. 40.31. They who distrust
themselves, and put their whole confidence in God, shall change their strength.
For they shall change their strength of men, which is mere weakness for the
strength of God, they shall change their arm of flesh, and blood, for the arm
of our Lord: and so they shall have strength for all things, for they shall be
able to do all things in God. And therefore did Saint Leo say, nothing is hard
to the humble, nothing is harsh to the meek. The truly humble man, is he who is
magnanimous, courageous, and hardy to enterprise, and attempt great things: or
rather nothing will be hard to him, because he confides not in himself, but in
God, and looking up to him, and relying upon him, he contemns al dangers. In
God we can do all things. This is that, whereof we have much need, a great and
courageous mind, and a great confidence in God, and not a weak heart which
takes away our appetites from doing our duties. So that in our selves, we must
be humble, as knowing that of our selves we are nothing, we can do nothing, and
we are good for nothing; but in God, and in his power, and grace, we aie to be
strong hearted toward the enterprising of great things. Saint Basil declares
this very well, upon those words of the Prophet Esaias; Here am I, send me: Isa:
6.8. God was resolved to send one to preach to his People, and for as much as
he is pleased to work things in us, with our good will and consent, he said,
and said it so, as that Esaias might hear him: Whom shall I send, and who will go
for us? Isa: 6.8. To this the Prophet answers, O Lord here I am if you will be
pleased to send me. Saint Basil pondets very well that he said not, Lord I will
go, and can dispatch this business, for he was humble, and knew this own
weakness well, and saw that it was boldness to promise for himself, that he
would perform so great a work, which overcame his strength but he said, Lord
here I am ready, and vvilling to receive that which you shall be pleased to
give; do you send me, for upon your warrant I will go. As if he had said, for
my part I have no ability for so high a Ministry as that, but you are able to
make me sufficient, you can put words into my mouth, which will have a power to
make a change in the hearts of men. If you send me, I may well go; for going in
your name, I shall be able to perform the work. Then God said to him, Vade, Go,
See here, says Saint Basil, how the Prophet Esaias took his degree for being a
Preacher, and an Apostle of God: because he could answer very well in the
Doctrine of Humility, and attributed not his going to himself, but acknowledge
his own insufficiency, and weakness, he placed all his confidence in God,
believing he could do all things in him, and that if God sent him, he might go.
For this reason, God gave him the charge, and bad him go, and so made him his
Preacher, Ambassador, and Apostle. This is to be our strength, and our
magnanimity, for the enterprising and undertaking great things. Be not
therefore disanimated, or dismayed, when you consider your own insufficiency,
and weakness, Jer. 1.7.8. Say not I am a child (says God to the Prophet
Jeremiah) for thou shall go to all that I shall send thee, and whatsoever I
command thee, thou shall speak. Be not afraid of their faces, for I am with
thee. So that, for as much as concerns this part of Humility, not only it is
not contrary to magnanimity, but rather it is the foundation, and root thereof.

The second point, which belongs to the magnanimous person, is to desire to do
great things, and that in themselves they may be worthy of honor. But this
also is not contrary to Humility, because as Aquinas says very well, although
the magnanimous person desire to do such things, yet he desires it not, for
humane honor, nor is this his end. He will take care indeed to deserve it, but
not either to procure, or esteem it. Nay rather he has a heart, which so truly
despises both honor, and dishonor, that he holds nothing to be great but
virtue, and for love thereof, he is moved to do great things, despising the
honor which men can give. For virtue is a thing so high, that it cannot be
honored or revvarded sufficiently by men, and deserves to be honored and
rewarded by Almighty God, and therefore the magnanimous person values not all the
honors of the World at a straw. It is a mean thing, and of no price at al with
him, his flight is higher. For the only love of God; and virtue, is he invited
to do great things, and he despises all the rest. Now then, for the having of a
heart which is so great, so generous, such a despiser of the honor, and
dishonor of men, such as the magnanimous person ought to have, it is necessary
that he have also much Humility. To the end that a man may arrive to so great
perfection, as to be able to saywith S. Paul, I know both how to be abased, and
I know how to abound: every where, and in all things I am instructed, both to
be full, and to be hungry, both to abound, and to suffer need. Phil: 4.12. By
honor, and dishonor, by evil report, and good report, as deceivers, and yet
true: 2 Cor: 6.8.9. As unknown, and yet well known, as dying, and behold we
live: To the end that so stiff, and so contrary winds, as they of honor, and
dishonor; of praise and murmuring, of favors and persecutions, may cause no
change in us, nor make us stumble, or shrink, but that we may still remain in
our own being, it is necessary to have a great foundation of Humility, and of
wisdom from Heaven. I know not whether you will be able to keep your self free,
for the doing of all good works, when you are in abundance like the Apostle
Saint Paul. As for suffering poverty, and to be humble in the midst of
dishonors, and affronts, this perhaps you will be able to do. But to be humble
in honors, chairs, pulpets, and the higher sort of Ministeries, I know not
whether you will be able. Alas those Angels once of Heaven, knew not how to do
this; but they grew proud, and fell. Boethius says. Though both estates are to
be feared, yet prosperity more then adversity. It is harder for a man to
conserve himself in Humility, in honor, and estimation of the World, and in
high employments, and Ministeries, then in dishonor, and contempt, and in the
discharge of places, which are mean and poor, for these things draw humility
after them, and those others vanity, and pride. Scientia inflat: knowledge, and
all other high things, do naturally puff us up, and make us giddy, and
therefore the Saints say, that it is the humility of great and perfect men, to
know how to be humble, and amongst the great gifts and graces which they
receive from God, and amongst the honors and estimations of the World.

We must therefore procure to arrive to this humility, by the grace of our
Lord, we I say, who are called, not to the end that we should be shut up in
corners, or be hidden under a bushel, but set up on high, like a City upon a
hill, or like a taper upon a Candlestick, to shine, and give light to the World.
For which purpose it will be necessary for us to lay a very good foundation;
and for as much as is on our part, to have great desire to be dis-esteemed, and
despised; and that this may flow out of a profound knowledge of our own misery,
our baseness, and our nothing.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the great benefits, and advantages which are in this third
degree of Humility.
AFter King David had prepared much gold, and silver, and many rich materials
for the building of the Temple, he offered them up to God, and said these
words. All things O Lord are thine, and that which we have received at thy
hands, that do we render, and return again. This is that, which we must do and
say, in all our good works. O Lord all our good works are thine, and so we
return what thou have given us. Saint Augustine says very well. He who puts
himself to recount the duties, and the services which he has done thee, of
what other thing does he tell thee O Lord, but of the benefits, and gifts which
he has received from thy holy hand. This is an effect of thy infinite mercy,
and goodness toward us, to qualify thine own benefits, and gifts to us, to be
as new virtues of ours: and so when thou payest us for our services, thou
rewardest thine own benefits, and for one grace of thine, thou give us
another, and for one favor another, Gratiam pro gratia; Our Lord is content to
proceed with us, like another Joseph, by giving us not only corn, but he will
also give us the price, and money which it cost. All is Gods gift, and all must
be ascribed, and returned to him, he gives both grace, and glory.

One of the great helps and benefits, which is to be reaped, by this third
degree of Humility, is that it is the good, and true gratitude, and
thanksgiving, for the benefits which we have received at the hand of God. It is
well known how highly the giving of thanks, and gratitude is recommended, and
esteemed in holy Scripture; since we see that when our Lord vouchsafed any
remarkable benefit to his people, he instantly ordained, that some memory, or
seast of thanksgiving should be instituted: because gratitude does much import
us, toward the receiving of new graces and favors. Now this is very well
effected, by this third degree of humility, which consists as has been said,
in that a man attribute nothing to himself, but all to God, and to give him the
glory of all. For in this consists true gratitude, and giving of thanks; and
not in saying with the tongue, O Lord I give thee thanks for thy benefits,
though yet we must also praise, and give God thanks, with the tongue. But if
you shall do it with the tongue alone, it will not be to give thanks, but to
say thanks. But now to the end that it may not be only be saying of thanks, and
not only with the mouth, but with the heart, and indeed it will be necessary
for us to acknowledge, that all the good we have is of God, and that we must
ascribe, and return it all to him, giving him thanks for it all, and retaining
to our selves no part thereof: for in this sort, a man strips himself of that
honor which he sees to be none of his own, and he gives it to God, whose it
is. And this did Christ our Lord intend to make us know, in the holy Gospel,
when having cured those Leapers, and one only returning to give him thanks for
the benefit which they had al received, he said thus: There is none who has
returned, and given glory to God, but this stranger. And when God admonished
the people of Israel that they must be grateful, and not forget the benefits
which they had received, he gave them this advertisement; Deuteronomy: 8-11. Take heed
that you for get not God, when you shall be in the Land of promise, in great
prosperity of temporal goods, of houses, Lands, and stock, take heed that your
hearts be not then puffed up, and that you become not ungrateful, and say that
you have obtained it by your own wisdom, and strength. My power, and the might
of my hand has gotten me this wealth v: 17. This is to forget God, and this is
the greatest ingratitude into which a man can fall, to ascribe the gi^t of God
to himself. Take heed you have not once a thought of any such thing as this.
But see that you remember God, and acknowledge that the strength was his, and
that he fortified you in all things: and this, not for any desert of yours, but
only to comply with the promise, which of himself he had franckly made, to your
forefathers. This is the gratitude, and rendering of praise: wherewith our Lord
God will be honored, for the benefits and favors which he imparts to us.
Psalm: 50.23. Who so offers me thanks and praise, he honors me. This is the
sum of Saint Paul's Doxology. Now unto the King eternal, immortal, and
invisible, the only wise God, be honor and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.
That God only have the glory of all.

From hence also grows another benefit, and good, that the true humble man,
though he have many gifts of God, and be much esteemed and valued by the whole
World for them, does not yet esteem and value himself, one hair the more, for
that: but remains so firm in the knowledge of his own baseness, as if none of
that which they ascribed, were to be found in him. For he knows very well, how
to distinguish that which is his own, from that which belongs to another: and
to assign to every one his own: and so he beholds the benefits and graces which
he has received from God, not as his own, but as another; by whom they were
lent, and he also lodges his eyes upon his own baseness, and misery, and upon on
that which he would not fail to be, if God should take off his hand, even for
one minute, and were not ever conserving, and holding him up. Yea and even
whilst he is receiving the gifts of God, he is the more humbled, and confounded
thereby. Saint Dorotheus says, that as it happens with trees, which are mighty
laden with fruit, the same very fruit makes the bows stoop, and abase
themselves; and that, sometimes so fat, as to break them with their great wait,
whereas the boughs which bear no fruit remain perking up, and high; and as ears
of Corn, when they are very full, hang down their heads, so far that they seem,
as if they would even break the stalk, whereon they grow: and when they stand
boult upright, it is a shrewd sign that they have nothing in them; so it
happens says he in the way of spirit, that they who are empty, and without
fruit, look bigg, and lofty, and hold themselves for gallant men; but they on
the other side, who are much laden with fruit, and are full of the graces and
gifts of God, are the more humble, and confounded thereby. For even from those
benefits and gifts, the true servants of God take occasion to be the more
humbled, and to walk with the more warines, and fear. Saint Gregory says, that
as a man who has borrowed great sums of money, is glad in such sort, that he
has borrowed it, as that yet this joy of having received it, is very
sufficiently watered, by the knowing that he is in obligation to pay it again;
and care to consider, whether he shall be able to comply, when his Bond is due;
so the man who is truly humble, the more gifts he has received, he
acknowledges himself to be so much the more deeply a Debtor, to Almighty God,
and so much the more bound to serve him, and he is still thinking, that he
corresponds not to these greater favors, by greater services, nor to greater
graces, by greater thanks; and he conceives and believes, that to whomsoever
God would have showed that goodness, which he had showed to him, that man would
have made better use of it, and would have been more grateful, and a better
man. And so, one of the considerations which makes the true servants of God to
be very much humbled and confounded is this; They know that God will not only
call them to an account for their sins committed, but for his favor also
received and they know that to whom God gives much, from him he will require
much, and to whom he gives more, of him he will also require more Holy Macarius
says, that the humble man looks upon the gifts and favors of God, as some
depositary or treasurer would do, who had his masters goods in his hands; for
such a one will rather be in fear and care, than in pride, lest somewhat should,
by his fault be lost, when they call him to make up his accounts.

From hence also grows yet another good, which is, that the man who is truly
humble, disesteems or despises no other man, into whatsoever defects and sins
he may perhaps see him fall, nor will he thereby grow proud, or esteem himself
the more, for that; but rather will take occasion thereby, to humble himself the
more by having seen him fall, through the consideration that the other, and
himself, and both made of the same mould, and that when the other falls, he also
falls, for as much as he is in himself. For, as St. Augustine says, there is no
sin which is committed by any one, which another man would not, or might not
commit, if the hand of Gods mercy withheld him not. And so one of those
anrient Fathers, when he heard that any man had fallen, was wont to weep
bitterly, and say: To day for him, and to morrow for me. As he fell, I might as
well have fallen, since I am a weak man as he is. I must esteem it, as a most
particular blessing of our Lord, that I fell not too. Thus do all the Saints
advise us, that whenever we see one man blind, another deaf, another lame,
another maimed, or sick: we must esteem all those miseries of theirs, to be
benefits of ours, and give thanks to God, for not having made us blind, or
deaf, or lame, or maimed, as he made him. And so also must we make account,
that the fins of al other men, are so many benefits of our own, for I might
have committed them al, if our Lord out of his infinite mercy, had not defended
me. By this means, the servants of God preserve themselves in Humility, and in
not despising their neighbors, and in not carrying themselves high against
others: for whatsoever faults or sins they discern in them, according to that
of St. Gregory; True justice makes us have compassion of our neighbors, and
false justice disdain and scorn. But such men as these, have reason to be
afraid of that which St. Paul says, Gal. 6.1. Considering thy self, lest thou
also be tempted. Lpray God they com not to be tempted, in that very thing which
they condemn in others: and that, at length, they find not to their cost, how
great that misery is, which uses to be the punishment of this sin. In three
things, said one of those ancient. Fathers, have I judged others, and my self
fell into them al: To the end that we may know, by experience, that our selves
also are but men, and that we may learn, neither to judge nor despise any man.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the great mercies and favors, which God shows to the humble,
and why he exalts them so high.
ALgood things together came to me with her. Wisd. 7.11. These are the words of
the Wise man concerning divine Wisdom, which say, that al good things com with
it. But yet, we may well apply them to Humility, and say that al good things com
to us thereby; since the same Wiseman says, that where Humility is, there also
is wisdom. Vbi est Humilitas, ibi and Sapientia. And in another place, he
says, that to have this Humility, is supreme wisdom. And the Prophet David
says, that God gives wisdom to the humble. But besides this, we are taught
this truth, in express terms both in the old and new Testament; where great
blessings and graces are promised to them, by Almighty God; sometimes by the
name of the humble: at other times, of little ones, and sometimes of the poor of
spirit, for by these, and such other names are they, who are truly humble,
called. Says God, by the Prophet Isaiah, But to this man will I look, even to
him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit; and trembles at my words. Upon
these does God cast his eyes, to do them favor, and even to sulfil them with
benedictions. And the glorious Apostles St Peter, and Saint James, in their
Canonical Epistles lay, God resists the proud, but grveth grace unto the
humble. Jam. 4.6. 1 Pet: 5.5. We are also taught the same by that most blessed
Virgin in her Canticle Our Lord has put down the mighty from their seats, and
exalted them of low de. gree. He has filled the hungry with good things, and
the rich he has sent empty away. Luke 1. 52, 53. And this is that, which the
Prophet had said before: For thou will save the afflicted (or humble) people,
and shall bring down the high looks of the proud. Psalm. 18. 27. And that also
which Christ our Lord said in the holy Gospel, Luke 14.11. Whosoever exalts
himself, shall be abased: and be that humbles himself, shall be exalted. As the
waters run down the valleys, so the rains of Gods grace, fall down upon the
humble. And as valleys use to abound with fruit, by reason of the much water
which is assembled there: so they, who are low and humble in his sight, use to
yield much fruit, through the many gifts, and graces, which they receive from
God. St. Augustine says, that Humility draws down the most high God to it
self. God is high, and if you humble your selves, he will descend to you; but if
you grow proud, and exalt your selves, he will sly from you. Will you know why,
says St Augustine, Because (as we are taught by the loyal Prophet) God is a
high and seteraign Lord, and he looks upon such as are humble: and his looking
upon them, is to fill them with all good things: but he says, that God sees the
ptoud from far off, because, as when here, we see a man far off, we know him
not, so does God not know the proud, in order to show them any favor. I tell
you for a certain truth, says God, to wicked and proud people, that I know you
not, Luke 13.27. Bonaventure says, as when wax is soft, it is ready to receive
any impression, which men will make therein: so does Humility dispose your souls
to receive virtue and grace from God. When Joseph invited his brethren, the
youngest of them al, had the best part.

But let us now look after the cause, why God raises the humble so high, and is
pleased to do them so great favor. It is, because al his goods do thus com
back again to himself. For the humble man carries nothing away, and attributes
nothing to himself: but entirely ascribes and restores al to God, and gives him
the honor, and glory of al. Such as these, says God, may very well be trusted
with our goods: we may well put our riches and blessings into their hands, for
they are safe persons, and will not rise and run away with them: and so God
proceeds with them, as in a case merely his own; because all the honor and
glory is still his Even here we see, that a great lord or King, holds it for a
point of greatness, to raise a man sometimes, out of the very dust of the earth
(as we use to say) who before was nothing, and who had nothing; for so is the
bounty and greatness of that King, the more visibly perceived. Thus says the
Apostle St. Paul, 2 Cor: 4.7. We have the treasure of the graces, and gifts of
God, in pots of clay, to the end that the world may know, that the treasure is
Gods and not ours: for clay breeds no such commodity as that. So that for this,
does God exalt the humble, and show them so many favors: and for this does he
leave proud men empty: because the proud man confides much in himself, and in
his own diligences and ways, and ascribes much to himself, and takes a vain
contentment in the good success of his business, as if it had been dispatched
by his own industries and pains, and all this, takes somewhat from God, and
steals away that honor and glory, which is proper to his divine Majesty. As
soon as we have once made some little entrance in to the use of prayer with any
little devotion, any little tear, which we shed, we conceive that already we
are grown to be spiritual, and men of prayer. And sometimes we will be also
preferring our selves, before others, and we will think that they have not
profited so much, nor are grown so spiritual as we. For this reason, our Lord
does us no greater savor; and sometimes he takes that from us which he had
given us; left the good should to us, be an occasion of il, and left health
should be turned into sickness, and treacle into poison and so his benefits and
gifts, should prove to our damnation through our il use thereof: as to the sick
man of a weak stomach, though the meat be good, yet they must give him but
little of it, because he has not strength to digest more; and if they gave him
more, it would corrupt, and be converted into il humor. That oil of the
Prophet Elizeus, never gave over to run, til such time as vessels were wanting,
wherein it might be received: but then the holy Scripture says, instantly the
oil forbore to run. Now such is the oil of the mercy of God, which, in it self,
is not limited: for the graces and mercies of God, have no limits at al, on his
part. God has not straightened, or closed his hand, nor is his nature changed;
for God is neither changed, nor can change, but ever remains in his own nature,
and has more desire to give, then we to take. The fault is on our side, who
want empty vessels to receive the oil of the graces and mercies of God. We are
very sul of our selves, and put much trust in our own endeavor. Humility, and
the knowledge of our own weakness empties the house, and takes a man off from
himself, and makes him distrust himself, and all humane helps, and ascribes
nothing to himself, but al to God; and to such men as these, God shows his
favors with full hands.

CHAP. XXXV. How much it imports us to betake our selves to Humility, to supply
thereby, what siever is wanting to us in virtue, and perfections, and to the
end that God may not humble us, by punishing us.
THe blessed St. Bernard says, A very stupid fool is he, who confides in any
thing but Humility: for alas, we have al sinned, and offended God, many ways:
and so we can plead right to nothing, but punishment If man, says Job, will
contend with God, he cannot answer him one of a thousand. Job 9. 3. To a
thousand accusations he will not be able to give one good discharge. What then
remains, says he, and to what other remedy shall we have recourse, but only to
retire our selves toward Humility: and to supply by that, the want, which we
may have of other things. And because this is a remedy of much importance, the
Saint repeats it many times, both in these, and other words: Let that which is
wanting to you in the purity of your conscience be supplied by your being
ashamed of your selves: and let that which is wanting to you in fervor, and
perfection, be made up by your confusion. And St. Dorotheus recommended his
very much; and said, Brethren, since we cannot, through our weakness, work, and
labor so much as we would: yet let us humble our selves at least, and by this
means I hope that we shall hereafter be able to find our selves, in society with
them who have wrought hard. And when, after you have committed many sins, you
shall find your selves disabled to do many works of repentance and
mortification, for want of health; walk you quietly on, by the plain and even
way of Humility, for so you will meet with a most convenient means for your
salvation. If you think you be not able to enter into and excel in prayer;
enter at least into your own confusion: if you conceive that you have no talent
for important things, procure to get Humility, for by this, you shall supply for all those things.

Let us therefore consider here, how little our Lord asks of us, and with how
little he contents himself. He desires, that according to our baseness, we
would know, and humble our selves. If God should ask of us great Fasts, great
and many good works, great and high contemplation; some men might excuse
themselves, and say, that they had no strength for the one, and no talent or
ability for the other. But for the not humbling our selves we have no reason or
excuse to allege. You cannot say, that you have not health to be humble, or
that you have no talent or ability for that. There is nothing more casie,
(says Sain Bernard) than for a man to humble himself, if he have a mind to it.
We can al do this, if we will, and we have matter enough for it, to work upon,
within doors. All the furniture of thy Humility thou have at home. Let us
therefore retire out selves now at last, to Humility, and so let us supply with
consusion, that which is wanting to us of perfection, and so we shall be able to
move the bowels of God, to mercy and pardon. At least, since we are poor let us
be humble too; and we shall give contentment to God; but to be poor and proud,
will offend him much. Of three things, which the Wiseman sets down, to be much
abhorred by Almighty God, this is the first. A poor man that is proud: Eccles.
25.2. Yea and even it is odious, also amongst men.

But let us humble our selves at least, lest God humble us, for thus he is very
ordinarily wont to do. He that exalts himself shall be humbled. Luke 14 10. If
therefore you will not have god humble you, take care to humble your selves.
This is a very principal point, and worthy to be considered, and pondered at
great leisure. St. Gregory says, Do you know how much God loves Humility, and
how greatly he abhors pride and presumption? He abhors it so much, that he
permits us first to fall into certain sins, and many little faults: to the end
that he may teach us, that since we are not able to keep our selves from little
sins, and temptations, but that we still find our selves to stumble, and daily
to fall in mean things, and very easy to be withstood we may be very certain,
that in our selves we have no means to avoid such as are greater: and that so
we may not be proud, when there is question of great things, nor attribute any
thing to our selves, but walk ever on with Humility, and fear, and beseech
our Lord to show us savor and grace St. Augustine, upon those words, And
without him was not any thing made that was made: Joh. 1.3. And St. Jerome upon
that of the Prophet Joel: And I will restore to you the years that the lorust
has eaten, the canker-worm, and the caterpillar, and the palmer-worm: Joel
2.25 Say that to humble a man, and to tame his pride, God created these little
animals, and poor base worms which are so troublesome to us and that the proud
people of Pharach, might easily have been tamed and humbled, if God would have
sent Bears, Lions, and Serpents, in upon them; but he thought fit to tame their
pride, by the balest sort of creatures, as gnats, flies, and frogs, that he
might humble them so much the more. And so also, to the end that we may be
humbled, and confounded, God permits us to fall into little faults; and gives
way that some poor and vveak temptations, which are like gnats, and eem not
indeed to have any body, or bulk in them; may sometimes make war against us. If
we vvil pause to consider attentively, what is wont sometimes to disquiet,
and put us from our ease: we shall find that they are certain trifling things,
which being sisted, and discovered well, have no substance in them at al. I
know not what little word they said to me; or else they said it to me in such
a manner; or me thought they made light of me; and the like. Of a fly which
passes through the air, a man sometimes vvil build a whole tovver of vvind, and
then adding one thing to another, it shall serve to make his heart very unquiet.
What would then become of us, if God should let loose some Lion, or Tiger
against us, when we are put into such disorder, by a gnat? What would become
of us, if we were set upon, by some grievous temptation? And thus are we to
dravv more Humility and confusion, out of such things as these. And if as St.
Bernard says, this be drawn from thene, it is a great mercy and benefit and
favor of God, that such toys as those, may not be wanting to us, and that this
may be able to make us humble.

But if these slight things will not serve the turn, then know, that God vvil
pass surther on, and that very much to your cost, for so he is accustomed to
do. God does so highly abhor presumption, and pride, and loves Humility, so
much, that the Saints affirm, that he is wont, through his just and most
socret judgment, to permit that a man may sal into grievous sins, to the end
that he may be humbled thereby, yea and even into carnal sins which are the
most ugly, and full of shame, to the end that they may be humbled the more. They
say that he punishes secret pride with open lust. And to this purpose they
bring that which St. Paul said of those Philosophers, whom for their pride,
God delivered over to the desires of their hearts. Romans 1.24. They came to fall
into unclean sins, which were most filthy, and not to be named, God permitting
it so for their pride, to the end that they might be humbled, and confounded,
when they saw themselves turned beasts, with the heart, and conversation, and
custom of beasts. Who would not sear thee, O King of Nations? Jer. 10.7. Who
will not tremble at this punishment, which is so great as that there is none
greater out of hell? Nay sin is even worse than hell. Who O Lord has known the
power of thy wrath? or who is able to relate it (so the vulgar Latin reads)
through the great sear which ought to be had thereof.

The Saints note, that God in these cases is wont to use two kinds of mercy
toward us, a greater mercy and a less The less mercy is, when he succors us
in our less miseries, which are the temporal, and such as only concern the
body; and the great mercy, is when he succors us in our great miseries, which
are the spiritual, and which concern the soul. And so when David saw himself in
his great misery, of being abandoned and dispossessed of God, by the adultery
and murder which he had committed, he cried out, and beggs the great mercy of
God: Have mercy upon me O God, after thy great goodness: Psalm: 51.1. They say
also that there is a great, and a little anger of God. The lesser is, when he
punishes men here, in the temporal, with adversities, in loss of goods, of
honor, health, and the like, which only concern the body; but the great anger
is, when the punishment goes so far, that it arrives to the interior part of
the soul, according to that of the Prophet Jeremy, The sword reaches unto the
soul: Jer. 4.10. And this is that which God says by the Prophet Zachary, I will
be angry, with my great anger, with that Nation which is proud and puffed up.
Zach. 1.15. When God forsakes a man, and permits him to fall into heinous sins
in punishment of his other sins, this is the great anger of God; these are
wounds which are given by divine indignation, and they are not as of a Father,
but as of a just and righteous Judge. Of which vvounds, that of the Prophet
Jeremy, may be understood: I have wounded thee with the wound of an enemy, with
a cruel punishment. Jer. 30.14. And so also says the Wiseman: The mouth of
strange women is a deep pit: he that is abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein.
Finally, pride is so wicked a thing, and so much abhorred by Almighty God, that
the Saints say, that sometimes it is good for the proud man, to be thus punished
by Almighty God, that so he may com to be cured of his pride. So says St.
Augustine: I presume to say, that it is profitable and good, for proud men,
that God permit them to sal into some visible and external sin, that so they
who were very well satisfied and pleased in themselves, and were already
salu, though they perceived it not; may so begin to know, and to humble, and
distrust themselves, according to that of the Wiseman: Prove. 16.18. Pride goes
before destruction: and an haughty spirit before a fall. The same do St. Basil,
and St. Gregory affirm. St. Gregory, by the occasion of the sin of David, asks
why God permits that the elect, and such as he has predestined to eternal
life, and on whom he had heaped up his graces, and gifts, should fall sometimes
into carnal and filthy sins; and he answers, that the reason of it is, because
sometimes, thy who have received great graces fall into pride, and they have it
so rooted, and even wrought into the most intimous part of the heart; that they
themselves understand it not; but are so well pleased, and confident of
themselves, as to think that God and they, are al one. As it happened to St.
Peter, the Apostle, who conceived not, that those words of his, had flowed from
pride, when he said, Though al men shall be offended because of thee, yet will I
never be offended: Matt. 26.33. but he thought that it had been courage in him,
and an extraordinary love which he carried to his Master. Therefore to cure
such pride as this, which lies so close and is so disguised, as that a man is
already fallen, though himself perceive it not, our Lord permits sometimes, that
such persons fall into certain manifest, exterior carnal filthy sins; to the end
that so they may know themselves better, and look more exactly into their
souls: and may so com to perceive their pride, which they believed not to be in
them before: and whereof they look for no remedy, and would so have com to
perish; but now by means of such gross falls, they know it, and being humbled
now in the sight of God, they repent both for the one and the other, and so
meet with remedy for both their miseries at once, as we see St. Peter did: who
by that visible and apparent fall of his, came to know that pride which lay so
secretly within, and he grew to lament it, and to repent for them both: and
thus was his fall good for him. The same happened also to David, Psalm. 119.71. who
therefore says, O Lord it has cost me dear, I confess it, but yet, upon the
whole matter, it has been good for me that I have been humbled, that so
hereafter I may learn to serve thee, and know how to abase my self as I ought.
And as the wise Physician, when he is not able to cure the malady out right,
and when the peccant humor is so rebellious and malign, that he cannot make
nature digest, and overcom it; procures to call and draw it into the exterior
parts of the body, that so it may be the better cured: just so, for the cure of
certain haughty and rebellious souls, does our Lord permit them to fall into
grievous and exterior sins, to the end that they may know, and humble
themselves: and by means of that abasement which appears without, the malign
and pestilent humor may be also cured, which lay close within. And this is a
work which God works in Israel, which whosoever coms to hear, his very ears
shall even tingle for mere fear: these I say, are those great punishments of
God, the only hearing whereof, is able to make men tremble, from head to foot.

But yet our Lord who is so full of benignity and mercy, does never employ this
forigorous punishment, nor this so lamentable and unhappy remedy, but after
having used other means, which were most gentle and sweet. He first sends us
other occasions, and other more gentle inducements, that so we may humble our
selves. Sometimes sickness, sometimes a contradiction, sometimes a
murmuration, and sometimes a dishonor, when a man is brought lower then he
thought. But when these temporal things will not serve the turn to humble us,
he passes on to the spiritual: and first, to things of less moment, and
afterward by permitting fierce and grievous temptations, such as may bring us
so within a hairs breadth, and even persuade us, or at least make us doubt
whether we consented or no. That so a man may see and find by good experience,
that he cannot overcome them by himself, but may experimentally understand his
own misery, and the precise need which he has of help from heaven: and so may
come to distrust his own strength, and may humble himself. And when all this
will not serve, then comes that other so violent and so costly cure, of
suffering a man to fall into heinous sin, and to be subdued by the temptation.
Then comes this Cautery, which is made even by the very fire of hell; to the
end that after a man has even as it were beaten out his brains, he may fall at
length upon the just examination and knowledge of what he is, and may at length
be content to humble himself by this means, since he would not be brought to do
it by any other. By this time I hope we see well how mightily it imports us to
be humble, and not to confide or presume upon our selves: and therefore let
every one enter into account with his own heart, and consider what profit he
reaps by those occasions which God daily sends for the making him humble, in
the quality of a tenderhearted Physician, and of a father, that so there may
be no need of those other which are so violent. Chastise me, O Lord, with the
chastisement of a Father: cure thou my pride with afflictions, diseases,
dishonours and affronts, and with as many humiliations as thou art pleased to
send: but suffer not, O Lord, that I should ever fall into deliberate and
wilful sin. O Lord, let the Devil have power to touch me in point of honor,
and in my health, and let him make another Job of me: but permit not that he
may ever touch my soul. Upon condition that thou, O Lord, never part from me,
nor permit me ever to part from thee, whatsoever tribulation may com^ upon me
shall be sure to do me no hurt, but it shall rather turn to my good, toward
the obtaining of Humility, which is so acceptable to thee. Grant this, O Lord,
for Jesus Christ's sake our only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

FINIS.
A Prayer against PRIDE.
UNderstanding, O my blessed Lord, how displeasing pride is unto thee, and how
thou hate self-conceit, if I had indeed any understanding as I ought, the
consideration thereof would sufficiently persuade me, that I should not only
dislike but abhor it, as a mortal and damnable thing, since thou, O Lord,
do so abhor it, that the Angels whom thou createdst with so many perfections,
and adornedst with such be auties and gifts, giving them the possession of thy
inwardest heaven, yet for this sin only did thou banish them thence into the
infernal pit, where they suffer the condign punishment of their heinous
offense. and from that time till this present, and from this time for ever to
come, the proud thou always have and ever wilt abhor: and they are they on
whom it seems thou delightest to show the power of thy mighty Arm; humbling
them, casting them down, and making them equal with the earth, that they may
understand themselves, and not dare to lift up their heads against thee. Thou
abhorrest Pride in bodily strength, as thou declaredst in Goliath, giving him
over into the hands of a young and tender Lad, as was David. Thou detestest it
in self-conceit and estimation, as thou she wedst in abasing Haman, making him
serve for Page and crier of Mordecas's virtues, whom he sought to destroy. It
is abominable to thee in them who have it through opinion of their own
excellent beauty, so as had Absalom, whom thou sufferedst to be hanged up by
the hair, of which he went so proud. It is detestable to thee in them who lift
up themselves by reason of their great Riches and Dominions, as did
Nebuchadnezzar, whom therefore thou dravest out to live and feed among bruit
Beasts. It is odious to thee in them who are opinionated of their own wisdom,
as was manifested in Achitophel, whom thou sufferedst to become his own
executioner. by a shameful death because his counsel was not followed. Thou
hate it in words, thou hate it in Virtue and Goodness it self, knowing it
to be the moth and canker thereof, as thou taughtest us in the presumptuous
Pharisee, sending him away despised and rejected, only because he vaunted
before thee his own worth, and set forth his own Praises. And therefore did thy
servant Tobit counsel, Let not Pride entet at any time into thy understanding,
nor into any thing thou think, say, or do. To consider this, O Lord,
by so many examples evinced, that Pride is so much abominable to thee, and so
surely and sharply punished in them in whom thou find it, were more then
sufficient, if I had not less then no understanding, to breed an abhorring of
it in my heart, and an utter restraint thereof, not only in deeds and words,
but the inwardest thoughts of my heart. For though I were Valiant, yet should I
not be like Goliath: if I had Command, yet it would be much less then
Holophernes: though a Favorite, yet could I not match Haman: and also if I
might pass others, yet how far must I fall short of Absalom in Beauty; in
Majesty and Power of Nebuchadnezzar; in Wisdom of Achitophel; in Holiness and
all other Excellency of the Angels before their fall? and yet all these in
their several kinds, wherein their hearts were lift up, were by thee brought
down to the lowest of shame and confusion, and to the height of misery and
calamity, to the proportion of their Pride and vanity. But if to this I shall
add the consideration of mine own frame, and the condition of the things
themselves for which I am lifted up in mine own conceit, either I must leave
all Pride, or else clean quit all claim to the Understanding of a man. For my
being is but earth, and a clod thereof, so frail, so poor and beggarly, that I
can neither cloth my self without stripping others, nor maintain mine own,
without taking the lives from Birds, Beasts, or Fishes. Nor can I breath
without air, nor see without light, nor hear without sound, nor live at all
without the help of thy meanest creatures. And besides all this, so encompassed
with necessity, so environed with wants, of hunger, of thirst, of sleep, so
tired with labor, so beset with dangers, so overwhelmed with miseries, as if I
rightly take the estimate of my self, I must adjudge my self of all thy other
works the most wretched and contemptible. And what alas, if I truly weigh them,
are those things which make me swel, but lighter, and less worth then vanity it
self? Every injury of weather distempers my health, the lightest sickness
abates my strength, the least pains overthrow my contents, but a few hours want
of sustenance enfeebles me, a few days kills me. Riches slip away like water
from between my fingers, and if not rightly used, they a here to sorrows, and
increase torments here after in Hell. Honor vanishes like smoke, Nobility is
baseness, except it be set in virtue, Applause of the world passes like a
dream in them that give and take it. Favor of Princes lasts no longer then
themselves, and they perish when they least think it. Friendship is flattery
and private Interest. Love is unsound in substance, ^and fickle in durance.
Wisdom is folly, and Learning is weariness. And if the account be right cast,
our Knowledge amounts to no more then what we do. So that on all hands, if I
rightly consider, there is no ground but for Humility, no color but for
Lowliness; and in their several kinds all things cry out that I have in me
infinite matter of confusion and shame, nothing at all to glory or prise my
self for, only my folly, which, as I am, is more then all the rest in me, the
cause to puff me up. That it is, and only that, that makes me lofty,
presumptuous, self-conceited, vain. Lord, heal me of this frenzy, and restore
me again to a right understanding, that with that Humility of spirit which I
ought, I may henceforth serve thee, esteeming my self of all others the least,
toward thee nothing. Amen.

FINIS.

