THE MEMOIRES OF THE DUKE of ROHAN: OR, A FAITHFUL RELATION Of the most
Remarkable Occurrences In FRANCE; Especially concerning those of the Reformed
Churches there. From the Death of HENRY the Great, until the Peace made with
them, in June, 1629. TOGETHER With diverse Politic Discourses upon Several
Occasions.

Written Originally in French, by the Duke of ROHAN

And now Englished by George Bridges of Lincolns-Inne, Esquire;

London, Printed by E.M. for Gabriel Bedell, and Thomas Collins; and are to be
sold at their Shop, at the Middle Temple Gate in Fleet Street. 1660.

To the Right Honorable, JAMES, Lord-Marquess of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, Steward of His Majesty's Household, Knight of the most Noble Order of
the Garter, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
My LORD,
TO pretend an Ignorance of Your Person, which your Loyalty, (the only
Embellisher of all other Virtues) has rendered so Eminently Famous, and thence
frame an Apologetique Preface, to usher in this Address to Your Lordship, would
be a Crime greater than the Presumption, and an unpardonable Offense against
that Goodness, which never frowned on the meanest payment of that ^ibute Your
Merits justly challenge from all Men: It Is that, My Lord, which imboldens me,
Humbly to present Your Lordship with this Translation of a Modern History,
written Originally by the Duke of ROHAN, a Prince, whose Valor, and other Rare
Accomplishments, not inferior to the most Eminent of his time, had rendered
his Reputation as clear, as great, had they not been unfortunately employed
against a Party, in which his King was interessed (Religion it self having not
power sufficient to Authorize Arms, raised by Subjects against their
Sovereign) for one which paid all his services with Calumny and Detraction.

But far from me be the presumption to direct Your Lordships Judgment of his
Exploits, either in the Camp, or Cabinet; either of his Sword, or Pen; which I
was principally induced to publish in our Language, by some passages tending to
the Vindication of our late incomparable King, and Martyr, from no less false,
than foul aspersions concerning Rochelle, (His care and diligence to order
their relief, being here acknowledged by persons more concerned, than our
pretended Propagators of Religion, the Rochellers ruin being chiefly
occasioned by their own Inconstancy, refusing to admit those succors when
come, which they before, even with tears implored, and their own intestine
divisions and factions) with which His Blasphemous, and Rebellious Subjects,
first sought to wound His Fame, that with more security they might imbrew their
Hands in His most Sacred Blood: And knowing how zealous an Assertor Your
Lordship has always shown Your Self, both of His Rights and Innocence; and
how indefatigable, (though with the hazard of the dearest Treasures, both of
Your Life, and Fortune) Your Industry has been, for the restoring of His
Majesty, (by God's Miraculous Providence now Reigning over us) even in those
times, when Treason having usurped the Throne, Rewards and Punishments were
with such prodigious Impiety misplaced, that Loyalty was daily crucified, when
Villainy was cherished, and advanced; nor were our very thoughts exempt from the
Tyrant's barbarous Inquisitions; I could not more justly offer it to the
Patronage of any, than Your Lordship; together with him, who, with Your
Lordships pardon, humbly begs the Honor to subscribe himself,

My LORD, Your Lordships most Humble, Most Devoted, And most Obedient Servant,
GEORGE BRIDGES.

THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO THE Reader.
THIS Treatise presents you with the History of three Wars sustained in France,
in defense of the Reformed Churches there; the occasion of the first was
Bearne; that of the second, the not observing the Peace made at Montpellier;
and that of the third, was the hope to save Rochelle: But our sins fought
against us; for instead of profiting, we were hardened by the chastisements God
sent us. In the two first Wars, the divisions appeared but as scattered sparks,
which in the last united to make a general conflagration, there being no place,
where Corruption had not seated it self, and Avarice excluded Piety; so that
instead of expecting any overtures from our enemies, every one prostitut^d
himself to sell his Religion, and betray his Country: Our Ancestors would
have crushed such children in their Cradles, had they thought they would have
proved instruments of ruin to those Churches which they had planted in the
midst of Flames, and cherished in despite of Torments; and who by their
indefatigable pains, and perseverance, had left them possessors of a glorious
Repose: Nor will our Posterity easily believe themselves descended from such
Noble Grandfathers, and such Infamous Fathers, if they look not higher, to wit,
to God, who raises, and abates the Courages of men, according as his good
pleasure is to discover his Wonders to his Church, in raising it from the dust;
when the powers of the world conceive it buried there, and depressing it again,
when Pride, and an Abuse of his Graces, are the only Product of them.

And here I speak to you Princes, and Commonwealths, whom God has honored
with his Knowledge, blessed with his Favors, advanced to the height of Dignity,
and even satiated with Riches; take warning by us, and boast not your selves in
the Arm of flesh, and the greatness of your Forces; in the height of your
Prosperity beware a Fall; for then are you nearest danger: Many of you have
with dry Eyes, and lethargique Arms, been Spectators of our Tragedy, without
contributing any thing to our relief; and we our Selves, have seen the Ships,
and Armies of others ingratefully promoting the ruin of those, who relioved
them in their necessity: God will not fail to do his work without you, when the
time of our deliverance shall come; He is nearer to us in our Adversity, than
you are to him in your Prosperity; if we are obliged to implore his Favor, you
are much more to prevent his Judgments. Let the examples of others be your
instruction, and while it is yet time, consider from what source your blessings
flow, and give the honor and glory of it to him, to whom it is only due. In
the mean time, prepare your selves to see here, without any disguise, the naked
truth of what passed in our late trouble.

I have begun this History at the death of Henry the Great; for that during the
minority of the King, his Son, the Maxims laid down by the Father, for the
Government of France, were changed, and the foundation of the persecution of
those of the Reformed Religion laid, which had like also to have proved the
subversion of all Christendom, and given its Monarchy to the house of Austria.

I leave it to Posterity, to the end, that after my death, the truth of things
which I have seen, may not be obscured, either by the Fables of Flatterers, or
the Invectives of our Persecutors: I have done it, without any the least
Fiction, or Passion, and shall leave every man his liberty to judge of it, as
he shall please.

THE Memoires OF THE DUKE of ROHAN: OR, A true Narration of the most remarkable
Accidents in FRANCE, From the death of Henry the Great, until the Peace made
with those of the Reformed Churches there, in June 1629.
The first Book. Containing the troubles during the minority of the King.
AFter the death of Henry the Great, every one began to think of his own
affairs, the Queen to establish her authority, the chief Ministers of State to
maintain their own, by advancing hers, as being the easiest to be effected (by
reason of the absence of the first Prince of the blood, the imbecility of the
second, and the misunderstanding that was between the third and them:) and the
other great ones to raise themselves from that abject condition, the precedent
reign had cast them into. Amid'st all which, hatreds were frequent, and the
most subtle among them made use of the passion of others to ruin the authority
of those that eclipsed theirs.

He that received the first shock, after the Regency was settled on the Queen,
was the Duke of Sully, who by his services had acquired the honor of Principal
Confident to the former King, and purchased the ill will of most others: For a
virtue, eminent, as was his, accompanied with the favor of his Master, is
always attended on by envy, a vice as frequent among men, as unworthy those
who pretend any profession of honor. Many were very zealous for his ruin, and
that for different reasons; The Chancellor Villeroy, and the President Janin,
to confirm their own power in the government of the State, and take from among
them a Man, whose exactness in the discharge of his Offices was their shame,
so clear-sighted to discern, and so bold to discover their faults; The Count of
Soissons out of some particular hatred he bore him: The Marquess d' Ancre for
fear he should nip his budding fortune; and all the other Grandees, because
they thought him too good a mannager of the Public treasure; And the Prince of
Conde when he came to the Court, by the instigation of the Marshal Bouillon,
who bore him an inveterate malice, and drew on the Prince with hopes of
confiscating his goods: A powerful motive to set that Prince on work.

The chiefest means they used to remove him from the helm, were, to raise a
jealousy in the Queen of the austerity of his humor, who opposed her in her
liberalities; and to persuade her, that, having need of the Popes favor to
strengthen her authority, she could not suffer one of the Reformed Religion, to
have any hand in the Government of the State; Prevalent reasons with a
Princess, who was a Forraigner little versed in State matters, jealous of her
authority, and distrustful of all sorts of people: But in the end experience
discovered it to be the ruin of the State; For the Grandees grew up to a
height that diminished the Royal power; the Treasuries were drained, the
Arsenals strangely dispersed, and the comparison of that miserable condition of
France with that flourishing one, the Duke of Sully left it in, clearly
demonstrates, how highly prejudicial to the State, was his removal from his
employments in it.

The Marshal Bouillon, a man of great courage and understanding, able to
procure great good, and no less mischief to a Commonwealth, and who had been
always curbed by the late King, who was jealous of him, finding himself now at
liberty, uses all manner of inventions, to make himself thought useful, and
necessary: The first was to endeavor wholly to possess the spirit of the
Prince of Conde, whose kinsman he was, and to persuade him to become one of the
Reformation, by that means to make himself the Chief, and Protector of a party,
that was then very considerable; and with such industry carried he on his
Plots, that the Queen conceived great suspicions of him; and therefore to
divert this blow, sought after him, who as soon as he had made his conditions
with her, effaces the desires he had infused into the Prince, to imitate the
virtuous actions of his Ancestors; showing him the thorns were in the way to
honor, the perils, hardships and adverse accidents are met withal, in the
pursuit of it; In short, the misery and poverty that accompany it, which proved
most effectual reasons to dissuade him from a design so contrary to his
nature.

The Duke of Rohan in the mean time, who was Colonel of the Switzers, was
commanded away to the siege of Juilliers, taking with him a Regiment of the
Switzers, and having the command of the French Army in the absence of the
Marshal de la Chastre, who was the Lieutenant General. At his return from this
expedition, he finds how cruelly they oppress his Father-in-Law the Duke of
Sully; and that, after they had taken from him the Bastille, to dispose of the
treasure in it, and his command of the Finances, to rob France with fuller
liberty, they were now resolved upon his utter destruction, so to deprive him
of all means to resent such indignities: But seeing that it was beyond their
skill by any ordinary ways to blemish the administration of any of his
Offices, the Marshal Bouillon, who had infected the Prince of Conde, and the
Count of Soissons with the same malicious intention, contrived this design for
his ruin, viz. to procure a General Assembly of those of the Religion, which
was granted to be held at Chastelleraut on the five and twentieth of May, in
the year 1611, in which he promised himself power enough to cause the Duke of
Sully to be entirely abandoned, so that without any fear of those of the
Religion, he might be arraigned before Commissioners empowered for his trial;
and moreover, that by his industry he should so order the Assembly, and all the
affairs of the Reformed party, that he should make himself the only man
considerable: To bring this Project to pass, he vailes it with a pretense of
much affection to those of the Reformation, and large promises of an
Amelioration in their affairs; and communicates it to the Marshal de
Lesdiguieres, and Du Plessis Mornay in particular, by Bellugeon an attendant of
Lesdiguieres, who when he had been with them, returns with these following
Instructions from Du Plessis.

1. That the Provinces be exhorted to choose for Deputies, the best qualified
and most sufficient persons. 2. That besides those, others of eminency among
them, be also desired by letters to that purpose to be there. 3. That the
Deputies may have power to adhere to the plurality of voices, and that the
Assembly be not dissolved, till they have received full satisfaction. 4. That
the demands of the Provinces be all founded expressly, or upon consequences
deduced from the former Edicts and Concessions. 5. Amongst others, that the
Edict of Nantes be revived again, and observed as it was made with us, but
since abridged in many things without us. 6. That our Grants for the places of
security be made good to us, and the entire number of the Garrisons restored
us, half of which have been wrested from us. 7. That the places we have lost,
either by the Governors change of their Religion, or otherwise, be also given
back to us. 8. That all the places of security be continued to us for ten years
at least, and that they be paid quarterly, fully, and upon the place; and that
no money be upon any pretense whatsoever, removed from the places of receipt,
till the said quarter be satisfied. 9. That it may regularly be obtained also,
and had for provisions for vacant Governments, considering the abuses which
are, and may be there committed, to the prejudice of our safety. 10. That we
may be permitted to repair and fortify all such places, as time has thrown
into decay, and which for want of reparations will become wholly unuseful to
us: And that complaint be made, that under pretense of these Governments, we
are refused all other Offices and Dignities, contrary to the express Article
of the Edict. 11. That no resignations of such places of security be allowed of
without the consent of the Churches, which are therein most concerned: The like
also for Presidents, and Counselors of the Chambers. 12. That we may have free
liberty as before, to compose, print, sell, and disperse all manner of books
concerning our Doctrine. 13. That if there be any Town, whose place for the
exercise of their Religion is too remote from it, the King be petitioned to
grant one nearer, that being under the eye of the Magistrates, they may be
less subject to the insolency of the People. 14. That the Article concerning
burying places, which makes way for so many Barbarisms, may be reformed. 15.
That the Pensions allowed the Churches, considering the great number of them,
may be augmented. 16. That the Jesuits may not have any residence in our
places of security. 17. That those Preachers and Friars, who teach, that all
those who communicate with those of the Reformed Religion, or that serve and
assist them, are damned, may be punished, as seditious disturbers of the
public peace, and infringers of the Edicts, by which their Majesty's have
published their intentions, to reunite the affections of their people. 18. That
we may be allowed two Masters of request, to be paid by the King, for the first
time, and one Notary in every Parliament, or at least in the places of
security, and to be paid by us. 19. That some place of security be demanded,
as well in the Provinces where there are none, as where there are many of the
Religion. But that it be referred to the prudence of the Assembly, to consider
how far this demand be pressed. 20. That we may have a Grant for a General
Assembly to be held every two years, for the renewing of our Deputies General.
21. That it be expressly specified, that we may have two Deputies General in
Ordinary at Court at the Kings charges, but to be nominated by the Assembly.
22. That the Provincial Deputies may address themselves to the Deputies
General without any previous applications to be made to the Governors of the
Provinces.
These Instructions were sent abroad among the Provinces, where every one
according to the extent of his power, and credit got them received, and
resolved on. The aims of these Gentlemen were diverse; that of Du Plessis was
sincere, that of the Marshal Lesdiguieres (as the whole course of his life has
discovered) tended only to his own interest; as also that of the Marshal
Bouillon, who made use of the power of others to convert all to his own
advantage: For having filled the Provinces with hopes of bettering their
condition, and made them enter into most strict resolutions for that end,
discovers all at Court, shows them to Villeroy, and to the Ambassadors of
England and Holland, to whom he also pretended much zeal for the Reformed
Religion: And after this takes a journey to Sedan, that he might the better
give the Court leisure to foster fears of the issue of this Assembly, and find
out means to render it ineffectual: His desires in this met a wished success;
for at his return he treated fully with Villeroy, and having made his
conditions for the Government of Poictou, worth three hundred thousand Livers,
either for himself, or to be disposed of as he should order, and a hundred
thousand Livers augmentation upon the Taxes of the common people, which by his
appointment were disposed to several particular persons: he promises to change
all the resolutions of the Assembly, and give it such an issue, as should
highly content the Queen; which he confirmed by an irrefragable Testimony; for
revisiting the aforesaid Ambassadors, and particularly Arsens, he begins a
discourse concerning those of the Reformation, quite contrary to his former
before his Voyage to Sedan, viz. That during the Kings Minority they were
better entertain a little patience, than thoughts of bettering their condition,
and by that means justly purchase the Kings favor; that for his part he went
to the Assembly with thoughts tending only to peace, and wholly bent to
endeavor a submission of all to the pleasure of the Court. This much
astonished Arsens, who conceived now that his composition was made, which he
dissembled not at all to his friends: When he had made this progress, his
favorites and creatures seconded it with discourses of the same nature, the
better at a distance to dispose the people to a compliance with his desires:
And because Chastelleraut was within the Government of the Duke of Sully, whose
ruin he thirsted after, he caused the Assembly to adjourn from thence to
Saumure, the government of Du Plessis, that he might the more oblige him to a
conjunction with him.

Before the Session of the Assembly, he informs Du Plessis by several persons
of quality that he would not be President of it; that though they elected him,
yet would he not accept of the charge, and that it was his desire, he should
impart this his resolution to all he should see; for that he thought it very
improper for any of the great ones to undertake it. This extremely pleased
them all, especially the Dukes of Rohan and Sully, who now cast their eyes upon
Du Plessis, and assured him that they would carry it for him: But the Marshal
Bouillon, coming the last of all, and after they had waited for him a day
beyond the time prefixed, (though not without much murmurings, for that his
mischievous designs began now to be discovered) visits Du Plessis, and tells
him, that notwithstanding what had been said concerning the Presidentship, he
now desired their nomination, for that he knew the Duke of Sully had with much
boasting threatened to prevent him of it; that it was a thing that his many
services to the Party had merited of them; and that in case they refused him
the honor, he would be gone the next morning: This change of his mind wrought
no alteration at all in the resolutions of the Dukes, who found the greatest
part of the Provinces disposed to their inclinations; so that whatever suit or
parties the Marshal Bouillon could make, he had the voices but of six
Provinces, and Du Plessis of ten; who when he took his place, had Chamier a
Minister, chosen for his assistant, and Desbordes Mercier for Secretary. This
election so nettled De Bouillon, that returning to his Lodging he brake forth
into words of disgust, and threats of vengeance against all those that had
hindered him of the Presidentship; finding well by this Essay, that he was now
like to fail of all he had promised himself from the Assembly: However,
obliged both by prudence, and the importunate solicitations of those that were
equally friends to them both, he reconciled himself to the Duke of Sully, whom
he had before declared to be his greatest enemy.

The first thing the Assembly took into their consideration, was the disorder
committed at Chastillon, contrary to the express Orders of the Marshal Bouillon
and the Sieur Friar Commissioners appointed by the King for that particular
affair, for which the Marshal pretended so high a displeasure, that having
dispatched thither Beauchamp, one of his Gentlemen, to enquire into the truth
of the matter, he declared as his opinion, that it was fit the Assembly should
choose Senas for their Deputy, to be sent to the Court with full instructions,
and a strict charge to declare, That they would not treat of any thing with the
Kings Commissioners, before reparation were made for that wrong: But that
violent heat quickly abated; for he presently excused himself from meddling any
further in it, because his Commission was expired.

After this the Kings Commissioners had audience, who in all their discourses
pretended, that the preservation of those of the Reformed Religion was involved
with, and necessary to that of the State, assuring them of their Majesty's
favor, that they would graciously receive all their Remonstrances and
Petitions, cause their Edicts and Concessions to be observed, put those that
had hitherto been neglected, in execution; and interpret to their advantage,
what was obscure in them. And lastly, That they left it to the choice of the
Assembly, either to put their Papers into their hands, or send them to the
Court, protesting, that which way soever they took, they should have a quick
and favorable dispatch.

From these fair promises sprung no less fair hopes; and according to the
instructions of the Provinces, were their papers prepared; the Marshal Bouillon
not opposing one Article, having been the Author of those Propositions, which
were put into the hands of Lusignan, Aubigny, and the other Deputies to
exhibit the principal points of them to the Kings Commissioners, who, after
some debate declared, that they had not power to determine any thing concerning
them: But going to the Assembly, advised them to make their addresses by
Deputies to the King, to whom they would do them all good Offices; which was
concluded on. At the election of the Deputies, there happened a great stir,
occasioned by the opposition of contrary factions, which made the Assembly
resolve not to draw up their Instructions and Commissions, before their
nomination; that so they might either enlarge or restrain them according to
the conditions of the persons chosen, who were La Case, Courtaumer, Ferrier the
Minister, Mirande and Armet, who had no power to conclude any thing, but only
to debate the propositions; and having explained them, to give an account of
all to the Assembly, who would return them their resolutions thereupon: This
restriction pleased not all the Deputies, much less the Marshal Bouillon, who
now plainly perceived, that his design was broken.

While they were preparing their papers, there fell out two particular things
worthy the observing. The first was on the several oppositions the Marshal
Bouillon made to an Article, which the Duke of Sully as earnestly pressed, viz.
That the Assembly should interess themselves in his cause, for that they
endeavored to deprive him of his offices for no other cause, but of his
Religion, in which the Marshal proceeded so far, as an attempt to make the
son renounce his Obligations to his Father-in-law, which he violently pursued;
especially one time going to visit him being sick, telling him that it was
impossible, but that in the administration of those great charges he had borne,
especially in that of the Finances, when he was Comptroler of the Exchequer,
there should be found some faults committed; though not by him, yet by his
Officers and Servants; and that if the King should issue out a Commission to
examine his actions, neither the Assembly, nor any other of the Reformed
Religion ought to be offended at it; no, though the Commissioners should do him
wrong, since it would be by the ordinary ways of Justice that he received it,
and that he thought the Duke of Rohan so honest a man, a true French man, and
so great a friend to peace, that he would be nothing moved at it. This speech
was but ill-received, and no better answered by the Duke, who told him, that
the Duke of Sully's important services deserved a better recompense, than to be
exposed, as a prey to those that had disserved the State; that his actions in
discharge of his Offices, free from all corruption, and misdemeanour, could
not, by reason of his quality, be inquired into, but by a Court of Peers; and
that if he were otherwise dealt withal, all his kindred, and especially he, his
son in Law, with all their friends, would engage in his cause; so that after
several Sessions, the Assembly proceeding to a determination of that Article,
so much urged by the Provinces also, advised the Duke of Sully not to accept of
money in lieu of his Offices, and especially, not to quit that of Grand Master
of the Artillery, promising withal, that if for that end they should use any
undue, unlawful, and extraordinary procedures against him, they would publicly
Declare that they looked on the Duke of Sully's, as the same with the general
interest of the Churches, and of Justice; and that therefore they were resolved
by all just and lawful means to assist him: And of this the Deputies general
had an express charge given them in their instructions.

The other was concerning Berticheres, one of the Deputies for the lower
Languedoc, a Gentleman of quality, and of good parts, who in the reign of the
late King, who was displeased at him, by reason of his practices, and
intelligence with the Constable Montmorency Governor of that Province, was
somewhat unhandsomely turned out of his governments of Sommieres, and
Aiguemortes; to which having in vain sought to be restored, he conceived this
a favorable opportunity to make the Assembly embrace his cause, for that they
were both places of security; and, though they were in the hands of Gentlemen
of the same Religion, yet he presumed they were persons, that had not given so
great Testimonies of their zeal for the good of the Churches, as he had done;
and that though he had been constrained to accept of a recompense for his
Command, yet was it only for that of Sommiers; but for Aignemortes he never
received any thing; and that since his services to their party had drawn upon
him this prejudice, it was but reason that they should own the Justice of his
Cause: And forasmuch as he had brought with him Writings to verify what he
alleged, he moved the Assembly to appoint Commissioners to examine them, and
make their report to them, that they might consider of them.

It is to be observed that this Berticheres made a great profession of
friendship to the Duke of Sully, who had done him many good Offices to the late
King, so that he desired some of his chiefest friends for Commissioners, who
made so favorable a report of his business to the Assembly, that in spite of
the opposition made by the Duke of Bouillon, who stood for Arembures, to whom
the Government of Aiguemortes was given, it was so well received by the
Assembly, that the Deputies residing at the Court, were commanded to use all
diligence in his behalf, it being a thing of general concernment, and of great
consequence. When he had obtained this, he goes to the Court, where he steers a
new course, and to arrive at his aims, promises most powerfully to assist the
Court-party, upheld by the Duke of Bouillon, in the Assembly, and by this means
got a quick and satisfactory dispatch for his re-entry into Aiguemortes:
Moreover in this journey he made the Constable his friend, who embraced his
cause with the same fervor, as if it had been his own proper concernment, and
then returned to the Assembly: The issue of this affair shall be seen in its
proper place: But let us now return to the general affairs.

When the Deputies of the Assembly were come to the Court, their first dispatch
thence brought news of their fair reception, especially by the Queen, (who
commanded them to put their papers into the hands of Boissise, and Bullion,
Counselors of State) and of the favorable answers they had at several
audiences received from the Council: But this was soon clouded by another
message from them quite contrary to the former, which informed the Assembly,
that the promise to have their Propositions answered, and returned into their
hands, was now interpreted to be after the nomination of the Deputies general,
and dissolution of the Assembly: This highly displeased them who had already
divulged among the Provinces, the good hopes they conceived from the first
intelligence the Deputies gave them: But, forasmuch as it was a thing contrary
to the use and custom of the Kings Council, in affairs of all sorts to send
back the Deputies unanswered; and that in all their discourses with them there
was no mention of any such conditions, the Assembly unanimously resolve not to
dissolve before they had received an answer to their Articles; which the
Marshal Bouillon seemed to approve of, and promised his utmost assistance to
procure them a handsome return concerning it.

But there was a great difference between the Letter, he showed the Assembly,
and that which he sent away, which intimated his opinion, that at least some of
them should see the answers to their Propositions before their dissolution: But
the assiduous endeavors of the Deputies proving ineffectual, they returned to
Saumure, where Ferrier in the name of all the rest, made a relation of the
particulars of their whole voyage, by which they perceived that Bullion was
coming after with their Propositions answered; but that before his arrival
their Majesty's desired the Deputies general might be nominated; which
notwithstanding was suspended.

When Bullion came, he confirmed what the Deputies had reported, protested to
many upon his damnation, that the Propositions were most favorably answered;
terrifies some with threats, whiles he fills others with hopes; and to increase
both their fears, and hopes, he shows the Patents he brought with him for the
augmenting the pensions of Parabere, and others, and the Orders to cancel those
of the Dukes of Rohan and Soubize. The Marshal Bouillon for his part, employes
all his Art to win the Deputies of the Assembly by hopes of a general
deputation, and by the power he had to dispose of the Tax imposed upon the
common people now raised to an hundred thousand Livers more, the better to
enable him to corrupt more men: The resolution also of the Assembly to send new
petitions to their Majesty's, that they might receive their answers before they
dissolved, gave him an opportunity to play the notable Politician: For though
there was a very good understanding between the Marshal Bouillon and Bullion,
yet pretended they a difference in their opinions; the one assuring them, that
it would be but lost labor to importune the Court any more; the other
encouraging them to it with promises of good success; but his chief design was
to weary some with delays, that he might have the better opportunity to draw
others to his party; and in the mean time covered all his projects with a
pretense of zeal, that the simpler sort having less suspicion of him, might
the more easily be intrapped: But failing in this attempt, he resolved with
Bullion and his friends, to persuade their Majesty's to write a letter (of
which he sent them a draught) peremptorily commanding the Assembly to dissolve,
revoking the License granted for their meeting, and declaring null all their
past or future Acts: And forasmuch as their Majesty's were informed, that all
the Deputies did not agree in this obstinacy and disobedience, they commanded
those Deputies that would obey to proceed among themselves to the election of
six Deputies, who should receive from the hands of Bullion the propositions
with their answers; which Letter was to be brought by one, that knew well
enough how to play his Game. Bellugeon the Marshal Lesdiguieres his Agent, was
made choice of for this employment, a fit Instrument to execute such a
Commission, being a crafty fellow, void both of honor and honesty, whose subtle
pate was always busied about things conducing only to his own advantage.

Before he began this goodly journey, he takes his leave of the Assembly,
falsely pretending, it was only to see his friends and kindred in Berry, and then
goes out of the Town upon an ordinary Hackny, but soon after takes post: which
being certified to the Assembly, as also his treacherous practices at Paris,
together with the calumnies he aspersed the Duke of Rohan, and his friends
withal, he was by them declared unworthy to be readmitted to this, and for the
future to any other Assembly: But forasmuch as he had the honor of being a
servant to the Marshal Lesdiguieres, they referred his futher doom to him. This
censure infinitely vexed the Marshal Bouillon, who employed all the power he
had to get it revoked, declaring that it was by his command that he had
undertaken this journey, but all in vain; which so incensed him against the
Duke of Rohan, that they forbore to speak one to the other for a long time
after.

It was not long before the effects of this voyage were seen; for the Letter
for their dissolution contrived at Saumure, but dispatched from the Court,
came, and soon after Bellugeon, who declared that they should now receive full
satisfaction: But when the Marshal Bouillon went up to the Castle, and showed
the Letter to Du Plessis, and La Force, endeavoring to gain their approbation
of it, and the contents of it were fully understood by them, then were they
filled with amazement and displeasure; which Bouillon perceiving, he thought it
convenient that Du Plessis should impart the substance of it, to such of the
Assembly as he thought fit, that together they might contrive some means to
compose all differences. Bullion also promises to defer the delivery of the
Letter, out of a seeming desire to seek out some way for an accommodation; and
to that end desires a conference with Du Plessis, which being yielded unto,
after some discourse, they agreed that in case they should proceed to a
nomination of six Deputies, and rest satisfied with the answers were given
them, he (although he had no Commission for it) should undertake to procure
them satisfaction from their Majesty's upon the four or five principal
Articles, as, concerning the Chamber of Edicts at Paris, Provision for Vacant
places, the payment of the remaining part of Nine score thousand Crowns, and
the restoring of those places of security were taken from us; and all this to
be done before the dissolution of the Assembly; to which as Du Plessis was
ready to make his report of this conference, Bullion sent him word, that he was
informed, and that by very good intelligence, that there were some, who
intended to take advantage of his discourses the day before; wherefore he
retracted them, and desired he might be permitted to go into the Assembly to
have the Queens Letter read, and discharge his duty to the Commands he had
received from Her.

This sudden change clearly discovered, that the end of this conference was
only to amuse the honest party in the Assembly, the better to surprise them
before any thing was agreed on, or that they were prepared for what they were
to do, either in order to their dissolution, or the Deputation, and cheat them
of the thanks and benefit of their pains: But both Bouillon and Bullion too,
were not a little dismayed when they saw, that when upon the reading of the
Letter Berticheres rose up, and said, That for his part, he would obey, and
that it was fit that those that were of his opinion should likewise declare
themselves; all of them with one voice cried out, that they were more resolved
upon obedience than he, but that the business should be further discussed,
when the Commissioner was withdrawn, which was accordingly done.

But here it is to be observed, that notice being taken of the consultations
which were commonly held night and day in the Marshal Bouillon's Lodgings, by
five and twenty of the Assembly (which were all he could draw to a confederacy
with him) where Bullion also was often present, the rest of the Assembly, to
the number of fifty, with one consent conceived it fitter to yield to the
necessity of the times, than to make a division, which would inevitably force
them to accept for Deputies general, persons wholly devoted to the Court
faction, and that they were better seek out some other way to redress their
evils.

The Marshal Bouillon perceiving that the resolutions taken up by his
Antagonists, had frustrated his hopes of procuring some creatures of his own to
be chosen Deputies general, makes his applications by Proxy, to the Duke of
Rohan, for his consent to the restoring again of Bellugeon, and sharing the
Deputation general between them two: In which the Duke of Sully also interessed
himself, and so far prevailed with the Duke of Rohan, that he caused an
interview between them at his Lodgings, where the Marshal entreated him to
abate his rigor toward Bellugeon, which he promised him to do: But as for
sharing the Deputation, he was so averse from the very mention of it, that at
the meeting on the day appointed for their election, the Duke of Sully openly
blamed him for his obstinacy, telling him that he would ruin all by his
wilfulness: But the issue discovered the contrary: For having assured himself
of ten Provinces, he makes them agree to elect the six Deputies that should be
nominated by the Ministers of those provinces; which succeeded according as he
had designed it; for not one of those the Marshal would have promoted (to his
extreme discontent) were so much as named. Those that were chosen, were
Montbrun, Bertheville, and Rouvray for the Nobility; and Maniald, Boisseul, and
Milletiere, for the Communalty: As for Bellugeont, though the Duke of Rohan no
more opposed him, yet was there much difficulty to revoke his censure; many
times was it debated; at length, when a good part of the Assembly were risen,
those that remained, razed it out of their Records: The Regulations for the
Assembly were signed also, but the Marshal entered a Protestation under his hand
and seal, not to acknowledge the Ministers for a third estate, or order.

And hence sprang the Original of all our mischiefs and divisions; For the
Marshal takes his journey to the Court, to receive a recompense for his
services, and revenge himself upon all those that had opposed his designs,
principally the Duke of Rohan, who feared him least, and had withstood him most
of any; wherefore he lays a plot to out him of his Town of Saint John d'
Angely, of which he was Governor, and place therein La Roche-beaucourt the
King's Lieutenant in his room, alleging, that if he were once deprived of
that retreat, he would be unable to attempt any thing: On the other side, the
Duke of Rohan, and his brother, at a Consultation held at Saumure before their
departure thence, with those that were of their opinion, concluded that every
one of them should give their respective Provinces an account of what had
passed, and instigate them by particular Deputies to the Court, to make new
Remonstrances of their aggrievances, which they so happily performed, that in
spite of the contradictions of the Commissioners appointed for the execution
of the Edict, the years following there came to Paris Deputies from twelve
Provinces.

In the mean while the Duke of Rohan goes to divert himself at his houses in
Britany, and so to the Assembly of Estates of that Province; At his return from
thence he was informed of the conspiracies laid at Saint John's in prejudice of
his authority; to discover which, and also to apply convenient preventions, he
sends thither Haulte Fontaine, from whom receiving advice of the necessity of
his presence, he hasts thither with all speed, and as he passed through
Poictou, gave his friends intelligence of all, and sent Loudriere to Rochel.

His unexpected arrival much daunted his enemies, who nevertheless sent for
Roch-beaucourt to come speedily to their relief; but the Duke of Rohan's
friends, flocking in every moment, grew to such a number, as that
Roche-beaucourt durst not stir, but contented himself with giving the Court an
account of what passed: Upon which information the King dispatches away La
Fontaine to the Duke, in appearance to know what was the matter, but in effect
to confirm by letters, and encourage the Partisans of Rochebeaucourt, which the
Duke, having treated him nobly, learnt out of La Fontaine, whom he returned
with a faithful promise to wait upon their Majesty's, with a free account of
all his actions, upon their first commands, which within a few days after he
received; And presently sets forward to the Court, taking with him, among
others, Roche-beaucourt, and Faucault, whom he greatly suspected; and leaving
in Saint John Haulte Fontaine with all necessary Orders and Instructions, that
at his return, he might not find his own gates shut against him. Being arrived
at Court, he showed the Queen by several instances, that he had behaved himself
like an honest man at the Assembly of Saumure, and that he had opposed the
Marshal Bouillon, for that he knew, that he took part with those of the
Reformed Religion, for no other end, but to advance his own Interests, and
render himself more considerable both of the one side, and the other, and that
had he compassed his designs, she would have been the first would have felt
the effects of his arrogance: But there were no ears open to his
justification, (it being the constant humor of Princes not easily to be
reasoned out of opinions, they have been prepossessed withal) so that seeing
the time for the Election of a new Major for the Town of Saint John drew near,
and that his abode at Court was to no purpose, he pretended that his brother
was sick, upon which having got leave to be gone, he took post that very night;
which fell out well for him; For the Marshal Bouillon having notice the next
day of his departure, was very earnest to have him pursued, and brought back
again; but he made such haste, as it was impossible to overtake him.

As he passed by Parc in the lower Poictou, he took Soubize along with him,
advertised his friends in Poictou of what had happened, and went to Saint John,
whither Foucault, a Captain of the Garrison, whom he had taken with him to
Paris, being sent away from the Court, was come before him, and had secretly
assembled the Major and some others of that Cabal, to out the Duke of the
Government, and for that end offered them two thousand men; which the Duke
having notice of, presently upon his arrival at Saint John, he commanded
Foucault, who was then about three or four leagues thence, to return thither no
more, and at the same instant sent away Tenis to their Majesty's, to inform
them of the just cause he had, not to allow the said Foucault any more access
to Saint John.

The time for the Election of the Major being at hand, which is always the
Sunday before Palm Sunday, comes Claverie from the Court with an express,
which signified, that by reason of the divisions of the Town, it was the Kings
pleasure, for the repose of it, and the avoiding of factions there, that the
old Major should be continued, and that this precedent should not for the
future any way impair the Privileges of the Town; whereupon the Duke of Rohan
remonstrates to his Majesty, how that he was misinformed of the condition of
the Town, and of what consequence it was, both to his service, and the public
peace, that, according to their ancient custom, they should proceed to
Election of a new Major, hoping that this would be assented to, and for that
reason sent his Secretary with this letter to the Court.

Now the Marshall Bouillon rightly imagining, that the Duke of Rohan would
oppose the continuation of the old Major, as a thing highly prejudicial to him,
engaged the Royal authority in it to the uttermost, that so he might either
ruin him by his voluntary submission, or by obliging the King to force him to
a compliance; So that two days after the arrival of Claverie comes Saint More,
a younger brother of Montauzier, and brother in law to Roch-beaucourt with
another, and stricter express to the same purpose: But the Duke of Rohan
knowing, that his own ruin would assuredly be the consequence of the loss of
Saint John, conceived it least dangerous for him to secure the Town, and feared
not to refuse all those Orders as prejudicial to the King's service, and to
proceed to the Election of a new Major, according to the usual custom of the
Town, out of three of the Corporation, whose names were sent by Deputies,
constituted for that purpose, to his Majesty, to make choice of which of them
he pleased; and for the security of the place, the Keys were, in the interim,
put into the hands of the first Alderman.

The report of these things caused a great bustle at Court; Tenis, and
Onglepied, whom the Duke some few days before, had sent thither, were
committed prisoners to the Bastille; his mother, wife, and sisters were forbid
to go out of Paris; and Propositions were also made of drawing down an Army to
besiege him; On the otherside the Duke, well knowing the power of his enemies
at Court, and that he was to expect a violent persecution from them, took great
care to make all those of the Reformed Religion in France sensible; that the
hatred conceived against him, was occasioned only by the resolution and
constancy he had showed to the good of their affairs; that his, and the loss
of St. John, would draw after them their destruction also; that if their
adversaries found this easily accomplishable, they would not stop their course
in so fair a road; and then prepares himself the best he could to make a brave
resistance. But at length when all things were more maturely deliberated, the
King's Council thought fitter to commit this business to a Treaty, and
Themines was sent to the Duke to determinate the difference in a peaceable way:
The result of his negotiation was, That, for eight days the Keys of the Town
should be left in the hands of the old Major, that they should proceed to the
nomination of three, out of which the King should make choice of one; and, that
after this Election Roche-beaucourt and Foucault should be permitted to return
again to execute their charges, provided, notwithstanding that the latter
should presently quit the Town again.

Themines sent this agreement to the Court, where at first it was well enough
liked of; but when it was communicated to, and scanned by the Dukes enemies, it
could by no means be approved of: But Themines had orders sent him, to insist
upon the return of Roche-beaucourt and Foucault, before the new Election, which
the Duke of Rohan consented to; and thus, for the present, was mitigated the
heat of this affair, though the persecutions against the Duke of Rohan and his
party continued in their former violence; especially at Court, where the
Marshal Bouillon endeavored, first to corrupt the Deputies, then to make
divisions among them; and last of all to destroy their authority: And when the
Provinces sent their Deputies to the Court to remonstrate their resentments of
the ill impressions were given their Majesty's of their loyalty, to vindicate
themselves from the calumnies vented against them, and to obtain a grant of all
their just demands, so necessary to their subsistence: The Marshal Bouillon
perceiving, that neither his confederacies in the Provinces, nor the
Commissioners purposely sent in to them, could hinder the deputations, turns
now his whole endeavors to render their Negotiation fruitless, alleging,
that it was a diminution of the Kings authority to give audience to an Assembly
convened against his will; that, if their requests were yielded to, and
satisfaction given them that way, it would disgust the loyal part of his
subjects, and reunite the now disjoined Provinces with the Complainants; and
openly discovering also great displeasure, that they should repay all his
services with slights, and envy; imputing unto him, upon all occasions, what
ever mischief befell them: So that, though he could not prevent their audience,
he frustrated the contentment they hoped thence, telling the Deputies general
freely, that what he did, was in tevenge of the affronts he received from the
Assembly at Saumure.

These things passing thus, the Marshal Bouillon continues his ill offices to
the interests of those of the Reformed Religion in general, and those of the
Duke of Rohan in particular; and having obtained the Ambassadorship
extraordinary for England to get the alliance with Spain approved of there,
feeds himself also with hopes by the means of that employment, there to procure
a dislike of the actions of the Assembly of Saumure: But the Duke of Rohan
found an opportunity, by a Gentleman that attended on the Marshal in the
voyage, to give the King of England a true information of all things; so that
as to that particular, the answer he received, was, that if the Queen should be
induced to infringe the Edicts made in favor of those of the Reformed
Religion, so that it were manifest, that they were persecuted for their
Religions sake; his Majesty required, in that case, that neither the League
lately made with France, nor his present confirmation of the same, should be
understood to their prejudice: For Nature teaches every one, when he sees his
neighbor assaulted for a quarrel which relates to himself, to foresee what he
may expect from the issue of it. As for his part, the King of England exhorted
the Marshal to a reconciliation with the Duke of Rohan, to whom also he
intimated his pleasure in that particular: In reference to which, the National
Synod then held at Priuas, endeavored it also, and for that end, besides the
Deputies general, chose Du Moulin, and Durand, Ministers, and L' isle-gro lot
an Elder, whose care and pains in it were so effectual, that the sixteenth of
August, in the year 1612. the Marshals Bouillon, and Lesdeguieres signed these
ensuing Articles, viz. That they would hearken to a sincere reunion, promising
to submit their own particular interests to the common welfare of those of the
Reformed Religion, by an Oblivion of all past injuries: That they would freely
renounce all resentments, and animosities against any persons, and for what
cause soever: That they would love and honor every one according to his rank
and quality, giving them upon all occasions, all testimonies of friendship, as
far as the duty of true Christians, and faithful Subjects of the King should
oblige and permit them. They farther also protested, that they desired nothing
more, than by a firm Union and concord to see the Kingdom of God advanced, and
the Churches flourish in a happy peace, under the obedience of his Majesty;
and, moreover, to employ all their power, that the authority of the Synods be
not invalidated, nor the Discipline infringed; and that they would not favor,
nor any ways assist any particular persons or Churches, that by unjust or
prejudicial means should separate from the Union, and conformity to the
Doctrine and Discipline received in the Churches. This Protestation was also
signed by the Dukes of Rohan, Sully, and Soubize, La Force, and Du Plessis; to
which they desired might be added these following Articles; viz. To cause this
Act to be signed by the Governors of all places of security, and other persons
of consideration in the Provinces, and that by the way of Conserence; and, that
a Clause might be inserted, by which they should oblige themselves to observe,
as well all Politic, as Ecclesiastical order, and to restore and confirm the
authority of the Deputies general in their charges.

But for all these goodly appearances, the persecutions against those of the
Religion, and the Duke of Rohan, ceased not; which enforced them at last, upon
the grievances of the Province of Xaintonge to call an Assembly of five
Provinces, according to the regulation of the Assembly of Saumure.

Whiles these things were a doing, there happened a new accident, which hastened
the Assembly: Berticheres, supported with the power of the Constable, the
Decree of the Assembly of Saumure, and the favor of the Court, would needs
repossesse his government of Aiguemortes: But the Province, advertised of his
demeanor by Saugeon (whom the Duke had sent thither purposely with a character
of him) so ordered that affair, that, in spite of the Constable, they
maintained Arembures in it, and kept Berticheres out; which so incensed him,
that he made Saugeon a prisoner at Ville-franck in Rouergue, which was more
than he could do in his own government. When the Duke of Rohan, and the
Province of Xaintonge heard this, they avowed the voyage, and owned the cause
of Sangeon: The Assembly also met at Rochel, notwithstanding the ill usage, and
traverses occasioned them by the Marshal Bouillon, who showed himself more
their enemy, than all the Kings Council beside (notwithstanding his engagement
passed to the King of England, and the Deputies of the National Synod) and
instigated the Clergy of France to go to the Quetn, and hinder her giving any
favorable answers to those of the Religion, supposing that such rigor would
force them upon extremities, and would make them appear guilty of a desire of
war, and give him an occasion to interpose as a mediator for them at Court;
that so, he might render himself useful to both parties, and whatever happened,
still make up his own reckoning.

On the other side, Du Plessis tired with these persecutions, from which he
himself was not exempted, and fearing what the issue of these disturbances
would be, interposes for the composing of them, and comes to Rochel accompanied
with Rouvray, one of the Deputies general, and brother to his son in law,
bringing with him a draught of some Articles, not signed: But the success of
his negotiation, not answering his expectation, he withdrew again, and with
him, the Province of Anjou, (one of the five assembled) Nevertheless, the
other four continued well united, and by Messengers, desired the Duke of
Rohan's presence at Rochel, to consult with them about what was to be done:
When he came, it was resolved, that they should send a Gentleman to the Queen,
in the name of the Provinces, to accept, for the present, the offers had been
made them, referring the pursuance of the rest to the Deputies general. But
hearing, in the mean time, of the commotions at the Court, of a bold action
committed in the assassination of the Baron de Luz, to the great displeasure of
the Queen, and violation of her authority; the Assembly took the boldness to
send Le Parc, d' Archiat, and Cressonniere to their Majesty's, with
protestations of their loyalty, and offers of their service, choosing rather to
submit to their pleasures in accepting the offers made them, than to augment
the present troubles by their importunities: Bessay also made a Speech to the
same effect, in the behalf of the Duke of Rohan; and all were well received at
Court: Thus ended this Assembly, which though continually traversed, as is
before related, brought more benefit to the Public, and comfort to the Duke of
Rohan, than that of Saumure.

The Articles agreed on (and pretty well observed) were, 1. That the King's
Atturneys should have Orders to receive the Attestations of the Ministers,
without compelling them to add the Epither, Pretended, to the Reformed
Religion. 2 That the Ecclesiastical persons should be permitted the enjoyment
of the same liberty, they had in the reign of the late King. 3. That they have
a Toleration of Provincial Councils, for the ordering of their Politic
affairs, as in the late Kings time. 4. That the Ministers, as well as other
Ecclesiastical persons in France, may be exempted from the payment of all Taxes
and Subsidies, and that all necessary provisions to this effect, be given them.
5. That all the Edicts be published a new, together with a Declaration,
confirming all Grants, Favors, and Concessions of the late King, with an Act
of Oblivion, and a Decree, that all proceedings commenced against those of the
Reformed Religion become null, and as if they had never been. 6. That the
Inhabitants of Rochel be permitted to enquire into the occasion of what happened
at Couldray; and be also freed from the jealousies they may justly derive from
the two near approach of the Ships, and that, to that end, they be commanded to
ride farther from the shore. 7. That the Remonstrances of the lower Languedoc
be received concerning Aiguemortes; that provision be made for it; and that, in
the mean time, the place be committed to the care of Chastillon. 8. That the
razing of Vessieres be suspended, and the Remonstrances of the Province of
Languedoc, concerning that particular, be received. 9. That nothing be changed
in the Mas d' Agenois in the lower Guienne, and that La Vessiere be replaced
there. 10. That the Count of Panias be desired by letter, to continue the
Captain Pre in his command under him, in Mansiete. 11. That the troops which
are in Xaintonge, Poictou, and the places adjacent, be removed. 12. That
Roche-beaucourt, and Foucault, be sent out of Saint John. 13. That the one of
their Companies shall be given to the Duke of Rohan, and the other to the
King's Lieutenant, which shall be placed there, in the place of La
Roche-beaucourt, but with the approbation and good-liking of the Duke of Rohan.
14. That the Office of Sergeant Major of the place becoming void, either by
death, or demission of the Officer, it shall be supplied as the Duke shall
please. 15. That the pensions of the Dukes of Rohan, and Soubize, shall be
paid, both the arreares, and what shall for the future accrue. 16. That no
violence be done to the friends or servants of the Duke of Rohan; that those
that had pensions shall receive them, as before the Assembly of Saumure; and
that no injury be done to the Baron de Saugeon, but that he be restored to his
liberty.


Whiles the Court raised these tempests in the Provinces, it self was not free
from commotions. The Marshal d' Ancre, who had engrossed the whole favor of
the Queen, bred, and cherished divisions among the great ones, lest their union
should obstruct his advancement; so equally ballancing all parties, that
neither could over-poise the other, and continually fomenting envy and
jealousies among them, lest their reconciliation should prove his ruin: They
on the other side suffering themselves to be hurried on by the violence of
passion, rather than led by the calmer conduct of reason, so that all the
Princes of the blood were seen in opposition one against the other, and those
also of the house of Lorraine, according as their present enjoyments, or hopes
of future favor moved them: But at length the Prince of Conde upon the Queens
refusal to give him Chasteau Trompette, raised a party of discontents, under
pretense of reforming the disorders in the government of the State; The Marshal
Bouillon the main contriver of this Party, managed it with such artifice, that
he caused the Prince, the Dukes of Longueville, Nevers, Maine, and others, to
absent themselves from the Court, whom he himself followed the last of all, and
with the Queens consent too, upon the hopes he had given her of reducing all
those Princes; And with such dexterity hand died he the affair, that he became
both the Author and composer of it; in which there was one very remarkable
thing to be taken notice of, which was, that he imparted the whole business to
the knowledge of the Duke of Rohan's most faithful friends, and concealed it
from his own, whom in other things he had always trusted; for that he very
well knew the corruption and falsehood of the one, and the integrity and
fidelity of the other.

The Prince with his Partisans retired to Mezieres, a Town belonging to the
Duke of Nevers, near Sedan; The Duke of Maine who was Governor of the Isle of
France, with the Towns of Soissons, Noyons, and the Castle of Pierrefons; the
Marquess de Ceuvres with Laon; all very considerable places, together with the
Duke of Longveville, Governor of Picardy, with all the friends and servants
they could muster in their governments joining to the frontires of Germany, and
Flanders, with the rest of the discontents in France, made up a very formidable
party; to which I shall not add, that upon the retaining of these
Malcontents from the Court, the Duke of Vendosme being apprehended in the
Louvre, and there detained prisoner; a few days after made his escape, and got
into Britany his own government, where he made great preparations also.

Things being in this condition, the Prince writes a letter to the Queen, whose
contents were nothing but complaints of the disorders committed in the State
under her authority; that the Princes of the blood, Dukes, Peers, and Officers
of the Crown were excluded from the Public affairs, which were managed by
three or four only, who to maintain their own height, sowed divisions among the
Nobility, lavishing the treasures, and at their pleasure, disposing of them,
the Arsinals and Frontire Garrisons, which were entrusted in the hands of
strangers, who were in no wise responsible for them; that they desired an
Assembly of the States General, according to the Custom, during the Minorities
of their Kings, in which the Queen should find a legal provision made for the
support of her authority, the preservation of the Laws, and reforming all
abuses that obstructed the administration of them. He writes also to the
Parliament of Paris, and all the Grandees not yet confederated with him, to
invite them to a Conjunction with his Party; and to the Deputies general also,
telling them that those of the Religion were not forgotten in his
Remonstrances; He sent also Le Maretz Lieutenant of his guards, to the Duke of
Rohan to court him to arm in his behalf, protesting that he would not listen
to any agreement, but with his consent: But the Duke who on the one side knew
very well the credit the Marshal Bouillon had gained among his most intimate
confidents; and on the other, remembering the continual ill offices he had
received from him ever since the Assembly of Saumure; and being not unjealous
that the war was only declared in words, whilst in truth they were already
entered into a Treaty, resolved to send Haultfontaine, in whom he reposed great
confidence, along with Maretz, to make a discovery of the true posture of the
Prince his affairs; and in the interim made his addresses by letter to the
Queen, assuring her, that he would continue united with the whole body of those
of the Religion, to whom if she pleased to vouchsafe some satisfaction, she
should reclaim her discontents at an easy rate.

In the mean while the Prince came to Saint Menchould, a strong place within
the government of the Duke of Nevers, which he had secured; and there also
arrived Hault-fontaine, where, instead of a war proclaimed, he found a Treaty
well advanced; He was received with much honor, and admitted also to their
Counsels; Upon his arrival, it was given out, that he came with an offer of
eight thousand foot, and two thousand horse from his Master, on purpose to
hasten the Treaty, and yet was he sent back to the Duke with an assurance that
there should be none, and a request to raise arms: But Hault-fontaine assured
him that the Peace was concluded, and that Amboise was to be given to the
Prince, Menchould to the Duke of Nevers, and a round sum of money to the Duke
of Bouillon, and that an Assembly of the States general was promised; which in
a short time after was performed: And thus did their own private interests
intercept their regard to the consideration of the public.

The Duke of Vendosme, who, after his escape, had levied many men in Britany,
and engaged himself in the fortification of Blavet, was much troubled to see
himself thus forlorn: He sent Roche Giffar to the Duke of Rohan, with earnest
persuasions to join with him, which were well mixed with fair promises in
favor of those of the Religion: But all could extract no other answer from
him, than that the best counsel could be given him, was to digest, as well as
he could, his dereliction, and in time, to comply, lest his obstinacy should
draw upon him an inevitable ruin. But this advice had no operations upon his
resolutions; though the Prince, when he came into Poictou, added his
persuasions too, and endeavors to approve of his precipitation of the peace:
The Prince was also very serious to see the Duke of Rohan, who to satisfy him
in that particular, came to La Roche des Aubieres in Anjou, where he shows him,
how he had been forced to shuffle up a peace the best he could, for that the
Marshal Bouillon, ambitious of all the thanks and profit, had debauched and
seduced most of his party (speaking well indeed of none but the Duke of Nevers)
so that he was constrained to accept of Amboise; That he hoped to procure an
Assembly of the States General, in which his party would be the most prevalent,
for that every one in their Province, stickled hard for him; and that it was
there, the affairs of the Kingdom should have a redress, and the Nobility enjoy
their dignities, or else that they should have more forces, and a better
pretense for a War; that though he had cast off many Gentlemen and Soldiers,
yet he regarded not that much, for that he knew, France was always well stored
with discontents.

To which was answered, that the States would rather oppose his designs, and
instead of augmenting, lessen his authority; for that the fear of evil, and
hope of good, the most prevalent motives upon the affections of men, were from
the Queen, not him; and that the reason, why many refused to take Arms, though
he commanded them, was, because he himself did not, but had made his peace; for
which he was upbraided both by the Duke of Rohan, and his brother; of which he
excused himself the best he could, with many large protestations of friendship
to them, and a high approbation of the Counsel they had given the Duke of
Vendosme; and thus was their interview terminated: After which, the Prince to
make his advantage of all, wrote to the President Janin, that he had desired a
meeting from the Duke of Rohan for no other end, but to break off the
confederacy between the Duke of Vendosme and him.

This being past, all parties were very industrious to procure a nomination of
such Deputies in the Provinces, for the States General, to be convened at Paris
the winter following, as were most devoted to them; And in the mean while the
King and Queen took their journey toward Britany to reduce the Duke of
Vendosme: When they came to Poictieres, Villeroy dispatches to the Duke of
Rohan one Villette (whom he knew to be a friend of his) to let him know, that
their Majesty's passing within twenty Leagues of him, would take it ill if he
neglected to come and wait upon them, assuring him of a fair reception; and
that it was such an opportunity to set himself right again with them, as in
prudence he ought not to let slip: Upon this encouragement he went thither,
where, after a very good welcome given him, they engaged him to be present at
the States of Britany to be held at Nantes, where all their propositions were
answered with a free ass^nt to them, whether they concerned the Deputations for
the States General, or the Duke of Vendosme, who was for^ed to present himself
before them, and wholly submit himself to their pleasures. This done, they
returned thence, it being presently after the Autumn, to Paris, whither a
general curiosity carried every one to see what would be the issue of the
States General. The Prince was in very good intelligence with the strongest
party in the Parliament, occasioned rather by their hatred to the present
government, than by any influence from his virtue or good conduct; for had his
life and actions been in any degree proportionable to his pretenses, and
Remonstrances, he would have much disturbed the Queens government.

Come we now to the States, who assembled at Paris about the latter end of
October, in the year 1614: where all things passed according to the Queens
desire, who notwithstanding dissolved them, without giving them any
satisfaction at all: The Prince was feign to yield up Amboise again, which he
had gotten at the Treaty of Saint Menehould; and that by the advice of the
Marshal Bouillon, who thought by showing the power he had over the first Prince
of the blood, who only might lawfully question the actions of the Queen, to
render himself so acceptable and considerable, that of necessity he should be
employed in the management of the public affairs: But remembering that his
services had been less recompensed than his disservices, and that men stood in
awe of that aspiring spirit, so apt and ready for any great undertakings, he
resolves to employ it again to mischief; and taking occasion from the ill
propositions made in the States, from the treacheries discovered there, by a
pre^umption to establish the Papal in prejudice of the Royal Authority, from
the Decree made by them for the consummating the Marriages with Spain, from
the prodigious greatness of the Marshal d' Ancre universally envyed, and
maligned, especially in Paris; and from the discontents the Deputies the States
carried back into their provinces, all which things he so dexterously ordered
for his purposes, that from that foundation he raised a broulliery of that
importance, that even those that thought not at all of meddling in it, were
insensibly engaged in the party.

The better to arrive at his aims, the Marshal Bouillon drew into the
confederacy with the Prince all the Grandees of the Kingdom, whom either some
particular injuries received, or envy (the basest, yet most common vice of all)
had discontented; handles the Parliament of Paris so handsomely, that the
greatest part of them favored his design, prevailed so far upon the English
Ambassador, that he incited his Master to countenance his party, and made
Rouvray, Desbordes-Mercier, and Bertheville, Deputies General from the Assembly
of those of the Religion, persons of great abilities, and good repute, his own;
showing them the remedies he would apply to the disorders of the State, the
advantages should thence accrue to those of the Religion in general, and
themselves in particular; to wit, to the one the place of Ambassador into the
Low Countries, to the other the revenue of a Counselor in the Chamber of
Edicts; and to the third, the Deputation General; all very persuasive arguments.

When he had thus disposed his affairs, leave was granted for an Assembly to be
held at Jergeau, the fourth day of April, which place was judged improper for a
free debate, and attaining the ends proposed; wherefore it was removed to
Grenoble the fifteenth of July, one thousand six hundredand fifteen, upon the
instant request of the Deputies General, and the Provinces, and the assurance
the Marshal Lesdiguieres gave the Queen, that he would order all things so,
that she should have no cause to fear the issue of it; which place, though the
vast power, and well-known humor of the Marshal might cast some umbrages of
suspicion on it, could not however be refused, because that Dauphine was a
Province, in which those of the Religion were most numerous and powerful, and
where without danger they could not be disgusted.

Whiles these things were in agitation, great care was taken to incense the
spirits of the Parisians, and with such effect, that the Parliament set forth a
Declaration, inviting the Prince and Peers to join with them in their
Consultations; which though they were checked for, yet desisted they not, but
proceeded to the presenting of very bold Remonstrances to the King himself,
whose substance was, that he ought not to begin the first year of his Majority
with such absolute commands, nor accustom himself to such actions, which good
Kings, as himself, very rarely had recourse to, and after an exaggeration of
the great and signal services of their Court ever since its first
establishment, and that all the weighty and most important affairs of the
State were managed by their Counsel, or that the Kings had repented it, they
remonstrate the displeasure they had to see that the Late States should
endeavor to subvert the Fundamental Law of the Kingdom, by rendering the
Sovereign power of the King doubtful, and problematick; that for the
suppression of such pernicious Maxims, and that his Sovereignty which he holds
only and immediately from God himself, be not upon any pretense whatsoever
subjected to any other power, it were necessary to ordain, that the Original
Laws of the Nation, and the occasional decrees sounded on them be renewed and
put in execution; and those held for enemies to the State, that would subject
the Royal Authority to any foreign domination: Moreover they remonstrate also
how necessary it were to continue the ancient Alliances, and foreign
Confederacies renewed by the late King; that the King should be also advised by
the Princes, Officers of the Crown, and veterane Counselors, persons
experienced and interessed in the State, and that none be permitted to receive
pensions of foreign Princes or States: That all Officers be protected in the
discharge of their duty: That for the future no survivances or reversions of
Offices be granted: That the Military commands be not Vendible: That the
governments of provinces, strong places, and principal Military commands be not
conferred on strangers: That for the conservation of the dignity and splen dour
of the Romish Religion, without derogating from the Edicts of pacification, and
for the preservation of the privileges of the Gallick Church, and rectifying
the abuses crept into it by means of Suffragans and Coadjutors, there be not
suffered any multiplication of new Religious orders; and that Bishoprics be
conferred on persons of good Families, and suitable qualifications, both for
age and virtue: That the course of Justice be free, and all obstructors of it
punished; and that the Kings Council upon applications made to them, may not
abrogate any decrees of the Parliament; but that those who would sue for relief
against them, do it by the usual and Legal ways: That no pardon be granted to
any Murderers: That Edicts and Ordinances against Duels be observed: That the
decrees of the Kings Council be more stable, and not reverseable upon every
occasion, either for money or favor: That the exactions and irregularities
committed in the Chanceryes of the Parliaments, and Presidial seats, and Taxes
raised without verification in Parliament be suppressed: That all societies of
Counselors of Estate, Intendants, and other Officers of the Finances, or
Exchequer, together with all partnerships, be forbidden: That all public
gaming, and tippling-houses be suppressed: That provision be made against the
abuses of treasurers, and the offenders punished; and that the excess of
rewards be moderated: That the Government of the Exchequer be entrusted but to
a few persons, as in the time of the late King: That the profusion of the
treasures may be compued from this; that the Revenue is greater now, than in
the late Kings time, who spent every year in buildings and other expenses, now
taken off, three millions of Livers, and laid up two millions; that if those
five millions had been laid up every year since his death, there would be in
the Treasury twenty millions; besides the fourteen millions he left there,
which, to the great regret of all good French men, are now consumed;
extravagancies of such a nature, as will quickly send France a begging, if not
remedied; which cannot be but by a strict inquiry into the actions of those
that have been guilty of these male-administrations, of which they know their
Majesty's to be entirely innocent: Wherefore they most humbly implore their
leave, to put in execution their decree made in March, one thousand six hundred
and fifteen, promising to disclose to them things of great concernments to the
State, which are yet hidden from them; by means of which, provision may be made
for prevention of all these disorders: But in case that the evil Counsels, and
crafty Artifices of persons interessed herein, shall hinder these Remonstrances
of a fair reception, the said Parliament solemnly protests, That for the
discharge of their consciences, for the service of their Majesty's, and
preservation of the State, they shall be obliged hereafter to nominate freely
the Authors of these abuses, and lay open to the world their wicked
comportments, that remedies may be applied in due season, when the affairs will
more conveniently admit of them, and his Majesty shall please to take better
notice of them.

This Remonstrance wrought the designed effect, procuring the Parliament a
sharp check, and affectionating them so much the more to the Prince his party:
Hence ensued great animosities and very liberal discourses of all sides; and
presently after, came Letters from the Prince to the King, the Queen, and all
the Grandees both of the Court and Parliament, together with his Declaration,
which resuming the business from before the War of Saint Menehould, complains
of the irregularities in the elections of the Deputies for the States general,
of the elusion of the Article proposed by the third Estate or Commons, for
securing the life and authority of the King, against the designs of the Pope;
of the excessive Offices and exorbitant power of the Marshal d' Anere, and his
extravagancies in the administration of them, presuming to deprive the Princes
of their governments, and procuring Laws oppressive to the people, for the
satisfying of his own avarice, and ambition, disposing of all the Offices of
the Kingdom, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, infringing the liberty of the
States, to which the Prince was forbid an access, causing the Parliament of
Paris to receive a smart reproof for their Remonstrance; concluding the
marriages with Spain, without communicating the business to those it ought to
be imparted to, by such pactices slighting and deserting the Ancient Allies of
the Crown, and among others the Duke of Savoy; who, to the great dishonor of
France, is suffered to be trampled in the dust; causing a refusal of the
propositions made by the Nobility to the States, for the observation of the
Edicts of Pacification; attempting to induce the Clergy of France to swear an
entire observance of the Council of Trent: That it was most unreasonable that
the Marshal d' Ancre, the Chancellor, the Commander de Sillery, Bullion, and
Dole, Authors of all these violent actions, and mischievous Counsels, should
be maintained in such an unlimited power: The Prince also further demanded,
that before they proceed to a consummation of the marriages with Spain, some
course be taken for regulating the Counsels, and reforming, and composing the
abuses and disorders in the State: About which, he had several conferences with
Villeroy, to amuse and entrap him, rather than out of an intention to contrive
any remedies for them: At length upon the Summons given him by Pontchartraine,
to the voyage into Guienne to consummate the Marriages, foreseeing thence the
wrack of his hopes, and pretenses of a good Reformation, he declares that the
Arms he had raised, had no other aim than the preservation of the Kings
authority, and the glory, and honor of the Nation, inviting all good French
men, both of the one, and the other Religion to join with him, and all the
Ancient Allies of the Crown, to favor him in so good a design.

When the Prince had published this Declaration, he made his Levyes in France
and Germany, and took his Canon at Sedan: The King also raised an Army of ten
thousand Foot, and fifteen hundred Horse, Commanded by the Marshal de
Bois-Dauphin, to oppose the discontents, and with other Troops sets forward
toward Guienne, attended on by the Duke of Guise, who was to conduct Madame
the Kings sister to the Frontieres of Spain, and there to receive the Infanta,
and wait on her back to the King.

In the mean time the Prince earnestly sollicites the Assembly at Grenoble, by
his Agent La Hay, who delivers them his Manifesto, and shows them the
advantages would redound to those of the Religion, in case the Assembly would
comply with him in reforming the State, and opposing the matches with Spain;
and further engages himself not to conclude any thing, but by their advice. The
Prince his party, nor their adherents, durst not open their mouths to second
this motion; But yet the others imagining that from so important an opportunity
they might with good reason derive strong hopes of obtaining some favor from
the King, they deputed Champeaux, Desbordes-Mercier, and Mailleray, to him, who
found him at Tours, and presented to him five and twenty Articles of greatest
consequence to their Interests, humbly supplicating him to vouchsafe them some
satisfaction thereupon. Of these Deputies, Desbordes-Mercier was of the Prince
his faction, the other two were of the same opinion with the Duke of Rohan, who
thought the first equally affected to him with the others; of whose abilities
being very conscious, he reposed an entire confidence in him: He received
Letters from him from Poictiers, which gave him notice of their
dissatisfaction, and urged him to a conjunction with the Prince, assuring him
that the Assembly would be well satisfied with it, and also do the like
themselves: The other two Deputies governed by this, joined in this
intelligence, informing him moreover, how much their Majesty's slighted the
Assembly, so that adding to this, the refusal made him of the Survivance, or
Reversion of the Government of Poictou, (to which his father-in-law had given
his consent) contrary to the solemn promises passed to him for it; together
with the persuasions of his brother the Duke of Soubize, who was well affected
to the Prince, he began to stagger a little: Besides, in his return to Saint
John, from Saint Maixant, where he had been to see the Duke of Sully, he met a
Gentleman belonging to the Count of Saint Paul, who desired his assistance to
oppose the Marriages with Spain; and was seconded by Saint Angel, Savignac,
and Doradour, who in the name of all the Governors, and Nobility of the
Religion, solicited the same thing, and chose him for their General,
confirming him with an assurance, that the Count of Saint Paul would deliver up
Fronsac to La Force, as a pledge for the performance of his word.

The accumulation of all these things, to wit, the hope of Redeeming himself
from the neglect and slights lately thrown upon him; the solicitation of his
brother, together with the desire he had to serve those of the Religion,
overpoised his former resolutions, and sent him into Guienne, where he found
that the Count of Saint Paul, with the Romish Catholics, had made their peace,
and a great confusion among those of the Religion; nevertheless, having gotten
together La Force, Boisse-Pardaillan, Chasteau-neuf, Favas, and Pamissant, with
others of the Religion, it was resolved, that they should make use of the
leisure afforded them by the Kings stay at Poictiers, occasioned by the
sickness of Madame the Princess, to prepare for a War; feeding themselves with
hopes to raise an Army of six thousand Foot, and five hundred Horse, which at
their first Rendezvous amounted but to six hundred Foot, and fifty Horse; nor
could all their power ever bring more, than two thousand men together; so that
the King easily, and without any interruption got to Bourdeaux, whence the
Queen Mother dispatched Chesnay to the Duke of Rohan, with very fair offers,
upon condition that he would join with her: But neither he, nor Bois-de
Cargois, who was deputed from the Assembly with the like Commission, could get
any other answer from him, than, That he would not fail to make good his word,
where he had engaged it: But this failing, the Queen endeavors to take off La
Force, and Boisse-Pardaillan from him; As for the former, he conceived himself
obliged to the defense of Bearn, and the other persisted in his integrity.

The Duke of Rohan's chiefest care now was to engage in the party he had
embraced, all the Towns, and Communalties of the Religion, together with the
Assembly General, whom by express Messengers, he advertises, that upon the
refusal of favorable answers to their propositions, and the earnest
solicitations of their Deputies, he had now declared in Guienne, and his
brother in Poictou, persuading them to own their actions, and adhere to the
Prince: The Duke of Soubize, who had staid at Saint John during the Kings abode
at Poictiers, immediately after his departure, makes his levyes in Poictou, and
Kaintonge, and suddenly took the field with four thousand good Foot, and five
hundred Horse, which were very opportunely ready to receive the Prince at his
arrival there.

In the mean time the Duke of Guise conducts the Princess toward Spain, and
brings thence the Infanta; whose voyage afforded the Duke of Rohan the
opportunity to seize upon Lectour, by the assistance of Fonterailles, who let
him into the Town, where, when he was entered, he besieged the Castle, and
forced it to surrender, before the Duke of Guise could relieve it, or the
Assembly of the higher Languedoc interrupt his design: From thence he marches
to Verdun and Mauvoisin, which he could by no means draw to his party; and
thence to Montaubane, which, though with much reluctance, he got to declare for
him: In this March he met with the Duke of Candale, who discovered to him his
intention of embracing the Reformed Religion; after mutual complements they
part, and the Duke of Rohan keeps on his way toward Languedoc, to the
Assembly, who by reason they had not the freedom they expected at Grenoble,
were adjourned to Nismes, where his dexterous endeavors had such happy
success, that maugre the power of Chastillon, which the virtue of his Ancestors
had acquired him; he destroyed all his credit with them, made himself be
acknowledged General of the Seuenes, and so prevailed upon the Assembly, that
all the opposition Chastillon could make in it, or in Languedoc, could not
hinder their conjunction with the Prince; whose Partisans seeing themselves
backed by the Dukes of Rohan, Sully, and Soubize, at that time carried all
before them; and Desbordes-Mercier, Crusel, and Novialle, were deputed to carry
the Act of Union to the Prince, and get his signature to the Articles agreed
on: whose substance was, To oppose the reception of the Council of Trent, and
the marriages with Spain. To procure a reformation of the Council, and an
observation of the Edicts made in favor of those of the Religion; and that
they should not desert one another, lay down their Arms, nor hearken to any
pacification, but by a mutual consent.


At Montauban heard the Duke the first news from the Prince, though he had
dispatched several Messengers to him; and thither he sent him word, That,
notwithstanding the opposition of a strong and well-marshalled Army, he had
passed the Rivers of Marne, Seine, and the Loire; and that having gotten the
start of the adverse Army, he was now marching to join with him in Guienne,
desiring him to march toward the Dordoigne, and for the security of his
passage, possess himself of some places upon that River; which he quickly did,
taking among others, Souillac, one of the best passes on it, and beating up the
Quarters of the Count of Lauzune's Regiment that was barricado'd in two great
Villages.

But the Prince, instead of that, took the way of Poictou, where he very
seasonably met with the Duke of Soubize; for he was very weak in Foot, and his
whole Army so harassed, that had not the Town of Saint John received him, and
the Duke of Sully at length, with much ado joined with him, causing also all
the places he held in Poictou to declare for his party, he would have been but
in a sad condition.

In the mean while their Majesty's return toward Tours, the Duke of Guise
commanding the Army of the Marshal de Bois Dauphin, and the Duke d' Espernon,
with another, having the charge of their conduct: All these conjunctions with
the Prince, raised him from the contempt he lay under, to so considerable a
height in the opinions of his Adversaries, that he is now sued to for an
accommodation.

Now it is to be understood that the Marshal Bouillon and the Duke of Main,
being more strictly ligued, and of greater intimacy with the Prince than any of
the whole party besides, and consequently more sought after by the Court,
resolved to have a peace, and purchase their own conditions at the expense of
the whole confederacy: In order to which, a Cessation of arms is agreed on,
and the Town of Loudun made choice, of for the place of Treaty; Invitations
were sent also to the Assembly General, to draw as near to them as Saint Foy,
where the Marshal Bouillon was in great reputation: But the Duke of Rohan being
advertised by his brother of all their plots, discovered to his friends in the
Assembly the whole mystery, and let them know, that it were expedient the
Assembly should instantly remove to Rochell, where their authority would be
greater, and their strength more considerable; and that for his part he was
resolved to go to the Treaty, though not summoned to it, leaving Boesse
Pardaillan, in his absence to command in Guienne.

Before we proceed to the particularities of the Treaty, there are two very
observable things to be taken notice of. The first was the Duke of Nevers his
arming, without declaring for either side, but pretending as a Mediator to
enforce both parties to an accommodation, out of an apprehension he might give
them to sway the balance on that side he should incline to: A thing feasible
by the King of England, or of Spain, but a ridiculous attempt for him. The
other was nothing more Judicious, and that was a resembling action of the Duke
of Vendosmes, who by the King's Commissions had raised a considerable force,
but joined not with the Prince till after the truce; so that, he served for
nothing but to inhaunce the conditions of that party he declared for, and
frustrating himself of all means to make his own, being of himself not
considerable, attracts to himself the odium and malignity borne to the whole
party.

At this Treaty there were present of the Kings part, the Marshal Briassac,
Villeroy, the President d' Thou, d' Vi^, and Pontchartraine, who sedulously
sought by sowing divisions among them, to weaken the confederates, and
consequently lessen their conditions: The Prince, weary of the War, pretends
nothing but a desire of peace, renouncing in appearance, all further thoughts
of the public affairs, and demanding only a satisfaction of the interests of
particular persons, but resolving principally to find his own there too: He had
engaged to the Duke of Vendosme, not to consent to any peace, unless he had the
Castle of Nantes given him: To the Duke of Longueville he promifed the
Cittadell of Amiens, and to those of the Religion, a confirmation of the
Edicts: But when the Duke of Main, and the Marshal Bouillon were arrived at
their ends, they quitted all thoughts, but how to make the rest relinquish
theirs, to effect which, they used all manner of Artifices, the most crafty and
pregnant inventions could furnish them with: But the admirable constancy of the
Assembly General at Rochell, and the firm union between the other Grandees,
threw insuperable difficulties in the way to their designs.

But in the midst of these transactions, the Prince falls desperately sick,
which caused a great confusion among them all, and made them more sollicitous
to have this affair dispatched: The Duke of Sully was desired to go to the
Assembly, and represent to them the dangers, that attended the present
condition of things, whence he returned, with a full assurance of their good
inclinations to peace; which three days after, they confirmed by ten Deputies
they sent with an express charge to supercede all former demands, that might
retard the conclusion of the Treaty; confining themselves to an obtention only
of all expedients, necessary to confirm and secure to them their former
Concessions: Among which were the continuation of the Assembly where it was,
until the verification of the Edict; the disbanding of the Armies; the
restitution of Tartas; and the dispatch of the Commissioners appointed to put
the Edict in execution, according as the Duke of Sully had promised them in the
Princes name; which he clearly made appear by his instructions, when the
Prince receded from the aforesaid promise: But the King's Commissioners
encouraged under hand, insisted eagerly on the dissolution of the Assembly,
which had like to have broken all, had not the Duke of Sully, pregnant in
evasions to prevent mischiefs, firmly persisted in his endeavors to compose
the business, offering another Writing to the Commissioners, which they
approved of, and desired him to procure the Deputies of the Assembly their
assent to it also, which, with the assistance of the Dukes of Rohan, Candale,
and Soubize, he so happily endeavored, that they assented to it, upon
condition, that there might be an alteration of some terms; And forasmuch as
the Commission of the Deputies was too restrictive, they jointly sent an
express to Remonstrate to the Assembly the necessity of terminating this
affair, and to that end desire such an enlargement of their power, as should
oblige them to ratify what they should conclude in their names, and with the
advice of the Grandees of the Religion: The Duke of Sully thinking he had now
finished all, carries the said Writing to the King's Commissioners, with whom
were present the Dukes of Nevers, Maine, and Bouillon, who all confirmed it,
and after them the Deputies also: But when he returned with it again to the
Commissioners, they denied what they had done; but yet as the Duke was going
from them, they recalled him again, and after much contestation came once more
to an agreement: After which they all met at the Duke of Nevers his Lodgings,
who treated the whole company at Dinner; where the King's Commissioners, for
the third time, so altered the Writing, that there was nothing left of its
first design; for which reason the Duke of Sully would no more trouble himself
with it.

Whereupon the Prince caused the Grandees to be called to sign the Peace; he
was yet so ill that he could neither understand it, when it was read, nor
comprehend the difficulties yet to be surmounted: Nevertheless he called the
Duke of Sully to know what hindered the signing of it, which being told him, he
calls Villeroy, and having whispered something to him very softly, presently
declares to the Duke of Sully, that Villeroy had given him the Writing just as
it was at first designed with the advice and consent of the Duke; and without
expecting the Answer of the Assembly, or any reason to the contrary, signed it:
Whereupon the Duke of Bouillon had many sharp contests, real, or pretended, and
delusory, with Villeroy, for that he desired that the English Ambassador, who
had been a great instrument of the Peace, should sign it too, which the other
opposed as a thing neither handsome, nor honorable for the King to suffer.

This precipitate signing of the Peace by the Prince, occasioned great and
general murmurings among the rest of the Party, that saw themselves thus
deserted by those that were the Authors of the War: And the Duke of Bouillon,
to enhaunce the price of the services he had done the King, bitterly inveighs
against the Assembly, branding them, and all that should abet them, with the
name of Rebels; offered to march against them, and declared that he should
esteem for enemies to the State, all those that upon any pretense whatsoever,
should refuse to sign the peace; But neither his, nor the threats of the
Commissioners prevailed ought upon the others constancy. And because this
brangling was a disturbance to the Prince, the whole company removed to the
Countess of Soissons Lodgings, where every one, all other difficulties being
cleared, to avoid disputes for the precedence, subscribed his approbation
apart, and none, but the Prince, and the Deputies, signed the Declaration.

But when all was done, this War wrought no alteration at all in the public
affairs, but what was procured by those of the King's party, who made use of
this occasion to revenge themselves upon their enemies: So Villeroy, and the
President Janin, whom the Chancellor de Sillery had formerly put by, that he
might have the sole administration of all affairs, caused the seals to be
taken from him, and committed to the President Du Vair: But Villeroy nothing
advantaged himself hereby; for the Marshal d' Ancre, conceiving a jealousy,
that at the Treaty he held correspondence with the contrary party, to out him
of the Cittadell of Amiens, caused his Office of Secretary of State, to be
given to Mangot.

When this business was thus concluded, every one departed, but diversely
affected, and very ill satisfied one with another; and the next day came the
full power from the Assembly to their Deputies to conclude the Peace. The
Marshal Bouillon, and the Duke of Trimouille, to insinuate themselves the more
into the King's favor, engaged themselves to the Commissioners, by an Act
under their hands and seals, to rout the Assembly, and all that should presume
to justify them, in case they refused to dissolve, after the six weeks
prorogation accorded them, was expired.

If the number of the discontents on the Princes side was great, it was not
less on the other: The favor of the Marshal d' Ancre was more insupportable to
those, that upheld, than those that opposed him: and he also perceiving himself
more tyrannised by his creatures, than his enemies, made the late reconciled
party believe he would enter into a firm and strict amity with them; which the
Duke of Guise suspecting, he also, to cross the Marshal d' Ancre's aims, seeks
after an union with them too: And in order to it, makes his applications to the
Marshal Bouillon; who fed him still with very fair words, and hopes, that in
case he failed of his end at the Court, he might have a good occasion to
entangle it in new perplexities.

Some days before the conclusion of the Peace, it was proposed in the Prince
his Council, that the Grandees of his party should enter into an inviolable
League amongst themselves, that two of them should always in their turns,
reside at Court, whilst the others kept at a greater distance from it; and
that every one of them should embrace the particular interests of the others;
The Marshal Bouillon rejected that Proposition, as unseasonable, for that,
having occasion to dis-oblige the greatest part of them, he foresaw this might
discover his intentions; and besides, he was yet desirous to derive his
advantage from the merits, and esteem of his services: But after the Treaty was
concluded, himself renewed the former proposal, which was then also as
unseasonable, because their minds were now too much varied from what they were,
and they so jealous one of another, that every one steered his course by his
own particular interest.

The Prince went to take possession of the government of Berry, given him in
exchange for that of Guienne; The Duke of Main, and the Marshal Bouillon to
the Court, to try how the pulses beat there, but principally to reap the fruit
of their services; The Duke of Sully to his government of Poictou; The Duke of
Rohan to Rochell, to inform the Assembly of what had passed at the treaty of
Loudun, and to procure a nomination of good Deputies general: But the Court
Caball being united with the Prince his faction, and the hopes of favor,
gratifications, and pensions, he gave to those that should incline to his will
wholly governed them, so that Bertheville, and Mainald were chosen.

The Duke of Rohan seeing how he was hated at Court, and that the success of
all things thwarted his projection, resolves to make an Essay upon the Duke of
Sully for the government of Poictou, of whom when he had obtained a demission
of it, his Patents were prepared, according to the tenor of the Articles of the
Treaty, upon condition that he should go to receive them at Court, which he
resolved to do; and there delivers himself freely to the Queen, telling her,
that the slights she had thrown upon him, had induced him to let her Majesty
know, that he was neither void of resentments, nor destitute of power; that,
it was true, he had served and obliged a most ungrateful person, which he was
very sensible of, and that if she pleased to vouchsafe him a pardon, and
amnesty for his actions against her, and admit him again to her favor, he
vowed that except the party of the Religion, he would devote his most faithful
services to her, against all the world besides; of which offer and protestation
she testified her belief by her acceptance of it.

But to return to the Marshal Bouillon; he employed the uttermost strength of
his whole abilities to gain an admission to the helm of State, declaring that
he was the only man could, at his pleasure, rule, and dispose of the Prince,
who was also the only person could prejudice the authority of the Queen, and
that consequently his satisfaction, and employment would free them from any
further apprehensions, whatsoever: But the Marshal d' Ancre, who had engrossed
all the power, being the only Favorite, and intended to change the whole
Council, to place therein creatures of his own, thought it not convenient to
suffer the introduction of such a one; which the other perceiving, stuffs the
Princes head with new jealousies, to prevent his return to the Court.

There were the Countess of Soissons of the one side, and the Princess of Conde
of the other, that extremely rejoiced at the report of the Prince his
intentions to return thither; but all (so jealous were they one of another)
agreed to divert him from them, unless it was by their means that he came;
which he knowing very well, waved them all, and by the mediation of Rochefort,
and the Archbishop of Bourges, secretly made his peace with the Queen, fixing
himself upon her, and to protect the Marshal d' Ancre, with the exclusion of
his own party; provided he might be solely entrusted with the management of the
public affairs, and made Chief of the Council of the Revenew.

Coming to Paris against the good liking of those aforementioned, he was
welcomed with loud acclamations, and applauses, and resumed a great power in
the State: The Duke of Rohan, with the Queens permission, gave him a visit, and
sharply reproached him for signing the Peace, without expecting the Commission
from the Assembly; which he excused, saying, that he was induced to it by an
apprehension he had, lest the Duke should hinder their granting it; and when he
afterward understood that he was restored to the Queens favor, he told him he
was very glad of it, for that he had now brought no other resolutions with him,
but to enjoy himself, mind his own affairs, and no more to intermeddle in any
factions, but entirely to adhere to the King, the Queen, and the Marshal d'
Ancre: And when the dissatisfaction of the Great ones, and principally of the
Marshal Bouillon, who was supposed to have an absolute power over him, was
objected to him; his answer was, That he now very well perceived his drift, and
the subtleties he used to persuade him, that the welfare of the State consisted
either in peace or War, according as he was pleased, or displeased, and that he
would no more stoop to that Lure.

On the other side, the Marshal Bouillon though he saw himself quite cast off,
despairs not, but for fear of exasperating him, covers the displeasure he had
conceived against the Prince, with a seeming approbation of all that he had
done; and that his Counsels might be of greater validity with him, draws the
Duke of Guise, with his brothers, and the Duke of Nevers, into an union with
those of his party; taking advantage of the Parliaments, and Parisians hatred
against the Marshal d' Ancre, and by the means of Luines, who now began to be
the sole Favousite, exposes him to the King's also; and communicated to many of
the prime Nobility his design to secure the Court by the death of the Marshal
d' Ancre, who had bartered away the King's Lieutenancies in Picardy, and the
Citadel of Amiens, together with that of Normandy, which the Duke of Monthazon
had, and reserved to himself the government of Peronne, Montdidier, and Roye:
The Duke of Longueville, enraged to see himself disappointed of Amiens, and the
rest of Picardy, pursues his design, loudly proclaims to the world his
discontents, and the Intelligence he held with the Town of Peronne, enters it,
and possesses himself of the Castle, before any one could stir to prevent him.
Mangot, the new made Secretary of State in the place of Villeroy, is sent
thither by the King, but to no purpose, for that the Castle was already
delivered: At his return from this successeless voyage, the King, being advised
to handle this business with all gentleness possible, sends the Marshal
Bouillon, who made two journyes thither, but brought not back the satisfaction,
was desired; and indeed his own particular aim was to confirm the Duke in his
conquest, to the end that he might engage him, and his friends, in the design
he still pursued. And one day, having assembled the chiefest of his
Confederates, to consult about the killing of the Marshal d' Ancre, the Duke of
Maine, who was supposed to the most zealous in the business, offered to kill
him himself, provided that the Prince would be there, and that it was necessary
to know his resolution therein; the Marshal Bouillon replied, That they ought
to beware of that, but that he would undertake to make the Prince avow the
action when it was executed, but that it was dangerous to impart it to him
before, and that he should not by any means have any notice of it, till it were
ready to be put in execution, that he might not have leisure to retract: But
the obstinacy of the Duke of Maine carried it, and the Prince when he was
acquainted with what they had resolved on, whether it was, that he feared the
issue of it, or that for this once he would be a man of his word, that very
Evening let the Marshal d' Ancre know, by the Archbishop of Bourges, that he
could by no means abandon the Duke of Longueville, and that he revoked the
promise he had made to protect him: Whereupon the Marshal, the same night
posted into Normandy; and there seeing himself forsaken by the Prince, and many
of the Great ones, combined to assault him in the Court it self, contrived how
he might prevent them: Informs the Queen by some of his Confidents, that the
Prince deceives her, that the Marshal Bouillon amuses her, that many of the
great Nobility were resolved to divest her of her authority, and that the
business was already come to such a point, that she had no other remedy left
her, but to seize upon their persons; on which she resolved, with Mangot the
Bishop of Lueon, and Barbin, creatures of the Marshal: And on the first day of
September, upon a Thursday at noon, was the Prince arrested in the Louvre, by
Themines, who for that action was created Marshal of France; and that which is
very remarkable in this, is, That upon the same day of the month, and of the
week, and at the same hour was he born: They thought to have surprised the
Duke of Maine, and the Marshal Bouillon there also; but the former lodging near
Saint Anthony's Gate, had opportunity enough to escape; and the other being
that day gone to a Sermon at Charenten, was advised by his friends to return no
more; so they went to Soissons, and the Duke of Guise and his brother took the
same way also; The Duke of Vendosme also fled toward La Fere; The Duke of
Rohan, who at the very beginning of these commotions had quitted the Prince,
was not however without his fears, when he saw him carried away by Themines,
and that immediately upon it Saint Geran came to enquire after him from the
King. This arrest caused a great tumult in Paris, which was increased by the
Prince his Mother, and many Gentlemen, who animated the people of the Suburbs
of Saint German to plunder, and raze the Marshal d' Ancre's house, which they
found so sweet an employment, that the pillage of it lasted two days; and
indeed great prudence was it, not to oppose them in the heat of their fury: For
the next day Crequi Colonel of the Regiment of the Guards, with one company of
them, and another of the Citizens, easily took them off from the prey, which in
the height of the hurly burly would have proved a greater difficulty.

Their Majesty's gave notice of this Mutiny to those of the Nobility that
remained in Paris, and likewise to the chiefest of the Council; among whom, the
Duke of Sully spoke his mind freely, and declaring his dislike of the action,
advised them to compose those differences by the intervention of the Pope his
Nuncio, and other Ambassadors, but so, as that the full power to determine all
should remain still in the King, and the Queen his Mother. But this Council
was disapproved, and the way of ferce made choice of: In the mean while the
Marshal Bouillon sets all his wits on work, to engage the Duke of Guise
somewhat further, offering to make him chief of a party, where he should
command all that durst dispute the place with him: tells him moreover, that
what they did, was to restore the first Prince of the Blood to his liberty, and
take the King out of the hands of the Marshal d' Ancre, against whom the
general hatred had evidently appeared by the burning and pillaging of his house
in Paris, even before the King's face; that if they should speedily gather
together their friends, and fire all the Mills about Paris, they should cause a
greater insurrection there: But when he saw that these persuasions prevailed
nothing upon him, and that he was treating for his return to Court, where he
was offered to Command the King's Armies; he then moved to have him stopped;
which the Duke of Main would not give way to.

Thus all the Councils of the Marshal Bouillon were rejected, though they were
very good; For, in extremities, things will not admit of tedious deliberations,
and ballancings of future events; and many times a rash attempt closely
pursued, meets a fortunate success, when circumspection (in such a case) ever
fails: Which clearly appeared here; for the Queen having drawn the Duke of
Guise and his brothers, changes the Officers of State, giving the seals to
Mangot, the Office of Secretary of State to the Bishop of Lucon, the Intendancy
of the Finances, or Treasurorship to Barbin, appeases all popular tumults, and
by a Declaration, verified in Parliament, criminalizes all that had absented
themselves; Raises several armies, and gives the command of that in Champagne
to the Duke of Guise, that in the Isle of France to the Count of Auvergne, and
having made Montigny Marshal of France, and Governor of Berry, sends him
thither, who secures the Province, and makes himself Master of the Tower of
Bourges: The Marshal de Souvre does the like to the Castle of Chinon, which by
the treaty of Loudun was given to the Prince. In the beginning of the year One
thousand six hundred and seventeen, the Duke of Guise storms some places held
by the Duke of Nevers, which, without any great resistance made, he takes, and
then prepares for the siege of Meziers. The Count of Auvergne also takes
Pierrefons, and marches toward Soissons: And the Duke of Maine attempting to
beat up the Quarters of the Duke of Rohan, Colonel of the light Horsemen, in
Villiers-Cotrets received a shrewd repulse: In the mean time the Marshal
Bouillon retires to Sedan, where he endeavors to strengthen himself with some
foreign assistance: Thus were the affairs of the Princes but in a sad
condition, even then when their deliverance appeared by the death of the
Marshal d' Ancre, which occasioning a change of the whole face of things, it
will not be impertinent, in this place to insert a particular relation of it.

The unlimited power of Favorites is the ruin of a State: For either they
change it themselves for their own ends, or else they give the ambitious
opportunities to attempt it, or at least are they made the pretenses of all the
disturbances that happen in it: For seven years had the Marshal d' Ancre
furnished France with such pretexts, and that great people, whom the reign of
Henry the great had accustomed to a subjection to the government of their King
himself, universally hated him, imputing all their mischiefs continually to
him; So that his death filled every one with hopes of an amelioration: But
those quickly vanished, when they saw Luynes, a man of a mean extraction,
clothed with his spoils, and at the first rise advanced to greater authority;
who by the pass time, and delights he showed the King in Hunting, and by his
low submissions had raised himself to the highest place in the affections of a
King, who was then but fifteen years old: A Prince very singular, and jealous
of his authority, which yet he understood not at all, and more apt to believe
the worst, than the best: It was a matter of no great difficulty to persuade
him, that the Marshal d' Ancre aimed at a power would prejudice his, and that
the Queen Mother was consenting to it, that she might continue the rains of
Government, as in his Minority, in her own hands; For the insolences which
always accompany great Favorites were exreame in the Marshal d' Ancre; and
the Queen Mothers neglect of her son too apparent: So that Luynes having
before hand dealt with Deagent the chief Deputy of Barbin, who was Intendant of
the Finances, caused him that night to entertain the King with a discourse of
the mischievous plots were contriving against him; and out of hopes of some
great advancement, he made his treachery against his Master the foundation of
the design: Marcillac, his Associate, was he who had formerly betrayed the
Prince to the Queen, and now betrays her to the King: Desplans an ordinary
Soldier in the King's Guards, had a share in this employment too, for that he
had been a servant to Brantes, who was brother to Luynes: In short, in the
contrivance of this design were employed only base and infamous persons; but to
Vitry Captain of the Guards was the execution of it committed, who was
commanded to kill the Marshal, and for recompense, was promised to be made
Marshal of France; which accordingly he performed as he was entering the Louvre:
At the same time were arrested also the Marshal d' Ancre's Lady, Mangot, the
Bishop of Lueon and Barbin, and then were the Chancellor de Sillery, Du Vair,
Keeper of the Seals, Villeroy, and the president Janin sent for to resume their
Offices. After this were the Queens guards taken from her, and some of the
King's appointed to wait on her: A Gallery also that led from her Chamber to a
Garden she had caused to be made, was broken down; nor was she suffered,
without leave, to see any thing, but the sad conversion of her authority and
liberty, into a low and despicable condition, and miserable servitude.

Expresses were sent into all parts to give notice of this change, all
hostility ceases, every one returns to the Court, where all strive, who should
soonest and most impudently renounce that, which but four and twenty hours
before, they adored; It being the property of generous souls only to follow
those in their adverse, whom they honored in their more prosperous fortune;
The Duke of Rohan got leave to visit the Queen Mother, the strength of whose
constancy was still superior to the violence of her pressures: And then,
seeing himself regarded with a frowning eye, and taking small pleasure to see
those he had so lately fought against to be the only welcome persons, goes into
Piedmont, where he arrived a little after the taking of Verseil, and passing
the Summer there; he saw an action worthy to be observed, and related. Don
Pedro de Toledo, after he had taken Verseil, which had endured a long siege, to
refresh it, divided his Army into Montferrat, and the Duchy of Milan, and
quarters it about Alexandria, a Country abounding in corn, and all manner of
necessaries: In the mean while the Duke of Savoy's Army recruited, and the
Treaty of peace was still continued by the mediation of the Cardinal Ludovisio
on the Pope's behalf, and Bethun on the King's; several conferences had they
with Don Pedro; In the interim of which, the Marshal Lesdiguires, who commanded
the relief sent by the King to the Duke of Savoy, to defend his States, but not
to attempt upon the Duchy of Milan; having sent to discover how the Spanish
Army lay, made a proposition to beat up the Quarters of two thousand men, that
lay in Felissan, a Village that was but slightly barricadoed, and seated in the
midst of all the other Quarters: proving by many reasons, that, though at
sifirst ght the design might seem very hazardous, yet really was it not so,
for that marching that way one night with all his forces, at break of day he
beat up that Quarter, which hindered the Spanish Armies rallying, and was the
reason that those he had left behind him, having no retreat, were utterly
lost. This motion took the wished effect; For the Duke of Savoy having
appointed his Rendezvous at Ast, marched by a private way, which avoided Nice
and La Roque, and came to Felissan, which was instantly begirt, and forced, for
they had no need of the Canon, which Shomberg Marshal of the Camp, was bringing
up with the Rear-guard, with which he was commanded to take in a Castle, to
secure the provisions, which he did: The next day was taken a place called
Quatordeci, in which were four hundred soldiers: The same day the Duke of
Savoy gives the Duke of Rohan three hundred horse, to cut off some Cavalry of
the enemies, that were coming from Alexandria: As he was marching to execute
that design, he discovers 300. horse and 1200. foot marching from Cazal to
Alexandria; He makes toward them with his whole party, but, notwithstanding he
used all diligence possible, he could not reach them before it was dark, and
that the enemy had sheltred himself in a very advangeous hold; A proposition
was then made for the incamping round about them, and sending that night for
two thousand horse, that might be ready there to defeat them by break of day;
and I believe this project might have taken; But the consideration of leaving
the rest of the Infantry at Felissan in the midst of the enemies Quarters,
who might easily beat them up, caused them to resolve upon a retreat: So that
after a days stay at Felissan, they marched toward Nice, which they
surrounded, and in twice four and twenty hours, was the Town forced, and the
Castle surrendered, in which were near two thousand fighting men: The next day
finding La Roque quitted, they pursue those that were of the garrison, who were
all Switzers, whom they overtook, and made prisoners: Thus in the space of one
week, were taken four thousand five hundred of the enemies army; which being so
weakened: and the Duke of Savoy finding himself to be more than twenty thousand
strong marching men, had designed to enter in to the Duchy of Milan; when lo,
from France comes the conclusion of the peace, with a Command to the Marshal
Lesdiguieres to get the Duke of Savoy's assent to it, which he effected: But
return we now to the affairs of France.

Luynes seeing that so short a time had vested him with the entire spoils of a
most eminent Favorites seven years toil, having the sole influence upon a
young Prince of fifteen years old, whose Mother he had mortally offended, being
himself but of mean parentage, and without any support in the Kingdom, not
studied, nor any way versed in State affairs, and yet governing all with a most
absolute authority, makes use of Deagent, and Modene as his chief Counselors:
And the next care he had, was to impose a Confessor upon the King, of an
immediate dependence upon himself, so to awe him by their superstition (a
powerful engine to work upon the spirit of a young Prince) and to place about
his person petty inconsiderable fellows, who amused him with childish toys,
and kept so close a siege about his person, that none could be admitted so much
as to speak to him in private: After this he caused the Queen Mother to be
conveyed to Blois, where she was most strictly guarded: And then, that he might
enrich himself with her wealth also, proceeded to the arraignment, and trial of
the Marshal d' Ancre's Lady; in which he used such unlawful solicitations, and
took such unusual courses to procure her death, that at her execution, the
former hatred of the Parisians against her was far exceeded by their passionate
commiseration of her present calamities; caused Mangot to be confined to his
own house; the Bishop of Lucon to be relegated to Avignon, and Barbin was sent
to the Bastille; and then marries the Duke of Montbazon's daughter to
strengthen himself with an Alliance not obnoxious to envy; having for that
reason refused the Duke of Vendosm's sister.

When he had ordered these things after this manner, he caused to be convened
at Rouen, the most eminent of the Nobility, together with the principal
officers of the Parliaments (called the Assembly of Notables) that without
parting from the King at all, he might put himself in possession of the
government of Normandy; where the disunion of the Grandees, their infidelity,
and pusillanimity, together with the base and servile spirits of the Officers
and Deputies of the Parliaments, present at this Assembly, confirmed the
Authority of this upstart Favorite, so that every one yiedling to his yoke, he
began now to think himself sufficient to dispose even of Fortune her self.

The Duke of Rohan, who was now allied to him by his wife, who was of his
family, courts him too, among the rest, endeavoring to reconcile him rather to
the Queen, than the Prince, who from his Prison had already sent him Overtures
and promises, that in exchange of his liberty, he would support him with his
assistance, and fix him in an impregnable condition; He told him, that he
could not long, keep them both prisoners; that he that was there before, his
advancement could have no color to lay his restraint to his charge; and that
it was an easy matter to hinder his deliverance, that the Queens condition was
different, who one time or other would escape from him; for though she were
kept also under guards, yet was it with more respect, and not as prisoner; and
that such guards were not so secure: He added moreover, that if the Prince
regained any power in the State he would be a more dangerous opposite than the
Queen Mother could, that he was of a good wit, quick, highly ambitious, and
covetous; that though he was not of a vindicative nature, yet was he not
obliging neither, nor had he the least friendship for any one; that being not
able to detain them both still in prison, it was necessary he should
strengthen himself with the assistance of one of them; and that however he had
displeased the Queen, yet would she prove his surer prop, for that she was not
so prone to intermeddle with the affairs, as the Prince was; and the jealousies
that were between the King and the Queen (which he knew well enough how to
mould to his own advantage) would be his security against them both; Luynes
seeming satisfied with these arguments, encouraged the Duke by all means to
mediate this reconciliation; who having a servant named La Ferte, who was an
intimate friend of Barbins, had by that means an opportunity to let him know
the service he intended to the Queen his Mistress, to which the Duke of
Montbazon, Luynes his Father-in-law, was also much inclined. Barbin, (by the
means of Bournonville, Governor of the Bastille, where he was a prisoner) gave
the Queen intelligence of what had passed, advising her to write letters to the
King, Luynes, and to the Duke of Montbazon; to the first, full of complaints of
vindication of her self, and of respect; to the other two to do her all good
offices to the King: the draughts of which letters were first carried to the
Duke of Rohan, who amended them, and corrected the acrimony of some expressions
in them: But the Bishop who was to carry these letters, in who Barbin greatly
confided, proved felse, and most perfidiously betrayed the whole plot; yet,
according to the instructions he received from Deagent, made he several
journeys to the Queen, but with treacherous purposes to work the ruin of her,
and all else that had a hand in this business: But seeing that this design
tended only to a reconciliation, and yielded no colorable pretenses to ground
any accusation on, they fly to subtilties; and in Bournonville's name, desire
a Ring from the Queen, as a testimony of her acceptance of his service, for
that being brother-in-law to the Marshal Vitry, he could not otherwise believe
she could have any good thoughts of him: The Queen, though somewhat surprised
with this demand, yet could it not raise any jealousies in her, for that the
Bishop who was employed in all these errands, was a creature of Barbins, made
some difficulty to part with the Ring he desired, as unwilling to give any
thing that was not worthy of her, but promised to have one bought purposely at
Paris; But he importuned her so much, that she took one from one of the Ladies
attending her, and gave it him: The Bishop carries it to Deagent, who kept
that, and caused another to be made just like it, which he conveyed to
Bournonville, as if she had voluntarily, and of her own accord sent it him:
After this they infused jealousies into the King, that the Nobility had a
design to surprise the Louvre to introduce the Queen, and restablish her in her
former authority, and that all that were of the conspiracy, wore a blew Ring on
their finger, which was the cognizance of the party: And Luynes one day shuts
the Duke of Rohan into his chamber, where he entertained him with discourses,
that the King was certainly informed that he was always much devoted to the
Queens service, that he knew all his machinations for that end, and the secret
negotiations of La Ferte; but of regard of his alliance to him, he had
prevailed with the King to pardon him, and therefore now it was fit he should
tell him all: This proposition was with much disdain rejected by the Duke, who
replied, that he was no Informer, and that he was glad they knew his actions
which had no other aim than the King's service; that be confessed he was a
servant to the Queen Mother, and that it was the duty of every good Frenchman
so to be.

After all these contrivances, and many others which never came to my knowledge
La Ferte was taken prisoner, and committed to the Bastille, confronted with
Barbin, and both of them were brought to their trial; and notwithstanding the
importunate solicitations made in favor of them, and were admitted of
purposely to entangle more people, the result of all was, the depriving
Bournonville of the Bastille, the perpetual banishment of Barbin, and of La
Ferte for five years, who, notwithstanding never stirred at all from his Master.

These violent procedures filled the Queen with great fears and jealousies, and
made her more solicitous to free her self from this captivity, being now well
assured that the hopes Luynes gave her of it, sometimes by Cadanet, sometimes
by Modene were but only to amuse her, especially when she saw that the
negotiation of Arnoux the Jesuit and the King's Confessor came to nothing;
this Jesuit made the King solemnly swear at Confession, never to dislike what
Lnynes did, nor to meddle himself with any State affairs.

The consideration of all these things made her at length resolve to work her
enlargement; and to effect it, by the advice of the Marshal Bouillon, she made
choice of the Duke d' Espernon, whom she knew to be a man of great power,
valor, and prudence: But he was displeased with her, and came to Court with
full intention to side with the King; he must therefore be brought about; which
the Queens servants deriving much advantage from the Favorites ill conduct,
very dexterously performed: And first, they terrify Luynes with the great
power, and haughty humor of the Duke d' Espernon; qualities not tolerable by
one who aims at a general adoration: On the otherside they exasperate the
Duke, who was of a touchy nature, and unaccustomed to a base and servile
subjection: The first occasion they took from his attempts to promote his
youngest son to a Cardinalat, for the which he was the first upon the Roll,
and received all possible assurance of it, but was put by, by the contrivances
of Villeroy, who preferred Marquemont: But Villeroy dying immediately after, he
continues his pursuit, with great hopes still: But the Cardinal de Retz having
made Deagent, and by that means gained Luynes, carried it; but not without
obliging himself by promises unworthy a person of quality, with poor and
infamous submissions, which he still so religiously observed, that being
afterward made President of the Council, he seemed rather to do the duty of a
Deputy to Deagent, than of a Cardinal.

This was opportunely seconded by another occasion derived from the Keeper of
the Seals, Du Vair, who, hurried by his own pride, or the instigation of those
that were desirous of new troubles, would needs take place at the
Council Table, of all the Dukes and Peers of France: The Duke d' Espernon, as
the most ancient that was then there, complains, in the name of all the rest,
of it to the King, who took it ill from him, and the interest of the Gown-men,
was preferred before that of the Peers of France: This stomached him so, that
he brake out into many bitter invectives, even against the King himself; so
that it was no hard matter to persuade him that there was a design to send him
to the Bastille, considering the late Presidents before his eyes: The Queens
servants, (who would not discover any thing of their intentions to him while he
remained in Paris) so handsomely improved his jealousies, that one morning very
early, and without taking leave of any body, he goes thence to Metz. When he
was there, Ruccelay, the chief contriver, and manager of the whole project
begins with him, by moving a reconciliation between him, and the Marshal
Bouillon; and then imparts to him the Queens design, with her request to him,
to procure her liberty, with many large promises annexed to it, of which, in
such cases none are sparing: The almost insuperable difficulties and dangers of
this enterprise, together with the ingratitude, the usual recompense Princes
reward great services withal, at first startled, and caused some hesitation in
the Duke of Espernon: But then the glory would attend the execution of so high
and noble a design, the indignation he conceived at the small regard was had
of him, together with his desire of revenge, (passions predominating in all
great courages) overcame all the suggestions of his fears: When he had resolved
on it, he proceeds in it with that caution, secrecy, and good Fortune, that
having made all necessary provisions for Metz, where the King, purposely to
keep him at a distance from the Court, where he feared him, amused him with
pretended and imaginary designs, he passes through France into his governments
of Xaintonge, and Angoulmois, and there effected the Queen-Mothers deliverance,
on the one and twentieth of February one thousand six hundred and nineteen, who
came from Blois to Loches, a place belonging to the Duke, who there went to
receive her with two or three hundred Gentlemen, who all conducted her to
Angoulesme.

This escape of the Queen caused a great confusion at the Court, where it was
conceived that her party was much more numerous, or that it might quickly swell
to a bigger bulk; wherefore great preparations were made for war, that the
ensuing peace might be more advantageous: The command of the Army to be sent
against the Queen was given to the Duke of Main, who was thought to be the
most an enemy to her, and most faithful to Luynes; and because it was conceived
that it would be acceptable to him, to him also was committed the charge of the
negotiation of Bethune: Solicitations were also made in the behalf of the
Bishop of Lucon (who till then had remained in exile in Avignon) for his return
to the Queen, and enforced with promises made in his name, by his brother in
Law Pont Courlay, to incline the Queen to such a peace as should shoot with the
King's desires, and also to sow jealousies between the principal authors of
her deliverance; in which he failed neither of his endeavors, nor success.
For Rucelay, who had as largely contributed to her liberty as any one, left her
in discontent, and drew with him the Marquess of Mauny, and Themines, who
afterward proved one of the greatest enemies to the Queen, who found her self
but in a bad condition to engage in a war, by reason that many envied the
gallant action of the Duke d' Espernon, few would submit to his imperious
humor, and every one believed that all would end in peace, and were therefore
unwilling to imbarque in an affair, by which they should gain nothing but the
King's displeasure, and hatred, whilst others carried away the glory of the
enterprise: For which reason also the Duke of Rohan, being sought to, by the
Queen, sent her word, that he was much troubled that he was not privy to, and
employed in the beginning of her design; which if he had, he would have served
her most faithfully: But being at Court then when she made her escape, he was
commanded by the King to his government of Poictou, to preserve it in peace;
that, for his part he would do her no harm, but advised her to make a peace,
in which he was confident Bethune would serve her; and that being in full
liberty, and security, she would have more favorable conveniences to raise a
greater number of servants and friends than at present: Schomberg did clear
otherwise for to endeare himself beyond the other Zealots for her ruin; he
laid a plot to blow her up by firing the Magazine at Angoulesme, which was
happily discovered, and prevented. At length was a peace concluded, and near
Tours was the interview between the King and the Queen Mother, to whom was
given the government of Anjou, and for her better security, the Castles of
Angiers, Pont de Ce, and Chinon.

Come we now to the affairs of Bearn, the sourse and rise of all our evils,
which will retract our view as far back as the death of the Marshal d' Ancre,
after which Du Vair, Keeper of the Seals, being restored to his Office; upon
the solicitations of the Bishops of Bearn, and imagining he should do so
eminent an action, as would gain him such reputation at Rome, would advance
him to the dignity of a Cardinal, he procured an order of the King's Council,
for restoring to the Ecclesiastiques of that Country their goods that were
formerly aliened by authority, and had for forty, or fifty years been employed
for the maintenance of their Ministers, Academy, and the Garrison in the Fort
called Navarrins. La Force, then Governor of that Country, was at Court at
the same time, and mainly opposed the Order, showing the difficulties would
obstruct it, and the inconveniences might arise from it; which I conceive he
did with very sincere intentions: But being overpowered, turns his desires to
his own private advantage, and promises to promote the execution of it, upon
condition he might be made Marshal of France, which was promised him: But
either the difficulties he met withal, or rage to see himself laughed at at
Court, made him resolve to stand it out against all; In which he met with great
opposition in the Country, occasioned by those of the house of Benac, backed
with the Count of Grammond, his deadly enemies, and by the politic practices
of the Court, so that he was now hated by all parties for not doing what he
might for the satisfaction of either.

The Duke of Rohan, who was his friend, patronized him still at Court, and,
seeing that the Kings Commissioner Renard cast all the blame of the ill
success he had in his voyage upon La Force, used all means possible to compose
the business, showing that if the Province of Bearn should address themselves
to the Reformed Churches of France, their particular might grow into a general
cause, from whose circumstances might arrive some accidents not easy to be
remedied, and that it was the wisest course to quench this fire before it were
thoroughly kindled: That it was most reasonable (since the thing was begun) that
the King should receive satisfaction, and the Country also should be secured;
and that partial persons were most unfit to be employed in it: These reasons
were the better relished, for that they already began to discover several
Assemblies in the Provinces, and to fear the event of them: And now were things
in so fair a way, that the Duke of Rohan had obtained a re-imbursement of the
like sum of money restored to the Ecclesiastiques, to be had out of the next
receipts; and in case of non-payment, permission was granted to the Country to
seize again upon the goods of the Ecclesiastiques. But for as much as La Force
found not his advantages in this accommodation, he was easily induced to reject
it, complaining to the Court, that to discredit him thus, was the way to
disable him for any future services, and to those of the Religion, that it was
an introduction to the ruin of the Reformed Religion in their Country: And
notwithstanding that all the Churches of France, were, upon good deliberation,
satisfied with this agreement, yet never could the people be induced to it, so
that the dispute lasted till the Convocation of the General Assembly of those
of the Religion at Loudun, the three and twentieth of May, one thousand six
hundred and nineteen.

Luynes in the mean time did all the ill offices he could to the Duke of Rohan,
endeavored to criminalize him, for buying the government of Maillezais, of
Aubigny, and of a private house in Poictou which was very strong, and which he
compelled him to pull down; having, but a little before it was razed, engaged
some in an attempt to surprise it; and though those that had undertaken it,
were taken as they were teady to put their design in execution, yet ordered he
things so, that he could not have justice done upon them: After this, having
released the Prince from the Bastille, to strengthen himself with his power
against the Queen, and the Prince declaring himself an open enemy to the Duke
of Rohan, the Duke resolves to adhere entirely to the Queens service, of which
he went to Angiers to assure her; and understanding of the party was raising
for her, he advised her not to stay there, but to remove to Bourdeaux; that her
most faithful servants were the Dukes of Main, Espernon, and Rohan; that
being there, she would have a powerful Parliament to declare for her, and that
there she was secure from any invasion before she had an army ready to dispute
the field; that if she stayed at Angiers, and that if Pont de Ce were taken
from her, she and her whole Party would be lost without one blow striking: that
she ought to give the greater confidence to this Council, because it was to his
own disadvantage, for that being so near the King, he was like to be the first
would suffer.

To this she answered, That she much approved of his Reasons, but that if she
should follow his advice, it would give the Duke d' Espernon suspicions that
she intended to put herself wholly into the hands of the Duke of Main:
Besides, the hopes the Countess of Soissons gave her from Normandy, built upon
her Sonne-in-law the Duke of Longueville, who was lately made Governor of that
Province, and was Master of Dieppe, and the Grand Prior who held Caen, and both
of them had great correspondences in Rouen, prevailed so upon her, that she
would by no means budge from Angiers: But desired that the Assembly at Loudun
might be continued, which might have been effected, but then it must have been
by making such a division as at Saumure; when the Duke of Rohan had conferred
about it with the chiefest friends he had in the Assembly, and among others,
with the Count of Orval, his brother-in-Law, who was very powerful among them,
they concluded to accept of what the King offered, viz. With in six months to
give the Assembly satisfaction in the affair of Bearn, and the restitution of
Lectoure, one of their cautionary Towns, which if not performed, then should
the Assembly convene again within one month after, and that at Rochel: This
very well pleased the Queen, to whom it was farther manifested, that this new
Convocation, being in spite of the Court, to be in the most considerable Town
of their party, where none but the most resolute would come, would firmly bind
the Assembly to her, together with all the Reformed Churches in the Kingdom;
But withal they desired her, that in case any peace was made, they might be
satisfied concerning their two demands touching Bearn, and Lectoure, which she
promised.

Now, so violent and tyrannical was the government of Luynes, that it had
wearied all the world, and even his best friends also, as the Duke of Maine;
for whom, a little before, he had procured the Government of Guienne, in
exchange for that of the Isle of France; and not satisfied with this, he gives
it to the Duke of Monthazon his father-in-law and seizes upon that of Picardy
with all the Fortresses there, and in lieu of it gives that of Normandy to the
Duke of Longueville. Moreover, he and his two brothers were made Dukes, and
Peers of France; and all vacant Offices, Ecclesiastical Benefices, and Pensions
were engrossed by these three brethren, and distributed among their poor
kindred that flocked in to them, from the parts about Avignon: So that
jealousy, and envy, together with the bad administration of the public
affairs had rendered them so odious, that every one betook himself to the Queens
party; Even the Prince of Piedmont, to whose marriage with Madam the King's
sister, he had not long before occasioned; Luynes seeing himself charged on
every side, but supported by the Prince, persuades the King to prevent the
Queen his Mother; and whiles by diverse messengers, he entertains her with hopes
of an Accommodation* and corrupts, and seduces her followers, he makes fresh
levies of soldiers; which she perceiving, does the like, and by the Vicount
Sardigny sends a letter to his Majesty to let him know, how she is constrained
to provide for the security of her person, to save her self from the fury of
her enemies, who abusing his authority, employ it to ruin her. This, with the
advice of the Prince, hastens the King into Normandy, to secure that Province,
which was in a tottering condition, and much inclined to the Queen; but his
Presence, though accompanied with but a small force, soon settled all: Rouen is
secured, Caen yielded, Alencon also, and all the Nobility submit. This happy
and unexpected success makes him proceed to Man's, and thence straight to
Aagiers; Great was the confusion this caused in the other party, especially in
the Bishop of Lucon, who not suffering the Queen Mother to go where her
greatest forces lay, for fear lest she should get out of his tuition, makes her
resolve upon a pitiful defense in a town of no consideration, and an enemy to
her party, that so intangling her in a necessity of submitting to an inglorious
Accommodation, he might make his own peace upon better terms; which he did,
and from that time he ever held intelligence with the King's party. Moreover
the Duke of Retz, whether it was, that his Uncle the Cardinal de Retz had
gained him before, or whether his apprehension of the danger had altered his
mind, most certain it is, that seeing the King's forces ready to fall on upon
the works of Pont de Ce, of which he had undertaken the defense, upon an
imaginary discontent that a peace was concluding without his privity, he
suddenly quits them, and with all his troops repasses the Loire; Thus was Pont
de Ce taken, and the Queen who had thirty thousand good men ready in Guienne,
Poictoa, Xaintonge, and Angoumois, was vanquished by five or six thousand only,
and reduced to a necessity of accepting such Articles as her enemies pleased to
vouchsafe her; according to which, and her own particular order, the Dukes of
Maine, d' Espernon, Rohan, and Soubize laid down their Arms.

THE Memoires OF THE DUKE of ROHAN:
The second Book. Containing a Relation of the War against those of the
Reformed Religion in France.
AND now are we arrived at the sourse of all our evils, and fatal commencement
of the Wars against those of the Reformed Religion. The King, having thus
happily put a period to this War, goes to Bourdeaux, where he suppresses the
authority of the Duke of Maine, and commands the Bearnois that the late Decree
be put in execution: But they, neither knowing how to obey him, nor desend
themselves, oblige him in person to a voyage into Bearn: And there it was they
first began to slight and laugh at the performance of their parol engagements;
For the next day after their arrival, and a solemn promise made to the
Bearnois to preserve their privileges entire, were they totally divested of
them, by the reunion of Bean to France, and changing, contrary to the
engagement of their faith given the Governor of Navarrins.

Moreover it is to be known, that the Deputy general Favas, who was in pursuit
of the government of Lectour in the behalf of his son, the more to induce the
Court to yield to his request, threatened to send to those at Rochel to convene
the Assembly general, according to the power given them by the Assembly at
Loudun: But seeing, that prevailed not to compass his design, and not
considering how unseasonable it was, he writes to those of Rochel, from
Bourdeaux, to cause the said Convention, advising them also to repair their
fortifications; And thus are the public continually swallowed up by private
Interests.

When the King was returned to Paris, the Assembly general meets at Rochel, and
Favas still follows the Court, to find some means to accomplish his desires;
His Majesty in the first place, forbids the holding of the said Assembly, next
commands their dissolution, and lastly declares them Traitors: The chief of
those of the Religion, conceiving that great prejudice to them would attend
their obstinacy, were of opinion that they were best to dissolve upon certain
conditions, of which they had hopes given them from the Court: But the Letters
which Favas sent thence, together with the particular discontents of La Force,
and Chastillon, by reason of the hard usage the one received in his Offices,
and a desire the other had to have more, occasioned the continuance of the
Assembly; whence the King took a pretense to prosecute his designs to the
uttermost, to which, the baseness, and treachery of the Governors of the
Cautionary Towns facilitated his access.

It is to be observed, that before the Kings departure from Paris, the Dukes of
Nevers and Maine were in great discontent retired into Champegne, and the Count
of Soissons to Frontevault: The Duke de Luynes, that he might not leave such
thorns in his back, was very desirous to reconcile them; and to move them to
it, Favas was sent to inform the Dukes, that he was now going to the Assembly
with full satisfaction to all their demands, and that it would be prudence in
them to comply, before the determination of that affair; the like speech was
made to the Count of Soissons by Villarnoul, which wrought all their returns to
the Court, and occasioned the reconciliation between the Cardinal de Guise, and
the Duke of Nevers.

After the reducing of these Princes, the assurance Villarnoul gave of Saumure,
the defection of the Governors of the Cautionary Towns in Poictou, the revolt
of Pardaillan with a part of Guienne, that of Chastillon in the lower
Languedoc, and that by the presence of the Duke de Lesdiguieres they were
assured also of Dauphine; the King sets forth, not to a War, but a certain
Victory: The Duke de Luynes, lately made Constable of France, goes with him,
who so absolutely possessed his Masters favor, that in the progress of this
War, we shall see, not the intentions of the King, but the Treasons and
disloyalties of this Upstart executed, who having by that means crept into a
fortune, ruled all with a Sovereign power which he continued even to this
death, leaving the King's Council such a Copy, whose imitation would prove the
ruin of the Kingdom:

The first testimony of the lubricity, and insincerity of their words, was
given at Saumure, which, to the violation of the Faith engaged in his Patent,
was taken from Du Plessis Mornay: The same success also had all the Towns in
Poictou.

The Dukes of Rohan, and Soubize his brother, who had opposed the convocation
of the Assembly, and earnestly endeavored their dissolution, when convened,
seeing such a rout, resolved not to abandon the party: The Constable, who was
their kinfman, many times sent to try their pulses; but neither his promises,
nor threats, made the least impression on their consciences, or fidelity: The
last Messenger was the Colonel Arnaud, who brought them Letters from the King,
full of persuasions to quit their resolutions, and intermixed with menaces of
an inevitable ruin in case they obstinately persevered in them; and withal to
let them know that the first siege would be that of Saint John d' Angely: But
this journey had a double end; for, in case he prevailed not upon the two
brothers, he had Orders to confer with the Major General Auriac, who was then
at Saint Julian, about a quarter of a League from Saint John, with four
thousand men, to cause him to put in execution a design he was entered on, by
means of the intelligence he had with the Captains, Galloix, and Vaux, and two
of the inhabitants, whose names were Masures, and Roquier, who had promised, if
he would approach with his Troops, and fall in upon the Suburbs called Mata,
and thence make up straight to the Gate, they would be ready there, with their
confederates, and keep it open; which Auriac attempted the very next day after
Arnaud's departure from Saint John: But the presence of the Dukes of Rohan and
Soubize, both which were yet in the Town, prevented their success; Soubize was
resolved to abide a Siege; and Rohan three days after went to Rochelle, from
whence he brought and put a thousand men into the Town, with above an hundred
Gentlemen, besides two Barques laden with all manner of provisions; and then
went back to Guienne.

He was desired by the Assembly to reconcile La Force and Pardaillan, to which
the former was very much inclined, but the other would not so much as see the
Duke of Rohan, by which he clearly perceived his engagement to the Court: La
Force desired Rohan to take a view of the Communalties of the lower Guienne,
that he might the better take order for the security of the division the
Assembly had allotted him. From thence he goes to Bergerac, Saint Foy, Clerac,
and Tonneins, and thence to Nerac, where the Chamber, or Court of Justice yet
was, but must be removed, before they could secure the Castle, where the Court
sat, and where the President, a Romanist, lodged; who after many contests, at
length withdrew with one Gentleman, whom the Duke of Rohan gave him for his
Convoy as far as Marmande: But the President made but an unhandsome return of
this civility: For when he returned to Tonneins, he gave Vignoles intelligence
of it, who about a League from Tonneins lay in ambush for him, with six or
seven score Gentlemen Volunteers armed at all points, and three other Troops,
who let them pass, and then the first Troop followed their Rear, the second
marched up to flanck them, and the third, which was the strongest, between the
other two, that they might be ready to relieve the other upon all occasions:
The Marquess de la Force, who commanded Rohan's light Horsemen, was left to
make good the retreat, with thirty of La Force his guard, whom he caused to
alight from their Horses, and thirty other Horse, among which there were but
ten Cuirasses: The Marquess advertises Rohan and La Force, that the enemy
marched toward him, whereupon they face about, and advance, commanding him to
charge them: But the first Troop instead of ^eceiving the charge, flew off
toward Vignoles; when presently half of La Force's Guards gave them a Volley,
which killed and hurt about five or six Men and Horses, which made them keep
off at a Musket shot distance from them. The second Troop, which flanked them,
perceiving a little Ditch between them and Rohan, fell off, as the first did:
Which Vignoles seeing, advanced not at all with the third, so that without any
further interruption, they kept on their way to Tonneins: Among the Troops of
Rohan, and La Force, were there but fourteen Cuirasses; and of Gentlemen, and
their servants, not above seventy six Horse.

After this, Rohan left La Force who very exactly knew the Country of the
lower Guienne, and went from Nerac to Montauban, fetching a compass of above
five and thirty Leagues, by reason that the Marshal Themines lay in his way,
and arrived there on the eighteenth of July, One thousand six hundred and
twenty one: At Montauban he received intelligence that Nerac was besieged by
the Duke of Maine, who commanded in to him the Marshal, and all the Nobility of
Guyenne: La Force at the same time makes an attempt upon Caumont, surprises the
Town, and lays a fiege to the Castle; The Duke of Maine having a strong Army,
resolves to relieve it, and to continue the Siege of Nerac also, in which he
had a fortunate success; and the Duke of Rohan, to divert Themines, lies down
before Septfons, a place belonging to himself; and when he had drawn him
thither, with above five hundred Volunteers, he retired to Realville, and the
Marshal to Puy-la Roque: whence, after three or four days abode there, he drew
away again, and the Duke went to Montauban, to preserve the adjacent Country
from the ravage and spoil intended by the Marshal, who followed him thither,
where there passed between them some light skirmishes, of no great consequence.

Whiles the Duke of Rohan remained at Montauban, came news to him, of the
rendition of Saint John, and also of Pons, which was sold by Chasteau-neuf, of
the revolt of Pardaillan, the loss of Saint Foy, and also of Bergerac, by the
treachery of Pardaillan, and Panissault; of the taking of Nerac by the Duke of
Maine (who was drawing toward Gascony) which was followed also with the loss
of Lectour, Leyrac, Mas de Verdun, Mauvoisin, and the Isle-Jourdan; all which
places the Governors for money yielded up into the hands of the Duke of Maine.
Nor did they behave themselves better in the lower Guienne: For Tournon,
Mont-Flanquin, Puymirol, and diverse other places were delivered by their
Governors; and, which is most prodigious, Favas, that was then with the
Assembly general, at Rochelle, commanded his son to give up to the King
Castel-Jaloux, and Castetz, two cautionary places, and remote from the King's
way about twelve or fifteen Leagues. In short, of all that great Province, no
place made any semblance of opposition but Clerac, which was well fortified and
manned, there being in it (comprising the Inhabitants) three thousand fighting
men.

These great losses made the Duke conceive, that seeing there had not been any
resistance made in La Force's division, he should suddenly have the Royal Army
upon him: Wherefore he takes care to provide for Montauban, marks some of the
outplaces necessary to be fortified, makes up the Regiment of the Count d'
Orval ten Companies, reduces the Inhabitants into thirty, and orders all things
fitting for a long Siege, and resolves himself to go to Castres, thence into
the lower Languedoc, to raise up their dejected spirits there, and prepare some
relief for Montauban.

He departs thence attended on by his own guards, and accompanied by the Count
d' Orval and his, fords over the River Tarn near the Isle of Albigeois, where
he met with some opposition; at this pass, was the Captain of his guards
wounded; the Captain, with some of the Count d' Orv^l's guards, and one of his
Mules were killed, and his Gentleman of the Horse, had his Horse hurt: Thus
passed they to Castres, whence the Count d' Orval returned to Montauban to
expect the Siege.

In the mean while, the Duke of Rohan, that he might lose no time, sends to the
Sevenes, and the lower Languedoc, for a supply of four thousand men, and he
himself goes as far as Millaud, where he understood by the Messengers he had
sent thither, that though the people were generally well inclined, yet would
the Artifices of the disaffected prevail over their good intentions, unless he
himself advanced to the Sevenes.

Chastillon, at the same time, sent Briquemaut to the Duke of Rohan, to invite
him to a conference, which he accepted of, and to that end advanced as far as
far as Saint Hippolyte, where the said Briquemaut returns again to the Duke
from Chastillon, to let him know, that he very much wondered that he should
enter into the divison allotted him, and that he suspected it was with a design
to prejudice his authority: It was answered him, That certainly he had no good
memory, and withal was shown him the Letter he had written to the Duke, that
the only expedient to drive him out of the Sevenes, and stop his passages into
the lower Languedoc, was, not to impede the succors he had demanded, which
rather than fail of, he would encounter all difficulties whatsoever: that if
he was desirous of an interview, he was very ready to satisfy him; and that if
he would in person go to the relief of Montauban, as he had offered, he was
confident, they two would be able to procure the peace of the whole Kingdom.

In short, after he had strugled with many difficulties, he drew at length four
thousand. Foot out of the lower Languedoc, and the Sevines, and, with his own
money raised a thousand more, with which he returns again toward Millaud,
from whence he sent Orders to Malanze, Leran, and Saint Rome, who in his
absence commanded; the first in Albigeois, and Rouergue; the second in Foix;
and the third in Lauraguais, to make ready the forces of the Colloques: He sent
to Castres also, and upon his march caused all necessary provisions of meal,
and bread, for the nourishment of his Soldiers to be made ready.

In the mean time the King having besieged, and by reason of their intestine
divisions for want of a Commander in Chief, taken Clerac, and seized upon all
the places about Montaubon, except Saint Antonin, sat down with his Army
before Montanban on the one and twentieth of August, One thousand six hundred
and twenty one, (where La Force, with his two sons, were gotten in) and sent
the Duke of Angoulesme, with fifteen hundred Horse, and four thousand Foot, to
lie upon the River Tarn, and intercept the relief was preparing for Montauban;
who made as if he would besiege Lombez, a place, about half a League from
Realmont, where there was a Castle that commanded the Town, and held always
for the King. The Duke of Rohan, receiving intelligence of it from Malauze, and
also of the conspiracy in agitation for the delivery of Castres, with all speed
sends away Boy, one of his Colonels, with a thousand foot, and a faithful
promise to follow him suddenly with the rest of the Army.

When Boyer came to Castres, he found that Malauze had drawn his main Body to
Realmont; whither his coming also, with this supply, raised the Duke of
Angoulesme from before Lombez; whereupon Malauze, instead of expecting the
arrival of the Duke of Rohan, as he had commanded him, but suffering himself to
be carried away with the importunity of the multitude, goes with one piece of
Canon, which he drew out of Realmont, to besiege a Church that was Garrisoned
and Fortified, called La-Fauch, which as Boyer was viewing he was slain, and
the Duke of Angoulesme at the instant the Church was surrendered, came and
enclosed the rest of the party with his whole Army: After several charges and
skirmishes, in which Balauze behaved himself with much Gallantry, and Saint
Rome also, in resucing him, (for he charged through the midst of the enemy,
with fifty Gentlemen (many of whom he lost) they capitulated to march off with
their Arms, all but their Canon; and, for the space of six months not to bear
Arms for the party: Thus were all the forces with their Chiefs, and all the
Nobility of Albigeois, and Lauraguais, disabled from any service for the
remaining part of that, and until March the year following.

The Duke of Rohan, for his part, loses no time, but advances with his Troops,
and while his Rear-guard was marching up to him, draws the Canon out of
Millaud, takes Saint George a small, but well enclosed place, and Luzanson a
private house lying between Millaud and Saint Afrique, in which there was a
Garrison that extremely incommoded his passage; and had continued till he had
cleared the whole way, had not the intelligence he received of the defeat at
Fauch diverted him; that made him double his pace, so that he came very
opportunely to Castres; for Lombez was surrendered, Realmont was in Treaty, and
the whole Country in a drooping condition: He cheered them up the best he
could; yet all he could do, was not sufficient to get thirty Gentlemen, nor two
hundred Foot together in all the upper Languedoc; So that his whole dependence
was only on those he brought with him from the Lower Languedoc, and the Sevenes.

Another fear also perplexed him, lest in his absence, Chastillon should recall
his Troops, to prevent which, he opposed against him an Assembly of five
Provinces, viz. The Lower Languedoc, the Sevenes, Vivaretz, the Upper
Languedoc, and Dauphine, who empowered him to detain the supplies he already
had, and to raise more in case he had occasion for them.

Things being in this condition, the Duke sends to discover what Fordes were
passable and not guarded, furnishes himself with good guides, and forms his
design to relieve Montauban, at the same time, by the way of Ville-nouvelle, by
Saint Antonin, and of Ville-Bourbon by Carming. The first of which is five
Leagues distant from Montauban, the other ten; so that he intended to put in
his greatest relief, consisting all of Foot, on that side; and the lesser,
composed of Dragoons, and threescore Reformado's only, on the other.

In the interim of these actions, the Constable Luynes seeing that his
Embassies sent to the Duke of Rohan by Saint Angel and Saludie, could not move
him, nor the persuasions of the Duke of Sully, and Lesdiguieres those of
Montauban, who still replied, That they would do nothing without the advice and
consent of their General, resolved at length to give them leave to send their
Deputies to him (who were conducted by Desplans) to try if that might produce
an accommodation, who came just as the relief was ready to march: And very
opportunely too; for the Duke understanding by them, that they wanted nothing
but men, and that if they had but a thousand, or twelve hundred more, they were
confident they should be able to hold out all that Winter, he promised them
that, with in eight days they should have the recruit they desired, gave them
the Word, and Signal, and so they returned.

The Duke of Rohan had five hundred Dragoons, whom with hopes of pillaging the
Country up to the very Gates of Thoulouse, he had encouraged to advance
toward Puylaurens, Cuc, and Carmaing; but when they were all met at their
appointed Rendezvous, he sent them orders, by one of his Gentlemen to march
directly to Montauban, which orders were not observed, either by reason of too
much consideration, or apprehension of the danger, though there were less on
that, than on the other side.

As for the other relief, commanded by Beausort, one of his Colonels, it was
better ordered: He marched from Castres in the evening, with about a thousand
or twelve hundred men, comes to Lombez about one of the clock in the morning,
where he stays till the next night, then fordes the Tarn at Grave, marches all
night, and the next evening about five of the clock comes to Saint Antonin,
without any ill rencontre at all: There he stays all the next day, and in the
evening sets forward toward Montauban.

But the falseness of the guides he had taken up at Saint Antonin, who betrayed
him, forced him to return thither again: Three days after they sent him a
guide from Montauban, who safely conducted him over the River Veyrou at a
Forde, and brought him very well within half a League of the Town; whence,
notwithstanding the several parties both of Horse and Foot he perpetually met
with between that and the Town, and the many Redoubts and trenches that
obstructed his passage, he vanquished all those difficulties, and put seven
hundred men, and nine Colors into Montauban: But Beaufort himself came short
of it, being taken in this brave action: And it is to be observed, that this
relief which consisted all of Foot, marched every day almost eighteen Leagues
in an enemies Country, forded through two dangerous Rivers, and passed through
the midst of two Royal Armies that lay in wait to defeat them.

The Duke of Rohan took a double course to prosper the design of this relief;
one was by sending Calonges, and Des-Isles with Desplans to consult with those
before Montauban, about some way of accommodation; the other was, by marching
at the same time that Beaufort did, with forty Colors of Foot, and those few
Horse he had, toward Lauraguais: So that when the Duke of Angoulesme was ready
to pursue Beaufort with all his Cavalry, he received intelligence that the Duke
of Rohan, with the greatest part of his forces, was upon his march for
Lauraguais, which put such a Dilemma on him, that he knew not which way to
turn; and in the mean time Beaufort passes through the midst of his Army, and
the Duke of Rohan, the day following, returned to Castres, and sent back his
Troops to the places whence he had drawn them.

Calonges and Des-Isles were in the King's Quarters, when these supplies got
in, and thence returned to Castres with Desplans, who from the Constable
carried the Duke of Rohan an invitation to an interview, which he accepted of;
and notwithstanding the disswasions of the people of Castres, and almost every
one that was about him, he went to Villemur, and had a conference with him at
Reviers, about a League from Montauban, where after an exchange of many
complements, the Constable led him aside into an Alley, and there began with
him in this manner; I am much obliged to you that you have reposed such
confidence in me; it shall not at all deceive you; you are no less secure here
than in Castres: Being entered into your alliance, I cannot but be studious of
your prosperity; deprive me not of the opportunity, during the favor I enjoy,
to augment the splendor of your house. You have relieved Montauban even before
your Sovereign's face, a glorious and heroic action; but abuse it not: It is
high time for you to mind your own and your friends advantage; the King will
never consent to a general peace; see therefore that you make conditions for
your friends and servants, and let those of Montauban know that they have but a
short reprieve from their ruin; that the Forts and Lines drawn about them,
have barred up always to their further relief that, unless they now accept of
reasonable terms, to wit, either a Citadel, Garrison, or Demolition of all
their fortifications, you will utterly desert them: As for Castres, and the
rest of the places in your division, propose what you please, and it shall be
granted; and for your own particular, a blanck is offered you, insert your own
conditions. In vain may you hope for any assistance from Germany; they have
more need to crave, than lend aid; or from England; you know the peaceable
humor of that King; or from within our own Kingdom; the Queen Mother has all
her support from Spain, Rome, Savoy, and the Jesuits, who are no friends to
the Huguenots; and as for Monsieur the Prince, a piece of money swayes him any
way; As for Monsieur the Count of Soissons, I have received Letters from him
and from his Mother, who is ready to send him in to the King: As for the other
Grandees of France, I doubt not but you receive encouragement from them; but
it is with intention to purchase their own ends at your expense. I have, with
much difficulty, hitherto hindered the confiscation of your estate and
Governments, I cannot longer oppose it; you must either resolve to fall under a
certain and ignominious ruin, or to advance your house to a greater height
than it ever yet knew: For if you persist in your obstinacy, the King will
rather yield to all those of the Religion besides, that he may have the
satisfaction of making an example both of your person and family: But if you
will now credit me, you shall break through these dangers with honor, and the
favor of your King, and obtain whatever you shall desire, as to your own
fortune, whose increase I so much desire, as that it may be a support to mine.

To which the Duke of Rohan answered, I should be an enemy to my self, if I
desired not my Prince his favor, and your friendship; I shall never refuse
either goods or honors from my Master; nor from you the Offices of a good
Kinsman: I very well consider the danger I am in, but I beseech you also
reflect upon yours; you are mortally and universally hated, for that you alone
ingross that which is the object of every ones desire: The ruin of those of
the Religion is not so near, but that they may afford leisure enough to the
Malcontents to form their parties, and those that will not openly declare
for us, will yet comply in any thing that may tend to your destruction. The
beginnings of the Wars against those of the Religion, have commonly been with
great disadvantages to them, which yet the restless and volatile humor of the
French, the discontents of those that ruled not, and strangers have many times
repaired: If you can obtain a peace for us from the King, before the like
mischiefs happen again, it will be much for his honor and advantage; For
having subdued the party without the least check, without any appearance either
of divisions within, or relief from without, he will oblige his conquered, and
manifest to the world, that it is not the Religion he persecutes, but the
Professors of it; for their pretended disobedience, will break the neck of all
other factions, and, without any prejudice received, will return a feared and
honored Conqueror: This will also redouble your credit with him, and seat you
in a condition above the reach of any attempt whatsoever: But if you drive
things on to the extremity, and this torrent of prosperity continue not its
course, as it is like to find a bay at Montauban, every one will re-erect his
spirits, depressed by the business of Pont de Ce, and our later losses here,
and infinite perplexities will you be involved in: Consider that you have
already gathered all the fruits, that either your promises, or threats can
produce, and that what is left of us fight for a Religion we believe to be the
true one. As for my part I have already considered of the loss of my estate,
and Offices, which if you have retarded out of respect to our alliance, I am
obliged to you for it, but am fully resolved, and prepared for all extremities,
being solemnly engaged by promise, my conscience also commanding me, not to
hearken to any but a general Peace.

This Conference, because they would not admit of a general Treaty, proving
ineffectual, the Duke of Rohan returned to Castres. The difficulties at the
Siege of Montauban daily increasing, the Constable listened to the better
dictates of his second thoughts, and renewed the Treaty: But the unsteadiness
of his spirit, too fickle to perfect any thing, and the contradictions he met
with from those that desired a continuation of the War, entangled him still in
delays, till the King was necessitated to raise the Siege of Montauban, on the
eighteenth of November, One thousand six hundred twenty one, where La Force,
and the first Consul Dupuy, a man of great authority and courage ordered all
things so exactly for the defense of the Town, and execution of the public
resolutions, that they may worthily claim a great part in the honor of
preserving the place.

The Duke of Rohan in the mean while, had sent his troops into the County of
Foix upon the solicitation of Leran, who with them took in some Castles and
afterward laid Siege to Vareilles, which was relieved, and he, in some
disorder, retreated to Pamiers: But seeing the King's Army now at liberty,
having quitted the Siege of Montauban, he took care to provide for those places
were most in danger; and remanded his Forces from Foix: Saint Florent, one of
his Colonels, and a Kinsman of the Constables, to make his own conditions, had
intended to seize upon Saint Espuel; and in pursuance of that design, and that
he might with less difficulty be received into the Town, with his Regiment,
counterfeited a Letter from the Duke of Rohan; But the Consuls, forewarned of
his purposes, refused to let him in; so that the stay he made thereabouts, gave
the enemy an opportunity to preapare an Ambascade for him between le Mas and
Revel, where in the night time he was totaliy defeated, without any resistance
made of his side.

Mirambeau the eldest son of Pardaillan, perceiving that his father had
compounded for Monheur, and Saint Foy, and that he was to deliver them up to
the King as he marched by, enters and seizes upon Monheur, the news of which
hurried his father thither, who treats him very severely; and thinking he had
now entirely secured that place, returns to Saint Foy to make sure of that
also: But God would not suffer his treachery to escape longer unpunished,
raising up Savignac of Nisse, who lay in wait for, and slew him in an Inn in
Gensac; whereupon Mirambeau in Monhour, and Terbon his brother-in-law in Saint
Foy declared for the Party of the Religion: The King, having intelligence of
this alteration, sends speedily to block up Monheur, and marches after in
person with the rest of his Army, besieges and takes it upon composition;
During this Siege the Constable dyed of sickness; his death wrought a great
change in the Court: The Queen Mother, seeing her selfrid of her deadly enemy,
begins to cheer up again; The Prince also returns to the Court, in hope now to
Paramount it there; every one aims at the vacant place, and all remembrance of
the designs contrived in the Constables life time was buried with him.

The Cardinal de Retz, and Schomberg, usurp the management of the State
affairs, the Prince came to wait upon the King at Poictiers, who joined with
them, and so potent was their party grown, before they came to Paris, as that
the endeavors of the Queen Mother, and all the Ancient Ministers of State,
were nothing available to incline things to any propensity to peace. The Duke
of Lesdiguieres, upon some commotions raised in Dauphine by Montbrun,
immediately after the Siege of Montauban, got leave to go thither, and takes
order for their suppression. The Duke of Rohan also sent back all the Troops he
had out of the lower Languedoc, and the Sevenes, whither we must now reflect,
to see what this interim produced there.

Chastillon proposes to the Assembly of the five Provinces, the recalling of
their Forces, upon pretense to relieve the lower Languedoc, which yet was no
way invaded, but they rejected the proposition; so that, this invention taking
no effect, as to prevent the Duke of Rohan of new supplies; he causes a new
levy to be made (at which he was not present himself) which the Assembly gave
way to, upon the engagement of the Captains to wait upon him, in case the Duke
of Rohan should command them, which yet they refused to do upon his summons,
saying, That they owned no General but Chastillon, but trifled away their time
in besieging Alzon, a paltry Town of no importance. In short, Chastillon in all
things, and places, opposed the authority of the Assembly, who, in requital
(with the assistance of the people) divested him of all his power, forcing him
to quit Montpellier, and retire to Aiguemortes, while they detained his Son,
and Mother-in-law. Berticheres who was chosen Lieutenant of the lower
Languedoc, adhered to the Assembly, who having tasted the sweetness of their
authority, would by no means hear of a General, but continued their government
till the latter end of the year, that the people began to find it
insupportable; which they perceiving, elected the Duke of Rohan, who
immediately set forward toward the Province, and came to Montpellier on
New-years-day, 1622.

At his arrival there the Duke found the Provinces of the lower Languedoc, and
the Sevenes, engaged in such broils against the Assembly of the five
Provinces, that he was necessitated to spend the whole month of January in
endeavors to compose them: The Provinces declared that the Assembly had
exhausted their treasures, of which they were resolved they should render them
an account; and that, since there was a General chosen, they ought no longer to
prolong their Session.

The Assembly on the other side, maintained, That they ought no account to any
but to the Assembly general, from whom they derived their authority; that they
ought to continue in full power, till a final determination of all affairs;
that the General ought to have no other Council but themselves; and that to
them belonged the sole management of the Finances; that they were Superior to
the particular Provinces, who had nothing to do to supervise their actions, nor
had they power of themselves to summon any Conventions; and persuaded the Duke
to interdict them, as themselves, before his arrival, had intended to have
done: But he, seeing the Province of the Sevenes was already convened, and that
the lower Languedoc was resolved upon the like course, endeavored to get the
Assemblies allowance of it, who instead of assenting to it, because they
foresaw it would much impair the continuation of their Session, resolved on
other ways to prolong it. And first of all they used all possible means to
possess themselves of the Castle of Sommiers, backed by Berticheres, who
pretended a right to it, and addressed themselves to Chastillon for his
assistance: But defeated of their purposes by the diligence of the Duke of
Rohan, and the Castle secured, they turn their applications to the Duke de
Lesdiguieres, to whom they described the Duke to be an ambitious person,
desirous to perpetuate the War, that he might continue his power; and declaring
also, that they had rather submit to a peace with the King upon any terms, than
to his Tyranny; and that if he intermedled further with them, he should be
taught to know the limits of his power; But he refusing to hearken to them, and
all their other attempts failing of the success they aimed at, they send
Deputies to the Sevenes, and the lower Languedoc, where the Duke was, who to
prevent a further rupture (which proved a matter of great difficulty, so much
were the Provinces of Languedoc incensed against the Assembly) got them to
allow of the actions of the Assembly of the five Provinces, to receive their
Deputies into their protection; that there should be no peace concluded without
provision for their security, but that they should forbear to Act as an
Assembly, till the business were further determined by the Assembly general, to
whom all parties were to send their reasons; and that two Deputies of the
Assembly of the five Provinces, should be of the Duke of Rohan's Council.

It is to be observed, that after the Duke's arrival at Montpellier, the
Assembly that sat there, before his face, disposed absolutely of the Finances,
and of all other affairs, made Laws, gave pass ports, and protections; and in
all that time referred nothing to his Council of War but one quarrel to be
pieced up there; And when the Duke proposed to them a Convention of the States
of all Languedoc to be held at Millaud, to consult about the raising of money,
and to provide for the administration of Justice, they stiffely withstood it,
because they feared it was to abrogate their authority.

When they had occasion to send to the Assembly general, the Duke moved that
they would send jointly with him and the other Provinces; but they were still
for several Deputations, being resolved to calumniate him, what they could;
which they did sufficiently by their Envoy Babat a Minister, who recounted the
wonders they did, before the Duke came among them, who had since confounded all
by his ambition; that, he pursued his own, at the expense of the public
Interest; that having ruined Foix, and Albigeois, he would do as much to the
lower Languedoc, where he began to fix himself, and play Rex; that they were
better fall into the hands of the King, and entirely submit to his will, than
to be subject to this Duke; and that at length they should be feign to recall
Chastillon: That they should beware of coming under the power of Soubize, who
desired nothing more than the dissipation of the Assembly general, and had
already written to the Duke, that it was composed only of seven or eight
pitiful Rascals; and for conclusion, that if they would but empower them to
continue their Session, they would curb the Duke well enough.

After the Convention of these Provincial Assemblies, the Duke of Rohan,
considering, on one side, the preparations made by the Duke of Montmorency to
invade him, the Levyes of the Duke of Guise in Provence, for the same purpose,
Chastillon's plots to undermine him, and the Levyes of the Duke de Lesdiguieres
to invade Vivaretz; And on the other, the miserable condition he found the
Provinces, he came to serve in, by reason of the many needless armings
Chastillon had made there, to the great discouragement of the Soldiery, and
ruin of their friends Country, whence the Troops never stirred, exhausting of
their treasures, and stores of Salt, aggravated by the impossbility of
recovering more, by reason of Aiguemortes, which intercepted their Commerce, he
resolved with all speed to hasten his Levies.

Blaccons Lieutenaut of Vivaretz being in the mean while hard beset by the Duke
of Lesdiguicrs, sollicites the Duke of Rohan for a supply of five hundred men,
and withal, that he would make haste to follow them with his whole forces:
Those of Bedarieux and Gignac, likewise demand some relief, for that the Duke
of Montmorency had suprized Lunas, and forced Gressissac, both private houses,
besieged Fougeres, and threatened also the above named places: The Duke, having
no Forces on Foot, and two Armies upon his hands, excluding the Troops of
Provence, goes to the Sevenes to try if he could thence pass five hundred men
into Vivaretz; but at the straights near Villeneufve de Berg, were they
repulsed, which obliged him to send to the Duke of Lesdiguieres, to see if he
could by any means retard his advance: But, notwithstanding his Remonstrances,
and the dead of Winter besides, he continues his march with six thousand Foot,
and five hundred Horse; to make a Bridge over the Rhone, between Bay and
Pousin, besieges Pousin, and batters it, which abides his assault, Blaccens
gets in to it, and behaves himself bravely in the storm; at length, the place
being ready to be lost, by the mediation of him, whom the Duke of Rohan had
sent to the Duke de Lesdiguieres, was yielded to him, upon condition, that if
the peace (they were now in Treaty on) were not concluded, he should again
restore it to those of the Religion; that he should forthwith withdraw his
Army, and should not make any further attempts in Vivaretz, nor Languedoc: And
he for his part promised, as soon as possible, to send the President Du Cross to
proceed in the Treaty for a Peace.

The Province of Vivarets Assembled at Privas, approved of all, and wrote to
the Duke of Rohan, in favor of Blaccons, that he would confer on him the
Government of Bay, which he granted.

The Duke, thus freed of the Army of Dauphine, thinks now of Victualling Gignac
(which was well near starved, by reason of a Church well fortified, and
strongly garrisoned by the enemy, distant about a Musket shot from the Town, the
whole Country found about them being enemies also) and advancing with his Army
to oppose the progress of the Duke of Montmorency: In order to which he came to
Montp^llier, where he presently fell sick of a Feavor, which lasted him fifteen
days; In the mean while the President Du Cross, that at the beginning of his
Malady came to see him, was cruelly assassinated in the Town, and Berticheres,
by his order, Victualled Gognac,

Having recovered his health, about the beginning of March, and speeded his
Levies, he took the field, before he was well able to endure it, Berticheres
made a motion to attach the Tower Charbonniere, that opening that passage they
might have Salt by that way, and consequently money to defray part of the
charges of the War; Saint Blancart, Governor of Peccaix, seconded the
Proposition, so that, that design was concluded on; Chastillon presently had
notice of it, and the Duke of Rohan was informed that Berticheres had
faithfully promised him that he would ruin all his troops: Wherefore the Duke
resolved to refer this business to a farther debate; at which he urged against
Berticheres the difficulty of the siege; Saint Blancart thereupon stood up, and
said, That unless they resolved on it, he would comply with Chastillon, there
being otherwise no possibility of their subsistence; so that he was constrained
to yield to it; and in the mean while he makes an attempt on Beaucaire, which
succeeding not, by reason of the extreme coldness, and tempestuousnesse of the
night, it was executed in, he returned to the Tower Charbonniere, where he
found that instead of advancing, they were driven off, and that they had
suffered Chastillon to fortify several intrenchments he had made upon a
Causey, which at first might have easily been forced, but would now require
more than a months time to take them. Moreover, they had drawn off those
soldiers the Duke had lodged between Aiguemortes and Charbonniere; all which
he well considering, without imparting his resolution to Berticheres, sends to
block up the Castle of Montlaur, that hindered the intercourse between
Montpellier, and the Sevenes, and afterward went in person to the siege of it,
with intent to draw off the Duke of Montmoren^y from Bedarieux, who spent so
much time in taking of Fougeres that he could not come early enough before
Montlaur was taken by assault.

Immediately after this action was over, the Duke de Lesdiguieres, empowered by
the King, invites the Duke of Rohan to a personal Treaty for a Peace, which he
assented to, leaving his Army under the command of Berticheres; At Laval,
between Barjac, and Saint Esprit was their interview, where they agreed on
Articles to be treated on, and the Duke of Rohan, in his own, and the name of
the Provinces of his Division, appointed Calongues, Des-Isles, Dupuy of
Montauban, Du Cross of Montpellier, and La Boree of Vivaretz for their deputies:
Both he, and the Duke de Lesdiguieres jointly advertise the Dukes of Bouillon,
Sully, Trimouille, and Soubize, La Fo ce also, and the Assembly general of this
Treaty, that they might all send their Deputies to join with those of the
Provinces; informing them withal, that as concerning Sauviture, and the places
of Poictou, they could not conclude any thing, but must remit them to other
things to be terminated by the King himself: We must now leave the Deputies on
their journies, to take a view of what passed in the lower Languedoc.

The Duke of Rohan returned to his Army, which he found at Castelnau near
Montpellier; The Duke of Montmorency, with Chastillon, who was now joined with
him with his Gens d' arms, or no se men completely armed, and those of the
Duke of Guise, which he had sent for out of Provence, had besieged Courvousee,
two leagues distant from Montpellier, which the Duke of Rohan had resolved to
relieve, but the place being yielded the next day, he encamped at Saint John de
Vedas, and Salle-neusve, and the Duke of Montmorency at La Veruve, Fabregues,
and Saussan; a small river called Mousson, parted them, so that for six days
together, both armies played only with their Canon one upon another, after
which the Duke of Montmorency retires to Ville-neufve a small Town upon the
Lake. The Duke of Rohan the same day drew off to other quarters also, and in
his march summoned Saussan in which was left a Garrison, which yielded the next
morning

Berticheres, whether it was that he feared the loss of his goods, or that he
desired to ruin the Dukes Army, or that really he had received such
intelligence, comes and tells the Duke, that for certain the Duke of
Montmorency had passed the Lake, and was marching toward Saint Gilles, an
Abbey belonging to Berticheres, and a very convenient place for a Magazine;
beseeching him to allow him fifteen hundred foot, and an hundred horse to
prevent him, and that according to the intelligence he should receive from him,
the rest of the forces might be in a readiness to follow him; which the Duke
granted him; and in the mean while, with two thousand men he had left, goes to
besiege Saint Georges: But the Duke of Montmorency hearing that Sain Georges
was besieged, and that the Duke of Rohan's army was divided, returns to relieve
it, takes up his quarters at Saint John de Vedas, a league from Saint Georges,
and by discharging of two piece of Canon, gives them a signal of the succors
he had brought, and that very night essayed to put in two hundred men, who were
briskly repulsed. The next day the Duke of Rohan, leaving three hundred men to
continue the siege, made choice of a very advantageous place to fight in, and
there stayed all the day; and in the interim, sent with all speed to
Berticheres to command him back. That evening came Blacquiere to him, with a
Regiment out of the Sevenes, and the next day Malauze, with fourscore horse
from the upper Languedoc, and Berticheres stayed not long behind; so that the
Duke being now three thousand foot, and three hundred horse strong, in the very
sight of the Duke of Montmorency, raises his batteries, and takes the place,
which was yielded upon composition, the defendants lives only saved.

Berticheres was the second time like to have been the occasion of another
great fault, by his obstinate affirming that the Duke of Montmorency was
retreated to Ville-neusve, and had left five hundred men at the Bridge of
Veruve, which might be easily cut off: The Duke of Rohan was of a contrary
opinion, averring, that if he himself were gone off, he would not have left
those foot to the slaughter; the other desirous to evidence what he had
affirmed, leads him toward the Bridge, where they found some forlorn parties
of Musquetires in the ditches, which they soon made them quit: But Rohan
perceiving that Berticheres had engaged a Regiment too far, commands all his
forces, both horse and foot, to advance, and two fieldpieces to be drawn after
them; Berticheren closely pursues his design, commands Blacquiere's Regiment
to storm the trenches at the Bridge, and another Squadron to second them: But
this being but an extempore project, and executed without any precedent
deliberation, was also without success: For Blacquiere, and his Sergeant Major
Randon being slain with Musket shot, the whole party retreated in disorder;
and at the same instant the Duke of Montmorency drew all his Army into
Battatia, firing two fieldpieces on our men; Rohan made him the like return
from his side, and all the remaining part of that day was spent in Canonades,
and light skirmishes; the river Mousson still separating the Armies, who in the
evening drew off to their quarters: There were ten or twelve slain on either
side; and the Duke of Montmorency the second time retired to Ville-neufve;
whence, leaving his Troops in Garrison in the adjacent places he went to
Pezenas; which the Duke of Rohan having notice of, takes with him provision for
two days, and with two Culverins marches that night to Gignac, blocks up the
garrisoned Church adjoining to it, raises his battery in the open day, and
after the first Volley took it upon capitulation, and having demolished it,
returns toward Montpellier; taking his way through the Valley of Montferrant,
where he took and dismantled Mattelais, and other little places, and fortified
Churches, which yielded his soldiers good booty, which was the reason that
some of the Troops of the Sevenes, finding themselves so near home, forsook him.

Montpellier thus freed from the inconvenience of the enemies Garrisons, made
Usez desirous of the like benefit. Thither the Duke of Rohan marches, and upon
composition takes Cerniers, a Castle whose situation did indifferently secure
it from any battery, and Saint Suffret by assault: But as he thought to have
made a farther progress, he was prevented by a request from the principal
inhabitants of Nismes, to come to their Town, to suppress a Sedition lately
raised there; which with all diligence he did, leaving to B^rticheres the
charge of his Troops, the greatest part of which deserted their colors, so
that there were not left a thousand men together, Ports, having gotten
together near two thousand men besieges Pruzillac, a paltry place, which had
before been surrendered to Berticheres, who put in to it the Colonel Beauvois,
who having handsomely defended it for two days, was at length forced, for want
of powder, to give it up.

Chastillon at the same time comes before La Tour l' Abbe, near Peccaix, and
belonging to Saint Blancart, which, either by the Cowardice or Treachery of
Bousauguet who commanded it, was within the space of twice four and twenty
hours, surrendered; So that Rohan, who had rallyed some troops for that end, had
not leisure to relieve it, nor means any longer to keep his forces together,
with which he had marced up and down for three months together without any
pay, and made many sieges, both by reason of the refractoriness of his
Colonels, and the approaching harvest, a season, in which the poor of the lower
Languedoc gain their whole subsistence.

To return to Nismes, It is to be observed that Brison had been protected and
gratified by the Duke of Rohan more than any other, out of hopes he had to win
him that way: But he, being of a nature on which no obligations could prevail,
ungrateful, and presumptuous, had, notwithstanding designed to possess himself
of Nismes, to make his own conditions withal; pretending a most transcendent
zeal to their cause, and losing no opportunity to asperse the Duke with
calumnies, openly declaring that he had betrayed Pousin to the Duke de
Lesdiguieres, and was the sole cause of the loss of Vivaretz. He conspired
also with the Deputies of the Assembly of the five Provinces, who, instead of
returning to their own homes, went from town to town irritating the people
against the Duke of Rohan; and having now made sure of Brison, and his
assistance in Nismes were resolved upon the first opportunity to reassemble
there, to oppose the authority of the Duke of Rohan, who being informed that
they were all met at Nismes, with intention to begin again their Assembly, sent
one of his Gentlemen to forbid them, and to command the Deputies of Vivaretz to
return to their Province, showing them withal the Deposition of Babat, wherein
the Deputies had most basely scandalized him, which Brison stoutly opposed; but
found not the people any way inclineable to be led by his passion; So that, the
Deputies were forced to be gone, and Brison to wait upon the Duke to excuse
this procedure.

Whilst he was upon his journey, the principal inhabitants of Nismes, making
good use of his absence, took occasion to procure a Declaration of the general
Council of the Town, that the Government of Brison was no longer supportable,
that Rohan should be requested to approve of this result of their
deliberations, and that they might be permitted to live under the sole
authority of their own Consuls, till a more urgent necessity should require a
Governor, and that then they would accept of any one he should please to place
over them; and that he would with all speed repair to their town to prevent any
disorders might survene: Whereupon he went thither, and there approved of and
ratified this act of their Council. At the same time was there held an Assembly
at Nismes to take order for the securing of their harvest; to whom Brison
addressed his complaints; But the Assembly waved them, and approved of the
determination of the Council, and the Dukes confirmation of it: Brison seeing
he could not this way arrive at his aims, goes to Montpellier, and in all
places endeavors to stir up the people against the Duke of Rohan, attempting
also by means of his Confederates to raise to sedition in Nismes; which the
Duke having notice of, sends the Lieutenant of his Guards with a command to
arrest him, where ever he should find him, who, after some time spent in the
search of him, at length arrests him in Usez.

When Nismes was thus secured, order was taken for the leyying, and paying of a
sufficient number of Soldiers to preserve the Countries about Montpellier,
Nismes, and Usez from the spoil, and ravage, the Duke of Montmorency had
orders from the King to make in those parts, and also to send some supplies to
Montauban.

After the holding of this Assembly, it was thought fit that another should be
convened in the Sevenes for the same cause; and forasmuch as the Duke of
Montmorency already began to burn, and waste the places near Montpellier,
Rohan to prevent farther mischief, left Laudez his Quartermaster-General with a
Brigade of horse: upon the first approaches of Montreal Major General to the
Duke of Montmorency, at a contest about a Farme-house, the Adjutant seeing his
son too far engaged, goes with some Musquetires to disengage him, whereupon
Montreal charges him with above an hundred horse; but Laudez came very
opportunely to his rescue, charged, and wounded Montreal with his own hand,
made him fly, and pursued him fighting up to his own body, which was in so
tottering a condition, that had Saint Andre the King's Lieutenant of Montpeller
made use of that opportunity to charge them, he had utterly routed the whole
party.

We must now return to the otherside of the Loire, and the Deputies the Duke of
Rohan had sent to the Court: Those that were desirous of Peace, endeavored to
keep the King at Paris to expect those Deputies, of whose speedy arrival the
Duke de Lesdiguires had given notice; for that the Chancellor, and the
President Janin, who were unfit for travel, could not otherwise be present at
the Council, nor consequently be able to withstand the violent motions of those
who were inclined to a prolongation of the war, which they perceiving,
omitted no inventions to withdraw the King from Paris, and on Palm Sunday
carried him by stealth, out at a back gate of the Louvre, just as if they were
running away with him, to keep his Easter at Orleans; whence, without staying
for the Queen Mother, he goes down the River as far as Nantes; the fortunate
success of the Duke of Soubize obliged him to take this course; who with two
thousand men, in the midst of all the Duke d' Espernon's forces, in
Xaintonge, and Angoulmois, of the Count de Rochefoucaults in Pictou, and Saint
Lukes in the Islands had seized and fortified the Isle of Oleron, taken Royan,
the Tower of Mournac, Saugeon, and several other places, totally defeated Saint
Luke's Regiment, and at noonday forced La Chaume, and took Les Sables: In
short, he struck so great a terror into the Country, that had not the King's
arrival prevented him, he had absolutely made himself Master of the field: But
before the arrival of the Duke of Rohan's Deputies, the condition of affairs in
Pictou being much altered by the defeat of Riez, the retaking of Royan, and the
Treaty commenced by La Force, they were remitted to the Queen Mother, who
stayed at Nantes, and from thence to the Chancellor at Paris, so that they
returned without having effected any thing: The King keeping on his way in
Guienne, concludes the Treaty with La Force, who for a Marshal of France his
staff, and two hundred thousand crowns gave up Saint Foy, which he had
injuriously gotten, and detained from Terbon Pardaillan's son in law: And he,
and his sons gave up all the Offices, and Governments they enjoyed, without the
privity of the Assembly general or the Duke of Rohan.

While this Treaty was in agitation, Tonneins, after a handsome defense, was
surrendered to the Duke d' Elbeuf; and Luzignan made a particular composition
for Clerac, which he yielded also, so that the King came to Saint Antonin
without any other opposition: The Inhabitants of Montauban, mindful of the good
Offices they had received from those of Saint Antonin, though they feared they
should disfurnish themselves of Soldiers, sent thither Saint Sebastien a
Captain in Beaufort's Regiment, with what Soldiers they could spare to command
the place: But his being mortally wounded, in an assault made upon some
outworks, which were carried by main force, together with the springing of
some Mines, so terrified the Inhabitants, that in great confusion, and so
suddenly yielded they the Town, that two hundred men, which they desired from
Montauban, conducted by Salce, and Rousseliere found the place taken, where
they were quietly let in by the enemy who stabbed many of them, before the rest
could perceive that the place was lost. But at length discovering their error,
they saved themselves the best they could; Salce and Rousseliere were taken,
and not released but by the Articles of Peace.

Those of Montauban fearing that from Saint Antonin the next visit would be to
them, solicited the Duke of Rohan for a Governor, and some supplies of men,
who sent them Saint Andre de Montbrun, who with great courage, and equal
fortune made way for himself and five Hundred Men into the Town.

The King's approach to the higher Languedoc greatly disheartened the whole
party, and gave those that were false among them an occasion to renew their
intelligences; Every Town in particular, sent the same harsh message to the
Duke, that unless he presently repair thither, the whole Country will be given
up. This cast him into many anxious perplexities; for if he goes not whither he
is called, the Country is lost; and if he does go, he leaves the lower
Lauguedoc to a manifest hazard, where his absence would give Chastillon an
opportunity to revive his factions and conspiracies: And on the other side the
Duke de Lesdiguieres presses him with reiterated summons to a second interview:
At length he resolves to relieve those that were most necessitated, excuses
himself to Lesdiguieres, sends a renfort of Soldiers to Montpellier, to
preserve their fields from ravage, by reason that the Duke of Montmorency had
received a recruit of five Troops of light Horse, which Zamet brought him from
the King's Army, and gives order for the levying of a thousand men for the
higher Languedoc; whither as he was going with his own attendants only, Chauve,
Minister of the Church of Sommiers, a man of exemplary piety, and singular
eloquence, comes to him at Saint John de Gardonnenque, and tells him that he
knew, and that by very good information, that Chastillon, much displeased with
himself for his former actions, was sore troubled to see the imminent ruin of
those of the Religion, whom, but for the affronts he had received, he had never
deserted; and was confident, that if he were handsomely dealt with, he would
return again to the party; to the great advantage of it, both by reason of the
consideration of his person, especially in Languedoc, and of the consequence of
the Town of Aiguemortes, which was in his hands. This was a device of
Chastillon's confederates, who, knowing the reputation of this Minister, had
abused him with these hopes, that the Dukes refusal to admit of him, might
furnish them with more specious pretenses on which to ground their detractions
and new calumnies against him; which the Duke very well foreseeing, answers,
That he was so far from diverting his good intentions, or hindering a work of
so general concernment, as the regaining such a person to their party, that, on
the contrary, in any thing tending to their advantage, he would meet him more
than half way: As for the command conferred on him, by reason of the other's
absenting himself from the Province, as he had never sued for it, so neither
was he so fond of it, as not to yield it up, whenever the Province that gave it
him should think fit to revoke it; and that he wished with all his heart, that
he would seriously and in good earnest, comply with his duty to his own, and
the public Interests; that for his part, he was contented with the command
assigned him by the general Assembly at Rochell, in the upper Guienne, and the
upper Languedoc, whither he was now going to provide against the dangers the
King's approach gave them cause to fear, leaving the way open for Chastillon
to return to those he had before forsaken: However the duty he owed both to his
employment, and conscience, obliged him to say, that there were yet many things
in this case to be considered, and that the Province ought maturely to weigh,
and every one in particular strictly to examine the importance and consequences
of this affair, and principally Chauve himself, both by reason of his
profession, and the charge he had now undertaken: But that the infallible trial
of his sincerity would be, whether he would effectively deliver up into the
hands of the Province, the Town of Aiguemortes; for that if his pretenses to
serve the party were real and sincere, he would make no difficulty of it, but
if feigned and fallacious, he would never dis-possesse himself of it: Chauve
very well approved the motion, believing he would accept of it; and so returned.

The Duke foreseeing that in his absence this business would be moved again,
gave an especial charge to Dupuy (whom he left his Agent in that Province) to
take great heed, that nothing passed there, to the prejudice of the public or
his Interest; to which end he gave him sufficient power, and instructions,
tending, chiefly to this, that if this proposition were started in any Assembly
whatsoever, and that they should proceed to Treat on it with out the precedent
condition, to wit, that the Garrison of Aiguemortes should be first restored to
the disposal of the Province, he should oppose it; and if they Treated on those
terms, he should see that there were no foul play used, and that nothing were
concluded without a previous performance of that condition.

This done, he proceeds in his journey to the higher Languedoc, and arrives
there just upon the taking of Saint Antonin, and so opportunely, that he
prevented the Rendition of Lombez and Realmont, and revives the drooping and
almost decayed spirits of the whole Country, in which he lost nothing but
Carmaing, Saint Espuel, and Cucque the first by treachery the other two by
reason of their weakness were quitted by the inhabitants, and afterward fired,
as the Army marched by.

The King seeing, that the Country resumed their courages, advances further,
carried on with the hopes the Duke of Montmorency and Chastillon gave him, and
chiefly of Montpellier, sending all his Ammunition down the Rhone to the lower
Languedoc; Blaccons revolt, who sold Baye to the King for twenty thousand
Crowns, having opened the passage of that River: The Duke of Rohan on the other
side gets before them, and enters Montpellier at the same time the King got
into Beziers; leaving a thousand Foot with Malauze to assist him against the
Duke of Vendosme, whom the King had left with an Army in the higher Languedoc,
as he had also the Marshal Themines with other Troops about Montauban.

About the same time came a Gentleman to the Duke of Rohan, from the Duke of
Bouillon, with credential Letters, importing also his resentments of the
miseries of those of the Religion; that he thought a Peace would have been
concluded at Saint John; and afterward at Montauban, that, since that he
understood that he and the Duke de Lesdiguieres were in Treaty about it, that
he advised him to conclude it upon any terms, provided it were general; for
that being not able to dispute the field with the King, for want of foreign
assistance, their destruction, though it might be retarded, would yet be
inevitable, and that the longer the peace was deferred, the more
disadvantageous would it be: Nevertheless if it was our ruin, that they had
inalterably decreed, that he would take the field with what forces he could
make, to assist the party by a considerable diversion of the enemy; that he was
in Treaty with Count Mansfeid, and that he desired three things of the Duke:
First, that he would empower him to Treat with Forraigners: Secondly, that he,
and the Provinces under his command, should oblige themselves to bear an equal
share of the charge of the Levyes: Thirdly, that no Peace should be concluded
without him; all which Propositions were assented to, and the Gentleman
returned well satisfied, having also received a faithful assurance, that if the
peace were not made by the first of September, it should not be concluded
without him, provided that with in the time limited he were certified of his
acceptance of the conditions.

In the absence of the Duke of Rohan from the lower Languedoc, the Council of
that Province, composed at that time of the Deputies of the three Towns of
Montpellier, Nismess and Usez, imagining that since Saint Antonin was taken,
they might be the next the King would invade, and that though the
fortifications of Montpellier were already well advanced, yet was it unprovided
of men and provisions, conceived it necessary to assemble the whole body of the
Province, to order all; and Lunel was the place designed for the Assembly to be
kept at; where when all the Deputies with Dupuy were met, and had debated, and
resolved on what concerned the victualling and securing of Montpellier, and
other places in case they should be besieged; the adherents of Chastillon, of
which there were many present, having made their party, thinking to make their
advantage of this opportunity, produced again the Articles for his
re-establishment: The Deputies of the three Towns, voluntarily, and of
themselves opposed this overture, for fear of falling into the hands, and under
the command of one, they had so highly offended, by devesting him of his
charge; Protesting to the Assembly, that if they assumed any other debate than
what concerned the executing of the Decrees already past, for the relief of
Montpellier, and other places, they would utterly desert them, and disavow all
their future determinations; Dupuy in obedience to the command he had received,
seconded this opposition, which Berticheres (Moderator of the Assembly, as
being the Duke's Lieutenant General) also much countenanced, alleging, that
they had no power to Assemble, in the absence, and without the permission of
their General; and that though they were now convened, yet was it with his good
leave and approbation, and upon the present exigency of affairs, of which they
had given him an account, and that this necessity being now taken off, they
ought to forbear the debate of other particular matters, till his return.

Nevertheless the confederates aforesaid resolutely persisted in their design,
renforcing every day their solicitations, with hopes to procure at length a
resumption of the suspended debate, and to carry it by plurality of voices, or
at least by this means to take off Lunel, Aimargues, and Mauguio, which
adhering to Chastillon, would raise his esteem at Court; of which when the
Deputies of the the Towns, and Dupuy had notice, they resolved, that at the
first mention of it, they would object the interest of the Province of the
Sevenes, which being a part of the Generality of the lower Languedoc, it must
needs be prejudicial to the common repose of both the Provinces, to determine
that affair, without the others intervention or privity; wherefore they sent a
true account of all that had passed to the Council of that Province then
sitting at Anduze, together with their advice concerning what they conceived
ought to be done by them in the behalf of their Province: The same Deputies
also, with Dupuy, went to Berticheres to make sure of him, who faithfully
promised to continue immovable in his opposition. In the succeeding Sessions
there were still some words thrown out by Chastillon's friends, concerning that
subject, but they passed unregarded. In the mean while came the Deputies from
the Assembly of the Province of the Sevenes, who made a large Remonstrance of
the injuries their Province would receive from the change they would introduce
in their proceedings, that it was an unheard of procedure, and that their
Province could never suffer, that that of Languedoc, should by it self presume
to abrogate the Decrees of the Assembly of the Circle, or five Provinces, in
which the Deputies of the Assembly of the Sevenes had a joint concurrence of
Votes with those of the lower Languedoc; and moreover represented to the
Assembly their own Interests, and the inconveniences would ensue their
submitting themselves to the power and conduct of a man, whom they had so
highly provoked, by the suspicions they had of him; and in the last place
protested, That in case the Assembly should proceed further, in the absence of
the Duke of Rohan, or without his consent and approbation, they would
absolutely disclaim them.

This opposition of the Deputies of the Council of the Sevenes, seconded by
those of the three Towns, grounded upon their own, and the large Commission,
and power of Dupuy something cooled the heat of those sollicitours, which yet
in a short time after they resumed again; and importuned Chauve anew, to
prosecute what he had begun; which he would by no means undertake, without
imparting it to Dupuy; who after he had remembered him, upon what terms he had
parted with the Duke of Rohan at Saint John de Gardonnenque, tells him that he
would consider of it, and then give him his answer; and in the mean time had a
conference about it with the Deputies of the three Towns, who thought it not
unfit that Chauve, as of himself, and without any particular Commission, should
sound Chastillon's inclinations, to discover whether he would yield to that
condition of delivering up Aiguemortes into the hands of the Province, which
was then very opportunely met, to receive both it, and him, with all assurance
he could desire of an Amnesty, and the continuance of their respects to him: It
being most apparent, that Chastillon, who they knew desired nothing more than
to intrude himself among us, only to render himself more considerable, and his
Interests more favored at Court, would never disfurnish himself of the only
means left him, to procure a performance of the promises made him, and that
thus they should also make him desist from his pursuit. When they had given
Chauve their answer in these terms, he approved of it; and promised to comport
himself according to their directions; and thereupon had a conference with
Bansillon the Minister of Aiguemortes, who highly magnified the advantages this
re-establishment of Chastillon would produce to their party in general: To whom
Chauve replied, That it would be impossible to efface the impressions
Chastillon's procedures had left in the whole Province, unless he supplied them
with the means he had in his hands, by yielding up the Town of Aiguemortes to
their disposal; which if he would do, they would evidence the contentment they
had, to see a person of his quality return into the way from which he had
digressed, by their promptness to serve and honor him, as they had formerly
done: This discourse pleased not Bansillon at all, who told him, that he
conceived that Chastillon neither would, nor ought to consent to this
Proposition; that he had good reason to take heed of falling into those snares
he knew were spread for him; for that having divested him of all power, they
might the more easily dispose of him at their pleasure, or at least pay all his
former service with the cold recompense of Oblivion, or neglect; and that
therefore he conceived the Treaty absolutely broken: Upon which, as Chauve was
about to leave him, he told him, that he would give Chastillon an account of
all, and him an answer the next day at the same place; which he did, and in
effect conformable to his own preconceptions; which absolutely cleared the
judgment of Chauve, and many others also, when he had given the Assembly a
Summary of this conference.

In the mean while the Deputies of the three Towns incessantly solicited
Dupuy, to press the Duke of Rohan's return, representing to him the condition
of the Province, and the danger it was in of being ruined by the divisions
sprung from this late Proposition, and the delay his absence occasioned in the
progress of their affairs: Whereupon Dupuy resolved, to make a journey himself
to the Duke of Rohan: But yet he would not leave the Assembly, before he had
gotten a promise from Berticheres, that there should be no more mention made of
the aforesaid re-establishment for eight days, by which time he should return
again from Nismes whither he pretended he was going; but in the mean time he
goes by great journeys toward the Duke, whom he found at Pont de Camares, who
having received from him an account of all passages, quitted all other things
to return with all possible speed to the lower Languedoc: When he was come to
Mirveis, he sent a Gentleman, with command to travel night and day to the
Assembly, to let them know that he was within two days journey of them, and
desired them to suspend all further debates concerning their affairs, till his
arrival.

This unexpected news surprised the Assembly so, that instead of continuing
their consultations, they went to meet him as far as Sommieres, where when he
had learned of them, what order they had taken for the raising of Soldiers,
and supplying the Garrisons with necessaries, he ratified what they had done,
and so dismissed them.

Thus ended this tentative of Chastillon's friends to restore him to a repute
with the Party: After which Rohan went to Montpellier, where he turned fifteen
or sixteen of his chiefest Confidents out of the Town, and ordered all things
necessary (as before he had done at Montauban) for a siege, both for
ammunition, victuals, and the fortifications.

It is to be observed, that in the Duke's absence, Americ the first Consul of
Montpellier, and Carlincas his Kinsman, took occasion upon a defeat of two or
three companies, near to Perolles, which Saint Andre had sent thither, while
the enemy was plundering the Country thereabouts, to accuse him to the people,
who had already a jealousy of him; and Berticheres, thoug his father-in-law,
instead of assisting him, helped to thrust him out of the Town; not out of any
affection to the cause, but of a pestilent ambition reigned among them; every
one laboring to raise his own advantages upon the ruins of others, and better
their conditions by delivering Montpellier to the King: But the seventeen days
stay the Duke made there, and the discovery he made, by a Messenger of the
President Faure, taken near Nismes, that Berticheres Treated with the King,
together with some Colonels, who were ordered for the defense of Montpellier;
and the execution of Bimart, who was one of them, reduced things to a better
posture; But yet these disorders retarded the Levyes, so that of four thousand
Soldiers designed for the defense of the Town, they got in but fifteen hundred.

It is moreover to be noted, that the Duke of Rohan seeing the great want of
Ammunition in the Province of lower Languedoc, and of time, and means to
fortify all their Garrisons, proposed the dismantling of them, and the reducing
of their forces to Montpellier, Nismes, Usez, and Sommieres; which the people
then rejected, but have since, though too late, repented it; for their
obstinacy drew upon them the loss both of their Estates and Liberties; for
whiles they vainly trifled away their time and labor, in fortifying so many
places, neither of them was fortified or defended as it ought, but both they,
and the reliefs sent to them, which in the other places would have been of
great use, were now made wholly unserviceable.

The King seeing that the care and diligence of the Duke of Rohan had defeated
all the designs of those that would have delivered up Montpellier to him,
staid some time at Beziers to expect his Ammunitions, and to recruit his Army:
And in the mean time sent the Marshal de Praslin to besiege Bedarieux, which he
took, and dismantled; and then sent the Duke of Montmorency to take in Mauguio,
which the inhabitants knew not how to defend, nor yet would they quit it, nor
spoil the wines, as the Duke of Rohan had commanded them.

The Prince of Conde about this time came to the King's Army, and thence went
to besiege Lunel and Massillargues, within half a League one of another, and
sufficiently stored with all necessaries, there being in Lunel two Colonels
besides the Governor, who all jointly wrote to the Duke of Rohan, that if he
would send them in but five hundred Soldiers, they would give a handsome
account of the place: The Duke, when he had settled Calonges in Montpellier, and
left Dupuy his Agent there, in his name to provide all things requisite for the
defense of the Town, went purposely to prepare the desired supply, and sent
them in eight hundred men; but much to their regret; for the next day, though
they had not suffered any the least extremity, and that the breach made was not
considerable, they yielded themselves with all their Arms, and Baggage. Those
of Massillargues had done the like but a few days before: But the Articles of
Lunel were violated even before the Prince of Conde's face; for when the
Garrison marched out, they were beaten, disarmed, stripped, and a great part of
them killed or maimed; and in this lamentable posture went they to Nismes and
Sommieres, on which they brought so great a terror, that upon the appearance of
the enemy before Sommieres, in which there were fifteen hundred men, they did
even as bad as those of Lunel; and, which is a most shameful thing to be
related, the Captains took two thousand Crowns, to leave their arms to the
enemy.

The Town of Nismes alarmed by these sad accidents, sent Messengers to request
a visit from the Duke of Rohan, which he willingly condescended to, but first
got together as many Soldiers as he could at Anduze, which he left under the
Command of Charce his Lieutenant General in the Sevenes, and of the Adjutant
General, who when they saw the Duke of Montmorency return to the Sevenes, drew
into a body about a quarter of a League from Anduze, at a Pass not easily
accessible, which they fortified; and had not their care and diligence in
furnishing Sauve and Aletz with two valiant and expert Commanders, and a
thousand, or twelve hundred Soldiers, drawn out of Saint Hyppolite, and the
places adjacent prevented it, those two Towns had been also lost: So that the
good posture they were in, together with the Duke of Rohan's obstructing of
Montmorency's provisions, which came a great way off, forced him, after a
successeless voyage, to return again.

In the mean time the Marshal Themines plundered all the Country about
Montauban, burnt all their Country houses, and obstructed their Vintage: But
all this hindered not Saint Andre de Montbrun, their Governor, from drawing out
his Canon, and battering, and taking many Castles, among others, Renie, and la
Bastide, and storing his Town with Corn and Wine for a whole year: He had
also several Skirmishes with the Garrison of Montech, and others also, and still
came off with honor and advantage.

The Duke of Vendosme also with seven thousand Foot, and five hundred Horse,
sat down before Lombez; Malauze comes to Realmont with intention to relieve
it; but conceiving it not tenable against such a force, by reason of the
weakness of the Town, and that the Castle which commanded it, was Garrisoned by
the enemy; contented himself after a long Skirmish, withdrawing off the
Soldiers, as well inhabitants, as strangers; and abandons the town, which was
burnt. From Lombez the Duke marches to besiege Briteste, a little place, weak
of it self, and commanded almost on every side: Thither Malauze sent five
hundred men under the Command of Faucon, one of Sesigny's Captains, who behaved
himself very gallantly: He endured the Siege a month or more, beat them off in
four or five assaults, was twice relieved with fresh supplies of men and
powder; by Malauze, whose main body lay at Saint Paul and Miatte, about a
League and half from Briteste, and never had more than two thousand Foot, and
two hundred Volunteers on Horseback, with whom, and by the means of the brave
resistance of the besieged, he did so well, that the Duke of Vendosme, being
commanded by the King to come, and join his Porces with the Army that lay
before Montpellier, raised the siege after he had spent two thousand Canon
bullets on them, and lost fifteen hundred of his men; and those within the town
three hundred.

The departure of this Army, freed the whole Country from much harm, and
greater fears; and invites us to return to the lover Languedoc, where the Duke
de Lesdiguieres, having exchanged his Religion for the honor to be made
Constable of France, conceiving himself more capable now, than heretofore, to
procure a Peace, sollicites the Duke of Rohan to another interview, who seeing
the hopes he had grounded on the Count Mansfield, who was gone into Holland,
had failed him, the more willingly complies with his desires. They met at Saint
Privas, where they agreed on all things, except the King's entry into
Montpellier; whereupon he obliged the Duke to a journey to the Town, to propose
it to them, with all possible assurances, they should desire, to testify, that
they intended not the least infringement of their liberties: But this to be
done without any cessation of Arms, nor was the Duke allowed more than two
days stay there, to perfect this negotiation; who, considering the danger
Montpellier was in, unless supplied with a new renfort of Soldiers; for that
the works being not finished, their defects were to be made up with an addition
of more men, sends express Orders to his Adjutant General Sorle, to draw twelve
hundred men, out of the two thousand he had with much ado detained at Anduze,
and by the Valley of Montferrant conduct them to Montpellier, the night ensuing
the evening that he should get in there: But when the Captains and Soldiers
knew that they were to be socked up in Montpellier, they all deserted the
Adjutant, who came thither accompanied only with fifteen.

Those of Montpellier would by no means admit of the Proposition concerning the
King's entry into their Town, fearing a suppression of their liberties, by
reason of the Prince of Conde's animosities against them; which the Duke
perceiving, encourages them to stand bravely upon their defense, assuring them
that he would provide for their relief, in which, for his part, he omitted
nothing that might forward it: But as there is a vast difference between the
promises, and payment of money, so instead of ten days, within which time he
thought to have sent them aid, notwithstanding his journeys to Nismes, Usez,
and the Sevenes, not without manifest hazard of his person, could he not, under
five weeks, get four thousand men together; nor those neither without engaging
himself by promises to most of the Captains; that they were not to be sent to
Montpellier, but only that the consideration of their numbers might procure
them a more advantageous Peace: So great was their consternation; and those
that were desirous to get thither, were yet deterred by the apprehension of the
difficulties, which really were very great; the King having then an Army
consisting of twenty thousand Foot, and three thousand Horse; for the
Constable, and the Duke of Vendosme had now joined their's with the other
Forces; besides, so great a way were they to go, and such difficult passes had
they to get through, that it was impossible to approach within three Leagues of
the Town, without encountering the King's whole Cavalry; and moreover so great a
scarcity was there of Proviisions, that they could not keep the Troops
together, more than eight or ten days: Those of Montpellier of the other side,
could no longer subsist for want of men, by reason of the excessive duty they
were on, and therefore every moment sent they most important Letters for
relief: To which may be added also a new Summons sent him by the Constable, who
had before left the Court in some discontent for that he could not prevail to
obtain a Peace; yet now at his return was he in higher esteem, both by reason
of the Forces he had brought with him, and that the Prince, in his absence, had
nothing advanced the Siege: All which the Duke considering, and that he was
utterly destitute of hopes of any Foreign assistance, having newly received a
Letter from the King of England pressing him to conclude a Peace, and seeing no
probability of any good to be done at home; every one being weary of the War,
and laboring to purchase his own particular safety, with the expense of the
public Interest; that the first Town should fall off, and embrace a particular
Treaty, would totally frustrate all endeavors for a general Peace; that the
least cross accident should happen to Montpellier, or the relief intended for
it, would be irreparable; that the King could not want men, the Duke of
Angoulesme being then at Lions with a recruit of eight, or ten thousand; and
that, without a miracle, Montpellier could not be preserved: Moreover, seeing
that there were about the King two powerful parties; the one pressing the
conclusion of a Peace, the other, the continuation of the War; and that the
former could not subsist without a Peace, no more than the other without a War;
and that the Chief of the latter, to wit, the Prince of Conde had deserted the
Court upon the Composure of former differences, he conceived that those that
promoted the Peace being always near the King, would take care to see it
faithfully observed: This made him resolve upon another conference with the
Constable, at which the Duke of Chevreuse was present; where all was concluded
according to the Declarations and Breviates drawn up to that purpose: Which
when the King acquainted the Prince of Conde with, he left the Court; and the
Duke of Rohan, with the Deputies of the Sevenes, Nismes, and Usez, went to
Montpellier, where they all confirmed the Peace; the substance of the principal
Articles of which was, as follows: 1. A Confirmation of the Edict of Nantes,
and of all Declarations and Articles Registered in the Parliaments. 2. A
restoring of both the Religions to the places, where they were formerly
exercised. 3. A re-establishment of the seats of Justice, Offices of the
receipts, and Officers of the Finances to those places and towns where they
were before the troubles, except the Chamber of the Edict of Guienne, to Nerac.
4. Prohibitions to hold all Assemblies concerning civil affairs without leave,
but an allowance of those relating to Ecclesiastical affairs only, as
Consistories, Colloques, National, and Provincial Synods. 5. A Discharge of all
Acts of Hostility according to the tenor of the seventy sixth, and seventy
seventh Articles of the Edicts of Nantes. 6. A particular Abolition for what
happened at Privas before the troubles. 7. A clear Discharge of all Persons
liable to any accounts, and Officers, according to the seventy eighth, and
seventy ninth Articles of the said Edicts of Nantes; as also of all Judgments,
given against those of the Religion, since the Commencement of the present
commotions, according to the fifty eighth, fifty ninth, and sixtieth Article of
the second Edict. 8. A Confirmation of all Judgments, given by Judges of the
Religion, Constituted by the Superiors of the Party; both in Civil, and
criminal matters. 9. A free Discharge of all persons of both Parties, without
ransom. 10. A restoring of all persons to their Estates, Liberties, and
Privileges, Offices, Honors, and Dignities, notwithstanding any former Gifts
or Confiscations. 11. And more particularly the King does Declare, Ordain, and
Decree, That for the future there shall be no Garrison kept, nor Citadel built
in the Town of Montpellier; but that his Majesty's pleasure is, that the
charge of the Town shall be in the hands of the Consuls, and that there be no
innovations there, except the demolishing of the late fortifications. 12. That
all the fortifications of Rochelle, and Montauban, remain entire; and the
moiety of those of the Towns of Nismes, Castres, Usez, and Millaud.


The end of the Second Book.
THE Memoires OF THE DUKE of ROHAN:
The third Book. Containing a Relation of the second War against those of the
Reformed Religion in France.
THe Peace thus concluded, the Prince gone from the Court, and his Faction, by
his absence, and the death of the Cardinal de Retz quite decayed, every one
began to have fair hopes of its continuance, and that, grown wise by our former
miscarriages, we should now renounce all future thoughts of Civil broils, and
mind the Protection of the ancient Allies of the Crown: But the beams of favor
now reflecting solely on Puizieux, a man of a hot spirit, and whose whole
ingenuity consisted in tricks and fallacies, he became more studious of his
own, than his Masters geatnesse (a vice incident to all favorites) being
careful to raise himself some props at Rome, and very unwilling to give Spain
the least disgust; So that all Leagues with other foreign Princes, were made
with such respect to those two powers, as if we stood in fear of their
displeasure: Nay, and to sooth the Popes Nuncio, who had always opposed the
Peace, at the very beginning of it, would undertake to show him, that it was
not made to abate the presecution, but to promote the ruin of those of the
Reformed Religion. For immediately after the King's entry into Montpellier, the
sense of the general Grant was inverted in most places of it, notwithstanding
the several Remonstrances the Duke of Rohan made to oppose it: Nor were the
Soldiers drawn away from Montpellier, though promised to be done immediately
after the King's departure; then was it put off, till his return from Provence,
then, till he came to Avignon, and lastly till he should be at Lions; whence
the Duke of Rohan having followed him to all those places, urging their
departure very earnestly, and perhaps too boldly, telling the King they should
desist from farther razing the fortifications, if he revoked that command,
returned with a Letter to Valence, commanding him expressly to do it. Nor did
they forbear in their march through Dauphine to seize upon all the places that
were in the hands of those of the Religion, though they had served the Kings
party, the only recompense they had for fighting against their consciences, nor
were any but those only, that were possessed by the Constable, exempt from this
violence, which yet he preserved with much difficulty, for had not the Marshal
Crequi engaged to deliver them up after his death, they had then gone the same
way with the rest. At Lions the Deputies of Rochelle came to wait upon the
King, whence they carried back Letters to Arnaud Governor of Fort Lewis,
commanding him, that within eight days after the Rochellers had performed what
the Articles had enjoined them, as concerning the demolition of their
fortifications, he should cause the said Fort to be slighted also: but Arnaud
received another of the same date, but a clear contrary sense.

When the King went from Lions, toward Paris, the Duke of Rohan returned to
Languedoc, really and sincerely to execute, what ever had been promised in the
name of those of the Religion, touching that part of their fortifications they
ought to slight. Going to Montpellier, he found the Consulate of the Merchants
changed, of which he complains to the Court, but in vain: He delivers the
Kings Letter to Valence, who promised to obey it; from thence he goes to Nismes
and Usez, whom he presently sets on work; thence to the higher Languedoc,
Montauban, Foix, and Rouergue, where at a conference with the Duke of
Ventadour, the Count of Carmaine, the President de Caminade, and the Count d'
Aquien, Commissioners, as he was for the demolishing the fortifications, all
things were agreed on between them and he for his part instantly set about
them, delivering up also all Forts, and Towns that had been taken in the War,
restoring also the exercise of the Romish Religion to those places, where it
had been formerly used.

Notwithstanding all which Valence, who, besides the four thousand men were in
Montpellier, had four or five Regiments more, and three or four troops of light
horse, had designed to surprise, with these the Sevenes under pretense of
taking up quarters there, and by means of some correspondencies he had gotten
among them; of which when the Duke had notice, from the principal Communalties
of the Sevenes, who sent him their complaints of this infringement of the
Peace, he wrote to them back again for answer, that he knew it was not the
Kings pleasure, and therefore that they should not receive them; and to Valence
that he should forbear those quarters till his arrival, least otherwise it
should prejudice the establishment of the Peace: The Duke of Ventadour, the
Count de Carmaine, and the President de Caminade wrote to him to the same
effect; which he regarded not, but proceeded in his enterprise, the Towns of
Sauve, and Gange receiving his Troops, but all the other places, upon the Duke
of Rohan's Letter refused them: The Duke when he had put things in such a
forwardness in the higher Languedoc, returns to Montpellier according to the
agreement between him, and Valence: But he was no sooner entered the Town, than
made a Prisoner, and kept with a severe guard upon him: This caused a great
astonishment in many, who could not imagine that this should be done without
order; but being known at Court, it was not approved of there, for fear lest it
should prove too great an obstruction to the raising of the fortifications; so
that his liberty was presently ordered.

Whiles the Duke was under this restraint, Valence, contrary to the Articles of
the Peace, divides the Consulate of Montpellier between those of the Religion
and the Papists, and to effect it, used all manner of violence to the old
Consuls, detaining them as prisoners one whole night in his own lodgings.

The Court gave the Duke of Rohan no better satisfaction concerning this, than
the former breach of the Peace; receiving, instead of relief, advice, that to
avoid the suspicions the lower Languedoc had of him, he should remove to the
higher, to execute the remaining part of his Commission: For Puysieux
brother-in-law to Valence, having cashiered Schomberg, and restored the
Chancellor his Father, was now the only powerful man, and by drawing false
glosses upon all the actions of Valence improved them all to his advantage, and
upon all occasions thwarted the affairs of the Duke of Rohan, clouding all his
attempts with injurious and sinister interpretations and jealousies: And yet
upon the answer the Duke sent that he would not leave Nismes, nor the Sevenes
till they were rid of those Troops that lay upon them, he quickly received an
order to dismiss them: After which he departed toward the lower Languedoc,
leaving those of Nismes very much unsatisfied of him, out of a persuasion that
he was of intelligence with the Court, and privy to all the violations of the
Peace, and that his imprisonment was not real, but a delusory trick to palliate
his other practices; The usual recompense persons of quality and honor derive
from services done to the people.

When he came to Millaud he was informed, that the Duke d' Espernou had written
to all the Towns held by those of the Religion in Rouergue, to send him
Deputies both of the one, and the other Religion, and that they should not
proceed to the Election of their Consuls, (who are usually chosen at
Whitsuntide) before they had from him known the King's pleasure therein; this
caused a great confusion among them; but by the advice of the Duke of Rohan
they proceed, notwithstanding, to their Elections, at the accustomed time,
according to the Declaration of Peace, which imports, that in the Consulary
Towns, held by those of the Religion, nothing shall be innovated; and then sent
their Deputies to the Duke d' Espernon to know what his pleasure was: Avoiding
by this means, the injury intended to the Peace, and them in this particular.

This done, he goes to Castres, where he fixes his residence, and thence sends
the King a perfect account of the entire execution of his Commission; humbly
beseeching him, that, according to his Royal promise, the disgarrisoning of
Montpellier, the demolition of the Fort Lewis, and the re-establishing of the
Chamber (or Court erected in favor of those of the Reformed Religion) at
Castres, might be no longer deferred: But instead of receiving Justice
thereupon, contrary to the Act of Pacification, verified in several
Parliaments, without any restrictions, or limitations, the engagements given
underhand and Seal, re-iterated by several Letters, the Answer given to the
Propositions of the Deputies general, and his Majesty's answers to the
Committee of the Parliament of Thoulouze, concerning the Chamber of Castres,
the Garrison in Montpellier was continued, and a Citadel also was erected
there, the Fort Lewis was re-fortified, and the Chamber was removed to Bezers:
But this was not all; The Tembles, or Churches of those of the Religion were
still detained from them; The Parliament of Thoulouze made an Ordinance for
dividing the Consulate of Pamiers, between those of the Reformed, and those of
the Romish Religion; vexes and torments particular persons, by imprisoning
their persons, and sequestring their estates for things they had, according to
the tenor of the Declaration, been indempnified for: In short, the pressures of
those of the Religion, since the Peace, were far heavier, than those they
suffered in the time of the war. The Duke of Rohan continues his solicitations
at Court; and declared his mind so freely, that he was forbid any farther to
mention of their affairs, it being the King's pleasure that they thould
address themselves to the Deputies general, who also promised with all speed
possible to send Commissioners into the Provinces to put the Edict in
execution, and redress all their grievances.

In the mean while the Galleys remained still at Bourdeaux, and the Duke of
Guise came up with his Ships to the Isle of Re, which gave a great alarm to
Rochelle, and made the Duke of Soubize, and the Count de Laval, to retire also
to the Town: But this fear was quickly over; the Duke withdrawing thence, and
sailing with his Ships toward Marseilles, followed by the Galleys, whose
absence had much prejudiced the trade of Provence, imboldning the Pirates so,
that they took and carried away their Merchandises even in sight of Marseilles.
But the King discovering much displeasure against those that fled in to
Rochelle, the Count de Laval, went to make his Apology at Court: But the Duke
of Souhize, conceiving that way not honorable for him; and that his abode in
Poictou, or Britany, could not be with any security, goes directly to Castres.

But let us now look after the Commissioners sent into Languedoc to put the
Edict in execution; Favier, Counselor of State, and Saint Private, were sent on
this employment; but, to make short, did nothing, either in the upper, or the
lower Languedoc, tending to the case of those of the Religion; but removing to
Pamiers, fell into a division concerning the business of the Consulate there,
and each of them sent his opinion, and reasons to the Court: And thus passed
the year one thousand six hundred and twenty three.

In the beginning of the year 1624. La Vieuville, whom the Chancellor had
advanced to the Super-intendance of the Finances, not enduring that his
Benefactor should be his Competitour in favor, amongst other things complains
of the disservices he and Puisieux had done the State, in preferring the
interest and advantage of Rome, and Spain, before that of France; and that the
acceptance of the Articles of Peace touching the affair of the Valteline, by
the Commander de Sillery Ambassador at Rome, and brother to the Chancellor,
was occasioned by instructions, which he (unknown to the King) had received
from France, to that purpose: Whereupon the King, as easy to believe the
worst, as hard to believe the best of any one, resolves to deprive them of
their Offices, and gives the Seals to Alligre Counselor of State, and
Puisieux his Office of Secretary of State, was shared among his other
companions; and Vieuville remained the only Favorite; who to improve their
disgrace to his further advantage, caused all the Ambassadors to be changed,
placing creatures of his own in their rooms; and had like to have framed a
Criminal Process against the Chancellor; who in a little while after dyed of
grief and age; and the Keeper of the Seals was promoted to his place.

After this, the new Favorite, changing the former Maxims, that he might the
better discover the male-administrations, of those whose disgrace he had
procured, caused the Treaty of the Valteline to be disowned; obtaines another
more advantageous to the State; sets on foot the Marriage of Madame the King's
Sister, with the King of England; renews the Leagues for the recovery of the
Valteline, and rescuing it from the oppression of the Germans: To which end
Bethune was sent Ambassador extraordinary to Rome; the Marquess de Coeuvres to
the Valteline; Mansfield into Germany with considerable Forces; and the
Constable with the Duke of Savoy against the Genoeses. This disposition of
affairs gave fair hopes of great matters, which indeed had very prosperous
beginnings.

And that there might be a good stock of money to carry on the Wars, an
Inquisition into the Financiers was thought very expedient. And because
Beaumarchais Vieuville's Father-in-law was the chiefest, and wealthiest among
them, they resolved to disgrace him first: And in order to it, first of all
they scattered little Pasquils against him; afterward they dealt more boldly,
and plainly with him, and every one, prognosticating, from the violent
prosecution of his Father-in-law, that himself was not like to continue long,
took liberty to exhibit accusations against him also, so that at length the
King commanded him to be arrested, and sent to Amboise, where he was kept till
he made an escape, without ever knowing the cause of his Imprisonment, and is
now at his own house in full liberty, and security.

To this Favorite succeeded the Cardinal Richelieu, who owed his first
introduction to State employments to his predecessor Vieuville. See how
faithfully these Favorites serve one another: The King recalls Schomberg, and
sets at liberty the Marshal d' Ornano, who by the instigation of Vieuville had
been a little before committed to the Bastille. The support the Cardinal had
from the Queen Mother, made his favor more lasting than the others, and
encouraged him also to greater insolences: For the King having a great
aversion to the Queen, his Wife, and no less a jealousy of his brother, the
Duke of Anjou, conceived that the Queen his Mother, would be of great use to
him, to moderate, and compose these domestic jars, which more disturb the
Palaces of great Princes than all their other affairs besides.

The Cardinal who now grasped the whole power of France, continues the Treaty
begun with Foreign Estates, and consummates what his Predecessors had left
imperfect. But Arnaud, Governor of Fort-Lewis, dying, and Toiras succeeding
him in his commands, favored by the Cardinal, and Schomberg, conceives greater
hopes of ruining Rochelle, than ever Arnaud did; which were so earnestly
embraced, as if they had not at the same time undertaken a War against the King
of Spain; So that the Rochellers, sadly reflecting upon the increase of their
persecutions, and that the preparations to block them up by Sea were near
perfected, and that the Foreign Engagements, nothing lessened the contrivances
against their Town, apply themselves to the Dukes of Rohan and Soubize for
their advice, and assistance; who were perplexed with many doubts about it, by
reason of the divisions, and other defections they had experimented in the
former Wars, and that they were fearful of displeasing the English and
Hollanders, because of the League lately made by them with the King, conceiving
that from them they were to expect either their preservation, or their ruin:
Nevertheless the necessities of the Rochellers forced them upon a design, which
the Duke of Soubize undertook the management of on Blavet, and the ships that
were there preparing for the Siege of Rochelle, hoping that upon his success in
the Attempt, the Allies, and Confederates of France, would more easily incline
the King to an Accommodation with the Rochellers, as well for the difficulties
would obstruct the pursuit of his intentions against them, by reason of the
loss of the Ships destined to that purpose, as also for his desires to
continue the grand design of the League.

Upon this ground the Duke of Soubize about the latter end of the year departs
from Castres to go into Poictou, where very secretly he makes ready five small
Vessels; with which, notwithstanding the perfidiousness of Nouailles to whom he
had entrusted the knowledge of the whole design, and who a little before it was
ready for execution had discovered it; he resolved either to carry the Fort, or
perish in the attempt. In the beginning of the year 1625, he sets sail from
the Isle of Re, with three hundred Soldiers, and an hundred Mariners, which
gave the great Ship called the Virgin so brave a charge, that after some
resistance, he himself boorded her the third man, with his sword in his hand,
took her, and, presently after, all the rest.

After this he lands his Men, with a resolution to attempt the Fort, which upon
Nouailles information, was newly reinforced with fifteen or sixteen piece of
Canon, and a stronger Garrison.

The Duke of Vendosme who was Governor of the Province, and had made great
preparations to block up the Duke of Soubize in the Port of Blavet, presently
rallies up two thousand Foot, and two hundred Gentlemen, to force him in the
Port, and with an Iron Chain, and a Cable, as big as a man's thigh, stops the
mouth of it, which was very narrow and close adjoining to the Fort; So that
Soubize for three whole weeks was locked up in it, having nothing to guard his
ships, and man the Town of Blavet (whose advenue, which was very straight, he
had cut off) withal, but the abovesaid number of three hundred Soldiers; and
was reduced to such an extremity, that the day before he got off, his great
Ship called the Virgin, endured a battery of six pieces of Canon, and received
an hundred and fifty shot.

Whiles he lay in this perilous condition, the wind, that had been, till then,
still against him, changed, and Soubize seizing the opportunity, sent some
Shalloupes manned with good resolute Soldiers, who, though all the while
exposed to the fury of two thousand Musket shot, with Hatchets cut asunder the
chain, and the Cable, that barred the Port; By this means he got out with
fifteen or sixteen ships, and lost but only two which were run aground on the
Sands: In this Equipage he recovered the Isle of Re, where having mended his
ships, and gotten together about fifteen hundred men, he seizes on the
Neighboring Isle of Oleron, where he staid to complete his Army.

The Duke of Rohan, at the same time, had also made way for some attempts in
Guienne, Languedoc, and Dauphine: But the Secretary Montbrun, as he was
traveling with some overtures from the Duke to his friends, was taken at
Villeneufve near Avignon, and discovered all, which dashed the greatest part
of his designs, and caused the three sons of Montbrun to retire to Anduze.

Presently was the news spread abroad, that Soubize his project was discovered,
and broken; and the long time he was shut up in the Port of Blavet, greatly
perplexed the Duke of Rohan, who had no other news of him, than what the common
rumor brought, but saw him disowned by the Town of Rochelle, by the Deputies
general also, and by all the persons of quality, that were of the Religion, at
Paris, who more favoring the Court faction, endeavored to make all our Towns
disclaim him.

During this interval nothing was attempted: The two Eldest of Montbrun's
sons, discouraged at these unhappy beginnings, make their peace, renounced
the Duke of Rohan, and go into Dauphine, but the youngest named Saint Andre the
most resolute of them, came to Castres, and did what he could, though in vain,
to encourage, and retain his Brothers in the Party.

The Chamber at Beziers, and the Presidial of Nismes also, together with all
Officers of our Towns, make goodly Acts of disavowal, which they sent to the
Court: But at length when the news came of Soubize's gallant and fortunate
Sally out of the Port of Blavet, and that he was absolute Master of the Sea,
they began to think otherwise of him, than as of a Pyrate; and the Baron Pujols
was sent from Paris to the Duke of Rohan, the Colonel Revillas from the Duke of
Savoy, and after them came the Baron of Coupet also from the Constable, to
mediate an accommodation, to which the Duke was really inclined, and clearly
did what lay in him to promote it, out of a desire he had to serve the King in
his Wars in Italy: But either the perpetual and malicious contrivances at
Court, against those of the Religion, or the bad Instruments employed in the
Treaty, or the indisposition, at that time, of the late King of England, and
late Prince of Orange, to assist us, or all these things together, frustrated
the negotiation of the success it might have otherwise had, and prevailed so
with our Towns to make them disclaim the Duke of Soubize, that the Duke of
Rohan, who till then would not stir, was now enforced to take up arms, to show,
that it was no defect of power, (as they imagined) but his zeal to pacify and
compose things, that had hitherto restrained him.

The first day of May he began with an attempt upon Lavaur, but coming an hour
too late, he missed of his aims there: yet was not this expedition wholly
successeless, for in it he wrought all the Towns of Lauraguais to declare for
him; and at his return to Castres, he found, that according to his order, the
Marquess of Malanze was turned out of Realmont, which about a month before he
had possessed himself of: And here it is to be observed, that Malauze was
sought after, as far as Auvergne, to be made Head of a party against the Duke
of Rohan, for that the Town of Rochelle was divided, and the Common Council
refused to join with Soubize: So that the Deputy of the Town, in all
negotiations, spoke only as from the common people, which party, the
Magistrates, and Principal Inhabitants, still opposed: So that a very hard task
had the Duke of Rohan, to reconcile, and unite the Town of Rochelle, and the
other Corporations of the Religion, with Soubize. And forasmuch as it was very
requisite he should go to bring about the Sevenes, and the lower Languedoc,
where the Deputy of Rochell could not have audience; he convequed an Assembly
of the higher Languedoc at Castres, by which being chosen for their General, he
raised some Troops, established a Committee of the Assembly to order all
affairs in his absence, and then sent Saint Andre de Montbrun with a Commission
to be Governor of Montauban, which after much reluctance, at length declared
also for the party.

This done, he goes thence with six hundred Foot, fifty Horse, and four score
Harquebusiers, and marches toward Millaud: When he came to Saint Afrique, he
was met by Couvrelles, sent from the Town of Rochelle, and Soubize, to inform
him of the entire conjunction of the whole Town with Soubize, and that,
according to the Articles of Agreement, they had sent Deputies to the Court,
desiring us to do the like, and to this end La Faye Saint Orse had brought the
King's pass-ports for the principal Corporations; to which his Majesty was at
length induced, after he had in vain essayed to divide the Dukes of Rohan and
Soubize, and bring them to several Treaties.

When the report of this news was also brought to the Council, and that
Couvrelles had represented to them the great divisions of the Rochellers, and
the factions sprung up amongst them, how extremely desirous they were of peace,
upon what hard conditions they had joined with Soubize, and the ill order they
took for their Navy, they conceived they had now no time to throw away upon
tedious debates; and that (though Rohan liked not of their procedure in
Treating with the Court) since Rochelle had begun, it was expedient, to show
that the party was well united, and ready to follow their example. Le Clerc,
and No^llan, were chosen Deputies for Montauban, Dorson, and Madiane for
Castres, Guerin for Millaud, and Foreign, and Milletiere, for Rohan, who
desirous to extract what advantage he could out of this opportunity, to
insinuate into the Sevenes, makes use of the King's passe-ports to induce them
to call an Assembly at Anduze; which happily succeeded: From Milland he draws
his Forces to Saint John de Breuill, which made a flourish, as if they intended
to stand it out: but when they saw him in a posture ready to storm their Fort,
they instantly changed their note, and submitted. Hither came to him three
Deputies from Vigan, to dissuade him from marching thither, for that he would
find the Gates shut against him; to whom he gave no other answer, but that he
would try whether he should or not: The next day he continues his way, and two
Leagues from Vigan, met another messenger to the same purpose, who also added,
in case he advanced, threatenings of effusion of blood: But this prevailing
nothing on him, his adversaries courage failed them, and they drew back; So
that without any difficulty he got to Vigan; whose gates thus opened, cleared
all the way as far as Anduze.

Whiles he was on his march, the Presidial of Nismes, and also the Chamber of
Beziers, used all their skill (but to no end) to alienate the affections of the
people of the Sevenes from the Duke; who having resolved on a journey to
Nismes, was yet loath to put it to a hazard, without first sounding the
inclinations of the Inhabitants, for fear lest so public an affront, as a
refusal to his face, should ruin his whole affairs. To this end he sent
thither Saint Blancart, who having conference with some of his friends in the
Suburbs, their advice was, that the Duke should suspend his coming thither, and
that they would send their Deputies also to the Court, that the Town of Usez
should do the like, with instructions conformable to those of the Sevenes;
which accordingly they performed, choosing Castanet for Nismes, and Viguier,
Goudin, and Boisleau, for Usez.

The Dake of Rohan seeing, that he was excluded out of the Towns of Nismes,
Usez, and Alez, convoques an Assembly of the Sevenes, at Anduze, the most
numerous he could, where yet there were many wanting, from many of the
Churches, especially of the Colloque of Saint German, where the Marquess des
Ports mainly opposed him; and after he was declared General of that Country,
he sent Caillou, Du Cross, Puyredon, and Pagesy, Deputies to the Court.

While these things were in agitation, the Marshal Theminns brought four
thousand Foot, six hundred Horse, and Canon too, and with them a great terror
also upon the Countries of Lauraguais, and Albigeois; whereof the Duke being
advertised by redoubled messages, he sends back the Marquess of Lusignan, with
all the Forces he had brought with him, and with all diligence hastens his
levies of Soldiers, to be commanded by Freton, Saint Blancart, and Valescure,
in which his endeavors met with such unhappy traverses, that instead of four
thousand men, which was the number he aimed at, he could muster but half the
number: Whiles these men were raising, he sent his Scouts toward Sommieres,
resolving to attempt it with seven or eight hundred common Soldiers, upon this
supposition, that Valance would not run the hazard of drawing out of his
Garrison, to relieve it, that it would be a means to make Nismes publicly
declare for him; and that if he could have but twice four and twenty hours
time, the whole Country would come in to him, and raise him to a condition
able to force the Castle: But, as it is a danugeros thing to prefume on the
defects of others, instead of relying on a man's own strength, the event clearly
deluded his preconceptions; For though he had taken the Town, Nismes would not
stir to his assistance, nor could he get relief from the Sevenes time enough;
Valence at the same time sent twelve hundred men, out of his Garrison, to
relieve the Castle, who from three of the Clock in the afternoon, till night,
fought with Saint Blancart, who had lodged himself, with three hundred men
only, in a place of such advantage, that he could be no way forced, nor yet
could he hinder the entry of the relief into the Castle, by reason of the
extreme largness of the advenue: Which the Duke perceiving called off Saint
Blancart into the Town; resolving, that night, to draw off with the whole party
also, which he did, carrying with him his wounded men; and among others Freton,
who was wounded with a Musket shot in the knee, of which he afterward dyed:
Saint Blancart in this conflict, when the relief entered the Castle, lost three
Captains, and some other Officers.

After this, the Duke thought on nothing more, than hastening his Levies, that
he might be in a condition to relieve the higher Languedoc; and taking order
that his affairs in the Sevenes might not be prejudiced in his absence; to
prevent which, he left a Committee of the Assembly, to direct the management of
them; in which he engaged all that had any interest in the places of greatest
consequence, and left Chavagnac his Field Marshal to command all the Soldiery
in that Country.

While these things were in agitation in the Sevenes, and the lower Languedoc,
the Marshal Themines drew near to Castres to plunder, and spoil the Country,
which put the Council the Duke had left there, in such a confusion and fear,
that they durst not give order for any thing at all, but left the whole burden
upon the Duchess of Rohan, who contrary to the natural and more tender
disposition of her Sex, showed so much care and resolution in all things, that,
every one deriving courage from her example, the Marshal received several
losses, being worsted in every skirmish before the Town; where Nougarede an old
Gentleman of the Country got much honor.

In the mean while the Marquess of Lusignan marches toward Castres, with those
Forces the Duke had given him to conduct thither; which when the Marshal had
intelligence of, he drew off his Cavalry, and part of his Infantry, to fight
him; whom he found lodged in Croisette, a Village two Leagues distant from
Castres, where he stormed him, but found him so well Barricado'd, and resolute
upon his defense, that after a furious assault, he was feign to retire with
much loss, many of his men being slain and wounded; which when he had done, the
Marquess of Lusignan retreated as far as Brassac, and the next day, taking
another way, marched with all his Troops into Castres, at noon day, Drums
beating, and Colors flying, and without any opposition at all. This renfort,
with some skirmishes that passed to the Marshal's disadvantage, made him,
seeing he could do no further mischief to the Town, resolve to retire to Saint
Paul, and la Miatte, which were sufficiently manned: Nevertheless Saint Paul
made no resistance at all, but was taken in the open day without any battery
raised, or siege formed, and the Soldiers all marched off to La Miatte, which
they yielded also upon composition not to bear arms for six months.

This was the only check the Marshal Themines, by chance, gave us in
Lauraguais, and Albigeois, where, when he had fired the aforesaid places, he
made as if he would besiege Realmont. But understanding that the Duke of Rohan
was come hither with above two thousand men, which he brought from the Sevenes,
whose passage at Larsac, where he had defigned to fight him, since he could not
prevent; he draws off all his horse and foot, marches up almost to Castres,
firing all as he went, passes by Brassac, endeavoring to gain a commodious
field for his Cavalry, between Cauve and Viane: But Rohan, having intelligence
of it, makes such haste, that by incessant marches night and day, he got to
Viane, before the other could be on his way thither; from whence he sent the
Regiment of Valescure to Cauve, and his own guards, and the Captain Dupuy with
his Carabines (for that his foot, was so tired they could not march) to Brassac.

The Marshal having now lost all hopes of preventing the Duke, and taking
Brassac, goes forward, burning some Villages in his march, and comes with his
whole strength, both of Horse, and Foot, in sight of Viane, where having drawn
them up in Battailia, and seeing that the Suburbs of Viane, called Peiresegade,
which lies at the bottom of the Town, and is divided from it, by the height of
the hill, was not at all fortified, falls into it with all his Forces, takes,
and fires it, and then retires to his Quarters: In this assault there was one
Captain slain, another taken, and about five and twenty, or thirty Soldiers
killed and wounded, Saint Blancart also had a light hurt; and the soldiers
that were in the Suburbs drew up to the Town.

The Duchess of Rohan, who by several messengers had sent to inform the Duke,
of the Marshal's design to stop his passage, omits nothing on her part, but
sends to all the Garrisons, appointing them a Rendezvous at Brassac; which the
Duke having notice of, he departs that evening, and comes to Brassac; where
finding fifteen hundred Foot, and two hundred Horse; he resolves, the next
night to send out to discover the posture of the Marshal's Army, which lay at
Esperance between Brassac and Viane, and according to the intelligence he
should receive to fall into his Quarters the night following, with all his
Troops, Saint Blancart by the way of Viane, and he himself by the way of
Brassac. The discovery made, and the Scouts returning with intelligeace that
the Army lay there in great disorder, and in a place of great disadvantage to
the Horse, the design to beat it up was concluded on; but the very day
preceding the night it was to be put in execution, either upon notice given
him, or that he foresaw their intentions, or that provisions failed him, he
quitted those Quarters, and taking his way toward Vabres, went to lodge at La
Bichenie: The Duke also rallyes all his Forces, and marches toward Croisette,
and Roque-courbe, from whence he sent five or six hundred men into Realmont,
and then divides all his Troops about Castres, to observe the posture of the
enemy, who when they had refreshed themselves for some days about Lautree,
march toward Lavaure, and there prepare for a march into Foix: The Duke goes
into Lauraguais, puts some men into Britefle, sends the Regiment of Freton to
Revel and Sourire, and that of Montiuz and Valescure, to Realmont, and as soon
as he saw that the enemy steered his course toward Foix, he commanded Saint
Blancart, who was then at Puylaurens, thither with five hundred chosen men.

Lusignan, in the mean time, being informed that the Regiment of Lescure had
taken up their Quarters in the Suburbs of Teillet, goes instantly to beat them
up; breaks through their Barricado's, kills, and wounds about an hundred, takes
one Captain, and forces the rest to fly for shelter to the Fort; but had he
come by night, as he did by day, not one of them had escaped; for there was a
very great dissension between Grandval, who commanded the Fort, and Lescure, to
whom he would never have opened his Gates in the night time; which was the
reason that induced Lusignan to this attempt, in which Valescure, and Montluz,
two Colonels were wounded, but not much: After this the Duke of Rohan returns
to Castres, whither he commands Lusignan also; rallies what Forces he had,
takes with him one piece of Canon, and Marches toward Realmont, both to give
the enemy a diversion, and to enrich his Army with Booty.

The first place he fell upon was Sicurac, which endured five and twenty, or
thirty Canon shot, but after he had fired the Town through the breach, they
were feign to yield. This march of his made the whole Country look about them;
The Duke of Ventadour got together about two hundred Horse, and two thousand
Foot; The Marshal Themines also hies thither, with all his Horse, and the
Regiment of Normandy; but both the one, and the other, being informed that the
place was taken, went back again; and the Duke continues his course toward the
Mountain of Albigeois and Rouergue, leaving his great Canon at Realmont, and
taking with him only two little field pieces, that carried a Ball about the
bigness of an Orange.

Those of Foix in the interim, sent him word, that the Inhabitants of Caumont,
Lesbordes, Samarac, and Camerade, were resolved to fire their own Towns, and
retire, the former to Mazeres, the other to Azil, for that they wanted
Soldiers to defend them; whereupon the Duke commanded thither Boissiere
Lieutenant Colonel of Freton's Regiment, with five hundred men, many of whom,
when they heard they were to go to Foix, forsook their colors, so that he went
with two hundred and forty only, who got very well thither.

And here we may not pass over in silence a generous action of seven Soldiers
of Foix, who resolved, in a poor mudd walled house called Chambonnet near
Carlat, to wait for the Marshal Themines, and his whole Army, whom they there
kept at a Bay two whole days; and after they had, in several assaults, killed
forty of his men, seeing their ammunition was spent, and that he was drawing
down his Canon upon them; they consulted how they might, the night following
save themselves; to which end one of them goes out to discover how they might
avoid the Courts of Guard; which when he had done, and as he was returning, the
Sentinel of the House espying him, and taking him for one of the Enemy, shot at
him, and broke one of his Thighs^; Nevertheless he gave them an account of his
discovery, shows them the way, and very instantly urged them to make their
escape: But his brother, who was also the man had wounded him, almost mad with
grief, resolves not to leave him, and tells him, that since he had been the
unhappy instrument of his disaster, he would be his companion in what fortune
soever befell him: The good nature of one of their Couzin Germains, moved him
also to a resolution of embracing their destiny; so the other four at the
request of these, and under favor of the night, after mutual embraces, save
themselves; whiles these three, placing themselves at the door, charge their
Muskets, with patience expect the light, and then most valiantly receive their
enemies, of whom when they had slain a good number, themselves dyed freemen:
The names of these poor Soldiers deserve a place in History, their action
being not inferior to the most memorable, Antiquity can boast of.

But to return to the Duke of Rohan, who marches along the frontires of
Rouergue, and takes a small Fort called Roque Ciziere, in which he left a
Garrison; the same day he goes to another, called La Bastide, which he found
deserted, as also some others which were pillaged, and burnt: From thence he
goes to la Cauve, and in his way thence toward Augle, takes and burns some
other small Forts; and then makes a descent into the Valley of Mazavel, where
he goes on firing more Forts, up as far as Saint Pons: And as he would have
continued this progress, in revenge of those places the Marshal of Themines
had fired in his absence; he received intelligence from Bretigny, Governor of
Foix, and from Saint Blancart also; that the Marshal Themines, and the Count de
Carmain, Governor of the Province, had invested Azil, with an Army of seven
thousand foot, six hundred horse, and nine piece of Canon; that there were in
it seven hundred soldiers, people of the same Country, which they had sent
thither, under the command of Captain Carboust, and Captain Vallette, both
experienced old soldiers; that they could not conjecture, what would be the
issue of the Siege, for that the place was but weak, and the assaults most
furious; but yet was it of that consequence, that if it should miscarry with
those which were in it, there would not be men enough left to maintain the
lower Foix, both by reason of the weakness of Pamiers, which would require a
very strong Garrison, and also of the Intelligences the enemy had in it: But if
he could spare them a recruit but of five hundred Men, they would engage
themselves to keep the lower Foix, and would do their uttermost to preserve
Azil.

This Intelligence diverted the Dukes resolutions, who thereupon sent Lusignan
with a party of Horse and Foot, to convoy the Canon back to Castres, and thence
to Realmont, while he himself with the residue of his Troops, with much
difficulty convoys six hundred Soldiers to Revel, where when they had staid a
day to receive some pay, he sent them under the command of Valescure into Foix,
who conducted them very well thither; and then returns to Castres.

The difference between the Baron de Leran, and Bretigny, much perplexed the
Duke of Rohan, for that, being Master of Carlat (which was but a League distant
from Azil) it was in his power either to promote, or impede its relief*
Whereupon he sent Villemore and Orose, Captains of his guards, to make him
sensible of the injury he did himself, in obstructing the relief of Azil, by
denying his Soldiers admittance into Carlat, commanding them withal, in case
the Baron would not submit to reason, publicly to declare to the people of
Carlat the cause of their coming; which they so handsomely ordered, that he was
compelled by the Inhabitants to yield to the Duke's commands, and to receive
whatever Soldiers should at any time be sent thither, by his order, which
proved no small advantage to Azil, and indeed was the only cause of its
preservation.

While things were thus carried on in Foix, the Duke d' Espernon, with fifteen
hundred Horse, and four thousand Foot, advances toward Montauban to ravage the
Country thereabouts; and Soubize, to divert him, makes a descent into Medoc,
where he took some Garrisons: But understanding that Manti, with the Admiral of
Zealand, named Haultin, were coming against him with forty good Ships of War,
he re-imbarques, meets, fights, and defeats them, sinks five of their Ships, of
which the Vice Admiral of Zealand was one, and kills them more than fifteen
hundred men.

The news of this defeat, made them change their note at Court, and whereas
before they protracted the Treaty in expectation of the issue of this fight,
now, seeing it proved to their disadvantage, they conclude it, and send
Deputies to the Rochellers, to receive their acceptance of it: Forain also goes
to them from the Duke of Rohan, who, considering the indisposition of the King
of England, and the Prince of Orange, toward their party, advised them to
accept of that peace their Naval Victory had purchased them; to which Soubize
adds his persuasions also; but the Rochellers very indiscreet in that
particular, and according to the humor of people as insolent in prosperity, as
dejected in adversity, refufe to hearken to it, without a present demolition of
the Fort.

In the mean time the King takes great care speedily to repair his Fleet, and
obtains of the King of England seven great Ships; So that the delays the
Rochellers used in concluding the Treaty of peace, gave their enemies
opportunity to corrupt some of the Captains of Soubize his Fleet, and among
others, his Vice Admiral Fozan: At the same time also the Duke of Montmorency
resolves upon a descent into the Isle of Re, and to make an attempt upon
Soubize his Fleet which lay in the Fosse de l' Oye, a Road joining to the Town
of Saint Martin de Re; a rash and senseless enterprise in appearance, which yet
treachery made feisible, and purchased it a far different Character.

Then came Milletiere and Madiane to Rochelle, with the Articles of peace
agreed on at Fontainbleau; but it was then, when Soubize, who was in the Isle
of Re, sent them word thence, that the King's Navy were sailing toward him,
and that with all speed they should transport themselves into the Island: At
first, every one laughed at this Message, nay, and there were some in Rochelle
offered to lay great wagers, that the English and Dutch Ships were called off
again: Soubize reiterates his Messages, and for the last time summons them to
his assistance: There were then in Rochelle eight hundred Gentlemen well
mounted, and about eight or nine hundred Soldiers, of Soubize his Army, with
the greatest part of his Officers, and among others the Counts of Laval, and
Loudriere: Upon this last summons they all make ready to imbarque; but the
Mayor diverted them, persuading them that they were better to expect the
morning, than run the hazard of the evening Tide, and so made them lose all
opportunity to transport themselves; For the next morning appeared thirteen of
the King's great Ships in the Road, which prevented their passage over: Soubize
seeing himself thus abandoned, lands all his Foot, which were not above fifteen
hundred Soldiers, leaving only an hundred in his great ship called the Virgin;
commands his Admiral Guiton, and his Vice Admiral Fozan, not to stir out of
the Road, where they were secure, but there to wait his further Orders; And
then divides his Army into three Squadrons, to secure those three places, which
he conceived most obnoxious to danger, and where he thought it most probable
that the enemies should attempt to land: But, notwithstanding all his care, he
could not dispatch time enough, before Toiras had landed three thousand Foot,
and fifteen hundred Horse; whereupon he resolved to draw all his men into a
body, and fight him the next day, which accordingly he did: At the first onset
he routed the Avantguard, and slew about three or fourscore of the most
forward of them; but being relieved by the main body, Bellesbat who commanded
Soubize his left wing, instead of seconding him, faced about, and plunged
himself, and the whole party he commanded in the Marshes: This much encouraged
the Enemy, who now oppressed Soubize on all sides, whose Major General
Verger-Malague, and some of his Captains being slain, the rest fled in such
confusion, that all the Art and Industry of Soubize could not rally them
again; who yet that day, even by the confession of his enemies, justly
purchased the reputation of a worthy Commander, and valiant Soldier. The
remainder of his Troops he drew off to Saint Martin de Re, where he made
account to transport them again to his ships, and once more try his Fortune in
a battle at Sea; But there he found, so great a terror had possessed Guiton,
that contrary to his express command, he had turned out the hundred Soldiers
left in the Virgin; and that Fozan, with some Captains, combined in the same
conspiracy with him, to intimidate the rest, had run aground the best ships,
and that the rest, seeing themselves thus betrayed, and abandoned, shifted
every one, the best he could, for himself; all but the Virgin, in which there
were only five Men left, but very resolute, who seeing four of the King's ships
making toward them, resolved to stand it out against all extremities: The
enemy came up to, grappled with, and boorded them, whereupon the Master, whose
name was Durand, leaps into the powder with a lighted match, and blows up all
the five Ships together, in which there perished seven hundred thirty six men.

In this accident there was one thing very remarkable, concerning one Chaligny
a Gentleman of Poictou, and his son, who were two of the five left in the Ship:
The father, before the firing of the Magazine, being wounded, and disabled to
save himself by swimming, commanded his son to shift for himself, who, with
much reluctance, at length obeyed him; but the good man, being in the
protection of God, was as well preserved, as his Son; for being, by the force
of the Powder, carried up into the air, he chanced to fall into a Shalloup of
the enemies, without receiving any further harm at all, and was afterward
ransomed.

Soubize finding his affairs in so broken a condition, leaves his Major General
Le Parc d' Archiat, at Saint Martin d' Re, and in a Shalloup gets to the Isle
of Oleron, where he provides the best he could for the preservation of it,
leaving five hundred men in the Fort, which he furnished with all necessaries,
and then, with seven of his ships, which had retired thither, sets out to sea,
and out of the relics of his late Fleet, gets together two and twenty Ships,
with which he passes into England to repair them: After which, Le Parc d'
Archiat, made an honorable composition, which was also well observed, and drew
off all his men from the Isle of Re to Rochelle; But those that Soubize left in
the Isle of Oleron yielded themselves basely, a thing not unusual after such
routs; for it is not given to all men, to have their courages of an equal
temper in adversity and prosperity.

This fatal accident did not so much deject the spirits of the Rochellers, as
it elevated theirs at Court: For when Milletiere and Madiane, returned thither
with the Rochellers acceptance of the peace, they would not endure any further
mention of it; but to break them by a division, continued their old project of
granting a peace to the higher and lower Languedoc, excluding Rochelle, and
Soubize.

While these things thus passed in those parts, they of Azil held out beyond
the expectation of their friends, and the hopes of their enemies that besieged
them, who from a battery of Nine Guns sent them in three thousand shot, and
made three indifferent large breaches: But the enemy preparing to give them a
general, and furious storm, Bretigny, and Saint Blancart, who had several
times relieved them, resolved, now at this last push, to Rack all their powers
for them; The conduct of this relief was undertaken by Saint Blancart, who got
in to them with three hundred and fifty men, forcing, in his passage, a Court
of guard which kept a Bridge, with the loss of one man only: The arrival of
this renfort silenced all disputes, among the besieged, concerning the command,
which before had occasioned some divisions among them; but all acknowledging
Saint Blancart for their Superior, he so well ordered all things, that after
the expense of eighteen hundred Canon Bullets within the space ofthree days,
the Marshal Themines gave them a fierce assault with his whole Army, commanding
also five hundred Reformado's to dismount, and serve on Foot (there being many
hundreds of people that had placed themselves on the tops of Mountains to
behold this fight:) Thrice was he repulsed with the loss of above five hundred
men; Within the Town the Capta in Vallette who commanded at one of the breaches
was there slain, some other Officers too, the besieged lost, together with
seventy or eighty Soldiers slain and wounded: But above all, either friends
or enemies, Saint Blancart there Renowned himself, both by his prudent care and
vigilance in repairing the breaches, and his Valor in defending them, being
always ready in person at all places of greatest danger; in this action
surpassing even himself: The Marshal now thinks of nothing, but how to draw off
his Canon; in which having spent two whole nights, and many of his Soldiers,
which he lost in the Attempt; he drew off with the Fragments of his shattered
Army toward Lauraguais.

This small success, together with the effect the Duke of Rohan's continual
solicitations wrought upon the people of Nismes, inducing them to declare for
his party, relevated his affairs out of the drooping condition they were in:
Some of our Deputies then attending the Court, were about the same time sent to
the Communalties to procure their acceptance of the peace, excluding Rochelle
and Soubize, which many ill affected zealously promoted, especially at Castres,
where they had resolved to assent to it upon those terms: But Rohan arriving
there in the nick, and urging their former resolutions to the contrary, made
them alter their intentions, and then summoned an Assembly at Millaud, where
the Towns of Nismes and Usez appeared by their Deputies, and all unanimously
made an Act of acceptance jointly with Soubize and Rochelle, and sent it to the
Court.

The Duke who several times had experience of their endeavors to surprise him,
under pretense of Treating, stops not there, but goes to Nismes, and Usez,
where he was received with great acclamations of joy; and having confirmed his
Party in Aletz, by sending thither Marmeyrac, a Gentleman of the Country, to
head them upon occasion, departs one night from Nismes, and comes the next
morning, by ten of the Clock, to Aletz, where at first he found the gates shut
against him, but the industry and diligence of Marmeyrac quickly got them open,
so that now there was not any place in the lower Languedoc, or the Sevenes,
that had not declared for the Duke of Rohan, who convened an Assembly of the
Sevenes at Aletz, both to assure himself of the Town, and also of the Colloque
of Saint Germain, which the continual solicitations of the Marquess de Ports,
and his faction, had still kept off from him; which obliged the Duke, in the
interim, before the meeting of the Assembly, to make a step thither, where his
presence was of great use, both to procure Deputations for the Assembly, and
the conjunction of that Colloque with the others.

At the beginning of the Assembly the Duchess of Rohan dispatched Villette to
the Duke her Husband, with intelligence, that, upon the assurance many
Communalties had given of their readiness to accept of the offered peace, with
the exclusion of Soubize and Rochelle, the Court party stiffely persisted in
their former resolutions, not to admit of any other, and had sent back some of
their Deputies to declare their adherence to them; and that therefore it would
concern him, to have a vigilant eye upon their actions: This message had a
sinister sense put upon it, and the Marquess of Montbrun, who a few days
before came to Nismes, on purpose to insinuate himself into the affections of
the people, found no better expedient to effect it, than vailing his intentions
with a pretense of much zeal to the Religion, by forging scandalous accusations
against the Duke of Rohan; which when he had notice of, and that Du Cross was
come with the final determination of the Court, not to grant any peace, but
with the exclusion of Soubize, and Rochelle; he took him with him to Nismes,
convoqued a second Assembly at Millaud, and caused Nismes, and Usez, in his
presence, to nominate their Deputies, and resolve in no wise to desert Soubize
and Rochelle; from thence he went to Vigan, where he also caused Deputies, of
the like resolution with those of Nismes and Usez, to be chosen for all the
Sevenes; and with them all proceed together to Millaud.

While he was thus busied about these affairs, he receives news of Soubize from
the Duchess of Rohan, which assured him, that, within three months, the King
of England would send a very considerable relief to Rochelle, desired him to
make it known to the party, and to order things so, that they desert him not.
When he came to Millaud, he understood that the higher Languedoc had determined
to accept of the peace, excluding Soubize and Rochelle, and that, had not the
presence of Lusignan, and Saint Blancart, as they returned from Foix with the
Troops of the Sevenes, very opportunely prevented it, they had sent their
acceptance to the Court. This intelligence made the Duke carry on the Assembly
as far as Castres, where when he had assembled the Province anew, and received
the resolutions of those of Montauban, to the same effect with those of the
Provinces of the lower Languedoc, and the Sevenes, he enforced the former to
retract their late intentions, and to confirm the other Act of acceptance,
including Soubize and Rochelle: But to effect this, he was obliged to some
extremities, securing the persons of seven or eight of the most eminent
Citizens, whom he dispersed into diverse places of Rouergue, and the Mountain of
Albigeois; publishing a Declaration of what he had done, as also the reasons
moving him thereunto, together with the Decrees of the said Provinces, which
were approved by all, except the Town of Puylaurens, who resolved to stand upon
their Guards, and not to open their gates to any of either side; protesting
notwithstanding that they wodul not dis-unite from the party of the Religion.

When their affairs were brought to this pass, the Deputies were sent back to
the Court with the final determination of the Provinces not to abandon
Rochelle: And a few days after their departure, arrives a Messenger from
Vivaretz, who informed the Duke, that Brison had taken Pousin, and some other
places of less importance, and that all Vivaretz had declared for his party,
and did beseech him to advow the taking of those places, and to confer the
Government of Pousin, and the whole Province upon Brison, which he condescended
to.

Not long after, the Duchess of Rohan sends the Viscount Roussille to her
husband, with intelligence that the Earl of Holland, and Sir -- Carleton
extraordinary Ambassadors from England, and Arsens extraordinary Ambassador
from the States of Holland, were arrived at Court to solicit the King to sign
the League, and make us accept the peace, which she believed was already well
advanced, and that she desired, if possible, to hear from him before it were
concluded; to which the Duke replied by the same Messenger, that above all
things the Deputies should endeavor to preserve from demolition, the
fortifications of Pousin; that that being obtained, and the Rochellers
contented, the Communalties where he was, would rest very well satisfied: But
befides the aforesaid Ambassadors, those of Venice and Savoy, in short, all
that were interessed in the League, out of the hopes the King would sign it,
interposed their mediation also, to hasten the peace; which the Ambassadors of
England by a Deed in writing, in the name of the King their Master, became
sureties for the entire observation of; against which the Deputies of the
Communalties having nothing to object, the peace was accepted by them, on the
fifth day of February, eight days before the return of the Viscount Roussille.

Whilst the Duke was busied in composing the disorders of the higher
Languedoc, he was alarmed by reiterated messages, that Nismes, unless his
sudden presence prevented it, would be certainly lost, by reason of the
divisions happened since the arrival of the Marquess of Montbrun, and his
brothers there; who with many Artifices, and great diligence, had gained the
populacy to them, and by seditions, and tumults, attempted to ingross the power
of the whole Country, which the most eminent of the Nobility withstood, so that
the matter was now come to a formal quarrel, which, but by his presence, was
not appeasable; this made him hasten his instructions for the higher Languedoc,
where he leaves the Marquess of Lusignan, with four companies of strangers,
whom he quartered in Castres, and then posts away to Nismes; where at his
arrival, he met first of all with the Baron D' Aubais, whom the lower Languedoc
had deputed to the Court; and afterward with Montmartin, the Deputy General,
who brought with them their late acceptance of the peace, and were now come to
have it ratified; Mainald the other Deputy General, Du Candal, and Mailleray
were sent to Rochelle, Novillan to Montauban, and Madiane to the higher
Lauguedoc. Montmartin sollicites the Duke of Rohan to ratify it at Nism^s, but
by no means would he consent to any particular ratification; but summoned an
Assembly to be held at Nismes, in which the Act of acceptance should with a
general consent be confirmed on the fifteenth day of March following; deferring
it to a longer term, that he might in the mean time hear from Rochelle; in
which interval, Montmartin goes to the higher Languedoc, to hasten the Deputies
of that Province to appear at the time appointed: But he found that at
Montauban the peace was already accepted, and that, without expecting the
Convocation, all the higher Languedoc had also ratified it, sending their
Deputies thither for form only. The day before the Session of the Assembly,
the Duke was informed of the Rochellers confirmation of it also; so that there
remaining only the lower Languedoc, and the Sevenes to do the like, the
Assembly drew up a general Act of Ratification, which Montmartin and Aubais
with the Deputies of the Duke of Rohau carried to the Court; in this act only
the Province of Vivaretz was not comprised, for that then they must surrender
Pousin, which our Deputies could not preserve, because they had no Commission
to make any demands concerning it before the peace was concluded; which was
occasioned by the negligence of the Deputy of that Province, that gave not
notice of the taking of Pousin, till many days after the departure of our
Deputies toward the Court.

Thus was our peace concluded, where we must observe, that the King, out of
fear of the supplies the Duke of Soubize had procured in England, taking
occasion from, and making very good use of the discontents of the English
Ambassadors, sent Botru into England, who so well managed all, that during his
Embassy, which lasted but three weeks, he obtained a Renvoy of new Ambassadors
thence to France, to conclude all things concerning the League, upon condition
they should enforce the Deputies of the Religion to accept a peace, upon very
ambiguous and uncertain terms, especially for the Town of Rochelle; who, in
regard they had no hopes of any considerable relief from any other part, were
of necessity obliged to be submissive to them. The Deputies also of the
particular Provinces, to show that they of the Religion preferred the
advancement of the grand design of the League before their own security, and to
remove out of the way the pretense of the Kings Counsel for not signing it,
while the War continued in France, did the like: But so resolute was the
demeanor of the Duchess of Rohan toward the English Ambassadors, and the
Cardinal Richelieu, to whom he protested, that unless the Ambassadors
interposed in it, nothing should be concluded, that, after she had neatly
broken a particular Treaty of the Rochellers, carried on by their Deputies,
whom the Court-party, and the Duke of Trimouille had drawn over to them, she
prevailed so far upon them all, that contrary to their former resolutions, they
interessed themselves in it. This sheltered her from the malice of her enemies,
and the Deputies from any blame that might be imputed to them from their
Communalties, and also obliged the King of England, seeing that the peace was
accepted by his advice, to see it faithfully observed, to which his
Ambassadors more strictly bound themselves by a formal Deed, signed, and
sealed with their own Arms; so that the conclusion of our peace was an
universal joy both to the Court, and all Foreign Ambassadors there residing;
but fifteen days after, when contrary to the solemn protestations made to them
concerning that particular, they saw also this Treaty in the Valtoline was
concluded by the King, and the King of Spain, they were clouded with no less
discontent; especially the English, when they perceived, that betrayed by
delusory hopes, they had been made the instruments, to oblige us to accept a
peace so much to our disadvantage.

Thus did the French, in cousening the English, and all the Princes interessed
in the League, deceive themselves also, having done nothing in this affair,
that tended not to the advantage of Spain, the oppression of the Allies of the
Crown, and the great detriment of France it self.

This is an account of the passaget in the second War; in the progress of which
Rohan and Soubize were opposed by all the Grandees, even of the same Religion,
whom either too much envy, or too little zeal, had aliened from their party, by
all the Officers of the Crown, and a great part of the most eminent of every
Town, whom their own covetousness, and the allurements of the Courts had
blinded; as for the Foreign Nations, the English and Hollanders contributed
their Ships, and Germany it self stood in need of the assistance of others; so
that it is no great wonder if a better peace could not be obtained; but yet was
it much more advantageous than the former, forasmuch as those of the Religion
preserved their Fortifications, and got the King of Englands caution for the
performance of it; God will assist us more powerfully, when our entire
conversion to him makes us more capable of his favor.

The End of the third Book.
THE Memoires OF THE DUKE of ROHAN:
The fourth Book. Containing a Relation of the third War against those of the
Reformed Religion in France.
AFter the peace was thus accepted by those of the Religion, Brison only, who
had not taken up Arms till toward the end of the War, seeing that a
submission to the Treaty of peace would divest him of Pousin, a place upon the
Rhone, which, nor long before, he had surprised, refused to be comprised in it;
encouraged thereunto by the Constable Lesdiguieres, who after his return out of
Piedmont, being in some disfavour at Court, and unwilling to return thither,
but catching at all employments hat might color his abode in his own
Government, made very good use of this occasion, which he so well improved,
that having spun out this affair for some months, he at length procured Brison
an ample Pardon, and forty thousand Crowns, in lieu of that place, which was
yielded up by him, and afterward, by the King's command demolished.

This was the last Act of the Constable's life, which suddenly after the
termination of this affair, crowned with many days and much honor, he
yielded up at Valence: He was a Gentleman of Dauphine, who by his valor,
prudence, and good fortune, having passed through all the lesser charges of the
War, had advanced himself to the highest: And had not so constant and
uninterrupted a course of prosperity, effaced, toward his latter end, all
shame in him, so that, he dishonored God, by his domestic, and infamous
debauches, sullying his house with Adulteries, and public Incests, he might
have justly been paralleled with the greatest Persons, Antiquity can boast of!

From this amicable composure of our Intestine differences, sprung fair hopes
of the duration of our peace; which in a short time also withered: For it was
contrary to the intention of those that aimed to raise their fortunes upon the
ruins of those of the Religion: Amongst whom the Marquess de Ports was the
most violent, who favored by the command he had in the lower Languedoc, left
no way uneffayed to force the people upon some desperate course; of whom he
exacted contributions as in the time of the War, though by the Articles of the
Treaty, they were entirely abolished: But this being not enough to provoke a
people harrassed with so many and yet smarting mischiefs, and covetous to enjoy
the small repose they possessed, they fly to another invention; which was to
ground a jealousy upon the Duke of Rohan's stay at Nismes, which many, out of
a desire, either to conserve an old ill paid pension, or to purchase a new one,
fomented with frequent calumnies, no week passing without some new accusations
exhibited against him, upon which, and the facility they proposed to themselves
of expelling him the Town, they resolve to make him the object of their malice,
furthering their design by an occasion taken from the annual elections of the
Consuls for Nismes, who are always chosen at the later end of the year.

Whiles they so industriously labor his ruin here, they are nothing less
remiss to procure it in the other Provinces, and indeed over all France,
striking at him by the National Synod, appointed to be held at Castres as a
place most animated against the Duke, for that during the last War, he had used
some severity toward some persons of quality in that Town, that would have
betrayed him. Thither was sent Commissioner Galand, a person without
contradiction of very great abilities, but withal mercenary, and void of shame,
or conscience, with instructions to disapprove the Duke of Rohan's late
engagement in arms, to disadvow his foreign Intelligences, and, if possible,
to get him excommunicated.

The Duke seeing two such strong batteries raised against him, and threatening
more danger than the War it self, prepares to defend himself against their
violence: And forasmuch as that of the Synod seemed to be of greatest
consequence, he endeavored to secure himself against it, by procuring, in
several Provinces of France, the election of such persons for Deputies, as were
men of an inflexible integrity both to the Party and himself too, and draws up
a Declaration, remonstrating chiefly the just cause he had to use such
proceedings against those he had formerly expelled the Town; for that he know
that to be the principal crime they had to charge him with in the Synod: And
forasmuch as the Town at a public consultation had ordered their gates to be
kept shut against him, and that he feared the like usage from them to any
should come from him, he very privately made choice of another Minister, in the
room of his own Chaplain, to communicate his Declaration to his friends, and
to entreat Beaufort the Deputy of the Sevenes to deliver his Letter, which he
had written to the Synod, with charge, that neither the one, nor the other
should discover themselves, but when it might be very seasonable; which
happened well to him; for they were prepared to refuse admittance to any that
should come from him; nay, Marmet his Chaplain, though he protested, that he
came only about an affair of particular concernment to himself, could not be
permitted any longer stay there, than of four and twenty hours.

On the fifteenth of September, in the year 1626, Chauve was chosen Moderator,
Bouteroue Assistant, Blondel Pastor, and Petit an Advocate of Nismes Scribe.
And now Galand bestirres himself against the Duke of Rohan, whose enemies in
Castres are no less diligent in preparing the venom they had to pour out
against the Duke in the Synod, animated also thereunto by the Commissioner
Galland: But all their designs vanished into air: For the Deputies being
before sufficiently satisfied with the reasons moving the Duke to proceed
against them in that manner, made them not dare to present any bill against him
to the Synod; who nevertheless could not conceal the displeasure they had
conceived against those of Castres, with whom they disclaimed any future
reconciliation; so that they were now become a general abomination; and the
only way to ruin any affair, was to offer it to Galand's recommendation; And
thus ended the Synod, where, by the Kings command, (that he might abridge those
of the Religion, of their liberty of convening any General Assemblies) were
chosen the Deputies General: The six nominated, were the Count de la Suze, the
Marquess of Galerande, and Beaufort for the Nobility: and for the Commonalty,
Texier, Dupuy Deputy of Burgogne, and Bazin; of whom Galerande and Bazin were
accepted.

This affair thus terminated, we must now reflect upon the Consulate of Nismes.
The Presidial, or Sovereign Court of the Town, according to the humor of many
Corporations, not brooking the Duke of Rohan so near them, joined with a Party
composed of many persons of Note in the Town, whom the Court faction had
invited, and drawn over to them: But finding themselves yet too weak, by
ordinary and Legal ways, to promote to the Consulate Creatures of their own,
they resolve to engage the Royal power in it, and to effect it by ways unusual
and destructive to their own Privileges, and contrary to the Articles of the
late Peace. To which end, they send privately to the Court, where they obtain a
Commission directed to the Chamber of Edict in Languedoc, to go and order the
said Election of the Consuls; and that nothing might be omitted to forward
their design, the Duke of Montmorency is sent from the Court into his
government, who passes by Nismes, where he encourages those of his Faction,
which he strengthens with the neighboring Nobility; and those he could not win
to his Party, he forces to absent themselves from the Town, till the business
was determined: And for as much as the Marquess of Montbrun toward the latter
end of the former war, had gained some credit among the Populacy, he was also
sent for out of Dauphine; for they hoped not only to make such Consuls as
should be at their devotion, but upon the Dukes opposing himself against it, to
hale him out of the Town, dead or alive: These things thus prepared, the day of
Election comes; the Marquess of Montbrun also arrives at the time appointed, so
do Monsac, DeSuc, and the two Deans (or Seniour Counselors) of the Chamber,
who were nominated Commissioners for this affair; who declaring their charge to
the Deputies of the Town, receive for answer, their fixed resolutions, to
maintain the Privileges of the Town: The Common Council of which meet
according to their accustomed manner, in the morning to proceed to the said
Election; whither the Commissioners go also; but finding the doors of the
Townhouse shut, are fain to return to their lodgings, where they declare
against the proceedings of the Common Council, and send about the Town to
assemble the Inhabitants for a new Election; some refuse to stir, others go,
but without any commotion in the Town were obliged to retire again.

Now the new Consuls enter not into their Office, till a month after the
Election; so that the Court had leisure to send a Prohibition to those that
were elected, forbidding them to meddle with the Office, and enjoining the old
ones to continue the exercise of it, till it were otherwise ordered:
notwithstanding which, when the first day of the year was come, the Baron d'
Aubais, Genoyer, Saguter, and Pelissiere, according to the usual manner took
possession of the Consulate; where we shall leave them in repose, to look
further back upon the affairs, and view their propensity to new imbroylments.

When the Peace was concluded in the year 1626, it was conceived, that the
Cardinal Richelieu's thoughts would be wholly bent on foreign affairs, of
which he gave some semblant evidence: The Prince of Piedmont, then at Court,
was nominated Leiutenant-General of the Kings Armies for foreign Parts; then
hoped the Venetian Ambassadors, they should now see Italy freed from the
Spanish oppression; the English that they would recover the Palatinate; and
preparations were making (but in words only) for all these designs; of the
reality of which if any one seemed to doubt, it was confirmed by a thousand
oaths: But when a few days after the signing of the Peace with those of the
Religion, unknown to all the Confederates, was signed also that of France with
Spain; then brake forth complaints and discontents of the one side, seconded by
excuses of the other, every one casting the blame upon another, especially
upon. Fargis Ambassador in Spain, whose Wife, as if he had exceeded the limits
of his Commission, was made to sue out his Pardon: but these pretenses could
not salve the distempers of the Confederates interessed in the League, which
some of them afterward upon occasions did discover.

The cause of this sudden and unexpected peace, was attributed to a desire the
Cardinal had to live some time in quiet, that he might the better secure his
own greatness. and that nothing might obstruct his pursuit of the design
against Rochelle, where he intended to do great matters; or else to some
Jealousy he had conceived of a new party, to be raised in France, under the
command of the Duke Anjou to ruin him; but whether it was the one, or the
other, or both together, certainly the occasion of these ensuing factions, gave
him fair colors for any design.

The Queen Mother desirous to marry the Duke of Anjou, would needs consummate
the Match, designed by Henry the great, between him and the Princess of
Montpensier, which he was absolutely averse from; whether this aversion
proceeded from himself, or the suggestions of others, not desirous this treaty
should take effect; which encouraged many to join with him. But the Prince of
Conde, and his Wife, whom this marriage threatened with a remove so many degrees
from the Crown, as the Duke of Anjou should have Sons; The Count of Soissons
for the same reason, and out of hopes he had to marry that Princess himself:
The Duke of Longueville out of Jealousy of the Duke of Guise, whose Sons were
all Brothers to the Princess Montpensier; The Duke of Vendosme upon the same
consideration, to which his Brother the Grand Prior of France added his
discontents against the Cardinal, who had deluded him with promises of the
Admiralty of France, which afterward under another title, he reserved to
himself; many of the chief Nobility out of particular Interests; The Queen who
feared the others fertility would prejudice her in the King her Husbands and
his Subjects affections; and the King himself induced by several apprehensions,
opposed it: See here very considerable obstacles to be removed.

Nevertheless the Queen Mother, who with good reason grounded on her own, and
the Interest of the State, was very zealous for this marriage, despairs not,
but begins her design with an attempt to gain the Colonel d' Ornano, who was
formerly the Duke of Anjou's Governor, and continuing still his Favorite had
a great influence on him: To this end, she gets him made Marshal of France; but
what ever promises these honors extracted from him, they quickly vanished, as
soon as he saw the Princess of Conde, whose beauty and attractions raised in
him so much love and vanity, as totally blinded him; so that being caressed and
sued to of all hands, he lost himself in that Maze of felicity: the better to
carry on his own designs with her, he pretends to the Queen Mother that his
services are wholly bent to effect her desires, and procure her contentment,
when really the charms of that Princess had drawn him entirely to her devotion;
'Twas she also governed the Queen, proposing to her the disrespect and contempt
the Children of the Duke of Anjou would bring upon her; and that if he must
needs be married, her Sister the Infanta of Spain would be a more convenient
match for him: But all this while this Princess hoped that having clearly
gained the Marshall d' Ornano to her assistance, she should in the depth of
this Labyrinth find out a way to conduct her own Daughter to the Dukes bed. See
here three Parties in one, the Queens, and those of the two Princes of the
blood, all which, though for different reasons, and which they concealed the
one from the other, conspire to impede this match; and so strenuously prosecute
their desires, that the Duke of Anjou absolutely refused her.

At the same time there happened a private quarrel which was seconded by many
other: Chalais Master of the Wardrobe, having in a Duel slain Pontgibault,
younger Brother to Ludde, Nephew to the Marshall Schomberg, and a Favorite of
the Duke d' Elbeuf, caused a great division in the Court; the Duke of Anjou,
the Count of Soissons, and the Grand Prior, undertook the protection of
Chalais; the Duke d' Elbeuf, with the whole family of Guise (except the Duke de
Chevreuse) favored the House of Ludde; this division lasted all the Winter; at
length, Chalais having obtained his Pardon, and sensible of his obligations to
his Protectors, gave himself up wholly to their Interests, and was of great use
to continue the Duke of Anjou in his obstinacy against the marriage with the
Princess Montpensier; The Princess of Conde also diffident of the sufficiency
of her power with the Queen, persuades her to engage the Duchess of Chevreuse
in her party, for that her own Interests lying with the other Party, she feared
lest otherwise she should divert her: But her will was easily brought to a
compliance with the Queens; the sense of her great obligations to her, making
her promise to sacrifice all her Interests to her commands and service. On the
other side, the Queen Mother passionately prosecutes the accomplishment of the
Marriage; especially the Cardinal, hoping that to effect it against so many and
great oppositions, would enlarge the Princess of Monepensiers obligations to
him so, that his power would suffer no diminution, though misfortune should
alien even the Kings affections from him; the Princess of Conti, Sister to the
Duke of Guise, and all their family bestir themselves mainly to the same end,
and by the means of the Duke d' Elbeuf, who was a Friend of Baradas the Kings
Favorite, or else of some other persons who engaged themselves in it, the King
was also brought about to relish the match too, out of an apprehension infused
to him, that those three factions pretended only a rupture of the marriage,
whereas, in effect, their design had no other aim but his ruin, to clap him
into a Monastery, and marry the Duke of Anjou to the Queen: This impression
made him now as zealously promote, as he had formerly opposed the marriage;
earnestly importuning his Brother, and sending to the Marshall d' Ornano, who
returned large protestations of obedience to his commands, but that as yet he
could not discover any disposition in the Duke for it: Thus for some time was
the Marshall caressed and sued to by all parties.

In the mean while, the opposite Party strengthen themselves with a supply of
all such as hated the Cardinal, especially the Duke of Savoy, who, (desirous to
repay him the ill office he had lately received by the conclusion of the peace
with Spain, which exposed him to the inconvenience of a war with Genoa, and the
hatred of Spain,) by his Ambassador the Abbot of Scaglia, proposes to the Duke
a match with the Princess of Mantua, and by the same instrument instigates him
to rid himself of the Cardinal, as the only obstacle to all his designs; but
the Prince of Conde, and the Princess his Wife, seeing the King varied in his,
had not courage enough to persevere in their resolutions for the Party they had
undertaken, though they were most engaged to prevent the marriage; but indeed
so great a propensity was there in their natures to treachery and falsehood,
that without any difficulty was this change wrought in them: the one hoping to
gain a piece of Land, called Dun-le-roy, and was a part of the Crown-land, to
join it to his Duchy of Chasteau-Roux; and the other, that she might not
totally leave the Court the seat of her pleasures and contents; and the better
to act their parts, the Prince comes to Valery, not far from Fountainebleau
where the King then was, whither the Princess also makes several journies;
after which the Marquess of Breze Brother-in-law to the Cardinal, makes three
voyages thither also, but very privately; to whom, as it is said he gave an
account of all passages, adding to, rather then curtailing the relation of any
particular, according to the custom of all Informers, that by such means hope
to inhance the price of their discoveries.

About this time were intercepted several packets going into Spain and Savoy,
which occasioned the securing of the Marshal d' Ornano, who was yet somewhat
more ceremoniously dealt withal then ordinary, in regard of his Master: The
King one afternoon commands the Regiment of his guards into the Basse Court at
Fountainebleau, under pretense of exercising before the Queens; but instead of
returning to their quarters, they possess themselves of all the advenues of
the village, which was also surrounded by the Cavalry: And the King going very
early to bed, not long after rose again, sent for he Queen Mother, the
Cardinal, the Chancellor, and the Marshall Schomberg, with whom he resolved
upon the Arrest, which was executed by the Captain of the Guard.

Whereupon the King sent instantly for the Duke of Anjou, to let him know that
the reason of his imprisonment was, because he knew that instead of serving him
according to his duty, the Marshall infused bad Counsels into him: at which the
Duke was highly displeased, and to as little purpose discovered he his disgust
both in words and gestures, flies in great fury at the Cardinal, demanding of
him, if he had been privy to this design, who told him that indeed he was not
ignorant of it; the same demand makes he to the Chancellor, who for not daring
to advow the action, lost his seals a few days after, and was banished the
Court.

After this Arrest of the Marshal, was Chaudebonne, a Domestic of the Duke of
Anjou's sent to the Bastille, as also Modene and Deagent for their old faults:
The Count of Chasteau-Roux, and the Chevalier de Jars were also banished the
Court, suspected for having so great a dependence on the Queen and the Count of
Soissons. The Marshal was sent to the Bois de Vincennes, and all the places
under his Command seized on, the most considerable of which was Pont Saint
Esprit in Languedoc: The report of this, made all the Princes and Great ones
then at Paris, and in no little amazement at this accident, return to their
attendance on the Court.

The Duke of Anjou persists still in his discontent, and is more averse then
ever from the marriage with the Princess of Montpensier; But being yet
destitute of any safe retreat, he is enforced to cover his displeasure with a
dissembled accommodation with the Cardinal; and hunting often about
Fountainebleau, resolves one day to go toward Fleury, and dine with him, who
then lay there; but having notice of the Dukes intentions, and that it was only
to do him a discourtesie, departs thence before day, comes to Fountainebleau
just as the Duke was rising, and gave him his shirt.

This little discovery rouses the Cardinal, and makes him very sollicitous to
provide against the storms impending over him: he understands moreover, that
all contrivances against his life come from Savoy, that the Abbot of Scaglia is
the chief Instrument employed in it; that the Queen made use of the Duchess of
Chevreuse to animate the Duke of Anjou against him, that the Grand Prior
irritated by a private discontent, is also one of the most violent against him,
whereupon he resolves to ruin those he could, and to rid himself of the rest
the best he could.

This was the ground of his irreconcilable hatred against Savoy, of the ruin of
the Grand Prior, Chalais, and the Dutch. of Chevreuse. To compass his design,
and prepare his way to the Government of Britany, which he coveted for its good
Ports, and the conveniences to execute this new office of Superintendent of
the Sea, which he had introduced to succeed the suppressed Admiralty of France,
he suggests to the King, that the Duke of Vendosme grew too potent in Britany,
considering his pretensions to that Duchy in the right of his Wife, and the
alliance he was entering into with the Duke of Retz, who was very powerful in
that Province, and Master of two of the most considerable places in it; that
the Grand Prior, the most zealous of all the Duke of Anjou's Partisans, was his
brother; that it might be one day a most secure retreat for the Duke, and of
dangerous consequence to all France, considering its situation both so near to
England and Spain; and that it would be expedient to provide timely preventions
against such fatal accidents. This made the King resolve upon a journey
thither, and to ptepare himself for it, the whole Court removed back to Paris;
but the better to conceal the intended voyage, they pretended only a journey to
Blois; Nevertheless the Grand Prior rightly conceiving that a further progress
was designed, offers to seek out his Brother, and bring him to justify himself
against all accusations whatever; provided he might be secured by an engagement
of their words, not to be injured in his person: this he imparts to the
Cardinal, who approves of his design, fills him with hopes, but no promise of
security, advising him to procure that of the King, which he does, and so
departs for Britany.

The Duke of Anjou was very unwilling to this Journey, but finding no evasion
for it, at length resolves upon it: All the Court go, except the Count of
Soissous, and the Princess of Montpensier, whom the sickness of their Mothers
stayed behind. The King being at Blois, thither came the Duke of Vendosme and
his Brother: For two days together the King made them infinite caresses, which
the third night he closes with an Arrest by the Captain of his guards, and then
sent them both Prisoners to the Castle of Amboise.

After this was done, the Cardinal, who had all this while stayed at one of his
houses near Paris, comes to Blois, openly commiserating the misfortune of the
Grand Prior, but not his Brother, in which the whole Court sympathize, for that
the one was beloved, but the other hated; and that which most moved their
compassion, was, that the Grand Prior had most innocently been the Instrument
of both his own and Brother's disaster. The resolution for the voyage into
Britany is continued, and also to press the Duke of Anjou to the marriage, who
still opposed it: But some of his Party, fearing lest at length he might recede
from his resolution, advise him to quit the Court: Some counselling him to take
the way of Rochelle, others that of Metz: Moreover they send to the Count of
Soissons for Balagny and Boyer, two trusty persons, the one to be his conductor
toward Rochelle, if they took that way, and the other to treat with his Uncle
the Duke of Villars Governor of Havre, that they might secure that Port to
receive the foreign succors promised them. But as 't is usual in all
dangerous enterprises, men's hearts failing them, instead of executing their
designs, they raise difficulties to overthrow them, so happened it in this; For
instead of going themselves, they sent a Gentleman belonging to Chalais, to the
Duke of Valette to know whether he would receive the discontents, and by that
means gave him opportunity to evade a business, in which, had they surprised
him, he had without resistance been engaged: For conceiving by this message
that they were not well resolved, he sent them word, that the place belonging
to his Father the Duke d' Espernon, he must first send to know his pleasure,
before he could return them any other answer: This very well pleased those that
dissuaded his departure, especially Chalais who was of a mild temper, and
naturally averse from faction; to which his friends had never inclined him, had
not his spirit been too flexible to withstand their solicitations; so that
seeing the trouble and danger still increase, he grew very desirous to
dis-entangle himself of the affair, and to that end, entreats the Commandeur de
Valence to assure the Cardinal, that he would renounce the Duke of Anjou's
Interests, and become his servant; The Cardinal who desired nothing more,
receives and cajoles him so handsomely, that he engages him by promise, to
discover all the Dukes designs to him: This lasted a few days; but the
inconstancy of his humor, which yet was nothing mischeivous, hurrying him to
another change; he repents of his promise, will discover nothing, and
raccomodes himself with the Duke of Anjou; requesting the Commandeur to revoke
the promise he had given the Cardinal in his behalf, who excuses himself of the
employment, foretelling him, that it was the next way to a Prison or worse; But
Chalais notwithstanding, persisting in his resolutions, got some other to carry
his intentions to the Cardinal, who nothing relished the message, which
recalled to his mind the business of Fleury, and gave him some Jealousies that
it was the Duchess of Chevreuse that had regained him, and therefore he
thought it now time to dispatch him: Wherefore he causes him to be arrested and
sent Prisoner to the Castle of Nantes; and Commissioners of the Parliament of
Britany were appointed for his trial; at which he confesses, and accuses, what,
and whom they please; thinking by that means (being little versed in criminal
proceedings) to save himself, confirms also some flying reports of his
engagement to kill the King who was helping him to bed; but he was condemned
and executed for this only, that being a Domestic of the Duke of Aujou's, he
had advised his Master to retire from the Court: But after all these
weaknesses, seeing how ineffectual they had been to save his life, he dyed with
much courage and constancy; At the same time also was Marcillac apprehended,
and divested of his Government of Sommieres in Languedoc; Troncon and
Sanveterre were also banished the Court, for presuming to dissuade the King
from the intended marriage: To which the Duke of Anjou, during those
procedures, was anew urged; and his Favorites being already won, the Duke upon
hopes of the Marshal d' Ornano's, and Chalais liberty, at length resolves upon
it, and falling from one extremity to another, suddenly and privately marries
the Princess of Montpensier, (who was purposely sent for from Paris with a
gallant train) loves and caresses her, and now cannot live without her.
Hereupon his Appanage was assigned him, to wit, the Dutchyes of Orleans and
Chartres (wherefore for the future we shall call him the Duke of Orleans)
together with the Earldom of Blois; great in appearance, but seated in the
heart of France, without any good place within the whole circuit of it, and of
a very small revenue, his chiefest assignations for the maintenance of his
house being out of the Treasury, that so they might at pleasure be taken from
him.

The marriage thus consummared, they proceed notwithstanding to the execution
of Chalais, inquiring also after informations against the Duke of Vendosme,
especially whether he held not Intelligence with the Duke of Soubize, during
the war in the year 1625. Commissioners also were appointed for the trial of
the Duke, and his Brother the Grand Prior; but the one objecting the Privilege
of his Peerage, and the other of his Cross of Malta, they were at last sent to
the Bois de Vincennes, without any further proceedings against them; only the
Dukes houses in Britany were razed, and he was deprived of his Government of
that Province, which was conferred on the Marshal Themines. 'Twas thought the
reason that diverted the Cardinal from the design he had upon this Government,
was, that having placed into Breast, one of the fairest and securest Ports of
all France, one Sourdeac, a creature of his own, out of hopes to secure it to
himself; the King without his privity, conferred that command upon a Soldier
of mean quality, which vexed him so, that abandoning all future thoughts of the
other, he resolved upon the purchase of Hauvre de Grace in Normandy.

Upon the Confession of Chalais, Messengers were also sent to Verger, a House
of the Prince of Guymenes to confine the Duchess of Chevreuse there, but she
escaped that confinement by her departure before to Paris, where being informed
of what had passed, she recovered, by great journies to Lorrain.

The voyage of Britany having thus succeeded, the King returns to Paris, where
the Count of Soissons durst not expect his arrival, but grown wise by the
misfortune of others, travels into Italy, where the Court-hatred pursued and
persecuted him; For Letters were sent to Bethune Ambassador extraordinary for
the King at Rome, that he should take care the title of Highness was not given
him; to which Bethune having no other passion then for his Masters service,
answers, that he would never be guilty of such a crime, but that if the Count
of Soissons had offended the King, he ought to punish him in France, and not in
that which would so much entrench upon the honor of the Crown; and that he
would rather quit his employment, then do such a disservice both to his Master
and Family.

When the Court came to Paris, not a word was spoken of the Duchess of
Chevreuse her removal; Sardigny and Bonoeil were confined to their own houses,
one being accused for advising the Count of Soissons to leave France, the other
for his too great propensity to the Queens service. Attempts were made also to
take the Chevalier de Jars, which having notice of, he prevented by his flight
into England: About this time also the Marshal d' Ornano died of the Stone,
whose death occasioned several discourses.

We will now leave the Duke of Orleans to comfort himself with the embraces of
his new Wife, for the losses and misfortunes of his servants; and the Cardinal
to refresh himself awhile, after having dissipated so thick, and menacing a
cloud, as hovered over his head, to come to the affairs of England; whither the
Abbot Scaglia, four months before, was gone in quality of Ambassador
extraordinary, and carried together with his Masters, his own particular
passions, both being unanimously bent to spare nothing, that might purchase
them a sound revenge upon the Cardinal, There he found the Duke of Buckingham
of the same humor, whom he encouraged to procure the banishment of all the
French attending on the Queen of great Britany, for that they cherished their
Mistress in some froward humors, which many times occasioned differences
between the King and her, alleging that Spain, France, and Savoy would be
sufficient presidents to warrant the action; recounts the numerous factions and
discontents he had left in France, the ill usage of those of the Religion, in
whose Interests the King himself was engaged, as being surety for the
observance of the last treaty of peace, and assures him of his Master the Duke
of Savoyes compliance and fidelity upon all occasions; All these persuasions
joined with the urgent solicitations of the Duke of Soubize, in the behalf of
those of the Religion, moved the Duke of Buckingham to persuade the King his
Master privately to send a Gentleman to the Duke of Rohan to inform him of his
deep resentments that those of the Religion had by his means and intervention
been deceived, that he now saw clearly, that instead of restoring Rochelle to
its liberty, presecutions they suffered in Languedoc; that it was expedient
they should address their complaints to him, that, being Caution for the late
peace, he might have just occasion to demand reparation for the infractions of
it, which if it was refused, he protested that he would employ the whole
strength of all his dominions, and hazard also his own person to obtain an
exact and punctual observation of the Edict for peace: But that since it was
fitting, for the better Justification of his procedures, to begin with such
formalities, he desires that he would send him over a Gentleman, by whom he
might be fully informed and directed how to proceed.

The Duke who saw no humane means to preserve Rochelle but by relief from
England, received this Message with all respect and honor; and informed the
Gentleman, that the Communalties of the Religion could not write to the King
his Master neither in General, nor in particular without being detected, which
would crush the affair in its birth, that he would undertake that office for
them all, by sending a Gentleman with a Letter, to implore that assistance of
him, he was obliged to give them; who moreover should be fully instructed with
the particular in observations of the peace, and what he thought was the most
convenient course to be taken in reference to the war: With this answer the
Gentleman returned, and a few days after, according to his promise, the Duke
dispatched St. Blancart with orders to go by the way of Rochelle, to see in what
condition was the Citadel of Saint Martin in the Isle of Re; which he exactly
well performed, and after his arrival in England, obtained a conclusion of a
war for our relief.

In the mean while the Duke of Buckingham causes all the Queens French Servants
(except a Chaplain) to be cashiered, which made so great a noise in France,
that the Marshall Bassompiere was sent Ambassador extraordinary into England
to compose the affair, and returned thence with satisfaction correspondent to
his instructions and intentions: But the two Favorites accord not at all; he
of France causes the Marshal, being no creature of his to be disowned, and the
other procures a dissolution of the treaty.

Not long before, the taking of some Normande ships by the English, gave
another occasion of difference; The Parliament of Rouen hereupon not receiving
that speedy satisfaction they expected, laid an Embargo upon all English
Vessels in all their Ports, and the English upon the reciprocal and fruitless
complaints of both Parties, made Prize of all the French they met with.

The Duke of Buckingham, who in all these affairs acted nothing out of
affection to religion, or regard to his Masters honor, but only to satisfy
his passion for some foolish Amors of his in France, upon these two occasions
grounds a request to be sent Ambassador to France; Thus from the petty follies
of the Court, springs the disturbance of whole Kingdoms, most of the mischeifs
that infest them flowing from the particular Interests of Favorites, who
trampling Justice under their feet, subvert all good policy, change the good
Maxims of the State, and make their Masters but properties to support their
greatness, wealth and revenge.

The Duke of Rohan jealous of this Embassy, sent one of his Gentlemen very
privately to Paris, to observe the actions of Buckingham, and to encourage him
in his former resolution: But the King would not admit of his Embassy, so that
his design of Love being frustrated, he now follows the dictates of his rage,
and since he could not see the object of his passion, resolves to show the King
his power, preparing all things for the war, in which, by his present care and
assiduity, he redeems his former negligence and remisness; and that he might
omit nothing that might further his design, the Lord Montague is sent into
Savoy, and thence to the Duke of Rohan, where arriving very privately, he
delivers his Credentials from the King, and from Buckingham, in whose names he
assures himof the great preparations in England for our assistance, to wit, of
thirty thousand men to be disposed into three several Fleets, the first
designed for the Isle of Re, the second coming up the river of Bourdeaux to
land in Guienne, and the third in Normandy, to give the King a sound diversion
there, whilst he should be busied in Guienne; that the Rivers of Loire, Seine,
and the Garonne should with good Frigots be kept closely blocked; that the Duke
of Savoy would make an invasion either upon Dauphine or Provence, and moreover
promised the Duke of Rohan five hundred auxiliary horse, and the Duke of
Chevreuse also the like number; that his desire was, that with those thousand
horse, and the foot he should levy in Lakguedoc, he would march to Montauban,
to rally those of the Religion in Guienne, and join with the English Army, that
should make its descent by the River of Bourdeaux: To which he replied, that
immediately upon the entry of the English into France, and not before, he would
engage himself to take arms, and procure the lower Languedoc, the Sevenes,
Rouergue, and a part of the higher Languedoc to declare, and upon his own score
to raise four thousand foot, and two hundred horse to march to Montauban; and
moreover, if he had half the Cavalry promised him, he would undertake to join
the English Army in any part of Guienne what, soever.

Mourague returned satisfied with this answer, and the Duke of Rohan began his
preparations, which yet he could not make with that secrecy, but that the
Court had soon an inckling of them; so that his Mother and Sister had been made
Prisoners, had they not sought their safety by flying to Rochelle, where they
did eminently contribute to the defeating of the King's designs there; and as
all contrivances against him, were clandestine and underhand, so, for his part
did he cherish those of the Religion in their discontens, especially concerning
the Consulates of Nismes and Aletz, whose accomodations he prevented, so that
he preserved those Corporations in a firm resolution to dare all extremities,
rather then suffer the least diminution of their Privileges, and all the rest
in a condition to adhere to them; And on the other side, the Court faction
having interessed the Royal authority in the concern of those Consulates, would
not in the least degree recede from their purposes.

When things were in this posture, about the twentieth of July comes the Duke
of Buckingham into the Rode of Rochelle, with a brave Armado, in which were ten
thousand men, with store of Canon, and ammunition for war, with all sorts of
Instruments for Pioneers: which when the Rochellers saw, instead of receiving
him whom they had so impatiently expected, they shut their gates and havens
against him, to prevent the arrival of any one from him, to impart his
Commission to them; for the Mayor and those in authority were corrupted by the
Court Party, and the poor people had neither strength, nor courage to admit
him: So that Soubize was fain to go on shore in a Shalloup, and landing near to
one of the Town-Gates with one of the King of Englands Secretaries, his Mother
went straight to another, whither when the Duke was also ^e, she went forth and
drew him in by the arm, at which the People much rejoiced, and in great troops
followed him to his lodging: When he was thus gotten in, he assembled the
Council of the Town, to whom the Secretary declared the substance of his
Message after this manner; That the Duke of Buckingham had sent him to let them
know, that by the command of the King his Master, he was now come in sight of
them with a Gallant Army, ready to land where occasion should require; that
that which induced his King to this, was his certain knowledge that the Council
of France, (corrupted by the house of Austria) conspired the ruin of all
Christendom; which manifestly appeared in the affairs of Germany, which they
have entirely ruined, especially by that permission was given to Count
Mansfields Army to pass through France, which, as he was ready to march, was
refused him, and was the destruction of that, and consequently of the German
Army, in which twelve thousand English perished by famine; that since the King
his Master had by his Ambassadors mediated a composing of the late War against
those of the Religion, and engaged himself for the faithful observation of the
Articles of the Treaty, (and that too with the consent of the King of France)
in which, those of the Religion had submitted to conditions too harsh for their
present estate to bear; he had seen their Confederates of Italy deserted, and
the Armies designed for their defense, employed to block up their Garrisons,
and to reduce this Town to a Consumption by Famine, the continual cries of
which place, and of the whole body of the Reformed party, having by the
mediation of the Dukes of Rohan and Soubize, reathed his ears, and taking
notice of the vast preparations at Sea, closely to begirt this Town, and that
to that end, by an unrepresidented act of injustice, one hundred and twenty
English ships, with all their Merchandise, Mariners, and Artillery, were seized
on in time of peace; that for these, and many other reasons, compassionating
their miseries, and heavy pressures, his promise also to see the Articles
agreed on, performed, obliging him, he now offered them a powerful assistance
both by Sea and Land, in case they will accept of it, and engage in the War
with him, protesting not to prosecute any particular pretension or interest
whatsoever, save only what was accorded to those of the Religion, for which he
became Caution: That in case the Town refuse this offer, the Duke solemnly
protests before God, and the world, that he holds his Master fully absolved of
all obligations both of Conscience, and Honor; and that for his part, he shall
dispose himself to execute the rest of the commands imposed on him by his
Master, and that he desires their clear and speedy answer: This Harangue much
moved the people, who saw no other re-sourse, nor hopes of deliverance then
from the English Arms; yet so prevalent was the faction of those that
endeavored the destruction of that poor, and miserable Town, that with much
difficulty were they induced to resolve on any thing; at length they sent their
Deputies to the Duke of Buckingham, to give the King of England thanks for the
care he took of them, and withal to let him know, that having heard, and well
considered of his Message, representing his Majesty's good intentions to all
the Reformed in France, of whom they were but a part; that being bound by their
Oath of Union to act nothing but by a general and unanimous consent, they
conceived their answer would be much firmer, and more acceptable to the King,
if it were accompanied with that of the Duke of Rohan, and the rest of the
Reformed party, toward whom they were now sending with all speed; beseeching
the Duke of Buckingham favorably to interpret this Protraction of the demanded
junction, and be a means that it may not be displeasing to the King of great
Britain. In the mean time they would address their prayers, and vows to God
for the prosperous progress of his Arms to a plenary execution of the good, and
holy intentions of his Majesty.

This answer had like to have drawn great prejudice on them of all hands; from
the English, to see their great irresolution, and that they should need a spur,
who could find no safety but in their courage, and audacity; from those of the
Religion, inasmuch as they demanded their advice, not assistance; Thus in
affairs of great consequence, Councels accompanied with too much
circumspection, are attended on by no less dangers; for they discover so much
fear, as raises the courages of enemies, and depresses those of friends: The
Duke of Soubize sent the Duke of Buckingham a particular account of this
deputation, and answer, by Saint Blancarte, and withal, an absolute assurance
of the Town of Rochelle.

It is now to be observed, that when Soubize left the Fleet, to know the
intentions of the Rochellers, two things were agreed on between him, and
Buckingham: First, that the first descent should be in the Isle of Oleron, both
for the facility of it, there being not above twelve hundred soldiers to
oppose them, nor any fortress able to make eight days resistance; and also for
the conveniences of the place, abounding in corn, and wine, commodious for the
maintenance of their Soldiers and Mariners, easy to be kept, and that once
taken, and the English Vessels guarding the Sea, would in short time reduce the
Isle of Re to great extremities; whereas if they made their first attempt on
the other, which was well stored with soldiers, sufficiently fortified to make
a good opposition, the success of the attempt would be full of hazard, and the
conquest of uncertainty; the other was not to attempt any thing before the Duke
of Soubize his return: But when Saint Blancart came there to acquaint the Duke
of Buckingham with the issue of his negotiation in Rochelle, he found the
design varied, a descent into the Isle of Re determined, and ready to be
executed, which the Duke of Buckinghem also, not expecting Soubize his return,
hastens; whether it was, that he feared lest Toiras, who had already three
thousand foot, and two hundred horse in the Island, should grow too strong,
many of the Nobility, and great numbers of soldiers flocking thither from all
parts; or that he was loath Soubize should participate of the honor of the
action. At this descent there was a smart and gallant combat, the English,
like a deluge, overwhelming all that opposed them, which greatly terrified the
Romanists; and had he closely pursued the victory, and gone directly to the
Fort, according to the advice of the Duke of Soubize, who was by that time
gotten thither, he had found it empty both of provisions and soldiers; but the
loss of five days idly trifled away, gave Toiras leisure to rally his
scattered men, and to carry all the provisions, could be found in the Village,
up to the Fort.

This only fault drew after it many mischiefs on the reformed party; in this
fight was slain Saint Blancart, (who came thither soon enough to land the
second man) deservedly lamented by his party, being a young man, whose piety,
courage, and prudence emulously strove to renown him.

This descent of the English caused great commotions at the Court, and, had a
sudden taking of the Fort succeeded it, probably a great alteration of affairs
had followed: For the sickness, the King, about the same time, was surprised
with, the general discontent of the Nobility at the Cardinals favor; the
jealousy of those were but lately engaged with the Duke of Orleans; the abode
of the Count of Soissons in Piedmont, and the Duke of Savoy's known desires of
revenge, for his desertion by the French, were sufficient grounds for more than
ordinary jealousies; and every one impatiently expected to know the fate of the
Fort, that they might declare their affections; which the King well knowing,
omitted nothing for its relief; fed the Town of Rochelle with hopes of an
accommodation, provided they joined not with the English, essayed to work upon
the Duke of Rohan with offers of large sums of money, and dispersed Messengers
to all the Reformed Towns, to render odious the descent of the English, and to
draw from them such Declarations as might secure him against the fear of their
conjunction with them; and prevailed with Montauban and Castres to send
Deputies to the other Corporations to dissuade them from it, and by this
Argument, that Rochelle had not joined with them.

The Duke of Rohan, who for a long while before had been acquainted with the
Artifices of the Court, and particularly knew their Partisans in every Town,
foreseeing well that he could not hinder such Declarations, advises them to
insert in them the general clause, under the benefit of the Edicts, and all
other concessions, that so he might in convenient season disengage them again,
and with hopes of good news from Rochelle, engages them not to desert that
Town. At length come letters thence, but such, whose contents answered not his
desires; nevertheless he is obliged to make use of them; but how to extract any
advantage out of them, was no small difficulty: If he should send them to every
Town, they might occasion diverse resolutions to be taken up by them, and
possibly contrary the one to the other, which must needs cause great divisions;
if before he took up Arms, he should conveque an Assembly, none of the
Corporations would dare send their Deputies, for fear of rendering themselves
criminal, which would yet be a greater evil; he resolves therefore to conceal
the letters he had received, and at the same time to write severally to all the
principal Communalties of the Sevenes, (and unknown the one to the other, nor
mentioning any Assembly) to send their Deputies to him to Nismes, to whom he
had things to impart that much concerned them in particular; the same desire
sent he to Vsez; hoping that when he had drawn the Provinces of the lower
Languedoc, and the Sevenes to any good resolution, the rest of the Reformed
party, or at least the greatest part of them, would easily follow their
example. This invention succeeded well; for all the Deputies came at the time
and place prefixed; but the Commission of the Deputies of Vsez, being not large
enough, and fearing some treachery from that Town, he carried all the Deputies
thither, and there formed an Assembly, not doubting, by his presence, to
confirm them to his party; this done, he recounts all the breaches of faith
during the first War; all the infractions of the Edict of peace, made before
Montpellier, (which occasioned the loss of that Town) the continuation of the
siege of Rochelle; the detention of their goods, and the injust and cruel
execution of many innocent persons, which was the cause of the second; which
being composed by the inter vention of the King of great Britain's
Ambassadors, they to obtain a condiscension of those of the Religion to the
Kings proposals, with the Kings consent, and in the name of the King their
Master, became Caution for the performance of the Articles, which being no
better observed than the former, the danger of Rochelle daily increasing by
straitning their Port; the loss of their Franchises, and liberty of Commerce,
by the repairing, instead of the promised razing of the Fort Lewis; by the
fortifying the Islands, and storing them with Ammunition, and other provisions;
by the building, collecting, and arming so many ships; by maintaining so many
neighboring Garrisons; by so many attempts upon the Town; by the subversion of
the privileges of Nismes, and Aletz, depriving them of their liberty of
electing Consuls; by the manifold infringement of the Edicts in all points, and
places, and toward all persons; that the consideration of all these things had
obliged him to remonstrate their condition to the King of great Britain, to
implore him, according to his Royal promises, to afford us some redress of our
grievances; which so prevailed upon him, that after a fruitless trial of all
fair means, he had at length resolved openly to assist us, and to that end had
sent the Duke of Buckingham with a gallant Army, whose beginnings were very
prosperous: But that it was upon condition, that the lower Languedoc should
join with his forces, and not listen to any but a General Treaty, and with the
consent of the said King, and of the whole body of the Reformed Party within
this Kingdom; adding moreover that the Town of Rochelle would not conclude any
thing without them: And, with that, showed them the Letters he had thence,
telling them, that, considering the importance of the affair, he had thought it
necessary to assemble the two Provinces of the Sevenes, and the lower
Languedoc, that there might be a perfect harmony in their resolutions, which
would never have been, had he sent those Letters to all the Towns severally;
that, moreover, he could not in time of peace convoque an General Assembly,
whose only summons would then have proved its prevention: but that he was
assured that the resolutions of those two Provinces would charm all the rest to
an imitation: wherefore he conjured them to a serious consideration of the
premises, assuring them of his strict and perpetual adherence to them.

Whereupon they decreed that the Duke of Rohan should be desired to resume his
charge of General of the Reformed Party, to make leavies of Soldiers and all
other things he should conceive conducible to their good; that he be desired to
form, as soon as may be a General Assembly, to continue during the war, for the
direction and management of their affairs, that the oath of Union be renewed,
with the addition of their Junction with the King of great Britains forces, and
also of all other Princes, Lords and Gentlemen, that for the maintenance of
this cause have, or for the future shall raise arms, with a subjunction of a
promise not to accept of any particular peace, nor to consent or hearken to any
treaty, but general, and with the approbation of the whole body of the Reformed
Party, and of those Princes with whom they are, or shall be united.

This being done, they all depart: and Rohan gives out his Commissions, and,
that he might not disgust the People, raises and arms his men at his own
expense, appointing a day to make some attempts upon several places: And while
he prepares himself for the field, let us reflect upon the Isle of Re, where we
left the Duke of Buckingham, publishing a declaration to justify his Masters
proceedings, and advancing to quarter his army in the Town of Saint Martin de
Re, whence he began to straighten the Citadel, consistingof four Bastions not
yet perfected; andhaving no outworks to defend it: This place he resolved to
reduce, by starving it, presuming they had but small store of provisions in it;
and that being Master of the Sea, he might easily prevent the entry of any
recruits either of men or victuals; but being something too careless in
blocking them up, he contents himself with stopping up the Haven with boats and
beams laid a cross it, surrounding the Fort with his Army, and the Island with
his Fleet, but disdaining to take a small Fort in the Island, which held for
the King, and was seated on one of the best landing places in it: whence
afterward issued all the mischiefs that befell him.

Besides those errors, were committed also these, viz. that instead of raising
a work toward the Sea, the only quarter to be seared a very frivolous and
useless one was raised on the Land, and three Batteries, but at a distance,
rather to affright, than hurt: A Well also was not well heeded, about five and
twenty, or thirty paces from the Counterscarp, in which was only thrown a dead
horse, and some stones to cover it; but the besieged knowing, of what dangerous
consequence that loss would be to them, disfurnishing them of water in the
Fort, quickly uncovered it, and having well cleared it, fortified it with a
work, which preserved it them during the whole Siege: The Guards also were not
well ordered toward the Sea; nor could the re-iterated advice of the Duke of
Soubize ever induce them to divide their Ships, and place them before the
Ports, where they would have much prejudiced the Romish Party. Nay, it was yet
worse; for upon very light pretenses, every day came one or other from the
Fort, to speak with the Duke of Buckingham, and discover the condition of his
Army; and from that time, by the means of the Baron De Saint Surin and Montaut,
were set on foot on diverse Treaties, which were continued till such time, as
the Duke of Buckingham dispatched one of his Nephews to the Court with the said
Saint Surin, but for what reason, was not known to the Duke of Soubize.

Now for the better understanding of this Affair, it is to be known that Re is
an Island, lying about a League from Rochelle, seven miles in length, and of
great fertility, especially in wine, and salt: There are in it, three principal
Bourgs, or unwalled Towns, of which Saint Martin De Re is one of the fairest of
France, and seated on the best Rode of all that Coast: There is also a fair
Port, which stretches it self all along the Town, like a little Arm of the
Sea; and it was the mouth of that which the Duke of Buckingham blocked up, to
prevent the introduction of provisions into the Fort: Between Re, and Brouage
lies another Island, called Oleran, as big, and populous as the other, but much
more fruitful; in which the King had garrisoned a Fort, b^uil there by the Duke
of Soubize in the former War, but of small consideration; had Buckingham seized
upon this Island, where almost all the Inhabitants are of the Religion, he had
then totally defeated the Fort of Re of all means of relief.

The King about this time falling sick, was constrained to send the Duke of
Orleans in his place, to command, and confirm the Army, which the Duke of
Angoulesme had about Rochelle, where notwithstanding the Rochellers
protestations by which they disowned any confederacy with the English, yet was
their usage nothing better, but they began now to begirt them more closely by
Land, to retrench all manner of Provisions: but the main design of the Army
chiefly reflected upon the Fort of Re, to recruit that with men, and victuals,
in which they spared no expense, neither of men, nor money; so that at several
times they got in sufficient numbers to keep it till its entire deliverance.

The Rochellers, after they had osten, but in vain, renewed their protestations
of fidelity and obedience, seeing that all their submissions, neither abated
their sufferings, nor the malice of those who thirsted for their ruin, but
only fomented divisions among those of the Religion, and furnished the
ill-affected with specious pretenses to exclaim against the others; at length
remonstrate how that they had withdrawn themselves from the Crown of England,
to subject themselves to that of France, the great privileges they had
acquired by it, their good services ever since, their immovable fidelity, in
which they had constantly persevered, notwithstanding the destruction of their
Trade, the consuming of their Harvests, the devastation of their Country, the
cruelties exercised upon their Citizens; in short, all those miseries which a
licentious Army in many years can inflict upon their greatest enemies; and
after this said repetition of their sufferings, openly declare for the English.

As for the Duke of Rohan, he also publishes a Declaration, containing the
infractions of the two former peaces, the reasons he had to resent them, and
makes his Addresses to the King of great Britain, who was Caution for the
latter; protests that he has no other aim, than at the observation of the
Edicts, which once granted, he freely offers to expose himself to a voluntary
exile from the Kingdom, that so there might be no ground left for future
pretenses and jealousies. On the other side, the King also issues forth new
Declarations, in which he promises an observation of the Edicts to those that
shall persist in their obedience, a pardon to those that had flown from it, if
within a certain time they returned to it, denouncing heavy securities against
the persons, and estates of such as shall adhere to the Reformed Party; the
Duke of Soubize was proclaimed Traitor; and the Parliament of Thoulouze,
though it has no jurisdiction over the Peers of France, condemned the Duke of
Rohan to be torn in pieces with four horses, proclaimed him ignoble, and set a
price of fifty thousand Crowns upon his head, ennobling those that should
assassinate him, which encouraged three or four unhappy Villains to attempt it;
but they came short of any other recompense than a Halter, or a Wheel; it being
not within the compass of any humane power, without an especial permission of
the Divine, either to prolong, or shorten the life of any man.

These light skirmishes of the pen thus dispatched, come we now to the more
fatal ones of the Sword; of all the designs contrived, and promised to the Duke
of Rohan to be put in execution upon diverse places, in several Provinces, none
took effect, but that of Corconne, the management of which, he had committed to
the Lieutenant of his Guards, together with one named De Pize, (who in a short
time after, gave it back to the enemy again) The chiefest obstacle of it was,
the peoples refusal to allow of any such attempts, before an open Declaration
of the War: So that at the beginning of this, there was not any Paltry Village,
or Fort, that stood not upon his Guard; a thing not heard of in the former
Civil Wars, when men were more zealous for their Religion, more faithful,
secret, and confident of their Commanders, to whom they gave so great respect,
that their bare Tickets only were sufficient to engage them in a War, and to
attempt the most considerable places of the Kingdom; whereas now the Irreligion
and Disloyalty of those of the Religion, is more difficultly opposed, than the
malice of their enemies.

About this time, Montague sent him an Express, importing, that the intentions
of a Descent to be made in Guyenne, were altered, and that for this Summer the
Duke of Buckingham would make no invasion but about the Coast of Rochelle; so
that the King of great Britain discharged him of his promise to march to
Montauban, leaving him at liberty, to make choice of what place he pleased for
this Summers action; but that the Duke of Savoy, with whom he was, was of
opinion, that he might make a more advantageous progress along the Rhone, than
in any other quarter, and promised to give the enemy a good diversion in his:
But all these designs were projected with reference to the taking of the Fort
of Re, of which there was not the least umbrage of a doubt. The Duke of Rohan
took this Express into consideration, and would willingly have made his first
Exploits in those quarters, had he not been necessitated to reclaim the Towns
of Rouergne, and the higher Languedoc, who in his absence had been inveigled
into resolutions contrary to his, and their determinations also sent to the
King; so that nothing but his presence was capable to make them take Arms;
which fixed him in his former purposes, for which he sent Montague his Reasons,
assuring him however, that, if the Duke of Savoy would instantly take the
Field, he would quit all other designs to join Forces with him; but that
otherwise it would be expedient to remit that Affair till another time: And so,
leaving the Baron D' Aubais, to command the lower Languedoc, and a Council in
the Sevenes, to govern their Affairs there; he marched with his whole Force,
composed of four thousand five hundred Foot, and two hundred Horse, directly
toward Millaud; and in his March, took Pont D' Arre, a private Gentleman's
house, and Arigas a Church that was fortified, and very much incommoded the
Bayliwick of Vigan; whiles he stayed at Saint John De Breuill, Alterac, and
Guerin, two of his Partisans in Millaud came to meet, and dissuade him from
that attempt, alleging the difficulties attending it, and that as soon as
Montauban and Castres had declared, they would do the like.

The Duke told them they had done very ill to come out of the Town, which they
had left to the disposal of those that were disaffected to them; that it would
be the ruin of his designs, and a President for all the Towns of Rouergue to
shut their Gates against him; that he could not begin with Montauban, and
Castres; for that Millaud lay directly in his way to them; and that he was
resolved with all his Troops to get in, or ravage their whole Country;
desiring them to go before, and give them notice of it: But they found how
their absence had encouraged the adverse party, who having shut the Gates of
the Town, and those of the Bridge over the River Tarn, where they must of
necessity pass, they could not obtain a re-admittance, but were enforced to
return to the Duke with the news; which yet stopped him not, who well saw the
necessity of prosecuting this design; hoping that the sight of him would
animate the people to an insurrection; who failed not his expectation: For
having with much difficulty and peril, by reason of the depths and largeness of
the River, passed over some of his Guards, who laying at the Gates of the
Bridge on both sides, they at length fell down, and gave him free passage to
the Suburbs, where taking some Horse, and his Trumpets, and in that Equipage
marching round the Town, he so excited the people, that under the favor of the
night, without any opposition, they meet all with their Arms, and forcing the
Consuls to open the Gates, went themselves to conduct him into the Town.

This success made him way into all the Towns of Rouergue, and of the Mountain
of Albigeois, except Brassac, and Saint Felix Tower, where he left some
Regiments with Vacqueresse, who had already blocked up this Tower, and having
sprung a Mine, took it upon composition; whereupon Brassac, at the end of four
and twenty hours yielded also: But Saint Germier, who carried on his business
at Castres, behaved himself so ill, that he suffered himself, with all his
Confidents to be turned out of the Town: This President made Realmont,
Briteste, and the three Towns of Eauraguais; viz. Puylaurens, Revel, and Soreze
refuse also to declare; so that he was fain to come with his Cavalry to
Roque-Courbe, a little Town, about one League distant from Castres, and two
from Realmont; whence he made several Essays to reduce those two refractory
places; at Castres he prevailed nothing at all; at Realmont his persuasions met
a more civil reception, and their Gates, that refused the Duke of Montmorency,
admitted him; there he placed Maugis Governor, who had been most active in
doing him this service, and very faithful to him in the precedent Wars.

The reduction of this place was some enlargement to him; thither he summoned
the Colloque of Albigeois, which he wrought to resolutions conformable to his
own; but before he could advance any farther, Puylaurens, or Revel must of
necessity be secured; otherwise it were impossible he should adventure to go
either to Montauban, or into Foix, being to march twelve or fifteen Leagues in
an enemies Country, and that over great Plains too, having the Duke of
Montmorency attending on him, who had drawn together the whole strength of the
Country to fight him, and was always double or treble stronger in Horse than
he; it was once in his thoughts to cross the Tarn, but the late abundance of
rain had made it unfordable; so that having no way but that of Lauraguais, and
an Army before him, he could not put himself upon the hazard of that passage
without some place of retreat. He begins therefore with Puylaurens, as a place
whose example would invite all the rest; Terrieux, and Mauris, two, whose good
services in the former Wars, made him repose a great confidence in, promised,
that if he would give them five hundred pistols to distribute in the Town, they
would procure his admittance; but, instead of performing what they had engaged
themselves to do, they betray the whole design to the Duke of Montmorency, to
the end he might surprise Cassagne, who with his own, and the Baron d' Aletz
his company, and fifty of the Duke of Rohan's Guards, were commanded to execute
it; to whom, when they came to the appointed Rendez-vous, the Traitors sent
word, that it was not in their power to effect what they had undertaken; the
others seeing themselves far from any retreat, Causse Caucallier, who had very
good acquaintance, and Gaillard, a brother, in Revel, who with
Des-Isles-Maisons were carrying on an infallible design there, and which wanted
only two days to be put in execution, fearing the inconveniences threatened by
the great length of their retreat, made a desperate proposal to anticipate the
time, and attempt it presently, which they all assented to, and succeeded so
well in, that the people of Revel seeing Rohans Livery, imagining he himself
was there, and Gaillard's brother, with some other of the Inhabitants, having
seized upon a Tower, favored their Escalade, in which they met with no other
opposition than some stones thrown at them: Thus they became Masters of the
Town, the news of which made the Duke of Rohan resolve, instantly, and without
any further delay to advance.

In order to which he caused forty thousand loaves to be made, and leaving
Roque-Courbe came with part of his forces, and lay at Arifat, a house not above
half a League from Castres; the next day he marched to Narrez, where he
appointed his general Rendez-vous, and quarters that night at Sajes, where he
had intelligence that the Duke of Montmorency with all his troops lay between
him and Revel, whereupon, to disencumber himself of all the Carts he had to
carry it, he distributed all the bread among his soldiers; and the next day
having marched about a League, he discovered the Duke of Montmorency, with
three or four hundred horse only: whereupon he rallies his men, and in good
order marches in sight of him, keeping on his way to Revel, without any
rencontre at all, and quartered about a League from Revel, where he arrived the
next day early. The Duke of Montmorency takes up his quarters at Saint Felix,
and other adjacent places, whence he might get the advantage of the way,
whether he took that of Montauban, or of Foix.

The Duke of Rohan, in the mean time, intercepts a Letter written by the
Consuls of Mazeres, and addressed to the President de Suc, importing the
inclinations of that Town to join with the Reformed party, but that the Duke's
presence was very requisite to promote the public Declaration of their
intentions; which he took into his serious consideration, and reflecting upon
this, that he had yet three days march before his Army could reach Montauban,
no retreat upon the way, that his journey thither was not necessary, the
English being engaged in other parts, and having good assurance of the entire
affections of that Town, he thought fit to embrace this offered opportunity of
reducing the whole Country of Foix to his party; This made him resolve upon
that course, and, that he might get the start of the enemy, having caused his
Soldiers to take bread for two days, and quit part of their baggage, he parts
from Revel at midnight; but by reason of the badnesse of the weather that
night, and the incommodious advenews of the Village, where his foot lay, it was
day before his Rear could get out of it; so that passing by Montcausson, where
a troop of horse of the enemies were quartered, notice of their march toward
Foix being given, it occasioned a slight skirmish, which yet retarded not the
armies march: The same troop followed his Rear at a distance, till they came
near to a little Town called Soville, two Leagues from Revel, where the Duke
of Montmorency was ranging his troops in Battalia, as conceiving it the most
proper place to oppose the Duke of Rohan's passage, and fight him, by reason of
a fair plain beneath it, very advantageous for his Cavalry, in which he was
much superior, and of a little, but very dangerous brook, all whose bridges he
had broken down, so that he could not pass but in sight of him.

The Duke whose Army consisted of four thousand foot, and fifteen hundred good
horse, made four Battalions of his Infantry, which he ranged in forms of
Lozenges, leaving great intervals between them for his Cavalry who faced the
enemies army, and could, as they marched, be easily ordered to charge them
either in Front, Flanck, or Rear; and his baggage placed he in the midst of
the four Battalions, resolving in that order either to pass, or fight him; But
enquiring of his guides, if there were no other passage over the brook but that
which the enemy possessed, they informed him, that upon the left hand of him
there was a Ford near a little Castle, called de Jean, where the brook being
narrow, there might easily be a bridge made for the passage of the foot:
Thither then marched he directly, leaving the Duke of Montmorency's Army on his
right hand, and when he had gotten beyond him, very opportunely sends to take
the Castle, which two hundred soldiers of Castelnaudary were coming to
possess, and would mightily have incommoded his passage. This done he
disencumbers himself of his baggage, which he sent before over the brook to the
Castle, and having gained a little hill, between the enemy and the brook, halts
there, to observe the countenance of the Duke of Montmorency, and considering
what he were best to do; Once he thought not to quit the advantage of that
place, fearing to march over the brook by day, in view of an army that sought
all advantages to encounter him, and might suffer as many as they pleased of
his men to get over, and then charge the rest: On the other side, considering,
that if he stayed there without provisions, in an enemies Country, an army
attending him, and having five long Leagues to Mazeres, he feared it would be
too great a burden for his soldiers to support, so that, by the advice of all
his Officers, he resolved to expose himself rather to the hazard of a battle,
than the miseries of toil and famine; and when the bridge was made, marched
toward it, in the aforesaid equipage. Alizon who had the command of a troop of
horse, and was nearest the Duke of Montmorency's Army, being placed upon a
hillock, that gave him the prospect of the whole Country every way, let the
Army advance too far before him, before he began to draw off; so that he was
charged by two hundred Horse, who pursued him home to his Foot in great
disorder, and had like to have Routed them too; but the Duke of Rohan's Guards,
who were very opportunely on foot, and ready to relieve him, gave them a
Volley, and at the same instant a sharp charge, and repulse; this beginning
much animated Montmorency's Army, part of his Cavalry, with his Foot also,
advancing with great shouts to the charge; but receiving a second repulse, and
two of the Duke of Rohan's Battaillons coming up, with their Pikes charged
directly to them, the Foot stayed not to expect them; but flying, cast away
their Arms, and quitted the Field; they were closely pursued up to a Work,
which hindered our discovery of what was on the other side of it, and saved the
enemy from an entire defeat: For the Duke of Rohan would not suffer his mon to
make any confused pursuit, because the Duke of Montmorency, who had not yet
come up to the charge, was beyond that Work, with above three hundred Horse in
Battalla; but commanded Leques only to advance, to observe their posture.

The Duke of Montmorency, when he had rallied his Men, drew them off to
Soville, and there Ranged them again in Battaila, but without any semblance of
renewing the Fight: The Duke of Rohan, for his part, kept the Field more than a
long hour, caused his dead to be buried, and thanks to be given to God; and
then, without any interruption, passed the Brook, and kept on his way; but
could not reach Mazeres till the next day at Noon, after he had been forty
hours on horseback: In this Fight he lost Causse-Caucallier, one of his
Lifeguard, one of his Pages, two Lieutenants of Foot, five or six Soldiers,
and had thirty or forty wounded. Of the Duke of Montmorency's party, were lost
many more, yet was it no bloody Encounter; and it is to be believed that this
engagement of his was rather occasional, than before determined; for it seems
he had more reason to charge the Duke of Rohan in his passage over the Brook,
than in any other part: But it is easier to correct the actions of others, when
a man is out of danger of the blows, than in the action it self, which
requires a prompt and sudden execution, and affords not leisure to perpend, and
weigh all events. The Duke of Montmorency had, at this Rencontre, but three
thousand Foot, but he had six, or seven hundred Horse of his own, besides all
the Gentry of quality of Languedoc, Rouergue, Foix, and some from beyond the
Garonne.

When the Duke of Rohan came to Mazeres, all his men oppressed with hunger,
lassitude, and want of sleep, for refreshment, he found the gates shut against
him, and the Magistrates utterly averse to receive him; but the common people
at length took heart, and in spite of the Consuls, and most potent
Inhabitants, let him in; where, after he had taken the best order he could for
quartering of his Horse, he made provision for his Foot also. When the Duke of
Montmorency heard of the indisposition of the people of Foix to join with the
Duke of Rohan's Forces; he came and took up his quarters at Saint Gallelle upon
the River Cers, which runs to Mazeres, a good league distant from Saverdun,
whence he sent to inform them, that he was come thither with his Army for their
assistance, that they should be of good courage, and not suffer themselves to
be caught by the allurements of the Duke of Rohan; who for eight days
together, was oppressed with the extremity of keeping all his Army upon his own
expense, and yet could he hardly furnish his Foot with one loaf a day each one;
having no other place in Foix besides Mazeres, and the River Riege swollen to a
height, that making it unfordable, cut off all communication with the upper
Foix: So, that had these inconveniences lasted but a few days longer, he had
been in danger of perishing by Famine if he stayed; or by the Sword, if he
returned; having no Ammunition to defend himself withal: All these necessities
pressing him, he sounded so many Fordes, till at length having found one
between Saverdun, and Pamicz, which the Duke of Montmorency could not so
suddenly reach, he resolves in this desperate condition, to make an attempt on
Saverdun, where he knew the people were well-affected to him, and the lower
Town being easy to be forced, he hoped that when he had taken that, fear would
induce the other to an accommodation with him; which project had a wished
success: To this end, he marches by night from Mazeres with a part of his
Troops, and at break of day passes the Ford; but with great difficulty for the
Foot, by reason of the swiftness, and extreme coldness of the River, which then
also was swelled so high, that some of his Soldiers, and many of his Arms were
lost in it; so that at last the Horse were necessitated to transport the
remaining Foot behind them; which done, he marches strait to Saverdun; where
first, by a Trumpet he summoned the Inhabitants to open their Gates; and upon
their refusal advances, and, after, some Volleys of small shot, which neither
slew, nor hurt any one, with the assistance of some honest persons of the Town,
Ladders were mounted, and the place entered: The taking of the lower Town, mcuh
confounded the illaffected; some fly, others hide themselves, at length all
cry out for mercy; and the higher Town also was surrendered on the 12th. of
November. 1627.

The same day Faucon, by the Duke of Rohan's order, with two hundred Men,
secured Montmaur, a small Town, and Castle lying between Revel, and Mazeres;
but of great consequence for the uniting Lauraguais, and Foix: This was
effected by the intelligence of La Barte, whom the Duke of Montmorency had
highly disgusted.

The Duke vigorously prosecutes these fortunate successes, and upon hopes of
some Correspondents in Pamiez, on the 22th. of the same Month he shows himself
with his Horse before it, but had no other entertainment than what they sent
him from their Muskets; whereupon he determined, the night following, to clap
a Petarde to the Wall, to which he was induced by some of the Inhabitants, that
had given him a meeting near the Town; instead then of returning to Saverdun,
whither he was going, he retires to a Covert, half a league from Pamiez,
forbidding his men to make any fires; thither he commands Goudin and Malmoirac,
with their Regiments, whom he had before ordered to be in a readiness; but
those that should have come out of the Town to conduct him to the place, and
inform him of the true state of it, came not to the Rendez-vous; never theless
Bruel, one of the Town, Author of this enterprise, and who knew well enough
where the Petarde was to be fixed, being with him, he proceeded in the designed
attempt, which was executed after this manner. Cassagne had the command and
conduct of the Petards, which were carried by Gentlemen of his own, and some
Officers of his Horse, who were seconded by Leques with thirty armed Men, and
fifty choice Pikes, and Musketeers; after whom marched Goudin, and Malmoirac,
then the Duke of Rohan himself in person: In this Equipage they come up to the
Wall, where, notwithstanding the Alarm, and Volleys of shot, the first
Petarde was fixed, but the Breach being not large enough, a second was clapped
on, which extended it to a sufficient wideness for an armed man to pass;
whither the Inhabitants flocking to defend the Breach, Bazier the Engineer,
took a small Granade, and threw it in through the Hole among them, where it
broke, and spoiled the Thigh of one of the Defendants, and dissipated the rest;
which gave the Assailants opportunity to enter the Breach; the first that
entered, was La Tour Cenestoux; the second, was the Baron of Villemade, and
after them, the whole Party. The taking of the Town in this manner, spread so
universal a terror over Foix, that some Forts, well stored with all
necessaries, gave themselves up for fear. After this the Duke was received into
the Mas d' Azil, and Carlat, by which means he reduced all those, that were of
the Religion in the County of Foix, to his party; and probably had done much
more, had the English enterprises in the Isle of Re prospered; whom it will be
now expedient to look after.

The negligence of the English, gave opportunity to thirteen Barks, laden with
provisions, to come up to the Citadel, where they arrived the sixth of
September, about the Morning, and got off again the ninth following, carrying
with them all the wounded and unuseful persons: The easy passage of these,
encouraged others to the like adventure; but, the Guards being reinforced by
the Rochellers, some of them were taken, and severely dealt withal; and on the
last of September, of fifteen or sixteen Barks which came up, seven were taken,
and the rest put to flight.

On the twelfth of September came from England a Renfort of fifteen or sixteen
hundred Soldiers, with a supply of all other necessaries; whereupon the Duke
resolved to attempt the little Fort De la Pree, and turned some of his Canon
that way; but this design was dashed upon a sudden, no man knows why.

On the sixth of October, the besieged, pressed by strong necessities, sent out
Montaud with offers to capitulate, in case they were not relieved with victuals
the next day: This obliged us to double our Guards, and, as the wind sat, it
was easy to conjecture that the relief could not come but from Osonne;
whereupon some ships were commnaded out to meet them, and prevent their
passage; but, instead of that, the Captain of the Guard took another course,
and went wtih his ships to the Fosse de l' Oye, while three and thirty Barks,
seizing the opportunity, passed without interruption, and nine and twenty of
them came up under the Citadel; where yet it is to be noted, that they could
not come near the Land, but upon a great Flood, which comes but every fifteen
days, by reason whereof the English might yet with much facility, have
destroyed the relief; which though arrived, yet could not be unladen; so that
Propositions were made to the Duke, assaulting them on both sides by Land, to
fire the Barks with what was in them: which might have been done without any
prejudice received from the Castle, by reason of the height of the Banks
capable to shelter the Assailants: He seemed to approve of this motion, but
took no course to put it in act; contenting himself only with trifling away the
time in vain attempts to fire them by Sea.

When the relief was gotten in, Buckingham calls a Council, who resolve to draw
off; so that on the twelsth of October, they began to re-imbarque their Arms,
and other Ammunitions they had upon the Land: After this he sent for a
Gentleman belonging to the Duke of Soubize, to whom he declared that the
Council of War, considering how well the place was stored with all necessaries,
the year so far spent, his Army much diminished, and all his Provisions
consumed, had conceived it necessary to draw off; The Gentleman endeavored to
dissuade him from that resolution, showing him that the Fleet which the Earl of
Holland was conducting to them, would sufficiently repair all those
necessities; that the relief the Besieged had received could not last long; and
that if vigilant guards were kept, they would be soon reduced to their former
extremities; that his retreat now he had engaged them, would be the loss and
ruin of the Rochellers, who would cast all their displeasure and odium upon
the Duke of Soubize, as the Author of their destruction, and that it would be
an irrepatable dis-reputation to the King his Masters Arms, to have attempted
such an enterprise with so little honor and profit.

To all which Arguments he gave no other answer, than that his Captains would
stay no longer; but yet, if the Earl of Holland came time enough, with his
Fleet, he would endeavor to alter their minds: By which the Gentleman
concluding that the Duke was fixed in his resolutions to be gone, gave speedy
notice of it to the Duke of Soubize, who ever since the middle of September had
lain sick at Rochelle of a tertian Ague joined with a great vomiting, desiring
him, if possible, to post thither; which he did, and at his arrival in the Isle
of Re, uses all his Art to persuade the Duke of Buckingham and his Officers
into a better humor, of which they gave him some small hopes; but he,
nevertheless, seeing them still carrying their things aboard, assured himself
they would not budge from their former purposes.

The King, in the mean time, being recovered of his sickness, comes in person
before Rochelle; where his presence raised both the number and spirits of his
Army, and upon intelligence how the Duke of Buckingham's was lessened, resolves
to make a descent into the Isle of Re under the protection of the little Fort
de la Pree, which had still held out. On the other side the English men's
desire to return, having made them very careless of their guards, they suffered
seven or eight pinnaces to steal up toward the Fort, and on the sixteenth of
October they land four hundred men; the twenty seventh there came up ten more,
and on the thirtieth five and twenty; whereupon the Duke of Buckingham rallies
his Men; and, quitting the greatest part of the Trenches, marches by night,
with what horse and foot he had, to prevent a descent already made, commanding
out a forlorn of French, which not being seconded, were enforced to retire.
The Merchants of Rochelle in the mean time, seeing what preparations were made
for his return, instantly solicit the Duke to give them fifty or sixty tons
of Corn he had upon the Shore, which he assented not to, till they had no
leisure to carry it off, so that they fell to the enemies share: But before his
departure, to show that he had left nothing unattempted, he resolved to make
one essay more, which resolution he grounded upon the report of some fugitives
from the Fort, who averred that there were but eight hundred soldiers in it,
and those too for the greatest part sick; that the Courtain toward the Sea had
neither graffe nor Rampart, so that if he mounted his Ladders on that side, it
might be easily forced. Without any further information, or battering the
Parapetts, he resolves to give a general assault, proposes it to the French
Officers, desiring them to dispose the English Colonels to it, and in case they
should stick at it, he would then make use of his power to command them. The
attempt thus resolved on, he prepares his men for the storm, assigning the
English and Irish their post on the land side, and the French mixed with
English toward the Sea: Manuel conducted the ten first Ladders, but could
mount but two, though his party behaved themselves with much gallantry and
resolution; (but to attempt to force by Escalade above fifteen hundred Men in a
Fort with four Bastions, well furnished with Artillery, and all other
necessaries, was a way eternally to discourage his Soldiers, rather than to
lead them on to the purchase of any honor) but leaving many dead, and carrying
off more wounded, they were forced to retire.

This repulse, together with the intelligence of the hourly increase of the
forces in the Fort de la Pree, hastened the Duke of Buckingham's raising the
Siege, and his retreat to the Bay de l' Oye, to ship his men with more leisure
and security: On the eight of November early in the morning the Drums beat for
their departure at noon, and scarcely was the Rear Guard got out of the Town,
but the King's Army appeared much stronger in Horse, and equal to the others in
Foot; having this further advantage, to pursue a retreating Army, and seize all
occasions which either the incommodity of the passes, or the usual disorders
that attend such retreats might favor them with. At the pass de la Coharde,
they made as though they would have charged them, but observing the good order
of the English, and the advantage they had of the ground, after a long halt,
both Armies marched off, the English keeping the plain, and the King's Forces
the Sea coast: Beyond this pass was a hollow way, which crossing the Marsh,
extended it self as far as the Bridge de l' Oye: At the entering of this the
Squadrons began to be somewhat pressed, and to stand upon their defense; but
the Van, and then the Body being got into it, the Rear-guard, charged by the
Marshal Schomberg, was easily routed; in which defeat the English lost seven or
eight hundred men, but the night approaching, favored their imbarquing of the
rest.

In this action the Duke of Buckingham committed two great errors; one was,
The committing his retreat to the charge of fourscore Horse, which being forced
in upon the Rear of their own Troops, broke, and confounded them; the other
was, His omission to raise a Fort, or some other defenceable work at the entry
of that hollow way, where he had still designed to make his retreat in case of
necessity, which would absolutely have secured it.

At his departure, he assures the Rochellers of his speedy return to their
deliverance, with a more numerous and better fortified Fleet, alleging the
inconvenience of the season, and defect of provisions, as the only causes that
obliged him to draw off; and promising them a quick and abundant supply of all
necessaries for a long defense; and further desires some of their Merchants to
follow him into England, that they might testify the integrity of his
affection and diligence, and that they might themselves carry back the effects
of his promises. Nevertheless when he drew near the Coast of England, himself
took a fly-boat, sending the Rochelle Merchants to expect him at Bristol,
desiring the Duke of Soubize to do the same at Portsmouth, where he would be as
soon as he; and then steers his course toward Plymouth, where the Earl of
Holland's Fleet rode. When he came thither, he gave order that the ships that
there lay ready, and laden with Corn for the Rochellers, should be discharged,
and the Provisions sold, upon pretense that they would be spoiled; which done
he gets before to pre-possess the spirit of the King of great Britain,
rejecting the blame of the errors committed in the expedition on those were no
way culpable; So that when the Merchants came to exhibit their complaints
against him, they were informed, it was the next way to make their condition
worse: And when they importuned him for a quick dispatch of the provisions for
the Rochellers, the Duke of Buckingham used no other excuse to answer their
solicitations, than that they were sold; and that which more amazed them, was
his carrying away three hundred Tun of Corn, which he might have left them,
till they could have been better stored. But notwithstanding all this, the
Merchans addressed themselves to the King of England himself; to whom they
represented their imminent danger, and the great preparations making to
consummate their ruin; imploring his Majesty to favor them with a good and
speedy recruit of Victuals, that being the greatest want that afflicted them;
which once supplied, there was nothing else which they much feared: But if
their enemies had leisure to block up their Port, their destruction was
inevitable: All which the King answered with promises of a powerful and speedy
relief, assuring them moreover, that he would hazard all the Forces of his
Kingdom, rather than suffer them to perish.

While they expect the effect of these promises, the Rochellers dispatched their
Admiral Bragneau with money, and express command to buy Corn, to lade both his
own, and those other ships they had already in England, and to return with it
with all speed: David, who was sent after him, with the like Commission, stores
his ships with provisions, and very happily got back with them into Rochelle:
But Bragneau, instead of executing his Commission, goes directly from Plymouth,
where all things were ready for him, to Portsmouth, under color of furnishing
himself at a better rate; and yet instead of doing that, goes to London, where
puffed up with vanity derived from the promises of the Duke of Buckingham, he
minded nothing but an ambitious and covetous pursuit of the honor and profit
of the Admiralty of the refugiated French, which at length he obtained, by the
voluntary demission of it, which the Duke of Soubize made of it, in favor of
the Rochellers, and to ease them of the extraordinary expenses they were at;
and yet notwithstanding, all the instant, and daily solicitations made to him
to that purpose, could not induce him to be gone, till the difficulties of the
passage grew so great, that he was at last forced to wait the departure of the
other Fleet preparing for their relief.

This was the issue of this expedition of the Duke of Buckingham, in which he
wracked both his own and his Countries honor, consumed much of the Rochellers
provisions, and ruined the party he came to relieve.

The hopes this Victory gave the King of carrying the Town, made him more
intent upon the Siege: The whole winter he spent in investing it by Land with
Forts, Redoubts, and lines of Communication, and straightning it at Sea by a
Bar extending from the point of Coreilles to Fort Lewis, in which he spared
neither cost nor pains.

The Bonfires the Romanists made throughout the whole Country of Foix, gave the
Duke of Rohan the first light of these misfortunes, the certainty of which was
afterward confirmed by an express from the Duke of Soubize, who encouraged him
still with hopes that, the next Spring they should return in a condition to
wipe off the stains this affront had cast upon them.

At the same time the Duke of Rohan received two several Advertisements from
the lower Languedoc; one was, that the Marquess de Ports, who had many
confederates in the Colleque of Saint Germain, having corrupted the Garrison in
the Castle of Florac, and gotten them to declare openly for him; Montredon,
chief of the said Colloque, hasted thither, and calling in the whole Province
to his aid, had besieged the Castle, and in sight of the Marquess de Ports,
who was come with two thousand men to relieve it, sprung two Mines, stormed,
and forced it to surrender: The other was, that the Prince of Conde was coming
down the Rhone toward the lower Languedoc, and that Brison was in Treaty with
him about the Province of Vivaretz, which he sought by all means to intimidate;
urging the Duke of Rohan's absence, and at so great a distance from them as an
argument to enforce his design: This made him consider that it was best to
preserve what they were already Masters of; conceiving that if he wintered in
Foix, he should bring a famine on the Country, which had already had but a bad
year, and was so little, and so remote from their other quarters, that if the
Prince of Conde on one hand, and the Duke d' Espernon on the other, should join
with the Duke of Montmorency, he should be blocked up on all sides: That if he
went to Montauban it would be to small purpose, for that the English were now
gone, and the Winter was come on, and moreover that there was no possibility
for him to return thence again; so that he conceived the securest way was, to
return toward the lower Languedoc to oppose the Prince of Conde there, and so
preserve that Country.

But before his departure, he convened the Colloque of Foix, settles Beaufort
in the Government of it, to the great satisfaction and joy of the Inhabitants;
leaving with him his own Regiment (which consisted yet of eight hundred men)
and his own Troop of light Horsemen; makes Rousseliere Governor of Saverdun;
took order for the fortifying of some places, of which there were three very
considerable, to wit Mazeres, Saverdun, and Carlat; and as for the Mas d' Azil,
the good fortune they had to withstand the former Siege, gave them courage
again to stand upon their defense.

The only perplexity he had was for Pamiez, being a great Town, not
fortifiable, nor well peopled of it self; nor indeed were there enough of the
Religion in all Foix to man it as it ought: The right course had been to
dismantle it; but Men, with whom in Wars of such a nature a man must of
necessity comply, are hardly persuaded to things of that kind: But although
this remedy could not be applied, yet he prevailed so far upon the Inhabitants,
as to fortify a quarter of their Town called la Marcadal, very conveniently
seated, where he designed a handsome fortification; which done he appoints his
General Rendez-vous at Mazeres, whence he marches by night, and returning the
same way he went, comes to Revel.

The Duke of Montmorency having notice of his motion, goes to wait for him on
the great Road to Montauban, whence he suddenly retired again to his quarters.
The Duke goes from Revel, to the higher Languedoc, where re-assembling the
Colloque he informed them of all he had done in Foix; encourages them to a
constant perseverance in their fidelity; and establishes a Council for the
direction of their affairs, until such time, as he could send them a
President for the Colloque, there being no man among them, that the rest would
give place to, for that the Marquess of Malauze who had been formerly their
President, and would, without dispute, have again been accepted of, was now
wholly bent against their Party; the Court having prevailed so far upon him,
as to make him oppose the Duke of Rohan in that Province; which that he might
the better do, he faines a desire to be reconciled with him, which he signifies
by Letter to Beaufort; and afterward, at his first meeting with the Duke,
discovering some displeasure, that Castres was not yet joined with the Party,
protested that as soon as that Town, and Montauban, should do so, and that a
General Assembly was formed, he would also publicly declare for them. This
had a pestilent influence on the weaker sort, and gave the disaffected among
them, an opportunity to work much mischief among the people; For neither the
Declarations of Montauban and Castres, nor the convening of a general Assembly
wrought any change at all in him, who continued still an enemy to the Reformed
Party; And dispatches also Villemade to Montauban to inform them of the cause
of his return, to persuade them to declare, and to command the Soldiery, but
in subordination to the Consuls: But this last proposition spoiled all the
rest; no man being esteemed a Prophet in his own Country, so that they
resolved ^o assure themselves of a Governor before they would engage in the
War.

After this the Duke returns toward the Sevenes, and when he came to Vigan,
received very urgent dispatches from Vivaretz, with intelligence that Brison
had quitted all the higher Vivaretz, upon the approach of the Prince of Conde
(although for want of Canon, he was not in a capacity to force the most
inconsiderable Fott there) who had burnt and pillaged that poor Country; and
that, if they had not speedy relief, it was to be feared that Privas, and the
lower Vivaretz, would make their peace, to which Brison earnestly incited them;
but upon notice of the Duke's return, and that he was coming in person to their
relief, they reassumed their courages, and maugre all Brison's disswasions,
resolved to stand upon their guard; which obliged the Prince to pass into the
lower Languedoc; whither when the Duke also came, he met with some Soldiers of
Nismes, who had seized the Castle of Vauvert, which he caused them to quit,
upon the advance of the Prince, who seemed to have an intention to besiege it;
unwilling to give him any occasion to stop there, knowing that his orders were
to pass into the higher Languedoc, and that his stay would prejudice a design
he had upon the Citadel of Montpellier, which Bretigny David, for six months
together, had managed with the Baron de Meslay, his Kinsman, and intimate
friend; and eldest Captain of the Regiment of Normandy, then in Garrison in
Montpellier.

Now, forasmmch as upon the arrival of de Fosse, the Regiments of Normandy and
Picardy were to be drawn out of the Town, and others to be placed there in
their rooms; Meslay who had there married one of the Religion, seemed much
discontented at this alteration; and that he had not left his own to embrace
the Reformed Party: Bretigny, on the other side, who very well knew his
ambition, cherishes him in this humor, and at length tells him, that if he
could contrive a way to make himself Master of Montpellier, it would be then in
his own power to make himself satisfaction, and that withal he would be
received into a Party, from which, by that means, he might obtain whatever his
own wishes could suggest to his Hopes. The other listens to him, and demands
time to consider both of the thing, and the means to effect it, and both
together contrived expedients for mutual Interviews, and conveying
intelligence, without suspicion, one to the other. Not long after he tells him
he was now resolved to undertake the business; Treats with him concerning the
advantages and conditions he expected from the Reformed Party, and shows him
the way he had to make himself Master of the Citadel; to wit, that being on the
Guard every fourth day with his own Company, he could, with much ease, let in
as many as he pleased into it: That for assurance of his fidelity he would give
his Wife in hostage; and when the design was to be put in execution he would
advance an hundred paces from the Citadel toward Bretigny, to yield himself up
into his hands.

When all these things were communicated to the Duke of Rohan, he very well
liked of them, for that the two lines of Communication, which conjoined the
Town with the Citadel, being made, and the Town Wall that separated them razed,
as they were now at work upon it, the Town would not be able to defend it self;
but withal he declared that he would never attempt this design, till that Wall
were down, or, at least, great breaches were made in it, that so one and the
same action might put them in possession both of Town and Citadel. The design
thus concluded on, the Duke, for some days, deferres his march: But seeing
they proceeded too slowly in raising the Walls, he departs, and advancing a
little way from Roque-Courbe to pass into Foix, Meslay sends Bretigny word,
that the affair was now in a very good posture, and that it was necessary it
should be put in execution, before the Garrison in the Citadel was changed;
Whereupon he is dispatched into the Sevenes, and the lower Languedoc, with all
necessary instructions tending to the executing of the design, and an express
charge particularly to impart it to Montredon, and to none else: But all was
delayed till the arrival of the Duke of Rohan, to whom they then made new
Propositions, that, at the same time the Citadel should be attempted without,
he should storm the Town with two thousand Men, and also scale the Walls of
Communication, alleging, that when they should be Masters of the Citadel, the
time they must have to pass three or four thousand Men, through one gate, would
give the Town too much leisure to arm themselves. This made him somewhat more
cold in the business, and gave him great suspicions of the treachery intended;
whereupon he continued firm in his former resolution; in so much as Bretigny
complained that he found him so refractory in a business able to revive their
drooping Party: But he demonstrated to him the danger of this last proposal,
and that being once Master of the Citadel, nothing could hinder his taking of
the Town also.

While the Prince of Conde was upon his March toward the higher Languedoc, the
Duke of Rohan Rallies his Forces, appointing the Rendez-vous to be on the 19th.
of January a little above Claret, five leagues from Montpellier; where about
two of the clock in the Afternoon, there met six thousand fighting men: Thence
he sent a party of Horse to advance before the rest of the Army, as far as the
Bridge of Saleson, which is about a league from Montpellier, to intercept all
such as might give any notice of his approach: And then commands Bretigny,
chief of the enterprise, to march with the Van, consisting of fifteen hundred
Men, and divided into fix Squadrons; the three first were composed each one of
thirty armed men, called out of the Volunteers, and out of the best of the
Cavalry, with Halberds and Pistols; and of fourscore others, half-Pikes,
half-Musquitiers; every ten armed Men had their Officer, and carried with them
Petardes, and Ladders, to force the Court of Guard in the Citadel; and two
great Forks to keep up the Portcullis; the other three Troops were composed of
four hundred men, each one; and were ordered for a Reserve to the other: After
these, marched the Duke with his Men at Arms, followed by all the other
Squadrons, the biggest of which consisted not of above four, or five hundred
men. When they came to the Bridge of Saleson, they found there the Baron de
Meslay's Man, who assured Bretigny that all went well; whereupon, leaving all
their Baggage on the other side of the Bridge of Saleson, with a hundred
Soldiers only to guard it, they advance as far as the Bridge called Juvenal,
which is about a Canon shot from Montpellier: Bretigny, by a bold Soldier,
gives notice of his arrival to his Cousin, who so well knew how to fool him,
that he returned with an assurance that all was well, and in a good condition,
and that there was no difficulty in the matter: Whereupon he proceeds, not
minding at all what had been so often recommended to him, not to enter the
place until Meslay was come forth to him, and had put himself into his hands;
but his impatient desire to execute so brave a design, animates him, without
this precaution, to enter the Citadel with six or seven and thirty men; those
within not daring to let any more come in: For as soon, as they saw them plant
their Forks to support the Portcullis, they cut a cord, by which means the
Bridge was drawn up, and a Trap-door opened, whence most of those that were
gotten in, fell down into a Trench, where they were all harque-busiered, the
Musquitiers at the same time playing on those without; Montredon, who in
Bretigny's absence was to command, and had received a charge to be at the Gate,
and see them all enter in good order, drew off the Troops, and gave the Duke
notice of their success, who had drawn up his whole Body in Battaila on the
right, and left hand of the great Road-way, which he had left open for the
retreat of those of the Van; who when they were all passed, he returned to the
Bridge of Saleson, where making an Halt, he Rallied his Men, and then drew off
into the Plains between Montpellier, and Lunel, quartering his Men in the best
Villages thereabouts; not any one stirring out of Montpellier to pursue him, or
observe his March. The next day he gave leave to the Troops, that came from the
Sevenes to depart; and marched with those of the lower Languedoc, to Saint
Gilles, where he thought to have made an attempt upon that Garrison, but the
violence of the cold forced him to send his Men into quarters.

This was the issue of that enterprise, in which Bretigny, and his brother were
slain, with about twenty others, and sixteen or seventeen more were taken
prisoners.

This Winter was the Duke of Rohan hardly pressed both in the upper Languedoc,
and in Vivaretz; in the former of which was the Prince of Conde; who whilst he
prepared to invade the Province by open force, endeavored also by secret
practices to undermine the constancy of those Towns that had declared for the
Reformed Party; so that the Duke of Rohans presence there, with his Forces, was
absolutely necessary: And on the other side Vivaretz, since the Prince his
March through it, was in a miserable condition; the higher Vivaretz being lost,
with all that the Duke held upon the Rhone: And besides all this, the Duke of
Ventadour in his Seigniories, and Messargues in those he held in right of his
Wife, used extreme cruelties, and violences against those of the Religion,
seizing on their Estates, torturing their Bodies with Whips, and Bastinadoes,
driving them to Mass; so that there came thence, to the Duke, frequent
dispatches, and Deputies, one upon the heels of another, to implore his
presence, and the assistance of his Forces, to restore them to their liberty,
which otherwise they should be enforced to purchase at any rate; considering
also the divisions between all the Nobility of that Country, and Brison;
assuring him also that they had taken care for the quartering of his Troops, as
long as their necessity should require their stay there.

There happened yet another accident, which much obstructed this Voyage; to
wit, the unexpected death of Brison, which much enlarged the former divisions;
for if the Nobility refused to submit to Brison, who had been already twice
Governor of the Province, much more would they oppose his brother Chevricles,
a young man, of small experience, and far short of his brothers conduct to
govern the Province: On the other side the faction of Brison, which was the
most prevalent in Privas, and Privas the most considerable place of all
Vivaretz, chose Chevrilles for their Governor; for that, being conscious of
his weakness, they thought to rule all more absolutely, than under his brother,
and to allow him what part they pleased, in the administration of the Affairs:
To which must be added, that the Province of the lower Languedoc, which was to
advance the Leavy-money, being highly interessed in the preservation of
Vivaretz, and blocking up the Rhone, it being a River that with great facility
and speed could convey all sorts of Arms, and Ammunition to the enemy,
preferred this design, before that of the higher Languedoc; for which place
Rohan had raised two Regiments, of five hundred Men apiece, which was all they
desired, in case he could not come himself in person: But the untoward humor
of Faucon, to say no worse, much retarded this relief; for being designed for
that expedition, after he had promised to go, and for that reason had received
more Advance-money than was usually allowed; he endeavored to corrupt his
Captains, that so he might reject his merited blame on them; but being not able
to prevail on more than one, he was at length constrained to declare openly
that he would not go at all; so that the Duke could send but eight of those
Companies with Caumette-Chambaud, who commanded the other Regiment: But by
reason of these difficulties, protractions, and the artifices used by Faucon to
withdraw both Officer, and Soldier from this Voyage, those eight Companies
could never amount to more than eight hundred men in the whole. The Duke
thereupon caused Faucon to be secured, and tried at a Council of War, where he
found more favor, than justice. It Is one of the greatest calamities that
attend the Generals of Parties poor, and composed of Voluntaries only, that
they have no capacity either to reward the Noble, or punish degenerous and
unworthy actions.

But to return to the Voyage of Vivaretz: The Duke of Rohan raises four
thousand Foot, and about two hundred Horse: But before he began his March
thither, dismantles Saint Geniez, and other small places upon the River Gardon,
within the Diocese of Vsez, lest the Romanists, in his absence, should possess
themselves of them, and by small Garrisons take off the contribution of all
that Country which was full of good Towns; and prejudice the passage from the
lower Languedoc to the Sevenes: And then engages the aforesaid Provinces in a
resolution not to hearken to any particular Treaty, but to communicate all
occurrences to him, as on his side, he promised the like, and never to consent
to any without the privity of them, all the other Provinces, Rochelle, and the
King of England.

When he had taken this course, he comes about the beginning of March, with all
his Forces to Aletz, where he was solicited (even to a sedition) by the
Inhabitants, to employ his Forces in taking in of Vezenobre, and Monts, two
Garrisons that incommoded them; but having cleared himself of this importunity,
he advanced. His first work was to secure the Castle of Rousson, lying between
Aletz, and Saint Ambroix; and afterward, in his March, takes in Tharque, and
Saint John de Marne sols, two places belonging to the Marquess de Ports, which
yielded at sight of his Canon; the latter of these he dismantled, but not the
former, being but a small Castle, and the usual residence of the said Marquess:
Having cleared his way as far as Bariac, and being now upon the Confines of
Vivaretz, he thought it necessary to secure a Pass upon the River Ardache, for
the advantage both of his advance and return. To this end he besieged the
Castle of Salvas, situate on that River, which he blocked up with part of his
Forces, whiles the other part, under the command of Aubais, passed the River,
both for the convenience of quarters, and provisions, as also that at the same
time he might block up the Castle of Valon also: The Siege of Salvas lasted
five days; for that the Canon, and other necessaries, to force it suddenly,
were not yet come up; so that they contented themselves with breaking some of
their Outworks, and then had recourse to two Mines which they sprung, and to
good effect too; the base Court being taken, the Garrison retreated to the
Tower, which was stormed on every side: Those within behaved themselves
bravely, killed and wounded many of the Assailants, and among others, the
Colonel Goudin was hurt; but the Canon came up, and did such execution on them,
that they were constrained to yield the next day after the assault.

Their example drew the Tower de Moulins, and the Castle of Valon also to a
submission: The Duke caused the two Castles to be razed, preserving only the
Tower of Moulins, which of it self was strong, and tenable by a small Garrison.
To secure this pass, and clear all the way of Vivaretz, there remained only
Ville-neufve de Berg, where the Governor Montreal had gotten together twelve
hundred men; but notwithstanding that, the Duke was resolved, had it been
possible, to attempt it; that so he might not leave any thorns behind him: But
he wanted Ammunition, having spent his small store at the Siege of Salvas;
where the scarcity of provisions, and the nearness of some of his men to their
own homes, had much diminished his Forces; and, which was worse, so little care
had the Province taken in it, that there was nothing for them about
Ville-neufve, so that he was fain to leave his Canon at Gorce, and for
convenience of quarters, to March with all his Troops to Privas, the Country
having not had the least thought of any thing, but how to retort the blame of
their want of Provisions one upon another, so that he had much ado to keep
together those Soldiers he had left. The first exploit after his arrival in
the Province of Vivaretz was the Siege of Choumerarg, performed by Chevrilles,
and the Country Troops, whilst his own refreshed themselves; it lasted three
days, and then their Works being all battered, the place was yielded on the
second of April.

The Duke of Rohan's designs in Vivaretz, were to place a Governor, and to
compose all the divisions there; but principally to secure a good pass upon the
Rhone, both to draw the Tribute of the River to himself, and to facilitate the
March of those Forces which the Duke of Savoy had promised him: For which end
some proposed to him Sojon, others la Voute, others Bajes, and Pousin; the
inconvenience of the first was its situation, being in the higher Vivaretz, and
so remote from Privas, that it could not be easily removed from thence; that of
the second was, that it was a place belonging to the Duke of Ventadour, and
being of it self weak, and not capable to be made good, would drain Privas of
all its Ammunition, and consequently draw an affront upon that place, which
would ruin his reputation, both with the adverse Party, and his own too:
Wherefore he pitches on the latter, and begins with Pousin, which when Brison
gave it up, was dismantled; but, to prevent our re-possessing of it, the enemy
had fortified a small Tower in the Castle, and raised a little Triangular Fort
upon the Rivers side; he commanded Aubais by night, to possess himself of that
part of the Suburbs which lies toward Lauport; and Leques at the same time to
enter the Town: In the mean time he drew his Canon, whereupon the Fort was
given up; but chiefly for that Leques had already taken the Tower, and from the
advantages of it, and the Castle, played so furiously into the Fort, that none
durst stir to show himself in it.

Chevrilles with the Forces of the Province, at the same time besieges and
takes Saint Aaban, which obstructed the passage from Privas to Pousin; and
Malmoirac was commanded to possess himself of the Town of Bajes, to secure it
with Barricadoes, and seize on all the Boats in the Port, which he happily
effected: This done, Aubais received command to attempt the two Castles of
Bajes, which after their dismantling, had been again repaired; but upon the
approach of the Canon, yielded: Which done, the Duke taking into his
consideration the situation of both places, conceived that of Pousin to be the
most convenient, both for the facility of being fortified, and the advantage it
had to command the River; thither then he commanded to be brought all the
Boats, and sent Leques with twelve hundred men into Dauphine, which brought so
great a terror on them, that many Towns sent him in voluntary contributions of
Corn, Meal, and Bread, which was a great relief to his men, whom the avarice,
and disaffection of Privas had exposed to great extremities; and, that he might
lose no time, sets about the Fortifications, to which the Country contributed
so little, that he was fain to make Collections among his own Officers to pay
the Soldiers that wrought in them.

The Duke, during his abode here, sollicites those of the Religion in Dauphine
to join with him; but in vain, the Count of Soissons amusing them with hopes
that he would shortly appear himself in the head of them; whereupon he sent the
Count some overtures to join with him, with four thousand Foot, and three
hundred Horse in any part of Dauphine, he should please to appoint; and that if
he would bring but as many, he would engage himself in a short time to make him
Master of the greatest part of Dauphine; but he had no other return than empty
words, and complementary thanks, which made him think that the Count had rather
make an inglorious peace with those he declared to be his enemies, than engage
in an honorable War against them.

Whilst he stayed at Pousin, he also received intelligence from the Duke of
Soubize by Carlincas, that the Fleet designed to bring the Corn to Rochelle,
would be there toward the latter end of May; but the other, from which they
expected their entire deliverance, not till after the Harvest. Chevrilles, who
saw the streights the Duke of Rohan's Forces were in, for want of provisions,
proposes him to an attempt upon Cheilard, a small Town, belonging to the Duke
of Ventadour, and seated upon the Confines of Vellay; It has large Suburbs, and
a Castle, that commands them: All the Inhabitants of this, and the neighboring
places, are of the Religion, and till now had been severely persecuted by their
Lord, even in times of peace; in order to the effecting of this design, he
demands of him two Regiments, which were granted him: The Town he took with
Petardes, and with the two aforesaid Regiments invested a Castle, called La
Cheze which is about a Canon-shot distant from Cheilard, and upon the sight of
two Faucons that were drawn up to it, was given up; with these Gunnes he begins
to play upon the Works of the Castle of Cheilard; but the Pieces being not
sufficient for Battery, he was fain to send to Privas for some bigger.

During this Siege, the Duke had intelligence from all parts, of the Duke of
Montmorency's arrival in the higher Languedoc, who raised all the Forces he
could to set upon him in his Marches, or to cut off his passage by taking
Barjac: This news made him resolve, no longer to defer his return; wherefore
he writes to Chevrilles, that in case the Castle of Cheilard was not taken by a
day, which he prefixed, he should send back the two Regiments; which so
quickened his diligence in the enterprise, that the place was taken within the
time limited him: And the Duke having given order for the razing of all the
places he had taken, except Pousin; and left Chevrilles in a firm possession of
his Government, sets out from Privas upon Easter day, and encamps that night
below Mirabel; and as he was marching thence the next Morning by break of day,
Aubais, that led the Van, informed him that the enemy appeared, both Horse and
Foot, about Saint Germain, a large Town, indifferently well fortified, and
distant about a quarter of a league from Ville-neufve; whence they also drew
out fresh Soldiers: They were all the forces that Ventadour and Montreall
could make in that Country, which alarmed not the Duke at all, while he was
employed about those small Sieges. They made choice of that place, as the most
advantageous for them, the passage being strait, and the Dukes Forces of
necessity to pass within a Musket shot of the Town, the passages to which,
were very commodious to lodge Musketeers in: But the Duke of Montmorency,
being half a days March short of them, they only made a little skirmish, which
made the Duke of Rohan desirous to pursue them, and force the Town, which he
might have done, but was happily dissuaded from it, lest the Duke of
Montmorency with his fresh Forces should surprise him, while he was engaged,
which would certainly have happened; for he came to Ville-neufve about two
hours after they had gotten over the pass, which was done with very good
conduct and order; in this Rencontre there were some slain, and wounded on both
sides: After this no enemy appeared; but the Duke when he came to Gorce, took
his Canon, which he drew back to Anduze, where he gave his Troops some
refreshment, which they very much wanted.

Mean while the Prince of Conde and the Duke of Montmorency joining their
Forces take the field, and march into Foix to attempt Pamiez, a great Town, but
of no strength: The ill destiny of Beaufort impelled him to a resolution of
defending it; to which end he calls in all his own, and most of the Forces of
the Country; but, a breach being made, their confusion was too great to give
them leave to think of any further resistance; those that were false among
them, using all means to augment the others fear: Beaufort seeing this
disorder, endeavored to save himself by flight, together with Anros, but they
were both taken, carried to Thoulouse, and there put to death: The town was
pillaged, and all manner of licentious cruelties imaginable from Soldiers
under such a Commander, were exercised in it: The taking of this Town much
dismayed the whole Country, where no place escaped the attempts either of
threats, or promises; but the courage and fidelity of Rousseliere, whom the
Duke of Rohan had made Governor of Saverdun, together with his sedulous
industry to encourage others preserved the Province; and the Prince marched
back, with his Army, into the upper Languedoc: Then was the Duke of Montmorency
fain to return to Vivaretz, to the assistance of his Partisans there; and the
Duke of Rohan was with no less instances solicited by the higher Languedoc, to
the same purpose.

The Prince his first exploit was the Siege of Realmont, a Town whose situation
rendered it very considerable; well stored with Soldiers, and all sorts of
Provisions, and which might have held out much longer, and very well expected
the relief preparing for it: But neither did he begin the siege, till he had
Treated with Maugis who was Governor of it; who, having corrupted the first
Consul, the Colonel Chaumette, and his Sergeant Major, and made some show of
opposition for ten or twelve days, without any breach made, or consulting with
his Captains, or the people, contrary to the Oaths they were mutually engaged
in, at the enemies first coming before it, not so much as to make the least
mention of surrendering, enters into a Capitulation, signs it, and presents it
to the Town; who refusing to approve of it, he lets in the Besiegers at a Port,
which was at his own devotion, whiles the rest were every one at their
respective posts; so that great was the confusion there, and though by the
Capitulation the Defendants ought to have marched off with their arms, yet was
that violated, and they disarmed, Sigalon, and Huguet, two of Chaumett's
Captains, with some other honest Inhabitants of the place, maintained a
Bastion, resolutely declaring to the World, that they had rather dye than quit
their arms, which they carried off, and with them as much honor due to their
bravery, as the others did infamy, merited by their baseness. Great were the
miseries of this poor Town, whence Men, and Women stripped, and without any other
covering than their dischevelled hair, came to Roque-Courbe; where Saint
Germier, and L' Espuguet, who had the conduct of the affairs of those of the
Reformed Party in those parts, by means of the Correspondents they had in
Castres, made use of this Barbarism to provoke the people to an Insurrection,
which had so prosperous an event, that notwithstanding the opposition of the
President Montespieu, of the Advocate General, the Consuls, and their
adherents, the Walls were scaled, and the Town without the effusion of any
blood taken, and the President, and the Advocate banished thence. Chavagnac at
the same time came very opportunely into the Country, sent thither by the Duke
of Rohan to command in chief there, where he was received, and, even in Castres
it self, with an universal Joy.

For besides the delight all Novelties usually bring with them, the present
state of affairs required a Governor; otherwise the Prince had carried all
the Mountain of Albigeois before him; whereas now the greatest mischief
suffered there was the loss of Cauve, which the Marquess of Malauze caused to
be delivered up to him, in which place, contrary to his promise, he left a
Garrison: After this he made an offer at Viane, blocked it up, and raised a
battery against it; but seeing that neither his threats nor promises made any
impression on the Besieged, and that the Governor Eseroux, and Assas, whom the
Duke of Rohan had sent thither with four hundred men, seemed to be such as
would give him a smart opposition, he raised his siege; and thence goes to
attempt Castelnau and Brassac, places of no strength, but surpriseable even by
unarmed men; Nevertheless the former gave him the trouble to draw down his
Canon, where the obstinacy of some, occasioned the loss of forty or fifty good
Soldiers, who chose rather to submit to all extremities, than to observe the
Orders given them by Chavagnac, to draw off as soon as they saw the Enemies
Canon, which they might have easily done: This done, the Prince, not daring any
more to look toward Viane, sends Linas to Saint Sever, a place of which he
himself was Lord, to persuade the Inhabitants to submit before he drew down his
Canon; but seeing how ineffectual all his persuasions proved, he stays there
with them; where, after they had endured many Volleys of Canon shot, themselves
made a breach in the Wall, and escaped by night. Thence he goes to a Conference
with the Duke d' Espernon, at which they resolved on the Siege of Saint Afrique.

But before we pass into the higher Languedoc, it will be expedient that we
speak a word or two of Montauban: This Town, though it was then governed by
Consuls, and other Magistrates that were great Enemies to the Reformed Party,
had nevertheless great inclinations to join with them: This, the Duke of Rohan
himself at first hindered, being not willing they should declare before he came
to them; and when after his return from the voyage of Foix, he desired them so
to do, nothing obstructed it, but their want of a Governor: Whereupon the best
part of the Town casting their eyes upon Saint Michel, a younger brother of La
Roche Chalais, and of Kin to the Duke of Rohan, who applauded their choice,
they received him into their Town about May, and there, after that de Bergues,
and Saint Foy, through many difficulties, and great dangers, had conducted
thither, from the lower Guienne, fourscore, or an hundred Horse, and Viant a
Company of Foot, and that he had all his necessary Provisions ready, on the
four and twentieth day of June, they put him in possession of his Command. The
first thing he did, was to order all things in a Militiary way; raising a
Regiment composed of Volunteers, such as had Asyled themselves there; and
inrolling also in the establishment, those Horse that de Bergues had brought
thither.

But before he could well settle himself in his authority he met with many
rubbs, having for enemies, not only those that were of a contrary Party, but,
even among his own, many rivals for the place, who underhand did him many ill
Offices: Some of these he surmounted by prudence and dissimulation; and to
others he was fain to apply open force, and the extremity of rigor: The most
eminent example of which, was occasioned by three young Soldiers, Natives of
the Town, whose names were Cartie, La Forest, and Brete, who disgusted at a
denial of some Offices they sued for; or else set on by some others, envious of
his honor, entered into a conspiracy against his person, and to compass their
design make a Party in the Town, to which they drew in many Giddy brains, and
among them some of quality, as the sons of the Advocate Clerk, and the
Counselor de la Rose, which gave greater suspicions that this business was
fomented by other persons, who, though they appeared not at all in it, yet were
they the principal Agents. The pretense of this conjuration was the public
liberty, by which means having raised many of the people, they show themselves
in the head of them, with their Swords and Pistols in their hands, and in that
equipage march to the Governors quarters, crying out Liberty, Liberty! and
that it was high time to rid themselves of those that oppressed it: When they
came near to his door, they were stopped by some of his guard, who so gallantly
behaved themselves in the defense of it, that they killed five or six of the
Mutiniers, and among others Clerk, and La Rosse: The tumult spreading it self
in the Town, the Consuls, with a great number of the Inhabitants, haste down to
the Governors; to whom when Saint Michel had recounted the Action, and
justified the procedure of his Soldiers, all were well satisfied; and the
Consuls causing the said Cartie, La Forest, and Brete, Authors of the sedition
to be apprehended, they were tried, and condemned by the Council of War,
which in favor of their relations in the Town, instead of hanging, caused them
to be shot to death.

Saint Michel, whom this example of Justice had now fixed in his authority,
thinks of enlarging his quarters; and conceiving himself strong enough in
Soldiers, by reason of those that were fled thither for shelter, he undertook
to put the Town of Cuasade in a posture of defense; and having put Chastillon a
Gentleman of Angoulmois with eight hundred good men into it, he used such
diligence in his fortifications, that in a very short space the place was made
tenable; This the Prince, and the Duke d' Espernon had intended to besiege, but
were diverted by the Siege of Creseil, which drew away the Prince with his
Forces, so that the Duke d' Espernon was unwilling to engage alone in the
Siege, but endeavored to contrive some intelligences, and correspondencies
within, that might help him to surprise it, in which even the Minister of that
Church, whose name was Le Grand, who had deserted it in the very beginning of
the troubles, was his great Assistant, informing him of the condition of the
Town, and persuading him, as much as in him lay, to attempt it; but finding his
design not feisible that way, he contented himself only with an assault, which
he caused to be made on the outworks, where he was so generously received,
that, leaving many dead upon the place, and some Garrisons in the adjacent
Towns, he drew away again.

But return we now to the Duke of Rohan, who, from the beginning of the Siege
of Realmont, was extremely importuned to relieve it, for which he was
diligently preparing himself; but after it was taken, he was as earnestly
solicited to march toward the higher Languedoc, so that there passed not a
week in which he received not two or three dispatches, to that effect: On the
other side he found he should have much ado to gain his Soldiers consent to
it; for that their late sufferings in Vivaretz gave them cause to fear they
should meet with no better entertainment in this Voyage; so that to allure them
to it, he resolves on a design upon Mirveis, a place upon the Borders of
Rouergue, strong, and of great concernment to the Sevenes, where he knew all
the Country would come in to him; assuring himself withal, that, whatever his
success should be in the attempt, having by this means drawn his men half way,
he should with more facility persuade them to adventure on the rest.

Wherefore he sends for le Fesque, who first moved this design to him, and
persuaded him, that in taking the Town, he should also surprise the Captain of
the Castle, and at one stroke carry both: He gave him Orders to take as many
Soldiers as he thought he should have occasion for; but at the time appointed
for the execution of it, so violent and tempestuous was the weather upon the
Mountain de l' Espernon, the place of Rendez-vous, that many of the Soldiers
(though it was then Summer) died of the cold; so that they were feign to put it
off till another time; which gave the enemy some jealousy of their intentions,
and those in the Castle leisure to furnish themselves with many necessaries,
and especially to recruit their garrisons with Soldiers: Notwithstanding all
which Le Fesque returns thither again within two days, and fixing four
Petardes to it, carried the Town: But, instead of presently investing the
Castle, and securing the Corn for the nourishment of the Army, every one fell a
pillaging, and in the mean time the Chevalier Chamboux, with fifty men, got
into it.

The Duke of Rohan in the mean time expecting the issue of this design at
Nismes, gave Orders for the raising of the Militia of the Sevenes, and
principally of the two Regiments of Valescure, and La Roque, and sent away
those of Lassayre, and Brenoux, commanding them by several ways to march
toward Mirveis, and, upon the first notice of the taking of the Town, to
invest the Castle, and draw thither the small Canon that was at Vigan: He sent
away also Goudin's Regiment to Barjac, which the Duke of Montmorency hovered
about, as if he had some design upon it; with Orders also, in case necessity so
required, to march into Vivaretz.

This done; he receives advice of the taking of Mirveis, and the disorders
there committed: Whereupon he departs from Nismes, and steering his course
thitherward, sent Leques post before him to compose and order all things there,
When he came to Vigan, he met with a dispatch from the higher Languedoc,
pressing him more instantly than ever to hasten thither, otherwise the whole
Country was in danger to be lost; whereupon he sent away Aubais with the
Regiments of Sandres, Fourniquet, and Bimart, and three Troops of Horse: When
Leques came to Mirveis; conceiving, that that Castle was not to be forced by so
mean a Train of Artillery as they had there, he commands the Canon to be drawn
to Nujolls, to secure a Castle standing upon a pass of great importance, which
upon the approach of it presently yielded.

After this, comes the Duke himself to Mirveis, and being of opinion with
Leques that there was no taking of the Castle without a bigger piece of
battery: Those that were at Millaud were proposed, as the nearest and most
easy to be drawn thither: Thither then he goes with a sufficient Convoy for
them, but found it absolutely impossible to bring them; wherefore he commands
Leques, by a Letter, to send with all speed to Anduze for the Culverin of
Nismes; And in the interim determines to go himself to Saint Afrique, upon
report of the Siege of Viane, which the Prince pretended to attempt; but as he
was ready to set out, he received a Letter from Leques, which informed him,
that upon a bruit spread among the Troops at Mirveis, that he was going toward
Castres, and that there was a great relief preparing for the Castle, very many
of the Soldiers had left their Colors, that the Inhabitants of the Town had
sent away their goods, and that unless his sudden return thither prevented it,
he would find the Siege totally abandoned: This made him face about with all
speed; and finding that the Letter he had written to Leques was fallen into the
enemies hands, he sent another to Anduze for the great Culverin; and resolved
now to see what would be the event of this Siege: In order to which he plants
his Canon, and with them batters the Outworks that he might the more easily (in
case there should be occasion for it) come to mining; and as he was giving
Orders to storm the Castle-works the night following, there came News that
there was a very considerable Body forming for the relief of Mirveis; that all
Larzac and Rouergue flocked in to them; that there were twelve hundred drawn
out of the Garrison of Montpellier, and that from Beziers and Gignac, were sent
many Soldiers also; and that their Rendez-vous was to be at Veiros, two
Leagues distant from Mirveis: In effect the thing was very true, and moreover
the Baron Puzols, who commanded the Duke of Montmorency's Life Guard, was
already come thither with three hundred Horse, to undertake the charge of the
whole relief which consisted of about two thousand Foot: This made the Duke
defer the storming of the Castle, that he might provide to repel these
succors; to which end he spent all that night in cutting a Trench across the
hill, the only way they had to relieve the Castle, and caused his Canon to be
drawn into a Redout; the next morning, the Majors General Leques and Boissiere,
visit all the quarters, cause the Redout, and Trenches to be well-manned, and
Ammunition to be delivered out to the Soldiers, and also give all necessary
instructions to the Colonels; the Duke of Rohan himself stays in the Parade
place with Montredon, the Volunteers, two Troops of horsemen, whom he had
commanded to alight, his own Guards, and La Baume, with two hundred of his own
Regiment, that he might be ready upon all occasions, to send relief to those
that should need it; about Noon the Scoutes give notice of the Romanists
approach, and suddenly every one betakes him to his Post, when presently after
they show themselves upon thetop of a hill, whence they sent down five hundred
men in two divisions, which advanced boldly, and in good order up to our very
Canon, which gave them a very harsh salute; besides which, they saw the
Trenches well stored with men, and on the right, and left hand, Regiments
marching up the Hill to environ them; this put them upon as sudden and nimble a
retreat; being followed with Vollies of Musket shot, up to the top of the
Hill, where presently all disappeared, and by the disorder was to be seen among
them, might be rather conjectured to fly, than to retreat: The next day every
one took his own way, and the Duke returned to the intended assault; battering,
the night following, the Pallisadoes of the Counterscarfe, all which were
broken down; and then drew up to the very Graffe, from whence he bear the
Defendants off their Works; who as he was approaching to the Wall, beat a
parley, which they obtained, together with very honorable conditions. This
Siege lasted three weeks; and when the Castle was delivered, there marched out
one hundred and thirty Soldiers, that wanted neither Ammunion, nor provision.

When the Prince had notice of the reddition of Mirveis, and that the fifteen
Companies drawn out of Montpellier, were upon their March to join with him, he
resolved with the Duke d' spernon, upon the Siege of Saint Afrique; which when
the Duke of Rohan was informed of, he would have gone to Millaud; but the next
day, after the reddition of Mirveis, finding that he had no more than eight
hundred men left, the rest being gone to refresh themselves, he was forced to
go to Vigan; after he had gotten an engagement from them, that within ten days
they should be all ready at any Rendezvous he should appoint them, to go to the
relief of Saint Afrique; he sent dispatches also to Nismes, and Vsez, from
whence he received a very good recruit.

In this interval, the Duke of Rohan had notice of what became of the second
Fleet, which was dispatched from England, to supply Rochelle with provisions,
until the greater, designed for its entire deliverance, could be made ready.
The story is this, The Duke of Soubize, seconded by the Deputies, and Merchants
of Rochelle that were then in England, urges the King with such earnest and
assiduous importunities, that he resolved upon the victualling of Rochelle; for
which, when all things were in a readiness, the Duke of Buckingham offered him
the command of the Fleet; but understanding that there were but five men of War
designed for their Convoy, and perceiving by so slender a provision of ships of
war, that he intended to draw an affront, together with the whole blame of the
Rochellers upon him, he refuses to accept it, but declared withal, that, if he
would go in person, he would be ready to accompany him; Upon this his refusal,
the Duke of Buckingham re-inforces the Fleet with five great ships more, and
many other men of War; and being raised to the number of seventy in all, on the
17th. day of May, he sent them orders to hoise Sail, which they did under the
command of his brother-in-Law, the Earl of Denbigh; soon as the enemy descryed
them, they weigh Anchor, as if they intended to advance, and fight them; but on
the sudden tacked about again toward the same place from whence they came.
Bragneau took a French Pinnace at Sablenceau, where the Earl cast Anchor so
near the Shore, that he thence received a Canon-shot into his own ship, which
made him weigh Anchor again, and with the whole Navy remove to ride at a
greater distance from the enemies Canon. Many days were spent in debates, and
resolutions never executed; so that some Merchants, that were there, urged him
to attempt either to fight, or pass by them; but his Captains stiffely
maintained that it could not be done, without exposing the English Forces to
too great a hazard; only the Vice Admiral, and one Capta in Carre, showed more
forwardness, and loudly exclaimed against the flackness of all the rest:
Whereupon the French that were then in the Fleet, to the number of two or three
and twenty ships, and Barques drew up together, and seeing the backwardness of
the others to resolve on any thing, come in a Body to the Earl of Denbigh, and
present him a Petition signed by them all, by which they beseeched him to grant
them four Merchantmen fitted for a fight, three fireships, and Soldiers to
guard those ships that carried the provisions, obliging themselves with that
equipage to get into the town, and promising moreover, both in their own, and
the names of the Rochellers, that in case any of those ships miscarried in the
adventure, they should be paid for, according to a just estimation of their
value. But to all this they received no answer, but evasions, and denials;
whereupon the French sent Gobert, to the King of great Britain, with their
complaints, and withal, to discover to him the facility of the passage, and
the offers they had made: Mean while the Captain Videau takes a small Boat, and
in it passes the Bay by night, carrying to the besieged a letter from Bragneau,
which advised them not to rely any longer on hopes of relief from the English,
who, at the same time, without any further attempt made, weighed Anchor,
steering their course homewards: When they came to the Isle of Wight, they
cast Anchor there, and thence sent their Apologies into England before them,
grounded upon the impossibility of the enterprise, and the tenor of their
Commission, whose most substantial words, and which imported a permission to
fight, they pretended were interlined, although it was with the Kings own hand.

These excuses were easily admitted by the Duke, and those of his Gang, though
others deduced from them but sad consequences for the Rochellers, that poor and
miserable people, that with such transports of joy beheld the arrival of the
Fleet, with no less astonishment saw it lie idle for eight days entire, and
then leave them in a greater dejection than before; and yet having received so
many promises, and assurances of relief, could they not give credit to their
Admirals Letter, but prepare a new dispatch to the King of England; who upon
the news of the Fleets return, assembles his Council, and resolves to send
back Gobert to the Earl of Denbigh with new Orders to return again to the Rode
of Rochelle, and there to expect a Renfort. About which time also came Bragneau
with news of the Fleets return, and two days after Clarke, who was sent to be
of the Earls Council, and Agent for the King in Rochelle, who when he had
given in his relation of the affair, had his own house for his prison: But to
hasten away this new relief for the distressed Rochellers, Orders were given to
Captain Manners, and Captain Pennington, to expedite the building of ten great
ships, of fifteen hundred, or two thousand Tun-burthen, made purposely to fight
near the shore, not drawing more than seven or eight foot-water, and carrying
two and twenty Guns a piece: The Duke of Buckingham, who desired not that any
one should pry too narrowly into the projects he had against Rochelle, removed
from the Court a Secretary that was very zealous for its deliverance, causing
him to be sent to Portsmouth to prepare other Vessels, and buy Provisions, and
Ammunition there, where he stayed till the departure of the Fleet.

But let us now see what passed at the Siege of Saint Afrique, a small Town,
lying between two hills that command it, so that nothing can be done within,
that may not from thence be discovered; neither did any till this time, ever
think of fortifying it: But yet the importance of the place for preserving the
Communication between the higher, and the lower Languedoc obliged us to break
the ground, which is there very maniable: But never did that Town expect the
honor of an assault from the first Prince of the blood: The River Sorgue runs
under the walls of it, and divides it from that part of the Suburbs, that lies
toward Vabre, which of necessity was to be fortified also, it being easy for
the enemy to make his approaches that way, and for that the River beating
against the Walls, would not give way to any nearer fortifications on that
side: The whole fortification of this Suburbs was composed of Spurs, and little
Flanquers, whose Trenches were four fathom wide, and the Parapet Canon-proof,
behind it was nothing but a small bank instead of a Rampart; all that gave us
hopes to be able to defend it, was, that there was room enough for us to
entrench our selves behind it; besides, so strangely odd was the situation of
that place, that without a great Army, there was no hindering of relief from
coming to it, both from Millaud, Saint Rome, Tarn, and the Bridge of Cauvers.

Anbais, who was advanced as far as the said Bridge, that he might have an eye
upon Viane, when he saw the Army bind its course toward Rouergue, divided his
Forces into two parts, reserving the stronger to himself, and sending the other
to Saint Afrique, which the Prince came before on the eight and twentieth day
of May; and having viewed it, conceived it intenable, and at that instant
condemned it to the fire, and all manner of extremities; nor yet indeed was it
to be defended, but by a great number of men: Aubais very handsomely did his
devoir, sending them from his quarters, as many men, and as much powder as they
desired: La Baume, whom the Duke of Rohan had left with his Regiment at
Millaud, for the same purpose did the like; so that in the very height of the
Siege, there was no want of any thing; but there happening a difference between
Vacaresse, and Bimart, Saint Estienne, and Sandres were fain to interpose, and
reconcile them, who afterward did very good service in the storm. The
approaches, batteries, and breaches, being all made with in the space of eight
or ten days, the Prince commands his men to make ready for the assault, and
those within also prepare to give him a brave reception; who, though they had
very good Works and Trenches, would not yet lose one inch of ground: There were
within the Town, besides the Foot, the Baron d' Aletz, and Saint Estienne's
Troops of horse; the best armed among them were placed at the Breaches, and all
the other posts were well manned also: The whole Garrison consisted of fifteen
hundred fighting men; the storm lasted five hours, was thrice renewed, and
during it, one Culverin discharged about sixty shot upon one of the Breaches,
which carried off some legs, and arms; but could not save the Assailants from
a repulse, who left four hundred dead upon the place, among which were La
Pass, and La Magdaline, two Captains, and forty other Officers, not
comprising those that were wounded; of the Defendants there were flain about
eight and twenty, and threescore hurt.

The morrow after the assault was made, came both from Millaud, and the Bridge
de Cauvers, four hundred men more to Saint Afrique: The news of this quickly
flew to the Duke of Rohan, at Mirveis, where he had three thousand Foot, and
made what have he could thither; having given order that Chavagnac, with the
Forces of Albigeois, should join with Aubais, and fall upon the enemy on one
side, while he did the like on the other; and the besieged, at the same time,
were to make a sally upon their Canon: But that which he feared, came to pass,
to wit, the Prince his raising the Siege: Then had the Duke a fair opportunity
to pursue him, and then thought of nothing that would prevent it: But the
affairs of Castres summoned him thither, where Saint Germier, induced to it, by
those that were disaffected to the Reformed party, opposed Chavagnac in his
command: Those of Foix required his presence, to remedy the disorders fallen
out there since the death of Beausort; the Town of Villaude would by all means
that he should sit down before Cresseil, and sent Deputies purposely to
solicit him to to that effect; and on the other side, the Siege of Saint
Afrique being now over, no body would stir a foot further; all alleging the
necessity of their return, to look after their Harvests, especially those of
Nismes, and Vsez, whose fields were threatened to be ravaged; and besides these,
there were in the Army many Citizens, and Merchants, too delicate, long to
endure the hardship of an Army: Vivaretz also cried out for help, the Duke of
Montmorency being fallen into that Province, with a strong power: Lyonnois also
with Dauphine, Vivaretz, and the lower Languedoc, importuned him to free the
Rhone; on which the Duke had already besieged Pousin, and battered Mirabel.

Amidst these urgent follicitations on all hands, the Duke, it being impossible
for him to divide himself amongst them all, returns to the lower Languedoc;
sends Aubais to Castres, to compose the divisions there, and designs Saint
Estienne with his Troop for Foix; whiles he with the rest of his Forces, to
divert the Duke of Montmorency from Vivaretz, goes to Vezenobre, which by a
long March he susprized, so disfurnished of men, that having with one Petard,
taken the Town, the night following he raised his Battery, and the next morning
began to play upon the Castle, which he took by assault; but gave quarter to
all in it.

This Siege wrought the wished effect; for the Duke of Montmorency, after he
had taken Mirabel, instead of continuing his progress in Vivaretz, marched off
to relief Vezenobre, which he thought would have held out much longer; but
finding the business all eady over, he drew off to Beaucaire; and the Duke of
Rohan, when he had given order for slighting of Vezenobre, dismissed his
Volunteers, put his other Regiments into Garrisons, and goes himself to Nismes,
to put them in a posture to prevent the spoil the Duke of Montmorency had
command to make there; but had written to the Court, that he could not
undertake it with less than six thousand Foot, and five hundred Horse; for
which care was taken, and he supplied with three Regiments from Dauphine, and
some Horse drawn out of the Army, the Marquess of Vxelles was then conducting
to the relief of Cazal: These preparations made Nismes, and Vsez look about
them, and promise good quarters to all the Horse and Foot should come in to
their assistanee: The Duke of Rohan writ to those of the Sevenes, to this
effect; but they came not so soon as they promised; nor did those of Nismes
gratify them as they ought; Nevertheless he goes to see what might be done,
and promises to preserve all their Corn, within a League of their Town, to wit,
that which lies upon the Vistre (which is the richest land about Nismes) a
small, but dangerous River; all whose passes he spoils, and in all places of
danger caused good Redoubts to be built; but as for the rest of their Fields,
there was no possibility of preserving them: And yet, had the Peasants observed
what was commanded them, which was, to leave their Sheaves scattered upon the
ground, they had saved a great part of them; which being made up in stacks, and
the enemy coming to forage at the time they usually thresh out their Corn,
(which is there done in the Fields) they were all easily consumed.

The Duke of Montmorency takes up his first quarters at Saint Margueriete, a
good league from Nismes; and the next day leaving it on his left hand, came and
lodged at Chaumette, and Saint Genies, three leagues distant from Nismes, and
as far from Vsez: Thence passes through the Towns upon the Gardon, and so
gets into Vauvage, and took up his last quarters at Bernis and Vehas.

In this march, which lasted six or seven days, he burnt much Corn, and also
many Villages; which done, he retires to Beaucaire (having not at all entered
into the Territories of Nismes) and the Troops of Dauphine returned to join
with the Marquess of Uxelles, all the Volunteers went home; the forces of the
lower Languedoc were sent into Garrisons, and the Duke of Montmorency himself
went to Bezieres and Pezenas.

About this time came a Gentleman from the King of England to the Duke, which
dispatch was occasioned by an apprehension given him, that since the return of
the second Fleet, there were two Deputies with the Duke of Rohan, in order to a
Treaty for peace; to divert which, he was commanded to tell him, that though
that Fleet after an ineffectual Voyage were returned, yet there was now so
strong a one prepared, and ready to set Sail, that he was confident it would
be the entire deliverance of Rochelle; and that though God should not favor
him in that attempt, yet would he never forsake the rest of the Reformed Party;
Nay, although there should be no more left than the very person of the Duke, he
assured him he would hazard all that he was Master of, for the preservation of
that alone; desiring further to know of him what hopes he had of assistance
from Italy and Spain, that in case the King should press him too hard, he
might be directed by him how to assist him, either by a diversion or otherwise:
David, one of the Deputies of Rochelle was present at the delivery of this
Message: To which the Duke replied, that he was so far from any thoughts of a
Treaty, that he had again caused the Oath of Union to be renewed, to this
effect, that none should hearken to any peace, but conjoyntly with him; and
that he had already made known to him, the means he had to assist him.

This done, the Duke seeing the Duke of Monmorency's Troops lay scattered and
dispersed in several parts, takes his turn also, and burnt all the Corn, and
Country Houses belonging to the Inhabitants of Beaucaire, within Musket shot
of their very walls: And when he thought to make another inrode into the
Marish-Countrey for Salt, he met, in a narrow place upon the Rhone, nearer
home, two Barques convoyed by a Frigote, and laden with four and twenty
thousand French Bushels, so that commanding some of his Soldiers to swim to
the other side for a Boat, he transported many of his Foot to Camargues, that
he might on both sides attaque the Frigote; but she soon forsook her
Merchandise, which was as quickly carried away: Besides this booty, they drove
much Cattle from Camargues, and did much spoil there also by fire. When the
Duke of Montmorency heard of these excursions, he made haste to rally his
forces, appointing them their Rendez-vous at Lunel. The Duke, in this
expedition, going, and returning, marched above fourteen long Leagues, without
making any long stay in any place; and got home again before any of the enemy
could be gotten together; And happy was it for him; for he was but in an ill
condition to fight; every Soldier being so laden with pillage, that he could
never get any more to march in order, than three hundred soldiers, of la
Baume's Regiment, which brought up the Rear.

When this expedition was over, the Duke was in great perplexities, not knowing
how to dispose of his Forces, especially his Horse: For he could now raise no
more contribution for their maintenance, by reason that the Villages were all
burnt: And the Sevenes was no Country for Horse: If he should go toward
Castres, there was the Prince with his Army in the higher Languedoc, who had
particular Orders to impede his passage; and the Duke of Montmorency had also a
strict Command, with his Forces to follow him, whither ever he should go: For
it was feared lest he should go to Montauban, and raise those of the Religion
in Guienne in favor of the English, whose coming they feared: If he went into
Rouergue to no other end but to eat them up, it would not be long ere their
cries would be heard; so that necessity now obliged him to undertake the siege
of Creseil.

But before we go thither, it will not be amiss to say something of Aubais his
return to Castres; who though he made but a seeming accommodation between Saint
Germier and Chavagnac, the cause of the misunderstanding still remaining, and
fomenting their conceived rancour one against the other, so that the pretended
reconciliation lasted not long; nevertheless his being there was to great
purpose to oppose those that came to forage and plunder those parts, where his
brother Saint Estienne was unhappily slain, by their own Canon, which being not
well spunged, as they were re-charging it, the Powder took fire, and killed
him: He was a Gentleman of great courage, and zeal for his party, and was the
next day to have gone into Foix, where they stood in great need of him.

The Marquess of Ragny, who commanded the Prince his Army, and had much ravaged
the Country, goes, for his last exploit, to burn Mazamet, and to besiege
Hautpont, whither Dupuy, a gallant Soldier, with the Inhabitants of Mazamet,
were retired; but having, to no purpose, lain before it for the space of twelve
days, he drew off to Brugiere, where he dyed.

And here it will be expedient to insert a word or two concerning Clausel, who
coming from Piedmont, made the Duke of Rohan some propositions of assistance
from Spain; which, if demanded, he was confident he might have freely, and in
a large measure; for that having conferred about it with the Spanish
Ambassador in Piedmont, he had given him very good hopes of it; telling him
moreover, that it was the Interest of Spain, to endeavor a prolongation of
the Civil Wars in France; that they might with more ease compass their designs
in Italy; that the Abbot Scaglia, the Dake of Savoy's Ambassador, was now in
Spain, and would contribute his utmost power to assist him in it; having
already in England, and elsewhere, declared himself a great favourer of the
Reformed Party, out of his implacable hatred to those that govern now in France.

The great exigencies the Duke was in for want of money, the Country being
unable, aad the Towns unwilling to furnish him any more; neither could he
expect any from England; nor had he received any thing from the Duke of Savoy,
but empty promises, enforced him to seek out some way or other to supply his
wants; and in effect he saw none but this; which yet he durst not pitch upon,
without the King of England's leave, fearing lest it might give him an offense,
and consequently an occasion to desert him: Notwithstanding this doubt, yet
would he not reject Clausel's proposals; but deferres his dispatch, till he
could give notice of it to the King of England, and to his Ambassador then in
Piedmont; from both whom he received very favorable answers; and then sent
Clausel into Spain; Injoyning him to declare to the King of Spain, that if
the continuance of the War in France might be serviceable to his designs, upon
condition he would afford those of the Religion a speedy and round supply of
money, he would engage himself to protect it, as long as it should be agreed
upon between them; but that otherwise he should be constrained to make his
peace; that he should have the whole Winter to provide it, and that he would
expect his answer till the next March: And forasmuch as that, immediately after
the departure of Clausel, there came news of the loss of Rochelle; he sent two
Messengers after him to let him know, that that accident had not any thing
shaken his resolutions; but that he continued constant to his former proposals.
Clausel passes through Foix into Spain, where he was very well received, and
heard; and had very advantageous Propositions made him also; All which good
news he imparts to the Duke of Rohan; giving him good hopes of a prompt, and
powerful assistance: At length having concluded the Treaty, he goes into
Piedmont, to facilitate and expedite the execution of all things; and as he
went, landed a Gentleman belonging to the King of Spain, who was to have
brought the Duke a Copy of the Agreement; But he suffered himself to be taken
at the Gates of Lunel, when he had but half a League more to go beyond all
danger, of which Rohan advertised Clausel, who when he came to Piedmont, gave
the English Ambassador an account of all his negotiation.

Return we now to Creseil, a place about a Canon shot distant from Millaud,
having a treble enclosure of Walls, one whereof environs the Town, and the two
others the Castle, which must be forced one after another, for that there is no
coming at the Castle, but through the Town; the farthest part of it being built
upon a Rock of a vast height: It is true, the Walls that enclose the Town are
not worth any thing, being ruinous, and full of breaches, so that it were a
shame to lie eight days before it, and not to take it: But he that has to
deal with a people, to whom no design seems difficult, and when they come to
put it in execution, make no provision of necessaries to effect it, will want
no encumbrances: Rohan gives notice of his intentions to Alteyrac and Guerin,
that without any noise, they might put all things in a readiness to effect
them; and gave Alteyrac also Orders to block up the place, a day before he came
with his Troops; that so he might surprise it at a greater advantage, when
meanly furnished with Soldiers; which he did, but yet all their diligence
could not prevent the entry of supplies into it.

When the Troops were all come up, the Siege was formed, and a battery of two
Guns raised, which had not discharged six shot, before the Carriage of one of
them flew all to pieces; and when that was mended, the like accident befell the
other; so that the whole time, almost, was spent in repairing the Carriages of
the Guns; and with such untoward Timber, that when all was done, they did but
little better than before; so that the breach being not made large enough in
one day, they were fain to remit the prosecution of their battery till the
morrow, which gave the besieged leisure to repair, and make it better than
before: Nevertheless urged by the shortness of his time, the Duke commanded an
assault to be made, in which he was repulsed. In the mean while the Duke of
Montmorency, who with his Army, had still waited on the motions of Rohan,
joins with the Prince; and having dissuaded him from his intended attempt upon
Causade, and gotten together all the Forces of that Country, came with eight
thousand Foot, and six hundred Horse to lie at Saint Geo ges, distant but a
league from Creseil; of which, when the Duke of Rohan had intelligence, that
very night he drew off his Canon, and the next day, having left Creseil again
at liberty, drew up his whole Army in Battailla near Millaud; where about noon,
the Prince appeared with his whole Army, which, when Montmorency had recruited
the Garrison with men, and all other necessaries, marched off to their quarters.

This Siege did at least this good, that it preserved Causade, which was not
yet in a condition to withstand so great a power: The night following Rohan
sends his Foot into Saint Rome upon Tarn, and into Saint Afrique; and seeing
that both Armies were so near him, he thought with his Cavalry, having no
baggage to incumber them, he might reach Castres in one night: This he proposed
to his Officers, who were of opinion, that it would be convenient to stay one
day longer, to observe the countenance of the enemy, which totally frustrated
his intentions of passing that way; for as he was about to attempt it the next
day, he found that Montmorency had prevented him, and waited for him on the way
both with Horse and Foot; which made him instantly resolve to take with him all
his Forces, and by great Marches got into the higher Languedoc, to besiege
Aimargues, which he was confident (in case he found but the ordinary Garrison
in it) a few days would make him Master of; It is a Town of an indifferent
bigness, distant about four leagues from Nismes, and one from Lunel, seated in
the best part of that Country, and upon a Flat, no ways to be commanded, the
mold also being soft, and tractable; and in short, accommodated with all things
necessary to make it a very brave place; it is also enclosed with fair
Freestone Walls, flanked with small Towers, and a large and deep Trench, full
of water, on the outside of which were two or three half Moons, little, and ill
made. To this end he sent Aubais to Nismes, to get the Canon in a readiness,
and that he might the better conceal his design, divides his Forces, and
marches thither two several ways; he himself, with that party which he
conducted, came thither first, and presently invests the place; the next day
arrived the others also, and then he assigned every one their post, and
entirely blocked it up: And without further delay sent to Nismes, to hasten
away the Canon, which came also in good time: The night following, he plants
them upon the Battery he had raised, and the next day, without the loss of one
man, made a fair breach; and having made provision of ladders, for that the
Walls, being but low in many places, are easily scalable, and the Trench in
many parts passeable, he disposed his men for a general assault: When the
Governor, the Marquess of Saint Sulpice, a younger brother of the house of
Vsez saw these preparations, conceiving he had not men enough to defend himself
against the storm, he demands a parley; the Duke of Rohan sent him word, that
he was much troubled that a young Gentleman of his quality should be so
unfortunately engaged in a place where from his first Essay he could derive
nothing but disadvantage and dishonor: Nevertheless out of regard to the amity
between their houses, he offered him as honorable conditions, as he himself
could have desired, which he accepted, and within an hour after marched out
with his Garrison.

The Duke of Montmorency, while he was yet at la Caune, at the same instant
received intelligence, both of the Seige, and taking of this place, and upon
the re-iterated importunities made him, presently repaired thither to settle
the Province, which the so sudden taking of Aimargues had much disordered. The
Duke of Rohan mean while employes that little leisure he had in clearing the
Country of those Paltry Forts, and Towns, which lay about Nismes, and Vsez; as
the Castle of Vauvert, Mainne, Sargnac, Saint Bonnet, Resmolins, Ves, and
Chastillon, which yielded upon the approach of his Canon: All which he
demolished, except Resmolins, which he was desirous to keep for that it might
be useful to him when he should have occasion to look toward Ville-neufive by
Avignon: But the conservation of Aimargues, and the Fortifications he had there
begun, made him relinquish all other designs for the present, to apply himself
wholly to that.

Whiles he was thus occupied, survenes the Duke of Montmorency, threatening to
besiege Aimargues, and preparing his Canon, and all other necessaries for it;
which obliged the Duke of Rohan to draw toward it, and clap in twelve hundred
Foot, where he designed also a Counterscarfe, Curtains, and half Moons, to be
made for the security of those places which were weakest, and most liable to
danger; and having summoned in the Militia of the Sevenes, he put six or seven
hundred of them into the great Galargues, whither he caused ammunition-bread to
be sent them daily from Nismes, commanding them to defend it against a party,
but not to stay till the enemy drew down their Canon. Some weeks passed they in
this posture; in the mean time the Duke of Montmorency despairing to do any
good upon Aimargues, turns his design upon the Forces in Galargues; appoints
his Rendez-vous by break of day at the Bridge of Lunel, and that morning goes
thence to invest them. The two that commanded there, were Valescure, and la
Roque, both gallant Gentlemen, the former very stiffely persists in a
resolution to see their Canon, thinking by night, to draw off into Vauvage, a
good Country for the Foot, and where all the Inhabitants were of the Religion;
but this was contrary to the express order of the Duke of Rohan; who
understanding that they were besieged, with all speed rallies his Troops, and
comes to relieve them: The Duke of Montmorency on the other side, draws all the
Garrison out of Montpellier; the Regiment of Normandy also, with several
others, come to join with him. His Army with his Canon, he ranged in
Battailla, in a place of great advantage: Rohan going to view him, that he
might know whether he should attempt this relief by day, or in the nightime,
finds him to be four thousand Foot, and four hundred good Horse strong, and so
advantageously lodged that there was no coming at him in any good order, nor
without passing within Pistol-shot of a dangerous Valley; which made him not
discover his Troops, and defer advancing with the relief till the night
following: He incamps about half a league from the place, in a Valley near a
Wood, leaving a Troop of Horse to observe the motions of Montmorency, and to
hinder the discovery of his own Forces: About the close of the evening comes a
Messenger from the besieged, to demand some assistance, whom he sent back again
with another with him, to tell them, that when they should hear the Alarm on
the other side, they should be ready to sally out at such a place as they
should direct them; that they should find five hundred selected men to receive
them within Musket Shot of Galargues; and that he, with the rest of his Army,
would be within a quarter of a league ready to bring them off; that if they
knew any better way to save themselves, they should acquaint him with it, and
care should be taken of them; but, if they approved of this course, that they
should make three fires upon the top of the Tower, that it might be accordingly
followed. The Messengers got very well in, and the besieged also approve of the
design; In witness whereof they give the signal of the three Fires, and prepare
themselves for the Sally: The Duke of Rohan sent the five hundred men he had
promised within two Musket Shot, caused the Alarm to be given thrice, and yet
no body stirred in Galargues, but all stayed till day; which being now pretty
well advanced, he drew off his five hundred men, who by a Volley of shot at
their departure, let them know how near they had come to fetch them off: The
Duke understood afterward, that some of the Captains, who had bad legs, or
lame courages, hindered their coming forth; whose fears flattering them with
false and deceitful hopes, made them choose rather to submit to their enemies,
than run the hazard of marching three or four hundred paces with seven hundred
men, with their Swords in their hands, which when they had done, they were sure
to be received by five hundred more, and a quarter of a league farther by two
thousand. In great choler, and with an extreme regret did the Duke draw off
again, the next day, knowing they had yielded themselves to be disposed of at
the discretion of their Conquerours, if they procured not the surrender of Aima
gues; which if they effected, then were they all to be set at liberty, and have
their baggage restored to them: Valescure, and Baviere, were chosen Deputies,
and sent with this goodly message to the Duke of Rohan, who made them both
prisoners; but Valescure escapes, and gets into the Sevenes, to incite the
Communalties there to an insurrection, in case Aimargues were not given up
again; others also went thither privately from Montpellier to the same end;
Rohan fearing some commotions in that Province, goes thither too himself, and
takes with him the Deputies of Nismes and Vsez, assembles both the Provinces at
Anduze, where he brought them to this resolution, that Aimargues should not be
re-delivered, and that all those prisoners they already had, or for the future
should take, should be treated with the same rigor as was used to those of
Galargues; and that he might have his revenge, he sits down before Monts, with
but two thousand men at most; five days did he lie before it, for that the
incessant rain that fell, retarded the arrival of their great Canon from
Anduze, for the space of three whole days together: But though the bad weather
mischieved him on that side, it abundantly recompensed that Injurv on another,
swelling the two Gardons, so that four or five Regiments, which could they have
come the direct way, had reached him in one days march, not able to pass the
Rivers any other way, than by a Bridge, were fain to make four or five days of
it; and he to prolong their journey, causes all the Boats, and Ferry-boats upon
the Rivers to be broken, and a strong Guard to be kept at Saint Nicholas Port;
so that immediately upon the arrival of his Canon, without further fear of any
disturbance, he batters the Castle, and reduces the besieged, a hundred and
fifty in number, to such ill terms, that they yielded upon condition to undergo
the same punishment as should be inflicted on those were taken at Galargues,
persuading themselves still, that Hannibal, to whom the house belonged, and who
was Bastard-brother to the Duke of Montmorency, would be able to prevail with
him to save his Friends, and Allies: But Montmorency, to make his action more
eminent at Court, having sent word that he had taken the prime Officers and
Soldiers of the Sevenes, the King commanded that all the Colonels, and other
Officers should be hanged, and the common Soldiers sent to the Galleys; which
the Prince having notice of, would not give him leisure to let the Court know
what had happened at Monts; so that he caused threescore and four to be hanged,
which indeed were not all Officers; but many that were well clad, styled
themselves so, out of hopes to find better usage; see how many times men gull
themselves: The Duke of Rohan also, for his part, caused the like number to be
hanged, not sparing any for their quality, except some few, which he reserved,
to fetch off some others, which Hannibal had gotten to himself, who were
afterward exchanged.

In the mean time Montauban goes on luckily with the War, in which that Town,
without the assistance of any other, always behaved it self best of any of the
Reformed Party. Saint Michel, before he engaged in any other enterprise, looks
after the preservation of Causade, upon some jealousies he had of the Governor
Chastillon; for that in all Military actions he discovered too much offeminacy,
and too much disregard of things relating to the security of the Town; but
principally for that he held too frequent correspondencies with those of the
adverse party, under pretense of procuring the enlargement of his brother, who
had been a prisoner ever since the last peace: Neither was he without some
suspicions of the others aim to out him of his Government, which made him
begin to think upon some way to preserve himself in it, to which end he Courts
the affections of the Soldiers, and people of the Town; but before he had well
made his Game, he most imprudently declared publicly, that he would no longer
own any subordination to Saint Michel, who to prevent, and crush this mischief
in its birth, exhibited the Articles he had to charge Chastillon withal to the
Council; whereupon it was ordered that he should be secured, and tried by a
Council of War; which was neatly carried by Saint Michel, who very privately,
and insensibly having gotten many Soldiers into Causade, and coming thither
himself unthought on, without any the least commotion, seizes upon Chastillon,
and carries him to Montauban, where he was for a time kept prisoner, and
examined: But whether it was, that the proofs against him were not clear
enough, or that they feared lest the punishing of him would be a discouragement
to other strangers; he was set at liberty again; and Pontbeton was made
Governor of Causade in his place; who continued in that command until the
Peace.

Saint Michel having thus secured this Town, thinks upon taking in of many
small Forts, and Castles, which were a great disturbance to Montauban; having
now a fit opportunity offered him by the plague, that had driven away most of
the Garrisons the Duke d' Espernon had left about him; in pursuance of which he
draws his Canon into the Field, and begins with the Castle de la Motte d'
Ardne, and having battered, and taken it by assault, fired it on the second of
September: When he came back to Montauban, he had intelligence of a great body
drawing up, composed of the Country Forces, and some other Regiments also,
sent for purposely to oppose his designs: On the 6th. of the same Month he
lays an Ambuscade for them among the Vineyards of Dieu-Pantole, about two
leagues distant from Montauban, and with his Horse goes to draw them into it,
and meets them in the plain of Castalans, and Saint Porquier, where the enemy,
without expecting till the rest of their men were come up, or indeed staying
one for the other, pursue him in disorder up to the very Ambuscade, where being
once engaged, he charges them on every side, and leaves some four or five
hundred of them dead upon the place, besides a great number of wounded, losing
not above three or four of his own: Thence he marches up to the very Towns of
Castalans, and Saint Porquier, and other Villages, and Farms, which he fired,
and then returns to Montauban. The next day he besieges the Castle of
Ville-Dieu; which having endured the battery a whole day, yielded the next;
those within it had their lives given them, but they remained prisoners of War,
and the place was burnt. On the 8th. of October he went from Montauban to
besiege Escaliez, about two leagues from Montauban; but those of that Garrison
stayed no more for him, then did those of Blavet, both which retreated to
Salvagnac; these two Forts he also burnt: And because Mouliere Governor of
Villemur, had now his Regiment on foot, he was very desirous to invite him into
an Ambush also, which he endeavored to do, by firing the Mills of Villemur,
which were in sight of the Town, whence yet none would stir out; in his return
thence he came before the Castle of Poulauron, which he forced.

The Garrison of Salvagnac being thus reinforced with those of Escaliez, and
Blavet, began now to grow insolent, and would no longer stand to the Agreement
made with those of Montauban, to suffer them freely to pass, and repass;
whereupon he laid an Ambush for them also; to allure them to which, he sent out
sixty Horse, and fifty Foot, when presently came forth an hundred, or six score
Soldiers, to gain the Ford upon the River Tescou, where they met with such
entertainment, as very few of them ever went back again.

About the beginning of November sallied out sixty seven Soldiers from the
Garrison of Loubejac, to lay an Ambush near Montauban, upon the great Road to
Negrepelisse; which Saint Michel having notice of, drew out some Horse, and
laid a Counter-Ambuscade in the way by which they were to retreat; and
charging them in an open field, slew about threescore and four of them; and
after this, took the Castle of Bourquet by Petard. Many other little actions
passed there at Montauban, in which Saint Michel always came off with honor.

It is now time to return to the lower Languedoc, whither presently after the
taking of Monts, came the news of the Reddition of Rochelle, after the long
sufferings of that poor people, had given such large testimonies of their
invincible constancy.

The Rochellers upon the retreat of the second Fleet, sent four several
Messengers to England, with instructions all to the same effect; viz. To
represent unto the King, the deplorable condition they would suddenly be
reduced to, and minding him of his promises, to beseech his Majesty with all
speed to send them some relief, assuring him withal, that how many, and heavy
soever their pressures were, they would not submit to them, but wait his
answer: La Grossetiere, who was one of the four, arrived there on the 15th. of
June, and was sent back again with many fair promises on the 30th. but in his
return was taken, carried to the King, kept a prisoner till the Town was taken,
and was then put to death. The 10th. of July following came the second, and on
the 14th. arrived the third; but the last, who came about by Holland, was
somewhat longer on his way.

Before the arrival of la Grossetiere, had the King of great Britain dispatched
la Land with two other Soldiers, to give the Rochellers notice of the great
supplies he was preparing for them; and after him was also sent Champfleury
with the like assurances, who got into Rochelle, but one day before the Fleet
showed it self in the Rode: The ships preparing for this expedition being not
yet finished, the Engineers pitched upon a new invention, to wit, the lotting
out of three ships lined, and the decks covered with brick, and laden with
stones of an immense bigness, and stuffed with barrels of powder, to make these
Mines play effectually upon the Barricado the French had made in the Port: But
the King of England very much unsatisfied with the flow progress of the Fleet,
went himself in person on the last of July to hasten it, in which journey the
Duke of Soubize waited on him.

The Duke of Buckingham staying behind, sets his wits on work to find out some
means to obstruct the sending away of the supplies, and to this end, endeavors
by the means of the Venetian Residents in England, and France, to have some
overtures for a peace made: But seeing that took not, he resolves upon a
journey to Portsmouth; but before his departure, sends for Vincent, a Minister
of the Church of Rochelle, and makes him write a persuasive letter to the
Rochellers, to dispose themselves to accept of the peace the Duke of Buckingham
was now procuring for them; which the Ambassador of Savoy having an inkling
of, he plainly demonstrates to Vincent, that it was only an invention to retard
the departure of the Fleet, and so defeated that project.

At length, on the 24th. of August, comes the Duke of Buckingham to Portsmouth,
and on the 29th. arrived there fifty ships, some men of War, and others laden
with provision, and ammunition: But on the second of September, the Duke of
Soubize going to visit the Duke of Buckingham, as he had newly dined, he told
him that just then he had received intelligence of the re-victualling of
Rochelle, and that he was now going with the news to the King; and as he was
lifting up the Hangings to go forth of the Room, he was stabbed with a Knife,
into the great Attery of the heart, by an Officer, whose name was Fellon, of
which he fell, and dyed immediately: Nor were the Duke of Soubize, and his
followers free from danger, it being muttered in the Chamber, that it was a
Frenchman had done this act; but Felton, who might have easily escaped, if he
had listed, having not been observed by any one, voluntarily discovers himself
to be the Author of this Homicide; saying, that it was better that two men
should perish, than a whole Kingdom. The next day the King makes the Earl of
Lindsey Admiral, Morton Vice Admiral, and Montjoy Reare-admiral; the other
commands were not changed, but the same Captains that were in the former
expedition, went also in this, with a greater force, but the same resolutions.
After the death of Buckingham, it appeared that not half of the Ammunition and
Provisions for the Fleet were yet shipped; and that should the prosecution of
their business answer the slowness of the beginnings, there would be yet three
months work more to do; but by the care, and presence of the King, more was
now dispatched in ten or twelve days, than in many weeks before; so that all
things being now ready, they set sail on the eighteenth of September: That
which made the Duke of Soubize conceive better hopes of this than the former
Fleets, was the care and diligence used by the King, and the command he gave
his Admiral, in his presence, not to do any thing without his advice;
committing the charge of this expedition conjoyntly to them both.

On the nine and twentieth of September came the Fleet into the Rode of
Rochelle, and after a calm, which continued all Sunday and Monday following, at
night the Wind arose, and sat fair for a sight, so that about two hours
before day, upon the Admiral's firing of a Gun, they all set sail, and at six
of the clock in the morning began a fight, which lasted about three hours, in
which, on both sides, were discharged three or four thousand piece of Canon,
and that was all: The next day about the same hour was the fight renewed, but
more temperately, and at a greater distance, so that both those fights were
concluded without any great loss to either side: On the third of October comes
up to them Friquelet a Captain that had formerly served under the Duke of
Soubize, and coming, as he said, from Tremblade, shows a Letter from the
Captain Treslebois, desiring him to know of them whether they would hearken to
a Treaty of peace or no; to which was answered, that he should show his
passport, or else that Treslebois should come up in his Shalloup between the
two Fleets, and there let them know what he had to say; which, on the seventh
of the same month, he did, with one whose name was de l' Isle, both who were
remitted to Montague and Forain, who, finding that they had no particular
Commission, but came only to know whether the French would Treat apart,
excluding the English, answered them, that that could not be, and so both
retired to their own Parties: Nevertheless upon occasion of this interview the
Admiral sent Montague with a Dutch Gentleman whose name was Kimphaussen, under
color of demanding of some Mariners, that were Prisoners in the French Fleet;
but his going thither again the two days following, pretending they had
promised to show him the Barricado in the Port, and confessing, at his return,
that he had not seen it, because the Tide did not serve, bred some jealousies,
that he went thither upon some other design; And when, upon a report that there
had Articles mutually passed between them, the Duke of Soubize complained that
they had entered upon a Treaty, unknown to him, and without the Privity of those
that were principally concerned in it; it was flatly denied: But when the
continual goings to and fro of Montague, had confirmed their suspicions of a
Treaty, it was put off with this excuse, that they treated of things not
relating to theirs, nor the Interests of France: And not long after, the
Admiral sent Montague into England, with a pass which the Cardinal of Richelieu
gave him.

On Sunday the one and twentieth of this month there happened a remarkable
passage; one Pojanne, a Captain that had formerly served under the Duke of
Soubize, a Villain covered with Crimes, and that had now redeemed his life, by
the engagements he had passed to the Cardinal, to kill, or burn Soubize in his
ship, sets sail out of the River of Bourdeaux, in a good ship of two hundred
Tun burden, and filled with Combustible matter; and, the better to palliate
his design, passes as an enemy, making prize of several French he met withal,
and so gets up to the English Fleet; When he was come in among them, he tells
them that he was come to serve the Party of the Religion as he had formerly
done, and desires to be conducted to the Duke of Soubize who knevv him very
well: With him was a Gentleman of Anjou, who, as he was going to Rochelle,
had been cast upon the Coast of Spain, there taken, and thence sent to the
Cardinal, who finding him to be a bold and adventurous person, promised him
not only his pardon, but infinite recompenses in case he would accompany
Pojanne in this enterprise: The desire he had to save himself together with the
persuasions of his brother, who was a servant to the Cardinal, made him promise
whatever they required of him: But when they came to the fleet, he unfolded the
whole plot to Soubize, whereupon Pojanne was taken Prisoner, his ship and
Prizes seized on: And to prove that this Gentleman said nothing but truth, he
offered to get through into Rochelle with the Cardinal's pass, and to return
thence with a true account of the condition of the place: His offer was
accepted of, and double Letters were given him, some of which he showed to the
Cardinal, importing a request to permit him to make this Voyage, and a promise
at his return to give him a perfect relation of his discovery. Thus he got in,
and returned with other private Letters, which truly represented the state of
Rochelle, which was so sad, that in case they were not relieved within two
days, there would be none left alive in it, and that they were now upon the
point of yielding.

On Monday the two and twentieth, about ten aclock in the morning the Fleets
made as though they would engage, but the Captains failing of their promised
duty, the whole time was spent in Canonades, without any prejudice to either
party, and all the fireships were so ill-managed, that they were vainly, and
to no purpose consumed: And in the mean time, in sight of that Puissant Fleet,
so well stored with all necessaries, while the time slipped away, the passage
unattempted, nor the Duke of Soubize his offers, to lead the way with the
French, desiring the Admiral but to follow him only, accepted, nor those of the
Count de Laval, while the others were engaged in the fight, to conduct the
three ships lined with brick, and in which were the Artificial Mines, up to the
Barricado; the famine finished its work in Rochelle; there being hardly a man
left that could support himself without a staff; all that were left alive were
so few, and so debilitated, that they had not strength to handle their Arms;
so that on the same day the Admiral of England had resolved with his Council,
once more to attempt the relieving of it, the Rochellers capitulated, and
yielded on the 28th. day of October; and on the 10th. of November following,
the whole Fleet left the Rode, and returned toward England: The miscarriages
of this action being imputed to the refractoriness and disobedience of some
particular Captains; some of them were confined to their own houses, and a
Commission was issued out for their Trial: But in a short time after, all this
vanished, and they received their pay as the rest did.

The Duke of Rohan's Mother, nor his Sister, would not suffer any particular
mention to be made of them in the Capitulation; lest the occasion of the
surrender should be imputed to their persuasions, or the respect borne to them;
not doubting however, but that they should equally enjoy the benefit of the
Treaty with the rest: But, the interpretation of Articles being commonly made
by the Conquerours, it was the Judgment of the King's Council, that they were
not comprised in them, since they were not mentioned in them: An
unpresidentable severity, that a person of her quality, of seventy years old,
coming out of a besieged Town, where she and her daughter had lived three
months together upon Horseflesh, and four or five ounces of bread aday,
should be detained Prisoners, prohibited the exercise of their Religion, and so
strictly guarded, that they had but one servant allowed to attend on them: But
all this rigor abated not their wonted courage and zeal to the welfare of
their party: For the Duchess sent to her son the Duke of Rohan a Caution, not
to give any credit to her Letters; for that in this restraint she might be
compelled to write things contrary to her inclinations, and that the
consideration of her miserable condition should not impell him to any thing
that might prejudice the Party, whatever mischief befell her: A truly Christian
resolution, and nothing varying from the whole course of her life, which though
it had been a continued texture of afflictions; yet, by the assistance of God,
with such fortitude comported she her self in them all, that she has justly
merited the applause and benediction of all good people; and will yield
posterity a most illustrious example of an unparallelable virtue, and admirable
piety. Thus this poor Town, once the Cabinet and delight of Henry the Fourth,
is now become the Subject of the wrath and Triumph of his Son Lewis the
Thirteenth: It was assaulted by the French, abandoned by the English, and
buried in a grievous and merciless Famine; but in the conclusion, has, by its
constancy, gained a more glorious Renown in succeeding ages, than those, whose
uninterrupted prosperity makes them the envy of the present.

This news caused a wonderful and general dejection among the whole Party,
every one casting about, how to make his own peace; and many made public
addresses to that end, alleging, that since Rochelle was now lost, for whose
preservation only they had taken up Arms, it was necessary that they also
should make their own compositions, before a greater extremity befell them; On
the other side the Romanists, by means of the Confederates they had in the
Towns of the Religion, infused suggestions into them, persuading them to a
speedy compliance, and that their early submission, would procure them a better
reception; offering withal, large recompenses to those that could induce their
Corporations to send their Deputies to the King, who at the same time also,
published a Declaration, wherein he promised to receive again into his favor
and protection, any particular persons, or Towns that should petition him to
that effect.

The people wearied and ruined with the War, and whose spirits naturally
stoop to adversity; the Merchants discontented at their loss of Trading; the
Citizens grieved to see their houses burnt, and their lands lie idle immanured,
and untilled, all incline to a peace upon any terms whatsoever: But of all
others the distemper of Castres was the greatest, by reason of the divisions
between Chavagnac and Saint Germier, who supported by the Consuls, and others,
who stayed in the Town purposely to mischieve the whole party, who played their
game so well with the Council of Albigeois, that they procured Deputies to be
sent to the Duke of Rohan, to desire his presence, without which their ills
were irremedible, and to summon him, upon his promises, to convene a General
Assembly, which might, together with him, take care of the public affairs;
giving the Deputies charge to return with his answer as soon as possible, that
accordingly they might resolve on what they had to do.

This resolution, as also the election of the Deputies, was made contrary to
the advice of Chavagnac, one of them being a Kinsman of Saint Germiers, yet was
he fain to submit to it for the present. The project of this message was
grounded upon the impossibility they conceived of the Duke's being able to come
to them; and upon a belief, that were the way open, yet would he never curb his
own power by a General Assembly; so that upon his refusal they promised
themselves a fair and plausible pretense, to make their own particular peace,
or at least, that making the Assembly their own, they should compel him to
assent to what they listed: Which the Duke of Rohan foreseeing, and having
also, before the arrival of the Deputies, reflected on a General Assembly, as
the only expedient, to preserve an entire unity among them, he condescended to
all their desires; and that he might lose no time, took the Deputies with him
to Nismes, where they made choice of Deputies for the lower Languedoc; thence
went they to the Sevenes, where they did the like, leaving the time and place
for the Convention to his determination: He sent them also Orders into Vivaretz
to elect their Deputies too; and then, having taken Order for the gallant
fortifications he had begun at Aimargues, and all Garrisons necessary to be kept
in the two Provinces, during his absence, he takes all his Horse, and five
hundred Foot, and with them comes to Castres about the beginning of December,
where he found Rousseliere, whom the Inhabitants of Saverdun had driven out of
their Town, by means of La Plant, his Lieutenant there, who suffering himself
to be seduced by their temptations, had drawn the Garrison out of the higher
Town, and given it up into their hands: This was also much promoted by the
mis-intelligence happened between Mazaribal (whom the Duke of Rohan, upon the
death of Saint Estienne, had made Governor of Foix) and la Rousseliere; upon
this occasion; for that Mazaribal his facility made him too much yield to the
follicitations of some of the Inhabitants of Mazeres (whose villainy was not
then known to him, as he confessed afterward, and that he took them for
persons well-affected to the Party) to uphold the Enemies of la Rousseliere
both in Saverdun, and Carlat; which made him requite his courtesy, by showing
favor also to all against whom Mazaribal had any Picque; and to such a height
grew their animosities one against another, that Mazaribal obstructed, as much
as he could, the payment of the Garrison of Saverdun, and gave free passage to
the Soldiers that ran from la Rousseliere; which much elevated the spirits of
his enemies, who cherished Mazaribal with hopes, that in case they could rid
themselves of the other, they would receive him into his place; but when, upon
the expulsion of the other, he had a mind to go thither to reap the fruits of
their promises, they reduced his train to a less number at the first, and shut
their Gates upon him the second time; but protested notwithstanding to continue
firm to the Party; which nevertheless, when they had sufficiently secured the
place, they utterly abandoned it, and presently made addresses by their
Deputies, to the King. It was then (but too late) that Mazaribal clearly
perceived the wicked intentions of la Rousseliere's enemies, whose Treachery he
could not now sufficiently aggravate.

The first thing the Duke of Rohan did, when he came to Castres, was to
assemble the two Colloques of Albigeois and Lauraguais, to acquaint them with
the resolutions of the lower Languedoc, and the Sevenes, and to incite them, by
the others example, to choose Deputies also for the General Assembly; the like
was also done by Montauban, Foix, and Rouergne: After this he endeavored to
compose the difference between Chavagnac and Saint Germier, which was now grown
into so formal a quarrel, that mutual challenges had passed between them: But
though Saint Germier refused not to submit to a reconciliation, yet would he
not condescend to own Chavagnac, as his Superior in the Town of Castres: But
on the contrary he professed publicly, and in private, and even in the
Council-House, that he would oppose him in all things, and in all places. This
made the Duke of Rohan think of removing him into the lower Languedoc; to which
end he offered him a Troop of Horse, and an honorable allowance for himself
and his retinue; but his Partisans, seeing that this tended to the dissipation
of their faction, dissuaded him from it, promising him withal, that if he
could find out any way to evade that employment, they would make him Master of
their Town.

The Duke also, finding the great scarcity of Corn was in Castres, to supply
that want, gets them to resolve to borrow ten thousand Crowns to buy some; and
offered them, during his abode there, sufficient Convoyes to conduct it safe
thither: But seeing that could not be effected, he seeks out some other way to
supply the necessities of the Town: And understanding that there was a great
quantity at Saint Amant, which lies in the Valley of Mazamet; he claps a
Petarde to the Town, and by that means enters it, and besieges the Castle,
which being hardly pressed, yielded also, and at three or four Convoyes, was
the greatest part of the Corn carried to Castres: This exploit was performed by
Chavagnac; He sent also for more provisions to some of the Religion, that
living as Neuters, hoped by that means to secure themselves against all parties.

He caused Donaret the first Consul of Realmont, who was a great instrument of
the taking of the Town, to be tried, and executed; but with much difficulty,
for that having married the President Montespieu's Niece (such persons seldom
wanting Intercessours) they were loath to pronounce a sentence of Death against
him: After this, the Winter came on so furiously, that he could not proceed in
his intended Design upon Brassac.

Whiles he stayed at Castres, he also defeated two several negotiations for
particular Peaces: The first was carried on by Dejan a native of Montauban, who
having formerly bought the Office of Provost of the Town, which the Corporation
opposed as a thing long before abolished, after a long suit, and a great
expense of money he was feign to accept of what he had disbursed: This man
being at the Court, had fresh hopes given him of this Office, in case he could
effect any thing in this negotiation: To this Lure he stoops, and having his
Commission dispatched, comes away with two Letters from Galand; one for
Montauban, and another for Castres. At the first place he was refused, and
referred to the Duke of Rohan; and as for the second, he durst not go directly
thither, but approaches as near it, as Bouquiere, which is about a League from
it, and thence Writes to Dupuy, to let him know that he was very desirous to
speak with him about a business of great importance; but he sent him word
again, That he could not do it, unless he would first acquaint him with the
nature of it: Whereupon he essays a second time to prevail with him, but in
vain; so that not daring to come into Castres, he was fain to return again
without any further satisfaction: Thus his Voyage bringing no advantage to the
Court, was nothing beneficial to himself neither, who reaped no fruits at all
of those many fair hopes were given him.

The other was managed by the Bishop of Mende, who was somewhat more zealous in
it, as shall be seen in another place; but for the present he discovered
himself thus far, and to the Duke of Rohan too; that being a servant to the
Cardinal, he had received a Commission to Treat with particular persons, and
Corporations, either severally, or conjunctively, and especially with him; that
if he would hearken to him, he would procure him conditions, in which he should
find what satisfaction he could desire; but if he would hear of none but a
general Treaty, he must not expect so good; and so openly did he discover his
purposes, that Saint Michel Governor of Montauban, fearing lest he should
engage in a Treaty without his Privity, sent a servant of his own toward the
Duke of Rohan, to observe what was done, that the intelligence he should
receive of the transactions there, might direct him how to steer his course;
who, when he savv that the Duke would not listen to a Man not empowered by
any Commission, nor admit of any clandestine or particular Treaty, discovered
himself, and told him, that he was sent to inform him from the Governor, that
the Bishop had made some overtures to him concerning a particular Treaty for
Montauban, but that he had rejected his Propositions; nevertheless if he had
any inclinations to a general Treaty, he was very well acquainted with him, and
could do him much service in it.

On the other side, the Bishop nothing satisfied with Rohan's answer; and
rightly conjecturing, that his presence would be injurious to his design;
resolves to have patience, until his return into the lower Languedoc; that in
his absence he might the more effectually prevail upon the several Corporations.

There remained nothing more now, than by a Provident foresight, to prevent
all inconveniences, might intervene at Castres, during his absence: To this
end he settles in the Consulate persons of great integrity, and no less
fidelity to himself, banishing from the Town three of the old Consuls, and some
others also, of whom he had great jealousy; and placed there four Companies of
Foot, for whose subsistence he also provided: The business of Saint Germier was
the only thing he could not handsomely clear, because he had absented himself
from the Town; which obliged the Duke of Rohan to make an Order, prohibiting
Chavagnac, and the Consuls, to give him, or any of his brothers, any admittance
into it; and, in case he came not in to them within the space of eight days,
to Proclaim him a deserter of his Party: He sent also a Company of Foot into
Roque-courbe, and another into Viane; forbidding them also to receive Saint
Germier and his brothers, and leaves three hundred Men, which he brought out of
the lower Languedoc, in Saint Amant, where, for their maintenance, he allotted
them their proportions out of a part of the Corn was found there.

When he had done this, he went with the Deputies of the General Assembly
toward Nismes, where he saw the storm was like to fall, and where his presence
would be most necessary; and conceiving it also a very convenient place for the
General Assembly, made no long delays after his arrival there, before he formed
it.

The first and most important affair that fell under their consideration, was
that of Castres: Saint Germier, after the departure of the Duke of Rohan
thence, animated by the Fugitives of Castres, and importuned by those of his
Faction, that were left in the Town, whom his Mother, and his Wife, whose Sex
privileged their stay there cherished in their discontents, resolves to return
thither again, and indeed he himself was the fourth man that came to the Gate,
and meeting with no opposition there, he goes up directly to his quarters,
where thirty or forty persons flocking to him, persuade him to go out into the
Marketplace, assuring him, that all the people would join with him, Chavagnac,
who was then at Church, having notice of his arrival, raises his Garrison,
commands his own Troop to make ready, and resolves to charge him, wherever he
should meet him; but his Lieutenant, l' Espuguet, being very opportunely
mounted with about twenty of his men to go out upon a party, hearing the
Alarm, goes directly to the place where Saint Germier was, and without taking
any other notice of him, charged him bravely; in which action he received five
wounds, and lost one of his men; but he slew and wounded many of the others
also, whom he so scattered, and dispersed, that they had no more mind to rally
again. Upon this rumor, the Consuls and Consistory interpose in the business,
and instead of detaining him prisoner, too charitably mediate for his quiet
departure again: This is that which usually ruins all public affairs, the
indulgence shown to offenders, under the goodly pretense of piety and
clemency, which in other men's matters every one cries out for, when as their
own particular interests will not endure to hear them mentioned.

This mild comportment of theirs toward Saint Germier, instead of pacifying,
renders him more haughty than before, puffing him up with a vain opinion, that
this courtesy was an effect of their fear; so that encouraged by his
followers, and by the assistance of many Thieves, and Villains, that had
sheltered themselves in Roque-Courbe, he gets into it, drives out the Garrison,
and makes himself Master of the place; the Assembly General foreseeing the
evil consequences this would produce, sent a Deputy to Castros, with order to
communicato his Commission to Chavagnac, and the Council of the Province, and
to endeavor to compose this difference, by submitting it to the determination
of Arbitrators; to the end they might not provoke Saint Germier to give away
the Town; which being now in his possession, he laughed at all mentions of an
Accommodation; so that the Deputy at his return, reported to the Assembly, that
all he had been able to do, was to confirm Roque-Courbe in their resolutions
for the Reformed party, which they had anew engaged themselves by Oath, never
to relinquish; but that for the present it was impossible to dispossess Saint
Germier of it; but yet that there was great probability that a little patience,
together with his imprudence, would give them what they aimed at; and in
effect, a few days after, when he urged the Inhabitants to declare for the
King, who knew well they must then submit to a Romish Garrison, they turned
many of his Faction out of the Town, which so terrified him, that thinking
himself no longer secure there, he leaves the place also, and goes with them to
Came, a house not far from it; which when Chavagnac had intelligence of, he
besieges, and takes him, and one of his brothers, with fifteen, or sixteen
others, half Romanists, and half of the Reformed Religion, whom he sent to the
Duke of Rohan: And yet after such actions as these, found he many Advocates,
who deemed it too great a severity to detain him prisoner, till the peace, and
seemed also much discontented that his whole equipage was not restored him, and
a Troop of Horse given him, that he might serve the party as formerly, and this
was the conclusion of this affair.

And now the Bishop of Mende renewes the pursuit of his design, with an Essay
upon Montauban, to which end he sent thither Vieres, a Gentleman of Quercy, who
feigned himself to be of the Religion, and wrote to the Town to this effect,
that being now going with the Kings Passport to wait upon the Duke of Rohan,
with some proposals tending to the general advantage of them all, he would not
proceed in his journey before he had acquainted them with them, which if they
pleased to receive from his Relation, he was confident they would approve of
them.

It was not thought fit to admit him into the Town, for fear of the danger
might ensue; but yet the natural curiosity of the French, at such a time, when
every one breathed nothing but desires of a peace; made them very sollicitous
to know what he had to say: Wherefore they sent four Commissioners to receive
his message, whom he told, that being of the Religion himself, he could not but
be very zealous for the general welfare of their party, and that the Bishop of
Mende having full power to treat, he was going from him, to the Duke of Rohan,
and the general Assembly, with some propositions to that purpose; which, that
they might be the better ressented, and that their Town might also have their
part of the thanks, and benefit thence accruing, he advised them to send
thither some Deputies also, offering the Kings Pass for their safe conduct;
when this was reported to the Common Council of the Town, they approved of the
advice, and presently made choice of some Deputies, of which they also
advertised the Assembly.

The Duke of Rohan had great jealousies of this Vieres, whom he had a long time
I nown for a notable cheat; nevertheless, with great impatience was this
Address expected; the report of which being generally divulged, suspended all
other thoughts, every one hoping to derive some advantage from it; three weeks
passed without any further mention of it, at length came a dispatch from
Montauban, importing, that they had received intelligence from the Bishop, that
he could not obtain the Pass-ports promised by Vieres; but that if they pleased
to send their Deputies to persuade the General Assembly to accept of such a
peace, as the King should vouchsafe to accord them, and in case they refused to
comply, that they themselves were resolved to submit to his pleasure, he would
engage himself for the safe conduct of their Deputies: This discovered the
whole fallacy to the Town, and made them resolve anew to remit all
propositions for peace to the General Assembly, which they exactly observed in
that, made them by the Marshal de la Force, to this effect, that the King was
resolved not to issue out any Declaration for a general peace; nevertheless, if
they would Treat every one particularly, the King admitting of all such
Treaties, and refusing a peace to no Town, it would at last insensibly prove
a general one.

When this business of Montauban was over, came a very urgent dispatch from
Vivaretz, grounded upon this occasion, that the Army which lay before
Rochelle, after the taking of the Town, went under the command of Toiras into
Auvergne, to refresh themselves, and that they were now upon a March toward
the upper Vivaretz, to go thence to Valence in Dauphine, there to wait the
arrival of the King; this their so near approach, gave the whole Country a hot
Alarm; especially Sojon, which Chevrilles about six Months before had seized,
and fortified; so that with great instancy they demanded a supply both of men
and ammunition. The lower Languedoc furnished them with fifteen hundred men,
the command of which was given by the Dake of Rohan to Saint Andre de Montbrun
as his field Marshal, with whom were also sent the Horse belonging to Cassagne,
who about three months before, was taken prisoner; to whom in this place I
must give his merited honor, publishing to the World with what generosity he
with-stood both the Menaces, and Flatteries of the Court; for, he being the
first Consul of Nismes, and of great authority, and reputation there; they
hoped by his means to raise a powerful faction there, and wholly take off that
Town from their adherence to the Reformed Party.

But to return to those of Vivaretz, all whose fears the King's Army having
transported with them over the Rbone into Dauphine, they countermand the Troops
were coming to their assistance, which turned to their great prejudice; for
that being now a burden to the Duke of Rohan, who knew not yet well how to
dispose of them, he was feign to seek out some employment for them, between
Vivaretz, and the Sevenes; and to this end he sent Saint Andre orders to make
an attempt upon Saint John de Valle-Francisque; and for the more convenient
prosecuting of a design upon Villeforte or Posts, to secure Genovillac, and
Chamberigand; he begins with Saint John, which he takes, as also the Fort of
Chamberigand, and some other places, which were like to incommode him, and then
takes up his quarters at Genovillac; whence he marches with intention to block
up Villefort; but finding the Marquess de Ports upon the way with a greater
power than his, ready to dispute the passages with him; he forces him from
them, and so advances to Ville-fort, thinking to have lodged his men in the
Suburbs; but being not able to effect it, he retires to Genovillac, and Saint
Germain, and thence informs the Duke of Rohan, that his men would leave all
their Colors, unless they were drawn off thence; whereupon he gives orders for
their quartering at Saint Ambroix, Barjac, Valon, and la Gorce; that they might
be in a readiness to march to Privas, upon any occasion should summon them
thither.

In the mean time came to him new assurances from England, that he should never
be deserted, nor any peace made, without comprising the whole body of those of
the Religion in France in general, and his Family in particular; encouraging
him also to a constancy in his resolution, and not to be dismayed at the loss
of Rochelle: Prince Thomas also of Savoy sent a Gentleman to him, to let him
know, that if he continued in his former humor, and would advance toward him,
he would give the King a handsome diversion in Dauphine, and meet him upon the
Rhone with ten thousand Foot, and a thousand Horse; to whom he replied, that he
was now in a better humor than ever, and ready to march upon the first summons
he should receive from him.

The King in the mean time goes toward Dauphine, but because the plague was at
Lions Lodges at Vienne, and appoints the Rendez-vous to be at Grenoble, where
preparation was also made of all things necessary for the relief and
victualling of Cazal; the jealousies these preparatives raised in the Duke of
Savoy, made him look about him in several quarters, there being an Army in
Province ready to fall upon Nice; another in Bressia to keep Savoy in awe, and
the King himself marching with the third to the streights of Susa, which is the
Key of Piedmont; so that the Duke was fain to divide his Forces, that he might
be ready to defend himself in any part where the storm should fall, and to call
in the Spanish Forces to assist him in the defense of Susa.

The present state of affairs, gave great probabilities that the King would now
have employments enough to divert him a long time from looking after those of
the Religion; and upon occasion of some reports dispersed among the people of
Nismes, that if they had any inclinations to sue for a peace, all necessary
Passports for their safe conduct should be given them; the Assembly took care
to enquire after the Authors, and truth of these Rumors; but finding them to
be all fictions, and the inventions of some Counselors of the Presidial of
Nismes, or of some of the Inhabitants that had been expulsed the Town; or of
some of Aiguemortes, some of them set on by the Duke of Montmorency, others by
the Marquess of Varennes, out of an intention to ruin them, by sowing
divisions among them, rather than to procure them any good; the Assembly made a
Decree, that all persons that had any proposals or overtures to make for a
peace, should first bring them to the Assembly, that they might be examined by
them, and improved to their advantage; expressly prohibiting also all persons
from such clandestine, and malicious buzzing of reports among the people, to
take them off from proceeding in the Fortifications they were then upon.

And next they fell upon the consideration of a course to procure a firm and
lasting peace; whereupon they laid down this for an infallible ground, that it
could not be such, unless it were made conjoyntly with the King of England;
neither could he himself procure any upon so good terms, without a previous
descent into France, whither he was now invited by so many considerable
emergencies to favor him in the enterprise; the King being now at the other
end of his Kingdom with his best Forces, prosecuting a design, was to be
executed without it; where he should have to oppose him, the Forces of the
Emperor, the King of Spain, and the Duke of Savoy. To this effect a letter was
written to him in the name of the Assembly, and the Duke of Rohan, beseeching
him to embrace this offered opportunity, and confirming the protestations
formerly made by those of the Religion in France, not to engage in any Treaty,
but conjoyntly with him: And for as much as their want of money was great, and
that without some Foreign assistance, it was impossible to keep their men
together, or advance their Fortifications, the Duke of Rohan was solicited to
write to Clausel, that they could no longer subsist without a supply of money,
and that he should let the Spaniards know, that the peace of France could be no
longer prevented, without a sudden recruit. It was also resolved, that they
should endeavor to procure some private Pass-ports, that they might with more
security send into England; upon assurance to be given to dispose all things to
a peace: Du Cross of Montpellier, who, with the consent of the Marquess de
Fosse, came to give the Duke of Rohan a visit, returned from him with the same
promise, which was also confirmed by the whole Assembly.

Thus were they careful not to omit any thing that tended either to their own
defense, or the procuring of a peace, even at such a time, when they had fairer
hopes of good success in their affairs than ever; but God, who had otherwise
determined of them, blasted all their projects: For the King, who left not
Paris, to go to the relief of Cazal, till he had privately gotten an assurance
out of England, which freed him from the fear of any invasion thence, whilst
he was engaged in that expedition, and made him confident of a peace with that
Nation, excluding the Reformed Party, would not admit of any addresses from
them, fearing lest they might prevail so far upon him, as to induce him to
alter his determinations concerning them: To which may be added, that
surprising his enemies by a nimble march, in the dead of Winter, he easily
gained the straits of Susa, and immediately after the Town also; which brought
so great a terror on them all, that Don Ganzales raised his siege from before
Cazal; the Duke of Savoy also, to prevent the loss of Piedmont, follicited for
a peace, by which he was obliged to re-victual Cazal The King, that he might
himself witness the performance of all Conventions, remained about a month
longer in that Country: And then leaving Toiras with four thousand Foot, and
five hundred Horse in Montferrat, and the Marshal Crequi with the like number
at Susa, bent all his thoughts, and the rest of his Forces upon the War in
Languedoc; in order to which he commanded the Marshal Schomberg to advance
before to Valence, to receive the Forces that were coming out of Bressia, and
the parts about Lions, to cause the Train, and all other necessaries to be made
ready, and to conclude a Treaty already begun with Chevrilles concerning
Vivaretz: To the Duke of Montmorency, he sent Orders to besiege Sojon; to the
Duke of Guise, that he should deliver up his Army to the Marshal d' Estree, who
had a Commission to march with it into the lower Languedoc, to ravage the
Country about Nismes; not long after the King comes in person to Valence with
a few Horse only, and a few days after, the Cardinal arrives also with the
rest of the Army; out of which were drawn fifteen hundred Horse, and sent under
the command of the Duke of Trimouille, to join with the Marshal d' Estree.

In the interim of these preparations the English Ambassador than residing at
Thurin, gave the Duke of Rohan notice of the peace concluded there; but that it
was not like to be of any long continuance; that the Army was now marching
toward him, but in so tattered a condition, that if he could but stand the
first shock, he would soon find such diversions made, as would be much to his
advantage. Clausel encouraged him yet much more with promises of a sudden
supply both of Arms and Money. Nismes, and Aimargues went but slowly on in
their Fortifications, Vsez a little better; but yet no Town would give quarter
to any Soldiers, till they were upon the point of being besieged; which drove
the Duke of Rohan to his usual way of offering to each particular Town to pull
out for them, the Thorn, that pricked them: And first he addresses himself to
Sauve, with over-tures of an attempt upon Corsonne, whither he goes; but finds
it a matter of greater difficulty, than his information had given him cause to
apprehend; for having battered their Works, the Walls were not to be scaled,
but with Ladders of a very great length; so that those he had brought with him
proving too short, he was necessitated to make all new again; which gave the
Marshal d' Estree, (urged by the Marquess de Fosse) leisure to march to the
relief of it with six thousand Foot, and four hundred Horse; whereupon the Duke
drew off again to Sauve; and the next day being desirous to view the Marshal's
Army as it marched, and who then took up their quarters at Sommieres; it was
demonstrated to him, that he could not get back again to Saint Gilles, but he
must pass the Vistre near to Aimargues; or the Gardon, if he intended to go for
Vivaretz, as it was reported he did, at both which places he might with ease be
discovered, and with advantage fought with: The Duke, that he might not lose
this opportunity, writes to Vsez for some more Forces, and sends Aubais to
Nismes for the same purpose; Lesques goes to Auduze for others, accompanied by
Goudin, and la Baume; he sent also to Saint Hippolyte, and the neighboring
Garrisons for more Augiliaries, appointing his general Rendez-vous to be at
Vauvage; and he himself sets out by break of day with two thousand Foot, and
fourscore Horse, to secure Canisson, a large, but unfenced Town, whence he
might be sure to take his advantage which way soever the Marshal should take,
but whether it was that he had the same design upon Canisson; or that he had
intelligence of the Dukes marching thither with so small a Force; he found him
also upon his march from Sommieres toward Canisson; nevertheless the Duke
having the advantage of the way, goes on directly to the Town, and there began
to secure the avenewes of it with his Van, that the rest, (considering he was
pursued by an Army twice stronger than his own) might in good order possess
themselves of the Town; but the extreme heat of the day, and fame of the good
Wine, wherewith that place abounded, had already drawn thither the greatest
part of his Officers, so that it was impossible for him to govern them; when on
a sudden he heard many Muskets in his Rear, which was then skirmishing with
five hundred Musketeers, which the Marshal had sent before to try if they
could break it; whilst he, with the rest of his Army stayed upon a little Hill
which gave him a view of all the Country, and what was done even in Canisson
it self, whence perceiving the great and general confusion there, he gave
Orders for a general assault: The Duke of Rohan commanded Montredon to rally
his men, together with Carlincas, Ensign of his Guards; whiles he himself draws
out a hundred of his own Guard, whom he led up to the Castle of Canisson, which
being seated on a little Hill, commands the Town, and circumjacent quarters, so
that it is not easily assaultable on any side, enjoining them strictly to look
well to the defense of that place. This done, he goes round the Town, which he
begins to fortify with strong Barricadoes; just as he had finished his
circuit, he meets with Leques, Goudin, and la Baume, and tells them that of
necessity they must resolve to defend the out-places, until the Barricadoes
were finished: Leques undertook the affair, goes to the head of his men, and
seeing that the Soldiers that were in the Castle, had quitted it, hastes
thither with others, whom he placed in their rooms; and so eagerly disputed he
his post without the Town, that when he would have retreated thither, he found
the enemy had intercepted his passage, so that he was fain to take the Field:
La Baume was also served in the like kind; as for Goudin, the Duke would not
suffer him, by reason of his wound, to shut himself up in the Town; but when he
had taken the best course he could to preserve his Foot, he drew off with his
Horse to Nismes to hasten away the relief he had before sent thither to prepare.

In the mean while Montredon, the Major General, la Boissiere, and Alizon,
after they had from post to post, disputed the out-quarters, retreated into
Canisson, where they had no sooner taken their several posts to defend, but
they received a general and furious assault; but necessity animating the
Defendants, they bravely repulsed the Assailants; and whiles they looked on,
perfected their Barricadoes; then got the enemy into some houses, which they
began to break through, thinking by that way to open themselves a passage into
the Town, but they were soon fired from that attempt; this storm lasted from
Noon till Night; the Officers within behaved themselves with much gallantry,
both in rallying, and encouraging their men; but Montredon, la Boissiere, and
Alizon, who commanded in chief, got most honor in this action; both parties
had their inconveniences; those within wanted ammunition, those without
provisions; so that, that very night the Marshal d' Estree, offered the
besieged a Parley, which they rejected, telling him withal, that they should
soon see the Duke of Rohan there with fresh Forces, to make them remove farther
off, and indeed that night had he sent two thousand men of Nismes, under the
command of Aubais, to get as near Canisson as possible, and to let the besieged
know, that he was now come so far to their assistance; but he returned again,
without giving them any notice of his arrival, either by Messenger, or other
signal made, as he was expressly commanded; none daring to adventure on the
employment; and indeed, so straightly were they invested, that it was impossible
for any one to get in to them; this much troubled the Duke, who having
refreshed his Troops, resolved to go thither in person, and either save his
men, or lose himself: To which end he sent Leques Orders to have the Garrison
of Aimargues in a readiness to join with him; but whilst he was preparing for
their relief, came news to him of the capitulation, which was made upon these
terms, That the besieged should with all security march off to the Sevenes;
that the Marshal d' Estree, should not enter the Town of Canisson with his
Army; but that the said Army should be drawn up in Battailla, at a great
distance from the way they were to pass; that the wounded of both sides, which
could not be carried off, should with all safety remain in the Town; and that
for the performance of these Articles, Hostages should be mutually given, all
which was punctually observed on both parts; of the party of those of the
Religion were slain about fifty or sixty, and above double the number wounded:
of the Romanists were there four hundred slain, and eight hundred wounded.

This was the issue of this action, in which the Duke of Rohan was very like to
have received a check, would have proved fatal both to himself, and his Party
too: But now imagining that it was not without cause that the Marshal so
earnestly pursued this design; but that his Forces were intended for the
Country about Nismes, he conceived he would again pass the Vistre near
Aimargues, that he might the sooner recover his quarters at Saint Gilles, which
made him desirous yet once more to see him; for which purpose he took two
thousand of the Foot of Nismes, and his Horse, with whom he came to Aimargues;
the next day he drew them up in a place between Aimargues and the Pass, with
intention to charge him when he should be half over; which the Marshal having
notice of, he changed both his design, and road, and lengthning his way a days
journey, passed the River at Aiguemortes; and the Duke returned to Nismes: And
seeing the preparations were making on all hands for the invasion of the lower
Languedoc, and the Sevenes, he got the Towns of the lower Languedoc to receive
their Garrisons; assigns the Regiments of Goudin, Fourniquet, and Bonal, to
Nismes; those of la Baume and Faulgeres for Usez; and that of Sandres for
Aimargues; After this, and the taking of the Fort of Sojon by the Duke of
Montmorency, which cost him but three days time, though Chevrilles had
promised to hold it out three weeks, the Duke of Rohan having learnt the
particulars of the Treaty for Vivaretz, made by Chevrilles with the Keeper of
the seals for twenty thousand Crowns; he thought it now high time to look after
the securing of it; and sent Saint Andre de Montbrun with five hundred Foot,
and some of Cassagne's Horse, to Privas, whither he got very happily, having
defeated Montreal and l' Estrange, who waited for him at some untoward passes
in his way, with a far greater strength than his. At his arrival there, he
found the Consuls with the Common Council assembled at the Town House; who told
him that indeed they had formerly wished for his company, but that at present,
they having no need of any Soldiers, it would be but a burden to them; and
yet, that they might with the better grace refuse to admit his party into their
Town, promisedto quarter them in the Villages that lay thereabouts; which Saint
Andre perceiving, was the more resolute to quarter in the Town: Chevrilles who
was then at Cheyla, was sent for in all haste, and coming thither the next day
with those of his Faction, he presently assembles the Council of the Province,
and of the Town too, to persuade them to request Saint Andre to return again,
and that in case their entreaties were ineffectual, to induce him to it by the
ill usage of his Men: which Saint Andre having notice of, he goes in to the
Assembly, and there declares that he was sent thither, by the command of the
Duke of Rohan, who only had power to recall him again; and that whatever their
determinations should be, he would not stine a foot thence without his Order:
When Chevrilles saw himself thus fallen from his hopes, he tells Saint Andre,
that in case the Town should be besieged, he would do them better service
without than within the place; that he would raise fifteen hundred men, and
would put as many of them into it, as he should think necessary, and with the
rest would forage and cut off the provisions from the King's Army.

His proposition was well approved of, and on the morrow he departs: And not
long after were there three Barques laden with Salt taken upon the Rhone: Saint
Andre hasts thither, but came not time enough, for that some Frigots had
already forced those that had taken them to quit their Prize: Nevertheless in
this excursion he learnt that the King was come to Valence but with a small
guard, believing, upon the information he had received concerning that
particular from the Keeper of the Seals, that the Treaty of Vivaretz was
absolutely concluded; but that finding that the coming of Saint Andre thither
had altered the whole face of things there, he was now preparing for the Siege
of Privas, which was to be blocked up with in four or five days: Large offers
was he tempted with, even to the value of an hundred thousand Crowns, but his
generous refusal of them showed him to be a person full of honor and fidelity:
At his return to Privas he makes them all resolve to abide a siege, engaging
them also by an Oath, that the first man, that should but mention a
Capitulation, should be put to death: Then he assigns to every one their
respective posts; and Orders the repairing of the outworks, to which, before
his coming, nothing at all had been done; nor yet could he begin them, but the
very day before the Town was invested, and yet such diligence used he in it,
that some of them were made very defensible, and held out bravely.

The siege was scarce begun, when the Catdinal came up with the rest of the
Army that stayed behind at Susa: He presses Chevrilles to the performance of
his engagement; who that he might not wholly lose the recompense of his
Treason, desires to have a part in the honor of the Siege, offering to bring in
with him 15. hundred men; his offer was accepted, and he comes in, but all
alone: The next day came a Trumpet from the King (accompanied with Argencourt)
to summon the place: Chevrilles, who failed not to be at the place, whither the
Trumpet was to come, sent one of his Captains to know what he had to say, which
when Saint Andre was informed of, he hasted thither with all diligence, and
sent him back again without any answer at all: Whereupon Chevrilles seeing him
resolved not to give them time to deliberate, whether they should hearken to a
Capitulation, or no, leaves them again the second time, carrying with him as
many men as he could, and was always the occasion that the Soldiers of
Bouttieres went not thither to their assistance, amusing them still with
promises to conduct them thither time enough, by this means ruining the
endeavors of those whom Saint Andre had sent thither purposely to invite them
to their assistance.

He was no sooner gone, but Brunel of Anduze, who commanded five Companies of
the Sevenes, confederating with the other Poltrons and Traitors, frames a
conspiracy to kill Saint Andre in case he should refuse to furrender the place;
and seconded by some of his Faction, threatens to give him up, if he denied to
comply with them: Whereupon it was thought fit by the Council, that he should
have a conference with Gordes, which he had, but they could not agree upon the
conditions.

After that the Cardinal was come up to them, they more closely blocked up the
place on every side, made their approaches and batteries, and then gave it an
assault, from which they were bravely beaten off with the loss of many of their
men; yet did this storm so terrify the besieged, that they instantly urge
Saint Andre to give Gordes another meeting: But in his room was substituted,
and sent Vennes a Captain in the Regiment of the Guards, who offered him very
honorable terms for himself, and the Soldiers, but nothing at all for the
Inhabitants; all which he refused, protesting that he would never desert them:
When Saint Andre, at his return, gave the people of the Town an account of the
interview, it struck so great a terror into them, together with those of
Vivaretz, that they all quit the Town, and fly to Boutieres, leaving Saint
Andre with five hundred men only to defend a place, which was not to be
maintained under two thousand. In this extremity he conceives it his best
course to draw off to the Fort of Toulon, where he might Treat with more
security, it being impossible to force him there in any short time, or without
the loss of a great number of Men: About break of day Deffiat, Gordes, and
Vennes, desire a conference with him, which he condiscended to; at which they
make him no larger offers than of his own life only, in case he would abandon
his Soldiers, which he generously rejected, and returned to embrace the same
fortune with them: When they saw this made not any impression on him, they
summoned him once more to send some of his Officers to them with his final
resolution: Brunel of Dauphine offering himself for this employment, was
accepted of; three journeys made he to them, in which time being corrupted by
the enemy, he returns from the last with an assurance of all their lives; but
adding withal, that they would not give any thing under their hands, until
Saint Andre, with some of his Captains had cast themselves at the King's feet
to implore his pardon; and moreover that the Count of Soissons, who was to
present him to his Majesty, had given him a strict charge to tell him, that he
should haste to him with all speed, that he must not now lose any time; and
that he did with much impatience wait for him: Whereupon he assembles his
Captains, who all earnestly importune him to go; which when he scrupled at,
they break out into open reproaches against him, charging him with having
ensnared them in a danger from which he would not endeavor to free them:
Forced by their invectives, he goes out with five Captains; Saint Preuil and
Fourille conduct him into Saint Simon's Chamber, where, the Cardinal coming to
him, told him, that since he was come forth, without any parole given him, he
was now a Prisoner: Then was he forced to write to those in the Fort, to advise
them to yield at diseretion, and that they should receive the same usage he
did; who, refusing to credit those Letters, or Brunel, who was sent with them,
desire to see Saint Andre, who was conducted up to the Fort with a strong
guard: As soon as they saw him, they imagined themselves sure of their lives,
and thereupon resolved to give up the Fort: Those that first entered it, fired
some barrels of powder, purposely to color the cruelty they were commanded to
execute upon those that were in it: Saint Andre and his Captains were kept
Prisoners: Thus were most that were in the Fort betrayed to their destruction;
some of the Prisoners being hanged, and others sent to the Galleys.

I have related the particulars of this affair, to let the world see how that
the perfidie of Chevrilles, the two Brunels, and of the most considerable
persons in Privas occasioned the miserable destruction of their Town, and a
great part of the Inhabitants, ruined the relief of Languedoc, and frustrated
those of the Religion of an opportunity to obtain a very advantageous Peace;
which, since the publication of that with England (which was made during this
Siege) they had entered on a Treaty upon with the Marquess de Fosse, who was to
that end empowered by the King's Commission: But the taking of this place, as
little dreamt of by the Romanists, as those of the Religion (considering their
brave resistance at the beginning of the Siege) quite ruined that affair: For
Du Cross had procured conference between Aubais, Dupuy, and Lucan, Deputies of
the Assembly general, with the said Marquess; and although at their first
interview, he refused to proceed, unless they would recede from their demands,
concerning the demolition of the fortifications; yet with more advantage might
they have Treated, while the King was further off, and Privas held out, than
when he should come into the Sevenes, and there discover the Factions,
weaknesses, baseness, and Treacheries, that were too frequent among those of
the Religion.

The loss of Privas, from whence was expected a longer opposition, surprised
the whole Party with terror and amazement; and put the Duke of Rohan in mind,
that it was now high time to go to the Sevenes, to take Order for the security
of that Province, and to oppose the first attempts that should be made upon it:
This Voyage was hitherto retarded by his fear to leave Nismes (which many
endeavored to seduce from its fidelity) till he had supplied it with
Soldiers, which, until compelled by necessity, they would not receive; and
withal by reason that having resolved to leave Leques there to command in
chief, in case it should be besieged, he durst not discover his intentions in
that particular too soon, because he knew that Aubais aimed at the same
command, and that he endeavored by secret practices to render Leques odious to
the people, and make himself to be desired by them: In the like perplexity was
he for Usez, where Goudin ambitioned the Government, but was absolutely refused
by the Inhabitants: Nevertheless, at length he sets out from Nismes, goes to
Usez, and thence takes Faulgiere's Regiment with him to Aletz, and thence put
it into Saint Ambroix, in hopes that the opposition that place would make,
would give him more leisure to provide for the Sevenes, where he thought to
have found a good sum of money ready raised, out of some Farms he had engaged
for his Leavies; but the apprehension of the King's coming into those parts,
made most of the Farmers refuse to disburse any: Upon their default he proposed
another expedient, that the Bailiffs should advance the money for the Leavies,
and that, for their re-imbursement both of the Principal and Interest, should
be assigned them not only the aforesaid Farms, but also an imposition then
newly laid upon the Country; but all these inventions, being not of force to
extract any money out of their purses, the Duke was fain to address himself to
the Communalties.

In the mean time the Marshal d' Estree, and the Duke of Trimouille began to
ravage the Country about Nismes, where there passed many handsome skirmishes,
in which, those of the Town (who killed and wounded twelve or fifteen hundred
of the enemy) had always the better, except one day, when some of the
Inhabitants, too inconsiderately advancing, were surprised by the Horse, who
dealt so roughly with them, that, besides those which were wounded, there
remained forty dead upon the place, and had not Leques come in with fresh
Troops, there had been much more mischief done: For his own part he was sorced
from his Horse, which was killed under him; but the Forragers came not within
Canon-shot of the Town.

The King on his side loses no time, but after the taking of Privas, sends part
of his Army toward Gorce and Barjac, which were given up into his hands:
Beauvoir and Saint Florent make their peace, and then turn Brokers for the
places belonging to the Reformed Party: The former of them comes to Saint
Ambroix, to persuade the Inhabitants, to imitate the example of Barjac; which
the chiefest of them were so ready to consent unto, that, had not the Soldiers
interposed, the thing had been then done: Nevertheless they continue their
correspondencies, so that upon the King's approach, though he had no Canon with
him, nor could have any come up to him within eight or ten days, fear united
the two Factions in the Town, who before were at mortal odds, and both together
force the Soldiery to a compliance with them, so that the Capitulation was
agreed on, upon condition that the Soldiers should no more bear arms for the
Reformed party: At which Article, when one of the Captains scrupled, the Duke
of Montmorency told him, that none ever treated with the King upon any other
terms, but that it was but a formality only, and obliged no man farther than
he pleased himself: And then flatters one, and another, with promises of great
rewards, if they would repair to Aletz, and serve the King there, by joining
with the Count of Aletz, who had promised to give him up the Town: Thither then
marched all the Soldiers from Saint Ambroix, where they excuse themselves by
revolving all the blame upon the Inhabitants, who compelled them to yield the
place; promising withal, that notwithstanding the Treaty, they would serve the
Reformed party, wherever they should be commanded. The Duke of Rohan was then
at Aletz, but had no Forces ready for service, but the Regiment of Foulgieres,
and five or six new raised Companies; the King being then within three Leagues
of him with all his Army, the people of Aletz very wavering, and uncertain
whether they would stand upon their defense or no; and the Baron of Aletz, who
had promised to deliver up the Town, that he might the better effect it, would
by all means be Governor of it; but the Duke was desirous to place Aubais in
that command, for that being Field-Marshal, every one would have submitted to
him, and promised to leave with him all the best men he had; but he excused
himself; for that being refused, the Government of Nismes, he had taken up a
resolution, never to stay within any besieged place. Then offers he it to
Assaz, to whose age and experience every one would have born an honorable
respect; but he also absolutely refused it: Whereupon he speaks to Boissiere
concerning it, whose modesty, not suffering him to think himself sufficient for
it, made him refuse to accept of the charge, as Commander in chief; but offered
to stay there as subordinate to Aubais, or any other the Duke should think
fitting; so that in this extremity he was fain to leave there one Mirabel, an
old G^tleman of Vivaretz, of a weak sight, and as feeble limbs: And when the
King came to take up his quarters within a League of Aletz, the Duke of Rohan
took the Baron d' Aletz with him, and went thence that very morning before the
Town was invested; promising, before his departure, to send them what supplies
of Soldiers he could possible; of which he took so great care, that at several
times he sent them in above fifteen hundred; besides the Garrison was there
before, which at length he raised to five and twenty hundred in the whole.

When the King saw himself frustrated of his hopes of gaining the place without
force, he sent for his Canon, and, (that he might lose no time) began his
approaches; part of the Town of Aletz is seated on a Plain, and the other so
near the Hills, that they command above half of it; the River Gardon runs so
near the Walls, that it is rather prejudicial, than useful to the
Fortifications; for that being but a small Torrent, fordable in most places,
and running so near the Town, it leaves no space for any Flanker to be made;
nor could it be fortified with in the walls by reason of the houses which made
a part of them; so that there was no way to secure that part of it, but by
raising Works on the other side of the River, and Forts upon the little Hills,
which command all a good distance from them, and must be joined by a Line of
Communication to two great stone-bridges, which cross the River. In short, it
was a work of vast labor and expense, nor could the Town be kept, but by a
great number of men, which was the reason it was never till then fortified; But
the people now seeing that Anduze was fortifying, would needs imitate their
example; a malady which reigned in most of the Communalties of the Sevenes, and
this discovered its infection, when the Duke was absent, and upon his Voyage
into Foix; who though he well knew there were already more fortifications
begun, then they had Soldiers to man, yet would he not cross them in their
humor, for fear of vexing and discouraging them; there was yet this further
mischief in it, that besides that, they took things beyond their power to
accomplish; when once the first heat was over, they would not employ what they
had as they ought, nor would they work, but when compelled by their fears; to
which I must yet add this, that when they were most intent upon the raising of
these fortifications, it was impossible to persuade them to store themselves
with other necessaries requisite to the defense of their Town; for in such
designs one expense draws on another; and if one of these four things be
wanting, to wit, Good Works, Ammunition, Victuals, and Soldiers, all other
provisions are but vain and fruitless.

This being the condition of this Town, they were very much surprised, having
neglected to raise a third Fort, which omission, the Duke willing to redeem, in
great have makes up one of Barrels, which flew in pieces at the first onset,
and on this side only did the enemy raise their Battery, between the Bridge,
and the Duke d' Engoulesme's Garden; this first assault so terrified the
Inhabitants, that they thought of nothing now, but how to make a handsome
composition, to which they were incited, by the Captains that came from Saint
Ambroix, and those of the Baron d' Aletz his Faction, whose solicitations
wrought such dangerous effects, that they made Holes in their Walls to let the
Besiegers in; which being discovered, the breaches were repaired, but the
offenders not punished; so that the mischief was only delayed, not remedied;
and the disaffected made more industrious to conceal their Treacheries: Two or
three of the aforesaid Captains upon their own request were sent to the Duke of
Rohan, to inform him how weak the place was, both in men and resolutions to
stand it out, that the numbers of the Garrison there before, and of the
recruits sent thither since, hourly decreased, by their continual slight from
it; whereunto he replied, that what they had said, could not be; that he very
well knew what Soldiers he had left there, and whom he had placed over them,
that he would daily strengthen them with convenient supplies, both of men, and
Ammunitions; and therefore persuaded them to return again to them speedily, to
animate them by their presence; which they plainly refused, alleging once for
all, that it was the next way to be hanged, considering their engagements to
the Duke of Montmorency, when they marched out of Saint Ambroix; whereupon the
Dake being informed that they had had secret conference with the Baron d'
Aletz, and that they had agreed together that his Cornet Mesargues should be
sent into Aletz, he commanded they should be all apprehended, and sent
Blacquiere thither with a recruit of five hundred men, and an express command
to kill the first man that should but mention a surrender; but the malady was
then past cure, the Townsmen having hid away the ammunition, and deserted the
most necessary Work of terrassing that part of the Wall which was opposite
against the enemies Battery, so that all he could do, was to protect the
capitulation two or three days longer, and by that means save five and twenty
hundred men, which had they been lost, as were those of Privas, it would have
deterred all others from any future engagement; that which was most fatal in
this reddition, was the Article semblable to that of Saint Ambroix, which
disabled them from evermore bearing Arms against the King.

As soon as the news of this was brought to the Duke of Rohan, immediately he
sent away Falquieres the Lieutenant of his Guards to Sauve, where the surrender
of Aletz had struck a general terror into the Inhabitants; the most
considerable of which, out of hopes of obtaining good conditions for
themselves, by the favor of their Lord, the Count d' Aletz, denied to let him
into their Town; but Falquieres, being of the place, and having much
acquaintance in it, by the means of some Ladders he had procured, got in; but
found the people so resolutely fixed upon an accommodation, that having seized
upon the Castle, and a Tower which commanded the Town, and served it instead of
a Citadel, told him openly, that they were now resolved to seek out some way to
preserve what they had left, and not expose themselves to an utter ruin.

In the interim the Count of Aletz, invited by those that had privately Treated
with him, advances with three or four hundred Horse, within half a League of
the Town, where when he understood that the arrival of Falquieres with his
Soldiers, had prevented his entry into the Town, he sent a Trumpet to them,
with offers of fair propositions; Falquieres could not by any means dissuade,
nor hinder them from sending back a Messenger again to assure him, that though
they could not give him admittance at present, yet were they Masters of all the
Forts; and that if the Duke of Rohan did not suddenly conclude a general peace,
as he had promised them, they would, by his assistance, make their own in
particular, not doubting but their example would allure the greatest part of
the Sevenes to an imitation of them: To which the Count replied, that it was in
vain to expect a General Peace; and that the Duke deluded them with that Airy
fancy; but whilst he made his own, and that then he would leave them in the
Lurch; that if they could be a means to dravv off any other corporations from
the party, it would be much to the advantage of their own conditions, and
that they should have but a Garrison of thirty Soldiers only in their Castle,
commanded by himself; they assured him of their zealous endeavors to effect
what they had promised, and that within two days they would send him a
further answer by a Messenger of purpose: Falquieres that had seen all these
Envoys, and heard the free, and land discourses of the people to him, sent the
Duke of Rohan word, that unless he recruited him instantly with four hundred
men at least, he should be turned out of the Town.

The importance of this unexpected news perplexed him so, that he took aside
three or four of his Officers, in whose fidelity he reposed most confidence, to
impart it to them, and receive their advice thereupon; some of them at first
sight conceived that the business was desperate, and irremedible, induced to
this opinion by their experience in the precedent Wars, of the disaffection of
that Town to the Reformed party; and that being now Masters of the Castle, they
might at their pleasure let in the Enemy; that it would be a thing of great
difficulty to send them any Soldiers; for that the people of Anduze, that very
moment expected a siege, and had not sufficient for their own defense, would be
very unwilling to part with four hundred men; that if the Duke of Rohan should
go in person thither, which was the best expedient for it, they would presently
raise, and diffuse a report, that he had abandoned all; so that it was to be
feared, least his endeavors to preserve Sauve, should prove an occasion of the
loss of Anduze; so that their advice was to send Falquieres and his party
orders to defend themselves the best they could; and to promise them a good
assistance, in case the King should draw toward them; but that for
preservation of their stores, he would not charge them with any more Forces,
until necessity should draw that burden upon them; others were of opinion,
that the place was of such consequence, that the loss of it would draw after it
all the Sevenes, up to Vigan, and cut off all communication between Anduze, and
the lower Languedoc; so that the Duke of Rohan would be totally blocked up
there, without any possibility of breaking through again; that the loss of it,
as was that of Privas, and Saint Ambroex, would be wholly laid to his charge;
and that it might be justly feared, lest the people of Anduze, who were known
to have inclinations seditious enough, and had store of malignant spirits among
them, should enter into conspiracies also against him; in short, that this
extremity gave them a capacity to betray him, and therefore it were better to
attempt to send four hundred men to Sauve, to preserve both himself, and the
Town too.

This Counsel was accepted of, and thereupon he drew out all the Garrison of
Anduze, and out of it chose four hundred men, to send to the relief of Sauve;
but none would undertake the conduct of them, but the Adjutant-General Randon,
nor he neither; but upon condition that (to secute his own honor) the Duke
would allow him the liberty to retreat with them again, in case he saw the King
's Army advance toward him; engaging himself nevertheless not to make use of
it, unless enforced to it by some extremity; thus was he fain to expose his
own, to save the honor of another.

Amid'st these perplexities, which were no small ones, the Court-faction in the
Sevenes used many subtle inventions to induce the Communalties there to a
particular Treaty, excluding the Duke of Rohan; the most dangerous of which,
were; first, to hinder the march of the relief from Anduze to Sauve; terrifying
them with continual Alarms, that a part of the King 's Army was to cross the
Country, which they would overwhelme with blood and fire, so that not a
Soldier could be persuaded to stir from his house; the next was, without his
permission to convoque an Assembly, to which were summoned only those they were
sure would consent to a Deputation to the Court in the name of many of the
Communalties for a particular peace; and the last was to asperse his honor, by
scandalous insinuations, that Privas, and Saint Ambroix were given up by his
especial order; that Blacquiere was sent to Aletz for the like purpose; and
that having made his own conditions, he would expose the people to a necessity
of accepting such as the King should impose upon them; and in effect these, and
the like defamatory rumors spread abroad, by petty, but very factious persons,
that hoped by such means to raise themselves a fortune, raised a general murmur
against him; for the people, (especially those of Languedoc) are naturally
prone to believe the worst, of the best, and the best, of the worst sort of
men; readily complying with such clamorous persons, as condemn the actions of
other men, when as themselves do nothing at all, but vail their hypocrisy with
an indiscreet zeal, tending only to sedition, and the subsersion of their
Religion, and liberties.

The Duke was at the same time solicited by often repeated Messages from the
Provinces of the higher Languedoc, Foix, Montauban, and Rouergue, both for men,
and money. Mazaribal sends him word, that unless he were recruited with a
hundred good men, and pay for them, it would be impossible for him to preserve
Mazeres; and that without such a supply, or a peace, he should within one
month be forced to quit the Country: Saint Michel, and the Town of Montauban,
tell him, that the Prince, and the Duke d' Espernon, were drawing down to
Ravage the Country about them, which they would inevitably ruin, unless he
sent them some assistance to prevent it; but that with a thousand men at most,
and money to pay them, which they earnestly importuned him for, they made no
doubt bravely to repulse them. Chavagnac, and the Town of Castres remonstrate
to him, that a Famine would inevitably surprise them, unless they quickly
gathered in their Harvest, which they were incapable to secure, without a
Renfort of a thousand Foot, and a hundred Horse, paid for two or three
months; and money also to muster and discharge the Forces of the Country;
that the Duke of Ventadour, who with his Army lay round about them, had made
them offers of very advantageous conditions, in case they would incline to a
particular peace, which they hitherto had refused, out of hopes of a sudden,
and effectual assistance, the want of which would necessitate them to submit to
such a Treaty. Millaud also presents him with the same doleful Note; and
Alterac, Governor of the Town, plainly tells him, that without a fresh supply
of Soldiers, he could no longer undertake the charge of it; and all the rest
of Vabres accord in the same demands, either of men, or a Peace.

The Duke of Rohan oppressed with the hourly increase of such calamities, saw no
other expedient for their remedy, but a General Peace, which also was attended
with many difficulties; for he conceived that the King, seeing to what a low
ebb the affairs of the Reformed Party were sunk, would not abate one jot of
the Article touching the Fortifications; and on the other side he very well
knew, that though the people had no resolutions to stand upon, nor inclinations
to prepare for a defense; yet would they never digest the demolition of their
Works: If he should resolve to stand it out, and struggle with the the
threatened extremities, then he considered, that if he quitted Anduze, all the
Sevenes would be lost, and consequently all the Garrisons, up to the very Gates
of Montauban, must submit; if he stayed there, he should draw a siege upon a
place no ways capable to sustain it; but if the King, waving that, should draw
toward Sauve, the whole Country would come in, and every Communalty having
made its peace, Anduze would be left all forlorn, and disfurnished of Soldiers
to maintain it: But the urgency of their affairs obliging him suddenly to fix
upon some course that had least of danger in it, he pitched upon a General
Peace; which, though accompanied with never so many disadvantages, would be yet
better than an absolute dissipation of the Edicts, which would be the undoubted
consequence of the particular compositions of the several Communalties; in
order to which, he summoned an Assembly of all the Communalties of the Sevenes
to be held at Anduze, to dissolve that which was already convened without his
permission; and at the same time sent Montredon to those that sat at la Salle,
to demand a particular Peace; to let them know, that a Provincial Assembly, in
order to a General Treaty, was convoqued at Anduze; and that, if they,
notwithstanding his orders to the contrary, obstinately continued their
Session, he had a command from the Duke to assemble the people of la Salle, to
make known their refractoriness to them, and to require their assistance for
the apprehending of their persons, and carrying them away Prisoners; his
persuasions, with the annexed Menaces, made them at length dissolve; for Fear
is oftentimes very persuasive.

After this the Duke sent for Caudiac, a Counselor in the Chamber of
Languedoc, who had already made several journies to the Court, in order to a
Peace, and was now but newly returned thence; where he found that their only
aim, and chiefest hopes now, were, a total dissipation of the party by
particular Treaties; him he desires once again to return thither, and to tell
the Cardinal de Richelieu from him, that he was a faithful Subject of the
Kings, that he desired nothing more, than the Tranquillity of the State, and
the Repose of his own party; and with, all, that both he, and the greatest part
of them, would expose themselves and fortunes to all extremities, rather than
submit to any Peace, but such as should be General, and Conformable to the
former Edicts of pacification; that it was a thing of dangerous consequence to
force an armed Party, how small soever, from all hopes of safety, but what they
ground upon their despair of any; and that if the King would vouchsafe to admit
of a General Treaty, and allow the General Assembly but four days time only to
remove from Nismes to Anduze, and Pass ports for the safe conduct of their
Deputies to come, and Treat with his Commissioners; and that in the mean time
all Acts of Hostility might be suspended, he was confident they should conclude
a peace: Caudiac cheerfully embraced the employment, and obtains the allowance
of the four days, together with the desired Pass-ports, which he himself was
commanded to carry back to the Assembly.

In the mean time every one is very sollicitous to draw his own particular
advantage out of this small interval: The Kings party continue their practices
in the Province; but with greatest ardour prosecute they the design of Sauve,
whither, when Randon came with the four hundred Soldiers, the disaffected, to
exasperate the others, oppress them with quartering, and that they might
disgust the people with an apprehension of the Duke's undervaluing of them,
quarrel at the person of Randon, as a man of too mean quality to command them;
and when, according to his Orders he would have mingled his Soldiers with the
Inhabitants, to strengthen their Guarders in all quarters, they would by no
means suffer it in the Castle, but loudly objected their privileges against
that procedure, as an infringement of them; a prevalent motive to work the
populace to any thing; so that upon this ill usage of theirs, Randon,
unadvisedly told them, that in case they refused him the absolute command of
their Town, he had Orders from the Duke of Rohan to quit it upon the approach
of the King's Army: This inconsiderate expression, so indiscreetly let fall by
him, and as nimbly taken up by the disaffected of the Town, had like to have
ruined all; for they published strange Coments on it to the people, crying out,
that the Duke had sent them men to abandon them, when they should most stand in
need of their assistance, and that desired only to possess themselves of their
strength, at their cost, to purchase themselves better conditions; so that upon
occasion of these jealousies they called a Council, at which they resolved, to
die all, rather than admit any stranger into their Castle.

In the midst of their deliberations came letters from the Duke of Rohan to
convoque the Provincial Assembly at Anduze, to consult upon some Articles for a
general peace; which mollified them so, that they nominated Deputies to send
thither: But when the Council was dissolved, the disaffected exclaim against
this as a trick of the Duke of Rohan to defeat their particular Treaty, and to
surprise, and detain their principal Citizens at Anduze, until they delivered
up their fortresses into his hands: whereupon they thought fit to send away the
next day, but one Deputy only to sound the forde, and give them notice how
things were carried, that accordingly thy might be directed in their
comportments; and at the same time sent they another privately to the Count d'
Aletz, to let him know, that the hopes they had newly received of a General
Peace, made them yet defer the performance of what they promised; but yet that
they suspected it for an invention only to interrupt the progress of the
Treaty they were already upon; wherefore they beseeched him to clear them in
that particular, as much as possibly he could, and to believe, that in case it
were not real, that Sauve should be at his disposal, of which he might assure
his Majesty, and that they had received Letters from the Communalties of Gange,
Sunienne, and Vigan, impowring them to treat for them also; and that though
Randon were in the town, yet could they at pleasure let him into the Castle, of
which they were still the Masters.

The King conceiving, upon this news, that with much facility he might now
possess himself of the Sevenes, in all haste sent Caudiac word, that he should
come back again to him, and let alone the general Assembly where it was: This
Messenger found Caudiac, and all the Assembly on their way toward Anduze, so
that much amazed, they returned the same way they came, and Caudiac, as little
satisfied, goes to Aletz. In the mean time Randon, and Falquieres acquaint the
Duke of Rohan with the final resolutions of the people of Sauve, and the
frequent Envoyes passing between them, and the Count d' Aletz, and that unless
seasonable preventions were applied, the place would be certainly lost:
whereupon he put his power upon the rack for a new supply of soldiers for
them; and that he might the more effectually proceed in the application of his
remedies, he sent to have the wound well searched by his Chaplain Rossell, who
had been formerly Minister of that Church, and of great authority among them:
As soon as he came thither, and had gotten the Common Council of the Town
together, he presented them a true state of their affairs, showing how near
they were obtaining of a general peace, if they preserved the union of the
Party, which particular compositions would divide and ruin; after all which
their condition would be nothing more exempt from fears or hazard; that to
introduce into their Castle, a Garrison of a contrary Religion, was not the way
to preserve inviolate those liberties they seemed so jealous of; that it was
ill done to call those strangers, who were their kindred and neighbors, and had
forsaken their own Houses, Wives, and Children, to come to their relief; that
to refuse the Generals Orders, and to such persons, half the Guard of their
Castle, when as they allow them that of their Walls, and Gates, was a
diffidence ill grounded, and probably of dangerous consequence to the Party,
considering the present condition of things; that he very well knew it was
publicly reported, that the Duke of Rohan's forces had not acquitted
themselves of their devoir in the Towns lately taken; but that he was as
certain that the contrary of it only was true; that at Privas the Inhabitants
deserted the relief was sent to them; that at Saint Ambroix and Aletz, they
compelled the Garrisons to capitulate; and that all the misfortunes that befell
those places, flowed from those who either corrupted by the enemy, or persuaded
by their own fears, quickly diffused the contagion over all the rest; that
they would do well to beware of such plagues, and for the future to yield a
greater observance to the General's Orders.

But all these Remonstrances were not sufficient to open the Castle Gates to
give admittance to the strangers, which when Rossel perceived, he made a
Proposition, that the people should nominate a certain number of them, the
third of which should be drawn out by lot to be there upon duty every one in
his turn, four and twenty hours together. The Common sort approved of this
way; but the Consuls, who disliked it, left the Council in distaste; saying,
that since they could be no longer trusted, they would discharge themselves of
their Offices: But they were called back again; and before the dismission of
the Council, was the Guard established. After this Rossel visits Puyredon, one
of the most eminent of the Town, both for Estate, Wisdom, and Courage, and his
particular friend, and one that had discovered a great affection to the Duke of
Rohan, whom he presses so far, that he at length got from him a confession of
the whole negotiation, between the Town, and the Count d' Aletz; and upon
Rossels assuring him, that if they separated not themselves from the Party, a
General Peace would be soon concluded; in which should be comprised the
business of Reprisals (in which he was interessed to the value of twenty
thousand Crowns) Puyredon also promised him, that, whatever were the success of
the Deputy sent to the Count of Aletz, he would order things so, that there
should be yet nothing altered for four and twenty hours.

When he had dispatched with these, he found that Randon, nothing pleased with
the Agreement, threatened to be gone; but when he told him, that he could not be
yet besieged for four days, that if he would have patience but for two of them
only, he should be furnished with all things he could desire, he was then
better satisfied; and Rossel departed from Sauve; and meeting on the way with
the Deputy that had been with the Count of Aletz, he imparted to him the great
hopes conceived of a General Peace, to which he gave no other reply than only,
God grant it; but turning his discourse to the Captain, that convoyed Rossel,
he told him, that the Duke of Rohan had too long abused them by his policies,
and that he endeavored yet to amuse them with hopes of a General Peace, but
only to frustrate their Communalty of the advantageous conditions they might
receive from a particular Treaty; but that they were now resolved to give no
further credit to him, knowing that all his talks of a General Peace was
nothing but mere delusion, whereupon the Captain took him prisoner, and carried
him with him to Anduze.

When Rossel came back to the Duke of Rohan, he gave the Duke an account of his
negotiation, telling him, that all his endeavors had no other effect than only
somewhat to assuage the tumor, until he in person should provide a better
remedy for it; whereupon he immediately departed thence, and went toward
Sauve: His arrival there much daunted the disaffected party; but they were now
so far advanced, that they knew not well, how to recede from their
engagements: The second Consul fled to the Castle; the Duke sent to command him
thence, which summons he durst not disobey: When he was come thence, and the
rest of the Council were assembled, that Duke acquainted them with the four
days liberty he had obtained, for the adjourning of the general Assembly to
Anduze; that he hoped to procure them such a peace, as should redound to their
general welfare, provided, that, renouncing all diffidence and jealousies one
of another, they preserved an entire unity among themselves; that he had borne
arms these eight years past, upon no other design, but the defense of their
Religion and Liberties; for which he had as clear a zeal, as any of them; but
that now he was to know of them, whether they would own him for their General
or no, and as such would obey him; whereupon the people crying our, that they
would submit to him, he resumed his discourse, telling them that he would then
go to the Castle, and place there such of the Inhabitants as he should think
fit: The Consuls at first refused to follow him, pretending, that since they
were not confided in, they would quit their Offices; nevertheless when they saw
him go up to the Castle, and that all the people flocked after, they stayed not
long behind him, who, when he had turned out, the Guard was then in it, made
choice of such a number of the Townsmen, as he thought sufficient to keep it,
obliging them by Oath to maintain it under the authority of their Consuls, and
for the general good of the whole party, against all persons whatsoever; which
gave great satisfaction to the people; /pg and when he had left in their Town a
thousand men, drawn from Saint Hippolyte, Vigan, and other places, he returned
the same day to Anduze.

The news of this came to Aletz as soon as Caudiac, and so netled the King's
Council, that they exclaimed against the Duke of Rohan for breach of promise,
saying, that the King had not stirred from Aletz, but that the Duke had been at
Sauve, where he had secured, and furnished the Castle, and the Towers, with
soldiers; nevertheless they gave him Orders to return with all speed to the
Assembly, but told him withal, that the King would not be obliged to any
further stay at Aletz; Caudiac, who clearly saw that all this choler flowed
only from the defeat of their design upon Sauve, replied, that the Duke had not
bound himself by any engagement not to stir from Anduze, but not to make any
attempt upon the Towns of the adverse Party; and that to provide for his own,
could not be interpreted any breach of promise: After this he went to the
Assembly, whom he found much perplexed about the Article concerning the
demolition of their fortifications; for that, besides the Deputies formerly
sent by them to the Assembly, the Towns of Nismes and Usez had sent others
purposely to oppose that Article, and, if it were possible, to draw in those of
the Sevenes to fortify them in that opposition.

Whereupon it was thought fit, before they proceeded to any conclusion, that
they should have the opinion of the Provincial Assembly of the Sevenes, that
accordingly they might order their resolutions; But that Assembly would
determine nothing in it, without the advice of the Common Council of the Town
of Anduze, which they looked upon as a place the most concerned in the
subsistence of the new-raised buildings, and fortifications, and most resolute
to defend them: The Council reported their opinion to the Provincial, and the
Provincial to the general Assembly; the sum of which, was, that considering the
absolute necessity that lay upon them, they should choose Commissioners to
Treat about a peace, and that the management of the Article concerning the
fortifications, should be referred to their discretions.

The Assembly general, unwilling to undergo the whole burden of the Treaty,
associate with them the new extraordinary Deputies of Nismes and Usez, and a
like number of the Provincial Assembly of the Sevenes, who altogether resolved
to send their Deputies to the King to demand a peace, and to moderate that
Article the best they could.

The Deputies haste away to the Court, where after several conferences had,
they agreed on many things, but at the proposal of the aforesaid Article, the
King's Commissioners would not endure the mention of any mitigation of it; but
thereupon sent back the Commissioners, who reported all to the Assembly, to
whom they plainly discovered that it was in vain to hope for any qualification
of that Article, which seemed to be thrown in as a stumbling block among them;
whereupon the Town of Anduze, and the Province of the Sevenes, being again
consulted, they demonstrated the inevitable ruin of their Province, unless a
sudden conclusion of a General Peace prevented it; for that otherwise every one
was fully resolved to compound for himself apart; and that the loss of their
Province would certainly draw after it that of the lower Languedoc; that the
fire was now at their doors, and that they had rather submit to that Article,
than fail of a Peace.

Whereupon after a full debate of the business, it was at length concluded that
they should admit of that Article; and thereupon the Deputies were returned
fully empowered to Treat, and conclude a peace: Which done, the Duke of Rohan
desired the Assembly to give their Deputies an express charge, that when they
had perfected their Negotiation for the Public, they should then mind his
particular concernments also, which they did.

Thus was the Peace concluded at Aletz, the 27th. day of June, in the year,
1629. The substance of the principal Articles of which, was as follows.

1. That a General Pardon be issued out. 2. That the Edict of Nantes, and all
other Edicts, Articles and Declarations registered in the Parliament-Rolls be
put in force. 3. That their Temples, and Places of Burial be restored to those
of the Religion. 4. That all Contributions imposed, during the present, or
precedent Broils, be taken off. 5. That they be also acquitted of all Arrears
of Impositions, and Taxes laid by any Governors upon those of the Religion, to
exempt the Romanists. 6. That they be restored to all their Goods moveable, and
immovable, notwithstanding any Gifts, or Confiscations. 7. That every one be
permitted to re-possess, and re-edific his own house. 8. That all Judgments,
both Civil and Criminal, given by those of the Religion, be confirmed. 9. That
the ancient Orders used before the Wars be observed, both concerning the
Consulates, and other Political Assemblies of the particular Towns. 10. That
they be also discharged of all Accounts, so that the Chamber of Accounts may
not demand any review of them. 11. That all Courts of Justice, Offices of
Receipt, and others, be restored again to those places, whence they were
transferred, during the cate Wars. 12. That the Chamber of Languedoc be
re-established at Castres. 13. That the Assembly of Estates in Foix be convened
at the usual times. 14. That the Inhabitants of Pamiez be restored again to
their Estates. 15. And that all Fortifications be demolished.
The Deputies Extraordinary of Nismes protested against this Peace, Declaring,
that if they should accept of it, their Act would be disowned, and themselves
killed, when they came home; and at their return, threw the blame of the whole
business upon the pretended perfidy of the Duke of Rohan, and those of greatest
trust about him, by whom they said they had been all sold; and having assembled
the chief Officers, both Military and Civil, cause them to oblige themselves by
Oath to stand it out to the last, and then sent to the Sevenes for some fresh
Troops; when they had by this means drawn the Kings Army before the Town, the
same persons, who were the Authors of this mutiny, to purchase themselves a
reputation at the expense of their Fellow-Citizens, got themselves empowered as
Commissioners to Treat for their Town, which derived no other advantage from
it, than the spoiling of their Fields and Vineyards; and that which accrued to
the Deputies themselves for disposing the Town, to supplicate the King to
honor them with his presence.

The Town of Vsez without any hesitation at all, accepted the Peace at first;
so did all Rouergue, the higher Languedoc, and Foix; nor was any place
suspected to refuse it, but Montauban; where the Prince of Conde would not
cease his plundering, until the King had sent him a second Order to that
purpose; and the Town it self, as the Cardinal marched that way, declared their
acceptance of the General Peace.

This is an account of what passed in this last War, in which the assistance
the Town of Rochelle had from England, served only to consume their provisions,
and draw a Famine on the City; and the vain, and illusory hopes with which
Spain, and Savoy, abused the lower Languedoc, had like to have proved the ruin
of the whole Party.

God, of his infinite mercy compassionating his poor Churches, has yet
intermitted their sufferings, that by a serious repentance of our faults, and a
sincere amendment of our lives, we might at length attract as many
benedictions, as our sins have pulled down calamities on them.

The end of the fourth Book.
FINIS.
A TABLE Of the most REMARKABLE THINGS Contained in this History.
A.
AN Assembly permitted at Chastelraut. page 3 Adjourned to Saumure. 6 Du
plessis chosen President, which vexed Bouillon. 7 The Assembly send their
Deputies to the Court. 10 Their Success. ibid. Articles signed by Bouillon,
Lesdiguieres, Rohan, Sully, Soubize, la Force, and Du plessis. page 18 An
Assembly of five Provinces convenes at Rochelle, opposed by the Marshal
Bouillon. 19 Articles accorded to the Assembly at Rochelle, by their Majesty's.
20 Ancre, the Marshal d' Ancre, sowes, and foments divisions among the
Nobility. page 21 An Assembly permitted to be held at Jergeau, removed to
Grenoble. 26 Adjourns to Nismes. 31 Removes to Rochelle. 33 Sends Deputies to
conclude a Peace. 34 Ancre, his ruin contrived by the Marshal Bouillon. 38
Persuades the Queen to secure the Prince, and others of the Nobility. 39 His
house pillaged, and razed by the people. 40 The manner of his death. 42 His
Lady with others, arrested at the same time. ib. An Assembly-General called at
Rochelle, the King commands them to dissolve; most of them are inclined to
obey, but by the contrivances of la Force, and Favas are dissuaded. 56 The
Assembly in Languedoc averse to the Election of a General. 67 Great complaints
of the Provinces against the Assembly. page 68 They apply themselves to
Chastillon, but are disappointed by Rohan, whom they calumniate to
Lesdiguieres. ibid. and 69 Saint Antonin reinforced by their Neighbors of
Montauban, but taken by the King. 77 Saint Andre de Montbrun makes his way
bravely to Montauban. 77 An Assembly called at Lunel by the counsel of
Languedoc. 80 Dissolved by Rohan. 83 Articles of the Peace before Montpellier.
88 Violated after the Rendition of the Town. 92, 93, 94, 95 Azil besieged. 106
Bravely defended. 110 An Assembly called at Nismes to ratify the Act of
Acceptance of the Peace. 114 The Duke of Anjou averse to the Marriage with the
Princess of Montpensier. 122 The Duke of Anjou marries the Princess
Montpensier. 128 Saint Afrique besieged by the Prince of Conde. 173 Is stormed,
and the Prince repulsed. page 174 Aimargues besieged by Rohan. 180 Is yielded
upon composition. 181 Saint Andre de Montbrun, sent to secure Privas his
entertaintment by the Consuls. 205 Is made a Prisoner. 208 Saint Ambroix, the
Garrison there forced by the Inhabitants, give up the place. 210 Aletz
besieged. 211 Treachery of some of the Officers. 212
B.
Bouillon ambitious to gain the administration of the public Affairs. 2
Designs the ruin of the Duke of Sully. 3 Precures an Assembly to be held at
Chastelraut. ibid. Which he afterward caused to be adjourned to Saumure. 6
Bouillon takes a journey to Sedan, and for what reasons. 5, and 6 Attempts to
withdraw the Duke of Rohan from his Father-in-Law, the Duke of Sully. page 8
Berticheres urges his Restoration to his Governments, is favored by the Duke
of Sully; but to arrive at his aims, complies with the Marshal Bouillon, and
obtains a readmission to Aiguemortes. 9 and 10 Bouillon juggles with the
Assembly. 10 Bullion sent to the Assembly. 11 Bouillon applies himself to the
Duke of Rohan. 13 Bouillon contrives to out the Duke of Rohan of his Government
of Saint John d' Angelis. 14 Bouillon labors to frustrate the negotiation of
the Deputies. 17 Sollicites the King of England his success. 17, and 18
Berticheres denied entry into Aiguemortes, and why. 19 Bouillon raises new
broils, etc. 25 Bouillon and Maine, urge the Prince to make a Peace. 32
Bearne, new troubles raised thereby, du Vaire. The Bernois being divested of
their privileges, occasioned the first war against the Protestants. 55, 56
Blaccons made Governor of Baye. 70 Brison joins with the Deputies of the
Assembly of five Provinces to calumniate the Duke of Rohan. 74 Bouillons
overtures to the Duke of Rohan. 79, 80 Botru sent Ambassador into England,
obtains a renvoy of new Ambassadors thence. 114 Brison refuses to be comprised
in the peace 117 Gives up Pousin to Lesdiguieres. 118 Buckingham arrives with a
great Fleet in the Road of Rochelle, and is refused admittance into the Port.
152 Saint Blancarte slain in the Isle of Re. 135 Bragneau sent by the
Rochellers to buy provisions, furnishes himself, but neglects his opportunity
to return to them. 152 Brison endeavors to betray Vivaretz to the Prince of
Conde. 153 Buckingham killed at Portsmouth. 187
C.
The Prince of Conde upon the instigation of Bouillon leaves the Court, with
others of the Nobility. 22 Writes to the Queen, and sollicites the Parliament
of Paris, and the Nobility to join with him ibid. Concludes a peace upon
conditions. 23 Desires a meeting with the Duke of Rohan, which was assented to.
23, 24 Writes to the King, Queen Parliament, etc. 28 Upon summons to wait upon
the King into Guienne, changes his pretenses. 29 Sollicits the Assembly at
Grenoble to join with him who sent Deputies to the King at Tours. 29 Signs the
Peace. 35 The Princes his return to Court opposed by Bouillon, and others; he
privately makes his peace with the Queen. 38 Is arested by the Queens order. 39
Chinon seized on by the Marshal Souvre. 41 The Prince of Conde sues to Luyne
for his liberty. 45 Chastillon proposes the recalling of his forces with the
Duke of Rohan, the Ass mbly oppose him. 67 Du Cross, assassinated in
Montpellier. 70 Chastillon takes La Tour, L'Abbe 74 Chauve a Minister treats
with Rohan about Chastillon, the Dukes answer to him. 78, 79 Chastillons
restablishment moved in the Assembly at Lunell, opp sed generally, and
particularly by Dupuy. 80 And by the Deputies of the Sevenes. 81 Chauve
sollicites Dupuy concerning Chastillon. 81 And treaty with Bansillon. 82 The
Consulate of Montpellier contrary to the Articles divided betw en the
Protestants and Papists, by Valence. 93 Castres bravely preserved by the
Duchess of Rohan. 102, 103 Chaligny miraculously preserved 109 The Princess
of Conde ambitious to marry her daughter to the Duke of Anjou. 123 Chalais
kills de Ludde in at duel, the consequence of it. ibid. Embraces the interests
of the Duke of Anjou. ibid. The Chancellour's seal taken from him, for not
daring to own his Counsel for the commitment of the Marshal d' Ornono. 125
Chalais leaves the Duke of Anjou, and becomes a servant to the Cardinal. 127 He
deserts him again, and is sint Prisoner to Nantes. 127 Is tried, condemned, and
executed. 128 The Duchess of Chevreuse flies into Lorraine. 128 Chevrilles
chosen Governor in Brisons place. 159 Chaumerargue taken by Chevrilles. 161
Clausel proposes to Rohan relief from Spain; the effect of it. 178, 179
Canisson bravely defended. 203 Yielded upon composition. 204 Chevrilles
treachery concerning Privas. 206, 207
D.
Dupuy charged by the Duke of Rohan, to see that nothing were concluded
concerning Chastillon, unless he would consent to give up Aigue-morts. 79
Which he duly observed. 80 Divisions among the Protestant party occasion the
loss of many towns. 84 Divisions in Rochelle. 100 Deputies General, viz.
Galerande and Bazin, chosen by the command of the King. 102 Thae Earl of
Denbigh sent with a Fleet to the relief of Rochelle 171 Divisions in Castry
between Chavagnac and St. Germie. 177, 191, 192 The issue of them. 196
E.
Espernon wrought to attempt the Queens deliverance, which he effects. 47, 48
Espernon ravages the Country about Montauban 107 Ambassadors mediate a peace
between the King and his Subjects. 113 The English Embassad^rs are caution for
the observation of the Peace. 115 Foreign Ambassadors sign the League at
Paris. 115 Are discontented at the Peace afterward signed with Spain. ibid.
English Secretary his Speech to the Rochellers. 132, 133 With their Reply.
ibid. The English descent into the Isle of Ree, the issue of it. 134, etc. The
English draw off from the Islle of Re. 149 Are defeated in their attempt upon
the Fort. 150 And in their retreat to their ships. 151
F.
France, the state of France after the death of Henry the Great. p. 1 La Ferte
servant to the Duke of Rohan, committed to the Bastille, for endeavoring to
serve the Queen. 47 La Force left by Rohan in Guienne. 58 La Force yields up
St. Foy. 76 France juggles with the Foreign Ambassadors 155 Fargis
Ambassador in Spain, bears the blame of the peace made with Spain. 121 Florac
corrupted by de Ports, is taken by Montredon. 153 Faucon corrupts his own
Officers, 159
G.
The Duke of Guise solicited to new engagements by the Marshal Bouillon, but
in vain. 40 Gignac victualled by Berticheres. 70 Galand an enemy to the Duke of
Rohan. 119
H.
Hauvre de Grace in Normandy bought by the Cardinal de Richelieu. 128
I.
St. John d' Angely, attempted, but in vain; reinforced by Rohan. 57 St. John
de Breuill taken by Rohan. 101
K.
The King of England persuades Bouillon and Rohan to a reconciliation. 18 The
King and Queen meet at Tours. 49 The King levies an Army against the Queen,
marches into Normandy, thence to Angers, and defeats the Queens Forces at Pont
de Ce. 52. 53 The King besieges Monheur and takes it upon composition, 67 The
King carried from Paris to Orleans, and thence to Nantes, by those who desired
a continuance of the war. 76 The King descends into the lower Languedoc. 79 The
King forwards the marriage of the Duke of Anjou. 123 The King of England sends
a Gentleman to the Duke of Rohan, his Message, the Dukes reply. 130 The King of
England goes in person to Portsmouth to expedite the relief for Rochelle. 187
The French Kings expedition to Susa. 200 The peace being made, sends his forces
into Languedoc. 201 Longueville possesses himself of the Town and Castle of
Peronne. 38, 39 Luynes the Kings favorite. 38, 41, 42 Mangott and Bouillon
sent to treat with the Duke of Longuevilie. 39 Luynes makes Deagent and Modene
his chief Counselors, and imposes a Confessor on the King. 44 Confines Mangot
to his house: sends the Bishop of Lucon to Avignon, and Barbin to the Bastille.
ib. Calls an Assembly of Notables, at Rouen, and vests himself in the
Government of Normandy. 45 Marries the daughter of the Duke of Montbazon. ibid.
Lucon by his brother in law sollicites his return from Avignon, whither he was
banished, promising to incline the Queen to such a peace as the King should
desire. 49 Luynes seek to ruin the Duke of Rohan. 51 Releases the Prince.
ibid. Lines and his brothers made Dukes, and Peers of France, ingrosse all
Offices. 52 Luynes sends to sound the inclinations of the Duke of Rohan, and
Saubize. 57 Luynes invites the Duke of Rohan to an interview, which he assents
to. 64 They meet. ibid. and 65 But to no purpose. 66 Luynes at the siege of
Monheur dies of sickness. 67 Lesdiguieres enters Vivaretz. 70 Besieges and
batters Pousin. Blaccons gets in, and defends it bravely: by the Duke of
Rohan's mediation is yielded upon conditions. 70 Lesdiguieres invites Rohan to
a personal Treaty. 71 Languedoc much disheartened at the Kings approaches,
sollicites the Duke to come to them; the like solicitations receives he almost
from all places. 77 Lesdiguieres made Constable of France, invites Rohan to an
interview, which he assents to. 86 Languedoc jealous of the Duke of Rohan. 94
Lesdiguires his death, and character. 118 Lusignan beats up Lescures quarters
in Trillet. 110 Lynsey made Admiral of the Fleet designed for the relief of
Rochelle. 187 Arrives in the Rode of Rochelle. 188
M.
Montauban declares for the Duke of Rohan. 31 Montigny made Marshall of France,
and Governor of Berry, is sent to his Command. 41 Montauban fortified by
Rohan. 59 Besieged by the King. 61 Bravely relieved by Beaufort. 62, 63 The
siege raised by the King. 66 Montmorency takes several places in Languedoc. 70
Montlaur taken by the Duke of Rohan. 71 Montauban desires a Governor, St.
Andre de Montbrun is sent, etc. 77 Malauze fetches off the Garrison from
Realmont. 85 Montpellier besieged by the King. 86 Marmeyrac secures Aletz for
the Duke of Rohan, 111 Montague sent to the Duke of Rohan. 131 Montague sends
an express to Rohan. 104 The Magistrates of Mazeres refusing to admit the Duke
of Rohan into their town, he is let in by the populacy. 146 Malauze, formerly a
friend, now opposes the Duke. 154 Montpellier attempted, but the design is
betrayed. 156, etc. Montmorency, and the Prince of Conde join their Forces,
take Damiers. 164 Maugis Governor of Realmont betrays it to the Prince of
Conde. 164 St. Michel made Governor of Montauban. 166 Suppresses a dangerous
mutiny there. ibid. Mervies besieged, the difficulties the Duke meets with
there. 169 St. Michel jealous of Chastillon Governor of Causade, surprises him
in his Garrison. 184 Takes several Garrisons about Montauban. 185 Mazaribal
upon misinformation opposes Roussiliere in his Command, in Saverdune. 102
N.
A sedition raised in Nismes, by Brison. 74 Nismes declares against the
Governtment of Brison, and desires to live under the Command of their own
Consuls, until they had more occasion for a Governor. 75 Nismes, and Bezieres
endeavor to alienate the affections of the Sevenes from Rohan, but in vain.
101 Nismes declares for the Duke of Rohan. 111 New divisions there occasioned
by Montbrun, and his brothers. 113 Nismes protests against the peace concluded
at Aletz 224
O.
Oleron taken by the Duke of Soubize. 76. 98 Oleron poorly yielded. 110 Ornano
courted by the Queen, and those that opposed her, about the marriage with the
Princess of Montpensier, 122 Ornano secured. 124 Ornano dies of the stone.
P.
Propositions sent from Du Plessis, to Bouillon to be treated on in the
Assembly at Chastelraut. 4 Du Plessis leaves the Assembly of the five Provinces
of Rochelle, and draws with him the Province of Anjou. 19 The Parliament of
Paris by Declaration invite the Prince, and Peers to join with them, and
present very bold Remonstrances to the King himself. 26, 27 Pardaillan's
treachery prevented by his two sons. 66 He is afterward slain in an Inn. ib.
Puzieux the Kings favorite, his character. 91 Puzieux opposes Rohan. 94
Puzieux disgraced. 96 Le Parc d' Archiat makes honorable conditions for his
men in the Isle of Re. 110 Pousin taken by Brison. 113 The Marquess de Ports
seeks by oppressing them, to excite the people to new commotions. 118 Pamiers
taken by the Duke of Rohan. 147, 148 The Protestants barbarously used by the
Duke of Ventadour, and others, 158 Pousin taken by the Duke of Rohan. 161
Poianne suborned by Richelieu to kill Soubize, is discovered, and taken. 189
Privas besieged. 206, 207 A general peace concluded at Alezt. 223
Q.
The Queen changes the Officers of State, and raises several Armies. 41 The
Queens Guards taken from her. 42 She is removed to Blois, where she is closely
guarded. 44 The Queen meets the King at Tours, has Anjou, with the Castles of
Angiers Pont de Ce, and Chinon given to her. 49 The Queen defeated at Pont de
Ce. 53 The Queen Mother very desirous to consummate the marriage between the
Duke d' Anjou and the Princess Montpensier, is opposed by many, and why. 122
R.
Rohan, the Duke of Rohan being in Britany, is informed of the contrivances to
out him of St. John d' Angelis, sends thither Haulte Fontain, whom immediately
he follows. page 14 Returns from St. John to the Court, leaving Haulte Fontain
his Deputy, in St. John. 15 Returns thence again to St. John. ibid. Is
undermined at Court by Bouillon, and proposals made of besieging him. 16 The
Issue of that Affair. 17, etc. Rohan Courted by the Prince to join with him;
sends Haulte Fontain to observe his actions, and writes to the Queen. 23 Rohan
at the request of the Nobility, and Governors of the Religion, engages to
oppose the Marriages with Spain. 30 Is solicited by the Queen to join with
her. 31 Engages the Assembly, and Body of the Protestants with him. ibid. Take
Lectour, and forces the Castle. ibid. Rohan obtains the Government of Poictou.
37 Applies himself to the Queen. ibid. Rohan gets leave to visit the Queen, and
retires into Piedmont. 43 Rohan seeks to reconcile Luines to the Queen, his
reasons to move him to it 45 Persuades the Queen to make her Peace with the
King, which she did. 49. Rohan in opposition to Luines, adheres to the Queen,
persuades her to remove to Bourdeaux, which she refused. 51 Retz, the Duke of
Retz, revolts from the Queen. 53 Rohan, advertized of great losses he had
received, marches into the lower Languedoc. 59 Cardinal de Retz, and Schomberg,
usurp the management of the State Affairs. 67 Rohan chosen General. ib. Rohan
falls sick at Montpellier. 70 Rohan and Lesdiguieres advertise the Assembly
General of the Treaty agreed on between them. 71 Rohan returns to his Army in
Languedoc, his actions there. 72, 73 Rohan besieges, and takes St. Georges in
sight of the Duke of Montmorency. ibid. Rohan forbids the Assembly of the five
Provinces to meet at Nismes, and defeats the purposes of Brison. 74 Rohan
prevents the design of some discontents at Montpellier. 83 Reasons which moved
the Duke of Rohan to conclude a Peace at Montpellier. 87 Rochelle fends
Deputies to the King. 92 Rohan performs the Articles of his part. 92, 93 Is
made a Prisoner by Valence, enlarged by the King. ibid. Richlieu the Kings
Favorite, 96. Continues the Treaties begun with Foreign States. 97 Rochellers
apply themselves to Rohan and Soubize. ib. Rohan calls an Assembly of the
Sevenes at Anduze. 101. Fails of his Levies. 102 Rohan marches toward
Realmont. 105 The Duchess of Rohan appoints a Rendez-vous at Brassac. 104
Rochellers indiscreetly refuse the Peace offered them. 107 The Duchess of
Rohan, her demeanor toward Richelieu, and the English Ambassadors. 115
Designs against Rohan, which he frustrates. 118, 119, 120 Richelieu promotes
the marriage with Madam de Montpensier. 123 Richclieu understands the
contrivances of the Duke of Savoy, and others against him. 125 Endeavors to
out Vendosme of his Government of Britany. 125, 126 Rohan's Mother and Sister
fly from Paris to Rochelle. 132. his policy to advantage himself by the
Letters from Rochelle. 135, 136, 137 Isle of Re described. 138, 139 Rohan
publishes his Declarations. ibid. Rohan sentenced by the Parliament of
Toulouse. 140 Gets into Millaud. 141. obtaines a victory over Montmorency. 145
Re reinforced by the King of France. 149, 150 Rohan dismantles several small
Garrisons. 159. and engages the people not to listen to any particular
Treaties. 160. and then proceeds with his Army. ibid. Rohan's care to preserve
the Country about Nismes. 175. Ravages all the Country up to the Walls of
Beaucaire. 176. meets and takes a good booty of Salt. ibid. Rohan besieges
Creseil. 179 Storms it, and is repulsed. ibid. Rises at the approach of
Montmorency. 180 Rohan puts a party into Gallargues. 181. Who are taken, and
put to death. 183. He in revenge sits down before Monts, takes it, and hangs
most of the Prisoners. ibid. and 184 Rochelle taken, 190. The influence it had
on the Reformed Party. 191 Rohan takes St. Amant. 193. Defeats two Negotiations
for a particular Peace. 194, 195. Convenes a General Assembly at Nismes. 196
Rohan is solicited on all hands for recruits. 216. Resolves upon a General
Peace. 217
S
Sully, the Duke of Sully, his ruin endeavored by some of the Grandees, and
why, together with the means they used to deprive him of his Offices. 2 Sully
urging the Assembly to interess themselves in his cause, is opposed by
Bouillon. 8 The Assembly declare for him. 9 States General convene at Paris. 25
Soubize makes his Levies in Poictou and Xaintonge. 31 Sully persuades the
Assembly to a Peace. 34 Sully upon the mutiny against the Marshal d' Ancre,
labors a composure. 40 Savoy, the Duke of Savoy's success in Alexandria. 43,
44 Saumure taken from du Plessis. 57 Soubize his attempt on Blavet, with his
success in it. 97, 98 Soubize disowned by several Towns. ibid Seven Soldiers
of Foix, their generous Action. 105 Soubize defeats Manti, and the Admiral of
Holland. 107. The effect of the victory gained by Soubize. ibid. Soubize, by
the folly of the Rochellers, and Treachery of some of his Officers, worsted in
the Isle of Re. 108, 109 Soubize sails for England. 109, 110 The Duke of Savoy
seeks the ruin of Richelieu, and by what means. 124 The Count of Soissons
flies into Italy. 129 Scaglia Ambassador from the Duke of Savoy into England,
endeavors the ruin of Richelieu. 129 Soubize by the help of his Mother gets
into Rochelle, together with the English Secretary, his Speech to the
Rochellers. 132, 133 Soubize proclaimed Traitor. 140 Saverdun taken by Rohan.
146, 147 The Count of Soissons hinders the conjunction of the Protestants in
Dauphine with the Duke. 162 Sauve treats with the Count of Aletz. 213, 214.
Mutinies against Randon. 218 Rohan goes thither in person. 221.
T
Toiras made governor of Fort-Lewis. p. 97. Themines brings an Army into
Lauraguais and Albigeois. 101 Themines falling upon Lusignan's quarters, is
bravely repulsed. 103 Themines made Governor of Britany. 128
V
Vendosme, the Duke of Vendosme's escapes into Britany. 22 Vendosme deserted by
the Prince. 24 Is forced to submit to the Assembly of the Estates of Britany.
25 Vieuville the King's Favorite. 96. disgraced, and sent to Ambois. ib. Vigan
taken by Rohan. 101 Valence bravely opposed by S. Blancart. 102 Vendosme, and
his brother sent Prisoners to Amboise 126 Valette refuses to receive the Duke
of Anjou's party until his fathers pleasure were known. 127 Vendosme and his
brother sent to the Bois de Vincennes. 128 Vendosme outed of his government of
Britany. ibid. Vicenobre taken by the Duke of Rohan. 175 Vieres sent by the
Bishop of Mande, to delude Montauban. 197
W
The grounds of the second War. 92, 93, 95
FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
In the Memoires.
PAge 3. l. 39. r. Amclioration of, etc. p. 16. l. 41. for determinate, r.
terminate. p. 22. l. 18. for not, add, r. add ibid. for retaining, r.
retiring. p. 27. l. 9. for vendible, r. venal. p. 28. l. 40. r. practices. p.
41. l. 6, and 7. r. drawn the Duke of Guise and his brothers to her party. p.
42. l. 31. for Lueon, r. Lucon. p. 43. l. 25. r. first sight. p. 46. l. 4r. r.
in regard of, etc. p. 49. l. 12. r. suit with. p. 49. l. 8. r. with Bethun. p.
52. l. 34. r. whose marriage. p. 71. l. 3. r. attaque. p. 76. l. 19. r.
Poictou. p. 87. l. 20. r. importunate. p. 93. l. 31. r. razing. p. 114. l. 4.
r. to submit to them. p. 115. l. 4. r. she. p. 125. l. 10. r. too great. p.
127. l. 42. for who, r. whilst. p. 139. l. r. r. built. p. 139. l. ult. for
securities, r. severities. p. 156. l. 23. r. razing. p. 157. l. 15. for called,
r. culled. p. 161. l. 25. for removed. r. relieved. p. 191. l. 42. r.
Irremediable. p. 212. l. 13. r. undertook. p. 213. l. 16. r. protract the Cap
-- p. 214. l. 32. for had, r. having. ibid. l. 26. r. Irremdiable.

In the Politic Discourses.
Page 1. line 10. read effected. p. 15. l 30. r. Partage. p. 15. l. 38. for
employed, r. obliged. p. 22. l. 34. for perish, r. persist. p. 25. l. 14. r.
never served. p. 28. l. 4. r. heretofore. p. 40. l. 22. for ad. r. omitted. p.
41. l. 12. for use, r. us. p. 60. l. 5. for descry, r. decry. p. 61. l. 33. for
ports, r. posts. p. 53. l. 9. for ravished, r. ravaged. p. 69, l. 8. for
satisfaction, r. vindication.


