THE SPEECH Of Colonel MALCOMB ROGERS (Agent for the King of Scots) At the
same place of Execution at Edenborough in Scotland, where the Earl of Montross
lost his life, for his raising of Forces against the English, in the Name and
Defense of his Masters Prerogatives.

With the manner of his Trial before the Officers of the Army; the Articles and
Charge, read, and exhibited against him by the Judge Advocate, the fatal
Sentence pronounced at the Bar of Justice; and a Narrative of the Transactions
of the whole Business.

LONDON: Printed for GEORGE HORTON, 1654.

SIR,
ON the 25 of April, 1654. a general Court Marshal was held within within this
City, where were present the Deputy Governor of Lies, and diverse Officers of
the Army; before whom was brought the grand Agent of the King of Scots, viz.
Col. Rogers, who was taken going to Middleton with new Commissions and
Instructions from his Master, inciting them to prosecute the War vigorously,
and to admit of all poffible encouragment toward those English that should
come in to their assistance, etc. And being brought to the Bar of Justice, the
Judge Advocate caused to be read the Articles of War, wherein the respective
Agents and Spies were comprised, which is death without mercy; and so
accordingly they proceeded to Sentence, which was, That he should be hanged
upon a Gollowes by the Neck til he was dead, at the place of Execution where
Montross suffered; And thereupon ordered, That he should be remanded back to
the place from whence he came; and thence, to the place of execution on the
morrow, between 10 and 11 of the clock in the forenoon: In pursuance whereof,
about the time appointed, he was conducted to the place of termination, where a
very high Gibbet was erected, much like unto that which the said Earl of
Montross took his last good night on: And coming near it, he looked up, and
said, Gods will be done, my Savior was crucified on a Cross, and shall not I
with patience here finish my course; yea, certainly, and by divine Assistance,
was this dreadful Object as high again, it should not in the least, I hope,
astonish me: For, truly Gentlemen, that which bears up my heart now, is, that
there is but few steps between me and Heaven; and that upon giving the fatal
Turn, I shall ascend to a glorious Throne: Blessed be God, that has given me
this assurance, that I am now sailing toward the Ocean of Eternity; through a
rough passage to my Haven of Rest; and through the Red sea to the promised
Land. This day am I making a double exchange, a Guard of Soldiers, for a Guard
of Angels, to carry my soul into blessed Abraham's bosom. For I protest here in
the presence of the Almighty Jehovah, and as a dying man, I do not bring a
revengeful heart to the Ladder, but am free from rancour and malice, but desire
God to forgive them, that would not forgive me.

And although they have passed the fatal Sentence of bringing me to so untimely
and ignominious an end; yet the justness of my cause takes a way the sting of
Death, and beautifies the end of my life; for truly, I was never culpable or
perfidious to my Master the King (putting off his Hat) in any thing; but
always rather chose to expose my se f to the greatest of difficulties, then
(in the least) to hazard the propagating of so great an interest; for, indeed,
had I as many lives, as hairs upon my head, I should freely submit and lay them
down in the Royal Quarrel.

But being interrupted, and not permitted to proceed upon such Circumstances,
he uttered these expressions: Well! Gentlemen, I see men hunger after my flesh,
and thirst after my blood, which will be a means (I hope) to heighten my
happiness: And as I must now draw to an end of my life: so shall I now come to
an end of my Speech; but before I expire my last breath, give me leave to;
justify God, and condemn my self; for God is righteous, though I have sinned:
God is just, though I have been wicked; And his great mercy is it, that my
Captivity was not made a Hell, and this place of execution the bottomless pit:
To him alone be ascribed all Glory; for I cannot only justify his divine
Majesty; but also magnify the riches of his grace toward me.

I have done, having no more to say, but to desire the help of your prayers,
that God would be pleased to give me continual supplies of Divine Grace, to
carry me through this Vail of Death, that so I may put off this body with as
much comfort of mind, as ever my Clothes to go to rest: I shall now draw to a
final period, and conclude with that speech of the Apostle, I am ready to be
offered, and the time of my departure is at hand, I have fought a good fight, I
have finished my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth there is laid up for
me a Crown of Righteousness; which the Lord Jehovan, the righteous Judge of
Heaven, shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but unto them also that
love his appearing: through whose blood, when breath is out of my nostrils, I
expect remission of all my sins; and so the Lord bless all those that fights
his battle.

The PRAYER.
MOst eternal and glorious Lord God, I thy poor and unworthy Creature, do here
prostrate my self before thy sacred Majesty, beseeching thee through the merits
of Jesus Christ, my blessed Savior and Redeemer, to have mercy on me; and dea^
Father I humbly beseech thee, that thou wi^t be pleased to strengthen me with
thy blessed Spirit in this great Work, in sailing toward the Ocean of
Eternity, to my Haven of rest; and so Lord Jesus into thy hands, I give and
recommend my soul.

After which, they sung a Psalm; and then immediately after going up the Ladder,
the Executioner did his office.

FINIS.

