To the Honorable the Commons in Parliament assembled; The humble Petition and
Remonstrance of Edmond Rolph, Prisoner in the Gatehouse, WESTMINSTER:
SHOWS,
THat in Judgment and Conscience he has adventured his life for the
Preservation of the Honor and just Power of Parliaments, with the Freedoms,
Liberties and Properties of the Freeborn People of this Nation.

That as heretofore, so at present, all the endeavors of wicked and malicious
men, are bent and employed to wound and destroy both the Parliaments Honor, and
the Peoples Liberties, by subtle designments and scandalous aspersions, thereby
to render both the Parliament, Army, and all godly people adhering to them,
odious in the eyes of the Nation.

That in order to the end aforesaid, one Osbourn and Dowcet has lately made a
false and scandalous suggestion, bruting it abroad that there was a design to
poison the King; and because it was necessary that they should father the
design upon some body, they have laid it upon the whole Army in general, and
upon your Petitioner in particular; using all means, by color of the said
suggestion, to exasperate the People to resist the Authority of Parliament, and
to weaken their power by the destruction of that Army, which by the blessing of
God has been your protection to this day, maugre the malice of your
adversaries.

That by means of the said Suggestion, your Petitioner has been by a party of
the Lords imprisoned and sentenced contrary to Law, without hearing, yea
without legal Crime or legal Accuser; having not only his life end angered by
his cruel usage, in the time of his bodily distemper, but also his name and
credit destroyed by having that scandalous imputation of a Traitor cast upon
him.

That this House has declared it to be a heinous Crime, against the Law of
Nature, against the Rules of Justice that innocent men should be charged with
so high an Offense as Treason in the face of the highest Judicatory of the
Kingdom, without Witness, without Evidence, without all possibility of legal
Repairation: 1 part Book Decl. page 201.

That by the Law of the Kingdom no person ought to be imprisoned, indicted,
arraigned, or condemned for any Treason or Treasons, without the testimony of
two Lawful Accusers, as appears by the Statute of 5 and 6 of Edw. 6. Chap. 11.
as was largely proved at the open Bar at the Assize and general Jail-delivery
held at Winchester for the County of Southampton, by Mr Maynard Counselor at
Law, and a Member of this honorable House.

That contrary to this and many other good Laws, providing against this evil,
your Petitioner has not only been detained in prison without any legal
Warrant, but has also been indicted contrary to Law, (the said Indictment
being drawn up here by the Kings Council, and by the said Lords transmitted to
be found at Winchester by the Grand Jury,) and yet your Petitioner kept
Prisoner in the Gatehouse.

That in order thereunto, Osbourn and Dowcet were by the Lords sent to
Winchester to give Evidence to the Grand Jury upon the said Indictment; which
they accordingly did on the 28 of August, 1648.

That notwithstanding the said Indictment did consist of four several heads of
Treason, wherein the whole Army as well as Your Petitioner was accused, yet the
said Osbourn and Dowcet gave nothing material in evidence, whereon an
Indictment could be grounded; so that upon the examination of the whole matter,
the Grand Jury returned an Ignoramus upon the said Bill of Indictment, as by a
Certificate from the Clerk of the Assize more plainly appears.

That Your Petitioner, notwithstanding he is clear in the eye of the Law, and
in the consciences of all honest men, yet he is still a Prisoner to the will of
the Lords, and left without a possibility of legal repairation, both for his
illegal imprisonment, besides his great charges and damages in his estate and
credit sustained, being left without all possibility of vindication or
reparation, unless this Honorable House be pleased (as in like cases
heretofore) to take him into consideration, and as a manifestation of their
just sense, of their own, and the Armies honor, and Your Petitioners unparaleld
sufferings, find some expedient both for the enlargement, vindication and
repairation of Your Petitioner; The Judges being both corrupt, and so nearly
concerned; the Lords so powerful; and Osbourn and Dowcet so beggarly; that it
is impossible Your Petitioner should ever be repaired in his estate or credit,
without Your Justice be exercised in the obtaining thereof.

The Premises considered, may it please Your Honors, (seeing that both Your
own, and the Armies Honor has been blemished by the said scandalous
information,) That therefore some publication may be made by the Authority and
Approbation of this House, of the proceedings in relation to this business, to
the end that Your, and the Armies Honor may be vindicated, and Your Petitioners
name and credit so far as may be repaired; and that some legal way may be taken
for the freedom and repairation of Your Petitioner, who is greatly impoverished
by the said Imprisonment, it having cost him nigh 120 l. of his estate since
the time of his restraint, besides the great damage received in his name and
credit, which is altogether unrepairable.

And forasmuch as the Judges are appointed to sit with the Lords as their
Assistants in point of Law, and ought to inform them by what rule they are to
proceed, being sworn thereunto, and yet have, contrary to Law and their Oaths,
connived at the apparent subversion of the fundamental Laws of this Nation, by
suffering such illegal Warrants to pass from time to time from the Lords upon
such illegal Accusations; That therefore this House would be pleased to call
the said Judges to an Account for these their undue proceedings; and out of
their estates (who ought to have prevented Your Petitioners sufferings and
damages) to allow him such legal repairations as to Your Honors shall seem meet
and couvenient.

And he shall pray, etc.

