The Saints longings After their Heavenly Country. A SERMON Preached at St.
Paul's Church on Tuesday the sixth of June; 1654. At a Solemn Anniversary
meeting of the Cheshire Gentlemen, and Freemen of the City of London, born in
the same County.

By that faithful and painful Servant of Jesus Christ, Mr. Ralph Robinson
late Minister of Mary Wolnoth London.

Ephesians. 2. 19. Now therefore ye are no more strangers, and Foreigners, but
fellow-Citizens of the Saints, and of the, household of God.

(...)

Heb. 13. 14. London, Printed by R. I. for Stephen Bowtel, and are to be sold
at his Shop under Marie Wolnoth Church in Lumbard-street, 1655.

TO THE Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and the rest, much Honored
Gentlemen of Cheshire, Citizens of London etc.
Met together at their solemn Annual, Festival Convention of Cheshire-Men in
London.
YOu were pleased (Gentlemen) the last year, when you revived this friendly
Meeting of your Country men in London, to desire Mr. Ralph Robinson to Preach
before you, which accordingly he did, and his Service herein was accepted with
such Approbation by those whom the Lord had put into a Capacity to judge of the
Spiritualnesse and usefulness of his Sermon, that the Copy thereof was desired
to be published. It was the Authors purpose to have Printed his Sermon, and to
have Dedicated it to you his Countrymen, and accordingly he had made most of
it ready for the Press; But the all-wise God prevented his Intention by Death.
The Subject of this Sermon, is, The Saints Longings after Heaven. Sirs, you are
here Minded what Countrymen you are, viz. Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and
of the Household of God; Ephe. 2. 19. Mehor est Christianus Rusticus q^am
Alexander (...) Lu ^. Nemo me major nisi qui justion. Prove. 12. 26. Psa. 4. 3.
Psa. 16. 2.
This is the best Country, true Christians may Challenge that Title to be
Choice of Men, for such are more Excellent than their Neighbors, they are Gods
Chosen ones, and the most most Excellent of the whole World. That which was
prounded to you, when this Sermon was preached, as the matter of your hope and
desire, is now the joy and enjoyment of faithful Mr. Robinson, your
Countryman, safely landed on the shore of Eternity, and now possessed of his
heavenly Country. Had God spared him, he had lived to be a special Ornament
both to the Country of his birth, and this City of his Abode and Imploiment.
But God has made a great breach both amongst you and us. The Lord sanctify
such a sad Providence unto us all, that we may faithfully serve out our
Generation, and seriously mind our way, and diligently mend our pace toward
our heavenly Country.

If any of you shall be at the trouble to ask why my name (possibly unknown to
some of you) is subscribed to this Dedication? You may be pleased to know,
that it was the request of Mr. Robinsons sorrowful Widow, that I would take
the care of committing this Sermon to the Press, which now in her Name, with
all due Respects is presented and put into your hands, and the Lord write the
serious and holy Truths herein Contained upon your hearts, and bless your
Meeting: For the Glory of God, the Honor and Happiness of your Country, and
the increase of Piety and Charity amongst your selves, which is the Prayer of

Sirs, Your most humble Servant in the Lord, WILLIAM TAILOR
From my Study in Colemanstreet London, July 7. 1655.
The Saints longings after their Heavenly Country.
A SERMON Preached at St. Paul's Church London, on Tuesday the 6 of June, 1654.
At a Solemn Anniversary meeting of the Gentlemen of Cheshire, Citizens and
Inhabitants of London.

Heb. 11. 16. But now they desire a better Country, that is, an heavenly.
Spiritual heart can make a heavenly improvement of every creature; It can
reduce every providence of God to an holy use. That which some have affirmed of
the Philosophers Stone, that it turns meaner metals into gold, is most true of
a gracious heart, it turns every creature, and every providence into gold, at
least it extracts some pure gold out of every providence.

The Ministers of the Gospel, should of all others learn this holy Chemistry:
They should study the holy art of spiritualizing the natural affections of men.
Our blessed Savior, when he perceived more then ordinary desires in those that
followed him after material bread, does set before them that bread which he
knew they had more need of, though their hearts were not so much toward it;
Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which endures unto
everlasting life, Joh. 6. 27. In imitation of this blessed Pattern of the chief
Shepherd, the Prince of Preachers, I have made choice of that Scripture which
was now read.

This days meeting does testify that there is in your hearts an high esteem
of your native Country. You are assembled before God to pray for it, thankfully
to acknowledge that mercy you received in it, and all that kindness of God
which he has manifested since he brought you out of it. The Text tells you of
a Country, which is in it self far better, and ought to be to each of you far
more desirable then the place of your birth. And if God will bless the word of
his grace, which is now to be delivered for the raising up of your affections
toward this glorious place, you will have cause to eternity to adore that good
hand of his that has brought you together.

That I may bring you to the Text, I shall briefly show you its coherence with
that which goes before.

The Apostle in the former Chapter, exhorts these believing Jews to constancy
in the faith, and to the bearing of the cross with patience; Ye have need of
patience, says he, that after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive
the promise, Heb. 10. 36. In this Chapter he goes on to amplify the same
Argument: This he does two ways.

First, by describing the nature of faith from the effects of it. Faith is the
substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen, v. 1, 2, 3.
Things that are remote from the eye of sense, are near to the eye of faith.
Faith gives a being to the things which God has promised, though carnal reason
thinks they shall never have a being.

Another effect of faith is, That by it the Elders obtained a good report,
(...), they received testimony, they obtained witness from God. It was their
faith that justified them, it was their faith that saved them, it was their
faith that made God precious to them, and them dear to God. Faith and Piety
will cheer a man while he lives, and embalm his name when he is dead. He that
would have his name immortalized must be a believer. Holiness though blasted by
men, shall have a good report from God.

A third effect of faith is, That through it we understand that the worlds were
framed by the word of God. Reason can see no reason why any thing, much less
such a glorious Fabric should be produced out of nothing; but faith believes
that the world with all things therein contained, were made at first, out of no
pre-existent matter, by the powerful creating word of God. Thus the Apostle
amplifies the Argument in hand by describing the nature of faith. He does it,

Secondly, by illustrating the grace of faith from the examples of the
believers of the Old Testament. These are either such as lived before the
Flood, as Abel, Enoch, Noah, of whose faith he speaks fully, verse. 4, 5, 6, 7.
Or they are such as lived after the Flood, in the several Ages of the world, of
whom he makes largely mention what glorious undertakings their faith carried
them through from verse. 7. to the end of the Chapter.

The Text falls under the description of the faith of the renowned Patriarchs
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

Abraham's faith is commended by two eminent acts of it.

First, By his readiness to forsake his native Country upon a divine Command.
By faith Abraham, when he was called to go out into a place which he should
after receive for an Inheritance, obeyed, and he went out not knowing whither
he went, verse. 8. A call from heaven will make a believer do any thing, though
it seem never so irrational, never so self-destructive. Faith has feet to walk
after God; it has no heart to dispute against God, or against any of his
Commands. Though Abraham knew not whither he went, yet he knew whom he
followed, though the Traveller was ignorant, yet he did believe he had a
skilful Guide. The wise God can neither mis-lead, nor mis-place any of his
Children.

Secondly, The faith of Abraham is commended by his so journing in the land of
Promise, as in a strange Country, verse. 9. And in this act did Isaac, and Jacob
concur with him. By faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as in a strange
Country, dwelling in Tabernacles with Isaac, and Jacob, the heirs with him of
the same promise. The holy patterns of Parents are very prevalent to persuade
their children. It was much that a man should be contented to leave a certainty
for an uncertainty, but it was exceeding much, that when he came to the place
which was promised, he should not live in a fixed habitation, but in moveable
Tabernacles. It is a high and noble act of faith, to get the affections unglued
from the things of the world; Nothing but victorious Faith can obtain victory
over the world.

The reason of that looseness of heart, which was in these holy Patriarchs from
the land of Canaan, was the certain persuasion they had of a better Canaan.
Their faith did not rest in the land of Promise, as if the possession of that
could make them happy; they looked higher; namely, to the Celestial Canaan, of
which they knew the Terrestrial was but a Type. They looked for a City that
has foundations, whose maker and builder is God, v. 10. They expected another
dwelling, they had another place in their eye, and therefore sat so loose from
the place of their present abode. This Country must either be their own earthly
Country, or some other; It was not their own Country, for says the Apostle, If
they had been mindful of that Country from whence they came out, they might
have had opportunity to have returned, verse. 15. Therefore of necessity it must
be some other Country, if they looked after another Country, it was either an
earthly, or an heavenly; not an earthly, for no earthly Country would
recompense the loss of their own. And therefore he concludes, that it was a
heavenly Country, which they reached after; But now they desire a better
Country, that is, an heavenly.

I shall first open the words, and then lay down the points which they do
afford us.

But now, (...) This phrase does not here signify time, but has the force of
an illative conjunction: It Is as much as atqui, igitur, as Beza observes well
upon the place. They did not seek an earthly, therefore an heavenly Country. We
meet with the same expression, 1 Cor. 15. 20. But now Christ is risen from the
dead, thatis, therefore is Christ risen: So in this place, But now they desire,
that is, therefore they desire; from whence, says Estius, it appears how
weakly they argue who would from this Text prove that the holy Patriarchs do
not yet enjoy the vision of God, but are still in expectation of it. This
phrase speaks nothing at all of time.

They desire, (...) The word signifies not a cold, faint, frigid with, but a
strong vehement earnest desire; such a desire as a covetous man has after his
Mammon. The love of money is the root of all evil, which while some coveted
after, they have erred from the faith, 1 Timothy 6. 10. It Is the very same word
which is here used (...). Never did a hungry Earth-worm thirst after silver and
gold, more than these holy Patriarchs did now thirst after heaven; they had
burning, flaming affections, their souls were in a fervent heat after this
Celestial Object.

A better Country. This word [Country] is not in the original Text, but is
necessarily to be supplied; for the Apostle speaks of a Country, verse. 14. The
nature of this Country the Text tells us, namely, an heavenly. It is called a
Country in opposition to that moveable, unsettled estate which they had in
Canaan; there they lived in Tabernacles, but they were in expectation of a
place where they should have a fixed abode; This he calls an heavenly Country.

The Text consists of three general parts.

First, The notion by which heaven is described: It Is a Country.

Secondly, The nature or quality of this Country. It Is an heavenly Country.

Thirdly, The believers affection, this heavenly Country, he desires it very
earnestly.

These three afford us a threefold Observation.

First, That heaven is a believers Country.

Secondly, That this heavenly Country is the best Country.

Thirdly, That true believers have vehement and strong desires within them
after this heavenly and better Country.

Doct. 1.
That Heaven is a believers Country.

A wicked man's Country is here below, here he lives, and here he desires to
live. An unbeleever is (...) or (...) as Socrates called himself, he is a
Citizen of the world, terrae filius, a son of earth. He is one that minds only
earthly things. His delights, his contentments, his happiness are in this life,
Psalm. 17. 14. And if he might have security that he should always continue
here, he would never desire any other place of abode. Give him Paris, and let
who will enjoy Paradise. But the true believer (...) Ephesians. 2. 19.
is (...) a Citizen of heaven, a free Denizen of that Country where Jesus
Christ is at the right hand of God.

Believers do disclaim and disown the world as none of theirs. They have ever
acknowledged themselves Pilgrims and Foreigners on earth. I am a stranger with
thee, says that heavenly Saint, and a stranger as all my Fathers were, Psalm.
39. 14. The world accounts them as strangers, and so do they account
themselves. They know Christ has told them, That they are not of this world,
as he is not of this world: They are in the world, but they are not of the
world; they disavow the world as much as the world disavows them.

As they disclaim the world, so they lay claim to heaven. We desire, say the
holy Apostles, to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven, 2 Cor.
5. 2. Believers, though they have never so great an estate below, yet are they
indeed house-less, and homeless, though all the world be theirs, in regard of
the little they have to it, yet do they account the world none of theirs;
Heaven is their home, Heaven is their house, heaven is their Country.

I shall by way of explication unfold these two particulars.

First, Prove that Heaven is their Country.

Secondly, Show how they come to have a title to it.

That Heaven is the believers Country, is clear, if we consider these following
particulars.

First, From hence they have their Nativity. The place of men's birth is that
which is styled their Country. The believers birth, as a believer, is from
heaven, though he be born again on the earth, yet is he not born again from the
earth. The Scripture teaches us, that all that are new creatures are born from
above, John 3. 3. (...) Regenerating-work is heavenly work. The Holy Ghost
which is the principal efficient of Regeneration, is not from earth, but from
heaven. No person would ever be renewed on earth, if principles of Renovation,
were not infused from heaven. The word of God which is the seed of the new
birth, as the Apostle calls it, 1 Pet. 1. 23. is a heavenly word. The dew of
blessing by which the word is made successful, is not from earth, but from
heaven. Should all the Angels of God come down to plant grace in the hearts of
men, the work would certainly miscarry under their hands, if the divine
benediction did not concur. The soul in its first creation is infused from
heaven, and the renewing of it when corrupted, is from thence likewise. The
Elect are not born again of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God, so the Holy Ghost tells us, Joh. 1. 13. The child that
is conceived in the womb may as well be said to beget it self, as the soul that
is dead in sins and trespasses to renew it self, Of his own will begat he us by
the word of truth. So the Apostle tells us, Jam. 1. 18. An unregenerate heart
has neither power to change it self, nor a will to be changed, until it be
given from above. All the births of Grace are heavenly births; we are said to
be Gods Offspring, as we are men, Act. 17. 28. Much more are we the Offspring
of God as renewed men. This is the first particular.

2 There are their spiritual Kindred. A believers nearest Allies, best
acquaintance are in Heaven; There is God who is his Father; The Divine Essence
is every where, filling Heaven and Earth; God is included in no place, excluded
out of no place, yet the place of his chief Residence is in Heaven, there he
keeps his royal Court of glory; Heaven is his Throne, Earth his Footstool, Isa.
66. 1. We are taught in that holy model of Prayer to look up to God as dwelling
above, Our Father which art in Heaven. As God the Father of believers is in
Heaven, so Christ their elder Brother is there likewise; he did bodily ascend
thither after his Resurrection, and there he sits on the right hand of the
Majesty on high, Heb. 1. 3. The humane nature of Christ shall not stir from
Heaven till he come to judge the World, and to fetch his redeemed ones into
Heaven. The blessed Spirit, who is the very soul of the believers soul, that
gives it life, and preserves it alive, is in Heaven also. There also are the
holy Angels, the believers Lifeguard, and from thence they are sent down to
wait on him as he stands in need of their service, Heb. 1. 14. There is the
general Assembly of the firstborn, Heb. 12. 23. The names of all those that
shall be saved are enrolled there. In one word, all a believers spiritual
Kindred either are or shall be there. This is the second particular.

3 There they have their Habitation. A Believers fixed seat is Heaven; here he
is but a lodger, there he is an Inhabitant, there lies his Estate, there are
his Revenues, a Believers Inheritance is above. The Lord is my portion, says
my soul, this was the Churches claim, Lam. 3. 24. Thou art my dwelling place,
says David, Psalm. 90. 1. The corruptible, the fading possessions of the Saints
are on earth, but their Inheritance, that is incorruptible, that withers not,
is reserved in Heaven, 1 Pet. 1. 4. They have some annual Rents coming in in
this life, but the grand Estate lies there; their Crown, their Scepter, their
Robes, all their Regalia their royal habiliments are locked up in Heaven, and
thither must they be translated before they have the full possession of any of
these. This is the third particular.

4 The language they speak is the language of Heaven. Men's speech do discover
what Country they are of; Thou art a Galilean, say they to Peter, and thy
speech agrees thereto, Mark. 14. 70. The time was when there was but one lip
in the world, Genesis 11. 1. All the sons of Adam spoke one and the same language;
but ever since God confounded the language of the World for that insolent
attempt of men, Nations have been distinguished one from another by their
several Tongues. As Nations have languages whereby they are known one from
another, so have the people of God a distinct language, whereby they are known
from other men. A wicked man, though he may sometimes have heavenly discourses
in his mouth, yet he does but lisp the language of Canaan; those that do
observe him will find him at some time or other speaking the language of Hell;
his tongue cannot be so bridled but it will break out into wicked discourses or
into vain communication. Perhaps when he is amongst the people of God he may
speak as a Saint, but when he converses with his own Companions his speech is
agreeable to theirs: But now a Believer speaks the language of Heaven
wheresoever he is, let him be amongst scoffers, amongst profane men, yet he is
still talking in the speech of his own Country; something of God, of Grace, of
Christ, of Heaven, he is uttering in every company. If he do at any time let
fall an unseemly word, how is his heart troubled? he cannot have peace till he
has wept out his sorrows by humble confessions into the bosom of God. Few
there are that have any communion with a true Believer but must give him this
testimony, that his speech is not like the speech of other men; His heart is
full of Heaven, and his tongue is ever running out Heavenward; he will draw
spiritual inferences from worldly discourses; whatever the text is, the gloss
which he gives upon, it is spiritual and heavenly.

5 There must be their eternal abode. The Apostle speaking of himself, and his
fellow-beleevers, says, Here we have no continuing City, but we seek one toco
me, Heb. 13. 14. The people of God, as other men, do but take a turn or two on
this great Stage of the world and then pass away. The longest time we can any
of us expect to live on earth, is but seventy or eighty years, our lease may
expire in a shorter time; the eternity that is beyond that time is the believer
to spend in Heaven. The bodies of some believers dwell in the dust for thousands
of years, but at the Resurrection they shall take up their Quarters where the
soul has been all that while, namely, in Heaven; So shall we ever be with the
Lord, 1 These. 4. 7. The believers being with men in the flesh, will be at an
end perhaps sooner than he thinks, though not sooner than he desires, but his
being with the Lord shall know no end; the believer shall be with God as long
as God has a being. Thus I have showed you that Heaven is the believers
Country, which was the first thing to be opened.

The second follows, namely, How he comes to have a right to it? This I shall
show two ways.

1. It is prepared for him. 2. He is prepared for it.
First, Heaven is prepared for the Believer, he has adouble right to it.

1 Its his by donation. God who is the great Owner and possessor both of Heaven
and Earth, has by a free Deed of Gift settled Heaven upon Believers. The
gracious Charter is frequently published and proclaimed in the Gospel. I will
give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish; the gift of God is
eternal life, Romans 6. 23. Believers are through grace chosen to Heaven, and
Heaven is freely bestowed on them.

2 Its his by purchase. Heaven is called therefore by the Apostle a purchased
possession, Ephesians. 1. 14. Jesus Christ has fully gone through with the
bargain, it is a free gift in respect of us, in respect of Christ it is a dear
purchase. Christ has bought and paid for it, and every believer is a joint
purchaser with him. The Son of God when he made that eternal Contract with the
Father did put into the Deed of Sale the name of every Individual person that
should possess it. In both these respects is Heaven prepared for the Believer.

Secondly, As Heaven is prepared for him, so is he prepared for it. The Apostle
blesses God for making us meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the
Saints in light, Col. 2. 12. The Election of God, and the Purchase of Christ
give the believer a Right to Heaven, but something else must intervene to make
him meet for Heaven. Nature that is corrupted, must be changed, Flesh and blood
cannot inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; Sanctification must be wrought before a
vessel of Election can be fit for glory. This Christ does by communicating his
own image through the Holy Ghost; he takes away the guilt of sin, by imputing
his own Righteousness for Justification; he removes the filthiness of sin, by
imparting his own Holiness for our Sanctification. He infuses the habits of
saving Grace, and so gives the soul a fithess for the participation of Glory.
Parisiensis has a good saying to this purpose, lib de virt. cap. 11. Natura
mentis humanae quantumeunque perfecta naturalibus donis, absque gratia non est
susceptibilis gloriae. The soul of man though never so perfectly enriched with
natural Indowments, till it be sanctified with grace, is not capable of
receiving glory. The Apostle puts Calling and Justification as intermediate
acts between Predestination and Glorification; Romans 8. 30. Whom he did
Predestinate, them he also Called; and whom he Called, them he also Justified;
and whom he Justified, them he also Glorified. A soul cannot immediately leap
out of a state of sin into a state of glory, though it be elected to life, but
must first pass into a state of holiness; This purgatory every man must pass
through that enters into life. Could an unrenewed soul be admitted into Heaven,
it would be as weary of that place as a Saint would be of Hell; the employment,
the company of Heaven are unsuitable things to an unsanctified heart. There is
no coming to the Palace of glory, but by the milky way of grace. Thus I have
showed you that Heaven is a Believers Country, and how he comes to have a right
to it.

The Application.
First, It lets us see that there is a spiritual relation between Believers.
True Saints are spiritual Countrymen, they are all descended from the same
stock. There eis a real affinity between Christians: They are consanguinei, of
one blood: They are all brethren: They are all members of one Society: They are
coheirs of one and the same inheritance: They have the same common privileges,
the same common promises, the same common interest, the same common salvation.
I in them, and thou in me, that they may be all one in us, Joh. 17. 23.

I note this, both to persuade the people of God to unity among themselves, and
to provoke them to be spiritually helpful to one another. It Is very sad to see
clashing between them that are so nearly related; Let there be no strife, says
Abraham to Lot, between me and thee, and between my herd-men and thy herd-men,
for we are brethren, Genesis 13. 8. Men of the same Country use to be cordially
united, especially when they are in a foreignland. As its sad to see fallings
out, so it is very unnatural that they should refuse to serve one another. These
spiritual Countrymen should rejoice to pray one for another, to counsel one
another, to bear one another burdens, they should be ready to perform all
spiritual kindnesses one to another, as becomes those that are bred and born in
the same land. It will be a comfortable evidence that you are members of this
heavenly Country, if you find upon your hearts strong affections and readiness
of mind to serve the soulconcernments of one another.

Secondly, It should persuade believers to do nothing unworthy of their
heavenly Country. A man's actings are to be answerable to his extraction and
education. The Apostle labors to deter the people of God from unholy deeds by
the indecency and unsutableness of such practices to their high estate;
Fornication, uncleaness, or covetousnes let it not be once named among you, as
becomes Saints, Ephesians. 5. 3. Noble actings are expected from such as are nobly
born. Many men have been preserved from unworthy miscarriages out of respect to
their Parentage and Country. Irregularities in the life of a believer, willcast
some reproach upon his heavenly Country, and make others of his brethren of
less esteem. For a Citizen of heaven to swear, lie, deceive, backbite,
overreach, this is very unseemly. Oh, I beseech you for your Countries sake,
scorn such baseness; Your heavenly Father that begat you, your heavenly Country
where you received your first breath, all your heavenly kindred will suffer
much prejudice, much reproach by such unworthiness. A good man is an honor to
his Country. The Learning, the Wisdom, the Valor, and Prowess of some men have
ennobled the very places of their birth. The lewdness of some men has brought
their very Countries under Proverbs of disgrace. (...)
The Cretians are always liars, evil beasts, slow bellies, Tit. 1. 12. If men
be swearers, drunkards, deceivers, dissemblers, etc. they will be accounted the
very stains and plague-sores of their Country.

3 Let it serve to persuade believers to magnify their Country, make it your
design to serve your Country, and to serve it cheerfully. The world has had
some Heroes, men of renown, who have not grudged to spend their estates and
their very blood for their Countries good, pro aris and foc is, for Religion
and Liberty, they have willingly adventured all. How careful should an
heaven-born Christian be to seek the advancement of his celestial Country? If
you have any spark of true worth in you, be entreated to act vigorously for
your Countries glory. Promote the privileges of this Country; bring in as many
as you can to be in love with it; acquaint the world that lies in ignorance,
with all the advantages, immunities, excellencies of this glorious place. How
careful was Joseph to let his father know what preferments were to be had in
Pharaohs Court; says he to his brethren, You shall tell my father of all my
glory in Egypt, and of all that you have seen, Genesis 45. 13. All this was done
that the old Patriarch might be invited to make haste thither. Men generally
take great delight to be speaking of every little excellency their native
Country affords. Believers can never say so much of their heavenly Country as
it deserves. The soil is so fruitful, the air so sweet, the waters so pleasant,
the inhabitants so wise, beautiful, every thing in it so transcendently
glorious, that no tongue can sufficiently utter, no pen fully describe the
goodness of it. Hereby it will appear that you are indeed freeborn men of this
Country, if you make it your design to imprint upon your own hearts, and the
hearts of those with whom you converse, high and glorious thoughts of it.

Fourthly, It shows us the reason why believers find such bad usage on earth.
The whole world is exceedingly engaged to the people of God, for their sakes
the world stands, they bear up the pillars of it, Ps. 75. 3. For their sakes
the Sun shines, the Rain falls, when they are gathered into Heaven fire will
soon break forth upon the world, yet do the wicked of the earth industriously
study their ruin, they are always plotting and contriving against them, the
Psalmist observes it in his time, Psa. 83. 3, 4, 5. They have taken crafty
counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy hidden ones: They have
said, come and let us cut them off from being a people, that the name of Israel
may be no more in remembrance. Those that are at deadly enmity among themselves
can unite heads, hearts, and hands together against the Saints. The Tabernacles
of Edom, and the Ishmaellites, of Moab, and the Hagarens, etc. This amongst
others is one reason of these furious attempts; the children of God are of one
Country, and wicked men of another; they are contrary seeds, they are of
contrary dispositions, Wicked men must either lay aside their wickedness, or
godly men their holiness, else these contentions will not cease. Our Savior
foretells all his Disciples of the worlds hatred, and the cause of it: Because I
have chosen you out of the world, therefore does the world hate you, Joh. 15.
9. Could the servants of God relinquish those holy courses they have taken up,
the world and they would soon be reconciled. The righteous is an abomination to
the wicked, Prove. 29. 27. Could a righteous man forsake his righteousness, he
might have as good quarter in the World, as other men.

Fifthly, It should persuade all Believers to observe the customs of their
Country. The Apostles counsel to the people of God, is, that they be not
conformed to this world, Romans 12. 2. But that they be transformed by the
renewing of their mind. It is the practice of men that love their Country to
observe the usages of it, especially such as are warrantable and praisworthy;
they delight to speak their own Language, to wear their own Apparel, a dish of
meatdressed after the mode of their own Country, has a sweeter relish than
better meats. It becomes the children of God to maintain the customs, and to be
zealous for the holy usages of their heavenly Country, and not to follow the
vain and sinful customs of the world. In all lawful things the Servants of the
Lord may suit themselves to the practice of other men; Religion is not opposite
to civility and morality. But as to the vain and sinful Garbes of the world,
the godly. must be strangers. It is a great strengthening of the hands of evil
men in their evil customs, when they see such as profess Religion tread in the
same steps. The world has a course of its own, which Believers though they
followed it before conversion, must follow no longer, Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. they must
renounce these usages. But as for the holy customs of their own Nation, they
must be exact in the observing of them, in what days or place soever God casts
their lot. And oh that this counsel might prevail with all that pretend to
Heaven.

It has been the holy custom of the Freemen of this Country to pray in their
Families, to read the holy Scriptures, to instruct and catechize such as were
under their charge, to observe the sanctification of holy Sabbaths, to see that
themselves and their houses did serve the Lord, to wait constantly in the
Courts of the Lords House, on holy Ordinances, etc. God commands all that
profess to be his people, not only to have the words of his law in their own
hearts, but to teach them diligently to their children; to talk of them, when
they lie down and when they rise up, Deuteronomy. 6. 7. God commends Abraham for this.
I know Abraham that he will command his children and Household after him to keep
the way of Jehovah, Genesis 18. 19. It was Joshua's Religion, that all that were
in his house should serve the Lord, Josh. 24. 15. It was Daniels custom to
observe his daily times of prayer, Dan. 6. 10. It was the custom of that devout
Captain Cornelius, to pray in his house, Act. 10. 30. It was David's custom to
go constantly with his Train to the place of public worship where the
Ordinances of Grace used to be dispensed, Psa. 42. 4.

Many in our sad times of Apostasy that pretend to a higher pitch of Religion
than others, have relinguished these holy practices of Gods ancient Saints, and
they judge it their perfection that they are beyond such forms; they have found
out a nearer way to Heaven, which is indeed the way to the Chambers of Death;
They can travel to heaven with half that cost which the people of God have been
at in former times. They can lay aside prayer in their families, they can cast
away the Scriptures, and yet, as they conceive, come as soon to Heaven, as they
that use these things. The madness and folly, yea, the gross profaneness of
these Nicknamed, Self-creating-Saints, should provoke the rather all that are
true members of this heavenly Country to keep up these usages. Do dutys, and
rest on Christ, this is the old way, and the good way; Abhor with all
detestation this fond kind of Religious profaneness, which the Devil labors
to impose on men for perfection of Piety, and walk in the steps of those
Renowned Saints. These practices through Faith in Christ have brought them
thither whither you are traveling. Continue in them as they did, and you shall
inherit that glory which they now possess. Thus much for the first point, That
Heaven is a Believers Country.

The Second Doctrine.
That this Heavenly Country is the best Country.

The Land of Canaan was the best of earthly Countries. It is called the
glorious Land, or the Land of ornament, Dan. 11. 16. the glorious holy
mountain, Dan. 11. 45. It is called glory of all Lands, Ezekiel. 20. 6. In many
respects it was the head and renown of all Nations, chiefly in this, because it
was Gods earthly dwelling place, where his Kingdom and Sanctuary was erected,
yet was the Land of Canaan with all its glory a Cabul, a dirty, filthy,
unpleasant place, in respect of this Heavenly Canaan. No Country in the world
is worthy to be compared to this Country. I shall set forth the excellency of
it above all other places, in these following particulars.

First, It is a Country of eternal continuance. The Apostle speaking of Heaven,
calls it a City that has foundations, Heb. 11. 10. The New Jerusalem, which is
no other than this heavenly Country, has twelve Foundations, Rev. 21. 14. It
is a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, Heb. 12. 28. Other Countries are liable to
many concussions and shakings, yea, they are daily in danger of over-turnings.
There are few earthly Countries but have had their convultions and shakings:
Sometimes one Lord has ruled over them, sometimes another has undermined his
Throne, and reigned in his stead. How many mutations of this nature has our
own Land passed under And what further changes may yet pass upon it, is only
known to him who is both the planter and supplanter of Nations. But now the
state of the celestial Country is of perpetual duration; it cannot be conquered
by any foreign Power, it does and shall continue for ever in the same height of
glory it now is. All other Countries may be made empty and turned apside down,
they may be laid waste and brought to desolation, but the beauty of this
heavenly Country is a beauty that fades not: God himself cannot be shaken nor
can this Country be shaken. In all earthly Kingdoms there are Spring-times, and
Autumns, Summers, and Winters; But in Heaven there is an eternal Spring without
Autumn: Kingdoms on Earth, as men, have their increasings, perfections, and
declinings, but the glorious state of the celestial Kingdom is a state of
perfection, that knows neither increasings nor decreasings.

Secondly, There is no ungodly person to be found in this Country. It is a
Country full of Saints, real Saints, Saints indeed. All Countries on earth have
a mixture of good and bad. The Church militant is the most glorious Society in
the world, and yet even here there has been, there is, and there will be a
mixture; this Barn floor has chaff as well as Wheat, this field has Tares as
well as good Corn, this garden has weeds, as well as flowers, in this net there
are bad fishes as well as good. If there be such a mixture in the Church, which
is the purest body on earth, there must needs be mixture of holy and profane
in Nations: Yea, it may be concluded without breach of charity, that there are
more vicious than virtuous in every earthly Country. Bona terra mala gens. This
proverb may without scandalizing and defamation be used of most, if not of all,
the Nations of the Earth, the Soil is better than the Inhabitants. If we search
the very best of Countries; even those where Religion has been longest
professed, we shall find some that are the spots and stains of their Country.
Some in every Nation will be found that are proud, covetous, debaucht and
profane. Swearers, Liars, Adulterers, Thieves, Blasphemers, Traitors,
Murderers, perjured persons, Idolaters, these, or some of these inhabit every
Nation under Heaven. And if any such be in your meeting this day, they will be
spots in your Feast of Charity when they feast with you, Jude 12. But now in
this Heavenly and better Country, which I am speaking of, none of these Vermin
are to be found, none of these impoysoned creatures can live in this Air; It is
a holy place, and no unholy thing shall ever enter into it. Be not deceived,
faith the Apostle, neith r Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor
abusers of themselves with mankind, nor Effeminate, nor Thieves, nor Covetous,
nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God,
1. Cor. 6. 9, 10. God has made another place in which such as these, living
and dying so, shall be tormented. Without shall be Dogs and Sorcerers, and
Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a
lie, Rev. 22. 15. Men have not garnished their Parlours to be Sties for Hogs to
keep in. God has not made such a glorious place as Heaven is for impenitent
and filthy sinners. Should a wicked man steal into Heaven, he would fright the
holy Angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect out of that place: There
is nothing in Heaven which affects a wicked man, neither is any thing there
which he affects. What a glorious Kingdom must that be in which no ungodly
person ever did or ever shall take one step!

Thirdly, There is no Oppression nor Injustice in this Country. There is no
Kingdom under Heaven but unrighteous actings are to be found in it; the great
devour the small, and the weaker are trodden down by the stronger: The great
Empires of the world are but magna latrocinia, great places of robbery. Even
amongst Gods own people, where God himself was the immediate Lawgiver, though
there were Statutes perfectly righteous, yet there were many violent
perventings of Judgment. The Prophets declaim very bitterly against
devourings, and spoilings: There were Kine of Bashan seeding in the mountain of
Samaria, which did nothing but oppress the poor and crush the needy, Amos 4. 1.
The Prophet complains of Jerusalem, the City of God, that she was wholly
oppression in the midst of her. Violence and spoil was heard in her. Grief and
wounds were continually in the sight of God, Jerem. 6. 6, 7. Scarce is there a
Kingdom in the World so well governed, but oppressive Acts may be found in it;
The Ass of the Fatherless is driven away, and the Widows Ox taken for a pledge;
the naked are made to lodge without clothing, and to be without a covering in
the cold; The fatherless are plucked from the Breast, and the sheaf is taken
from the hungry: Oh that many such unrighteous actings were not to be found in
our own Land! Well, however it be on earth, most certain it is, That in this
heavenly Country there is none of this work. If a man travel from one end of
Heaven to another, he shall hear no complaining in the streets of it; there is
no crying Widows, no sighing of the Fatherless by reason of violence and
oppression; there are no Plunderers, no Exactors to be found in and oppression;
there are no Plunderers, no Exactors to be found in all this land of
righteousness; Judgment does here run down like waters, and Righteousness as a
mighty stream. That is a very glorious promise which is made to the Church,
Isa. 60. 18. Violence shall no more be heard in thy Land, wasting nor
destruction within thy borders; This promise shall perfectly be fulfilled in
Heaven, there shall neither be wasting nor destruction to all eternity; There
is no unrighteous person in Heaven, as has been showed before; and where there
are no unrighteous men, there cannot be any unrighteous acts.

Fourthly, There is neither sickness nor weakness in this Country. In all
earthly Kingdoms there are diseases and sicknesses of several sorts, the whole
world indeed by reason of sin is but a Lazaretto, a great Hospital of sickly
creatures; Though the Climate be never so temperature, the Air never so pure,
yet cannot weakness and pains be kept out of any wordly Kingdom or Family:
Tombs and Sepulchers are to be found in every Country, which is an argument
that diseases and dyings have been and still are there; A man can hardly peep
into a Family but he shall see some Emblem of mortality. In all Kingdoms men
eat, and drink, and where there is eating and drinking, there will be dying.
In the state of Innocence man should have eaten and lived, but now they eat and
die; But now Heaven is a healthy Country: The Angels of God that have lived
there ever since their Creation have never yet felt headache or pain. And the
bodies of the Saints that shall spend their eternity there after the
Resurrection, shall not feel one moments sickness. They shall bunger no more,
nor thirst no more, neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any heat, but God
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, Rev. 7. 16, 17. Plagues, Fevers,
Coughs, Consumptions, Stone, Gout, Headache and other diseases, are things
unheard of in this heavenly Country: This is good news for sickly Saints. You
that have lain bedridden on earth, you that have had the Cottage of the body
often set on fire by burning Fevers; you that have seen the pillars of your
earthly house decaying by lingering Consumptions; you that have felt the
tormenting pains of Ulcers, of Stone, and other grief creating distempers, if
you can but get within the bounds of this heavenly Country, you shall never
feel any such afflictions. You shall for ever have perfect health both of body
and mind without the least distemper. One blast of that pure Air which comes
from the spicie mountains, will Antidote the craziest body against Diseases,
and put it into a state of undecaying health.

Fifthly, It is a Land in which there is perfect peace and quietness. The
Kingdoms of this world are full of strife and contention; The servants of God
though they are a meek and peaceable people, desiring to follow peace with all
men, yet they cannot enjoy peace. Woe is me, faith David, that I sojourn in
Mesech, that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar, my soul has long dwelt with him
that hates peace. I am for peace, but when I speak they are for War, Psa. 120.
5, 6, 7. The Nations of the world are full of tearings, tumults, seditions,
emulations, variances and strifes; but now in Heaven there is none of these
briars and thorns; there is neither maligning, nor undermining, nor envying one
another, but perfect Amity, and perfect Charity amongst all the Inhabitants
thereof. All those sinful distempers which occasion strife on earth are
banished out of Heaven: Pride is one of the mothers of Variance, Only by
pride, comes contention, Prove. 13. 10. In Heaven there is no Pride, and
therefore no Contention. Whispering and Tale-bearing is another root of
discord, Where there is no talebearer the strife cease, Prove. 26. 20. There
is not one of these kindle-coals in Heaven, and therefore no discord.
Difference of judgment is another cause of variance; In heaven all the
Inhabitants are of one mind, and therefore no disagreement. The Apostle tells us
that wars and fightings amongst men arise from those lusts that war in their
members, Jam. 4. 1. In Heaven all these lusts are perfectly mortified: All the
dwellers in this Country are such as seek one another good as well as their
own. There is no growing one upon another, no incroaching one upon another
within the Bounds of this Country. Consider it.

In Heaven there is perfection of Love in the Saints, to God, and to one
another. Every Saint sees the Image of God clearly, not only in himself, but
in every other Saint, which is a strong Lodestone to draw out the Affections.
And besides all those imperfections, blemishes, spots, which were in the
Children of God, whilst they had their abode on earth, which rendered them less
lovely to one another, are now removed. The body arises out of the grave as
free from sin renders Saints very lovely one to another, and because there is
perfect love, there must of necessity be perfect agreement. Heaven is a place
of peace, there shall never be jarring or contending to all eternity, which
gives it the pre-eminence over all earthly Countries.

Sixthly, It is a Land wealth and plenty. Here is the best provision, bread of
life, and water of life, The meat that indures to eternal life, Joh. 6. 27.
Here is mountains of Spices, how pleasant, how plentiful is this Country? A
Martyr wrote to his friend a little before his death, That he was going to that
Country where Gold and Silver bore no price: And well may it be thus said of
Heaven, which is the City whose streets is of pure Gold, Rev. 21. 21.

The Uses are these.
First, With what eyes do they look on Heaven that prefer their earthly Country
before it? Abundance are of that profane Cardinals mind, who would not give
his part in Paris for his part in Paradise; Most prefer Egypt before Canaan;
These are none of Abraham's stock, he thought Heaven better than Canaan, they
judge every dirty Country better than Heaven. It is a sign these men have never
traveled in this Celestial Country, it is a sign they believe not what they
hear reported of it, that prefer House and Shop, or such Manors in their own
Country, before those rich possessions that are in Heaven.

Secondly, Be contented if God have given you an Inheritance in this Country,
though you have not so great Estates on Earth as others have. One foot breadth
in Heaven is worth a hundred Millions of Acres on Earth, if you have an
interest in the body glory, honor, riches of this celestial Country, you have
more than if you had ten thousand Worlds. I have all my Brother (faith Jacob)
Genesis 33. 11. He had the dew of Heaven, as well as the fatness of the Earth. A
man may be a Lord of many Earthly Countries, and yet live and die under the
wrath of God. Ahasuerus had the command of all those Countries from Judea to
Ethiopia even One hundred twenty seven Provinces, and yet, because he was not
an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven, he died miserable and poor.

Thirdly, You that have an interest in this Country boast of it. It is a great
mercy to have our being in a wholesome Country, such is Heaven, Revel. 21. 4.
What a mercy is it to have a spiritual being from Heaven, and an eternal being
in Heaven. Glory in your Country, that others may be provoked to travel to it,
to trade in it. This is the second Point.

The third and last Doctrine is.
A true Believer has strong desires after his heavenly Country

(...), faith Text, they seek it, they seek it with their strongest desires, as
sick man seeks health, as a covetous man seeks money; They groan after it, so
the Apostle expresses it, 2 Cor. 5. 2. For in this we groan earnestly,
desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from Heaven. Our
conversation, says the Apostle, is in Heaven, Phil. 3. 20. Their hearts were
carried out aftes it, they longed to be in it. A believer when he is under some
sad darkness of spirit, when he has some great work to do, for the good of
the Church, may be unwilling to leave the world, as Hezekiah was, Isa. 38. 2,
3. But when their work is done, when all is clear between God and their souls,
then they would be in their heavenly Country.

Quest. What is employed by this phrase, desiring a heavenly Country?

Answ. 1. To desire Heaven, is to labor to have an interest in it. To labor to
make it sure to our selves that it does belong to us, to make good our
propriety in it; according to that of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Give all
diligence to make your calling and election sure.

2. To desire every day more and more to fit our selves for it. He that says
he desires an heavenly Country, and does not use all diligence to be made meet
for it, as the Apostle speaks, Col. 1. 12. does but mock himself.

3. To seek a heavenly Country is to long continually to be in it. This is that
which was the Patriarchs seeking, they longed to be in that heavenly Canaan, of
which the earthly was a pledge and seal.

Qu. 2. Why do Believers so desire their heavenly Country?

Ans. These desires of their heavenly Country spring from a double root.

1. The unsatisfactoriness they find in their earthly Countries. They find
nothing here but labor, sorrow, sin, toil, emptiness, disappointment, vexation,
etc. They have had enough of their earthly Country already, therefore, they
desire a better Country. It is enough Lord, says Elijah, take away my life,
for I am no better than my Fathers, I King. 19. 4. He had had as much of the
world as he did desire, he had found it to be a lying vanity, therefore he
desires to be in another place.

And then secondly, The felicity they believe and hope for in their Heavenly
Country. They know that they shall have in that Country all that their souls
can wish; They shall have Grace in perfection, Joy in perfection; I desire,
says the Apostle, to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which is best of all,
Phil. 1. 23. They see that, in their heavenly Country, which will make them
completely happy; So faith Paul, We know that if our earthly house of this
Tabernacle was dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not made with
hands, eternal in the Heavens. For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be
clothed upon with our house, which is from Heaven, 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2.

The Uses are these.
First, It condemns them that never have any desire of this Heavenly Country.
They have no serious thoughts of it, they study not how to get thither, they
pray not for it, they speak not of it, they love not discourses about it; They
drudge and toil for the world, rise early, go to bed late, etc. but they mind
not Heaven. This is very sad, How will such men do when they come to die: what
comfort will they have? if Heaven be not their Country Hell must: This Country
you must leave, and you know not how soon, and what will your hundreds, and
thousands, your Houses, your Lands then stand you in stead? you must pack away
and leave all you have scraped together behind you. When you see death at your
bed side, you will wish you had minded a better Country more, and the world
less. It is the complaint of the Church, Cant. 1. 6. against her mothers
Children, They made me (says she) the keeper of the vineyards, but my own
vineyard have I not kept. You will another day curse all your care, and
diligence about the world, which has hindered you from seeking Heaven, and this
Heavenly Country.

Secondly, Let me entreat all of you to imitate this example of the Patriarchs.
Seek your better Country. It is good when men seek the good of their Earthly
Country. You are met this day to testify your respects toward your Native
Country; It is a lawful and warrantable thing to do so. Nature commands men to
desire their native Country; It is unthankfulnefs to forget the place which
gave us breath, and provided for us our first food. The Greek Proverb is,
(...), The smoke of a man's own Country is brighter than flame in a strange
Land. Ulysses longed to see the smoke of his Country. It is an honorible thing
for men that have Estates to consult how they may advantage their native
Country. These Meetings heretofore have been very instrnmental for much good,
in the erecting of Schools, the maintaining of Lectures, you may help to save
many a soul, as you have ability and opportunity, it would do well to think on
these things; But above all things be mindful of your Heavenly Country.

First, Never be at rest till you get good evidences of your Right to the
inheritance of that Country. You will be miserable whatever outward advantages
you have till you have a possession in that Country. Prove your spiritual
Estate and Condition, you are all by nature of another Country; we are all born
the children of wrath as well as others, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. It Is Repentance, Saving
Faith, the work of Grace that will witness our right to Heaven. Take heed of
these false Evidences, of common Profession, Common Gifts, worldly prosperity,
on which most men build their hopes of Salvation. All these are but sandy
Foundations. Consider such Scriptures as these, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Romans 8. 10. If
Christ be in you, the body is dead, etc. Better you had never been than not to
have a Title to Heaven.

Secondly, When you have proved your Right to it, let your thoughts be much on
it. Mind the things of your Country, the glory, the happiness of that Country.
Let your hearts dwell upon the meditation of Heaven, and the things of heaven;
It is Gods command, Col. 3. 1. That we would set our affections on things
above, It was the Apostles practice, Phil. 3. 20. I might use many Arguments to
persuade you to these thoughts and studies. As

First, Your calling is a Heavenly calling, Heb. 3. 1. It is a heavenly calling
in regard of the Original and Efficient Cause. It is heavenly in regard of the
Object of it, it is all about things of a heavenly nature. It is heavenly in
regard of the tendencie of it. It is a call to Heaven, that is the Terminus ad
quem, Whom he called, them he glorified, Romans 8. 30. Glorification is the (...)
of effectual Vocation.

2. All your happiness is in Heaven, there it is that your Crown lies, there
all your treasure is, and where should your hearts be, but where your treasure
is? Matthew. 6. 21. There is your Riches, there is your eternal abiding if you be
Saints. There are your best and dearest Relations.

3 Not to mind the things of Heaven is an implicit denial of the resurrection
of Christ. See Col. 3. 1. he that does believe that Christ sits at the right
hand of God cannot but be often looking up that way. It is a good evidence
that Christ's Resurrection and Ascension have had some spiritual power upon our
hearts, when we mind the place where he is.

4. The serious minding of heavenly things, will make us less careful about all
earthly occurrences. He that lives much in Heaven is prepared to entertain any
Providence God pleases to produce on earth; the heart of such a Christian will
be quiet and composed whatever fall out. The serious thoughts of the good
things of that upper Country will make the heart patient, though it have but
little, will preserve it from pride, and surfeiting of the greatest portion of
the good things of these lower Countries.

5. It is the way to have a long Heaven. It is the way to have a double Heaven;
he that lives most in Heaven on Earth, has the longest Heaven. The serious
thoughts of Heaven do after a spiritual manner translate the soul into heaven,
that is a pertinent place to this purpose, 2 Cor. 3. 18. he that does by holy
meditation view the glory of the Lord, shall be visibly changed into the image
of the Lord.

And then Thirdly, and lastly, Be desirous to be put into possession of it. You
must stay in this lower world till God send the messenger of death for you,
but yet you may long and breath for such Translation. It is the last prayer of
the Spouse, Can. ult. ult. and the last prayer of the Church, Rev. 22. 20. That
Christ would hasten his coming. It is a happy thing to be contented to die,
twice happy to be desirous to die. Plutarch says that the Egyptians at their
feasts did usually bring in the Anatomy of a dead man's body. And Strabo
writes that the Persians at their Feasts used Pipes made of dead men's bones. He
that sets the Deaths head on his Trencher, will eat most spiritually, most
soberly, most thankfully. He that is fit to die, and willing to die, is
prepared for whatever shall come upon the World. We shall never be like
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob till we have these desires after our Heavenly
Country.

FINIS.

