A Compassionate INVITATION OF Christian Love TO All Tenderhearted People.

Testifying unto GOD's Free Grace. His Spirit's Teaching, and good End of Man's
Creation.

By one that has tasted of the Goodness of the Lord, WILLIAM ROBINSON. London,
the 25th of the 2d Month, 1692.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Northcott, in George-Yard in Lumbard-street, 1692.

A Compassionate Invitation OF Christian Love, To all Tenderhearted People.
MY dear Friends, and all tenderhearted People, there is Love in my Heart to
you all, according to the measure of Grace received from the Lord; and my Heart
is truly enlarged at this Time and Season, in the consideration of the Work of
the Lord, that he has begun in our day; and how the Lord has reached forth a
Hand of Help unto us, to bring us on our way. Oh! my dear Friends, there is a
Travel upon my Spirit, that none of us may turn back again, but that our Eye
may be to that Arm that has gathered us into a belief, that it can save us, and
preserve us if we keep to it, that that brings to the Birth will bring forth in
the Lord's due time; for, we may remember the earnest Cries that has been put
up unto the Lord in days past, and in years that are gone, that the Lord would
be pleased to make known his way to us; and we were ready to say we would walk
in it. And truly, Friends, the Lord has been very gracious to us; he has
brought us by a way we then did not know; and a great Concern and Travel was
upon our Souls, to be delivered from the Bondage and Captivity that we was then
under, notwithstanding we had a Profession, but there was still something
longed after, that is beyond all the Professions that are in the World, even
Life to our Souls. Oh, the longings of Souls that was in that Day, when the
Lord visited us! let it never be forgotten: And truly Friends, these things are
mentioned, that all may be stirred up to watchfulness and to faithfulness to
God, and for no other end; for, we may say, and that without boasting, we have
known the Terrors of the Lord, and therefore we persuade Men to come to this
godly Sorrow, and to a bowed down state before the Lord; for this we can say,
that the Lord wills not the Death of him that dies, but rather that he may turn
to him and live: Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye dye, (said the Lord)? Turn ye at
my Reproofs, I will pour out my Spirit upon you, and make known my ways unto
you. Oh! that all People were but willing to walk in God's way, and lay aside
all that hinders, that every thing that hinders may be brought down by degrees,
every Weight and every Burden may be removed, and Sin that so easily besets.
Oh, how easily are men persuaded and drawn away after this thing or the other
thing, not considering what the end of these things will be: Surely, if the end
was rightly considered, People might be more concerned how to get out of these
Besetments and Entanglements; for we may remember, that the wages of Sin is
Death; but the Gift of God is eternal Life, through Jesus Christ. We would all
men might come to this Gift of God he has given to us; this is that we shall be
called to an account for, whether it amount to the degree of one, two, or five
Talents comparatively, that all People may be faithful to it; the least
measure, the least appearance, is of a saving nature, if men will believe in
it. Oh, what a tender regard the Lord had to a People in former times, that
were beset and under heavy Burdens! how willing was the Lord to deliver them
and bring them out from under Pharaoh, that hard Task-master: Was not this a
lively Figure to his spiritual Israel in this our day; he divided the Waters
they passed through the Deeps, he brought them into the Wilderness, and Pharaoh
and his Hosts were drowned. And then they could sing and praise God for this
Deliverance. Now Friends, there is an inward Warfare to be known, there are
inward Enemies to be met withal, and we had need to know the same Arm of Power
(as they did) to work in us, and for us, that we may come to serve God, and
worship God, and love God with all our Hearts, love his Truth, love his Word,
and love his Appearance; though God may appear in Judgment, yet it is for a good
end that we that know him trust in him, and not in our selves, nor in the Arm
of Flesh, but in God. -- I will bear thy Indignation, O Lord, says one of old,
because I have sinned against thee, and though thou kill me, I will trust in
thee.

Now Friends, the way of his appearing is not to kill the Body, but the Sin
that dwells there, the evil Affections, the evil Desires that war against the
Soul. Oh, what Warfare there has been, and a Travel there has been, that we
might arrive at the good Land, and that we might not faint in our Minds! And
truly Friends, the Lord has given us a Brook by the way, he has turned our
Wilderness into a fruitful Field, so that we many times can invite others to
come and partake with us; for we believe that God would have all men come to
the knowledge of the Truth, and be saved.

Now there has been a great deal of searching after outward Knowledge, many
have been very busy and diligent in seeking that to talk of and discourse of,
but the knowledge of the Truth, as it is in Christ, is a saving Knowledge, and
a sensible Knowledge, to know the only true God and Jesus Christ, whom he has
sent, is Life eternal.

Come Friends, try your Experience, have you been made to cry out under the
weight and burden of Sin, as one did when it was too heavy for him to bear?
Now People may see what a loathsome thing it is to have a Profession, and Talk,
and Notions of good things, and be out of the Life and Knowledge thereof; for,
what benefit has a hungry Man or Woman in hearing tell of Bread, if they do not
partake of it? We know that the Lord feeds the Poor with Bread, but many are so
high and rich in Notions, they do not mind to come into a state of low degree,
nor the low and little appearance of Truth in their Hearts. Oh! come Friends,
let us take notice of the day of small things, and be faithful in a little, or
else we shall never be made Rulers over much.

And now Friends, as we turn in our Minds, we may find how the Lord reproved us
for many things, even things that were little taken notice of by some, and made
us to remember that Saying, We must give an account to God for every idle word.
Now Friends, here we can say was a good beginning, when the Truth met with us,
and brought Judgment upon us, we were made sensible what it was for, and how we
had been led away one time after another, and that Saying oftentimes did arise,
If the Blind lead the Blind, they shall both fall into the Ditch.

Now Friends, that we may never forget the love of our God herein, that has
reached to us, Oh the great Concern that has been upon many, and the Cries and
Bemoanings that was in secret to the Lord, that his hand might not spare nor
his eye pity, until Judgment was brought forth into Victory. We have cried to
the Lord sometimes, to bring us through Judgment, that we might know a Victory
and Freedom from Sin and Satan, and also cried, that others might come to be
thus concerned; for, I see many People very loose and unconcerned, and many
days have passed over their Heads in a Profession, and yet not truly concerned,
as to Godward and Heavenward, nor so as to yield Obedience to the Gift of God,
that will tell them all that ever they have done, though it has made many to
say, Is not this the Christ? Oh, that all People would come to consider what
Experience they have of the Work of Truth in their Hearts: Truly Friends and
People, I could be glad to see my native Countrymen and Women to come to know
the Work of the Lord, for I do believe, and therefore speak it, that Christ
Jesus, who is the Truth, is at work; as he said, I work, and my Heavenly Father
works also: How work, may some say? It is by his Spirit and Power, for he has
Power so to do in Peoples Hearts; a stony Heart is not made a Heart of Flesh
without him, who truly makes it so; he who has all Power in Heaven and Earth
committed to him, can do whatsoever he pleases, but truly this does not please
fallen Man, that is out of the Truth, so to come to please God, the way is too
narrow, and too strait for them, where the love of this World is not easily
parted with, nor the Delights and vain Fashions of the World not willingly
laid aside; nor indeed can they be laid aside or overcome, without coming to
the Light of Christ within, to know his appearance within; he is the Physician
of value, and the chief Cornerstone, and the true Foundation that every one
ought to have their Faith built upon, or otherways they will want a Foundation;
and we know he that builds a House, and has not a good Foundation to build
upon, he comes to Loss, and suffers Loss; and so has many a one, for want of
Experience how to build, they have been apt to trust to the Building of others,
and to the Knowledge of others, in that they should see to and for themselves,
For Faith is the Gift of God to Mankind, and Men ought to receive it so in
themselves, and know a growing in the Obedience of Faith, from Faith to Faith,
that so they may come to arrive at the Haven of Rest and Peace with God. It was
said, that there is no Peace to the Wicked, therefore ought all men to fear
before the Lord, and know his righteous Judgments to be set up in their Hearts,
that through Judgment they may come to learn to fear God, and keep his
Commandments, for this is the whole Duty of Man. Oh that all men would love
Judgment, that every thing that has offended the Lord, and grieved his
righteous Spirit, may be judged out, that clean Vessels we may be in the House
of the Lord, for the Vessels of God's House are holy Vessels, Holiness is
written upon them. Oh! that holy Principle of Truth, that has been and still is
at work, has made them such clean Vessels, purifying them, purging out the old
Leaven of Malice and Sin, and has made many as a new Lamp to the Lord, that has
thus been at work by his Spirit to bring Men and Women out of the Fall, out of
the Disobedience, and out of the Trasgression, and this is Christ Jesus that
works this Work, he is the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, become a
quickening Spirit; he is the Way, the Truth, and the Life; he is that great
Prophet that Moses spoke of, and told us, that we should hear in all things,
and whosoever will not hear this great Prophet, must be cut off from amongst
the People; for we know, that by hearing and lending an Ear to the voice of the
Serpent came Death, even that Death that the Lord said should come in the day
that Man eat of the forbidden Fruit; and so we also know (to the Praise of God
and his Truth be it spoken) that by hearing the Voice of Christ Jesus, that
speaks from Heaven, comes Life to be known again, and witnessed, and partaken
of; for, in the Lord Jehovah there is everlasting strength, and He gives
Strength and Power to his Children to overcome, and then to him that overcomes,
will I give to inherit all things, I will be his God, and he shall be my Son,
says the Lord of Hosts. -- But the Fearful and Unbelieving, the Abominable and
the Liar, is not to be numbered with God's Children, but in the Lake that burns
with Fire and Brimstone, (Rev. 21. 7, 8.) -- Now, my dear Friends, you that
have traveled this way, and have been exercised this way toward the Lord, and
toward his Kingdom, which is not of this World, you know how it has been, what
a Care there has been upon many, lest they should miscarry, and lest they
should be mistaken; for it may so come to pass, if we sit down at ease, and in
a careless Mind, let us remember there is a great Work to be done, there are
many Weights and Burdens to be done away; Sin is a great Weight and a Burden,
and as a Partitian Wall, that cannot be broken down, but as we come to the
Truth; and know, that to work in us, and for us, and set us free; for we may
remember the words of our blessed Lord to a People in former days, If you know
the Truth, the Truth shall set you free, and if the Son (who is the Truth) make
you free, then are you free indeed. This is a Freedom indeed: But, said they,
we were never in Bondage to any man. Ah! that all People did but know what
great Bondage Sin is, surely they would desire to be released out of such
Bondage and Slavery; if they had any regard to their poor Souls, they would
desire to be the Lord's Freemen and Women; they would not plead for Sin, and
for its continuance any longer, for it has reigned too long, if People were
but sensible, and well awake out of it. Awake to Righteousness, and sin not,
says the Apostle; and awake thou that sleep, arise from the Dead, and Christ
will give thee light. And we can have Life that is everlasting Life no where
else; but many People, and too too many, has had a Life in Sin, to their great
Sorrow and Lamentation; and truly Friends, Sin is always Cause of Sorrow; it is
Truths Enemy, and Man and Woman's Enemy also: If this great Enemy of Man and
Woman's Soul were but conquered and brought down, then Truth would reign, and
Righteousness would reign, but now these two cannot reign together in one
Heart; Righteousness and Unrighteousness cannot dwell together in one Soul, the
one is a man's Friend, the other is his Enemy, for a Man's Enemies are they of
his own House. Oh that I could persuade Men and Women to break off from their
Sins, or be an Instrument in the Truth, to direct others thither also; for the
Lord promised to dwell in Peoples Hearts; they that were of a clean Heart, and
feared the Lord, he promised the Son of Righteousness should arise with healing
Virtue under his Wings; that was, to heal those that wanted healing from this
deadly Wound, for all Nations have been wounded by it, and it is a deadly Wound
too, without this healing Virtue be known: Let us a little enquire into it, how
it comes to have a place in Man's Heart, how it comes to be seated there; it is
not because it ought to be there, but many loves to have it there, take a
Delight in it, and it has got such a Root in them, that they will plead for it,
and for its continuing as long as they live; and more than so, as if it were
unpossible to be delivered out of it, but blessed be God, a Deliverer is come
out of Zion, to turn away Ungodliness from Jacob; then Jacob shall rejoice, and
Israel shall be glad, because a Savior is known, they shall call his Name
JESUS, for he shall save his People from their Sins; not in their Sins, but
from their Sins, to be a People saved by the Lord. And these may indeed be
called God's People, because He has saved them, and redeemed them: There is
none that can be truly called God's peculiar People, and God's Children, but
those that receive him in his spiritual Appearance; for to as many as received
him, to them he gave Power to become the Sons of God. For, as People cannot by
all their Learning and Reading, and all as they can do of themselves, get Power
over Sin; so of themselves they cannot truly come to the Sonship, and yet we
may see there is a possibility, through the Power that Christ gives, to come to
that Estate.

Now, I hope, we may also believe, that it is as possible, through this Power,
(not without it) to overcome Sin, as it is to come to the Sonship, seeing the
overcoming of the one is the way to the other, and the saving from one that is
Sin, that Power that saves also entitles to the Sonship; and without all
question, it is as possible for Christ to save his People from their Sins, as
to give them an Inheritance with the Saints in Light, and as easy, because he
gave himself for us, to redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify to himself a
peculiar People, zealous of good Works.

I would have all People come to believe, that all things is possible with God,
that cannot lie, and He has said, Be ye holy, for I the Lord your God am holy,
and without Holiness no man shall ever see the Lord: That is, to his comfort.
This is a very weighty thing to be considered; for, I hope all men would be
saved, and therefore all men ought to consider what it is that shuts Men out of
the Kingdom of God, and keeps them out, it must needs be granted that it is
Sin. This is that that withholds Good things from sinful men, that they cannot
enter, for Sin cannot enter; that is certain, There is no unclean thing can
enter the Kingdom of God. But it is as certain there is a Rest and a Kingdom
prepared for the People of God, this we will all grant. But now to say or
think, that none can be or are prepared for this Kingdom, will be great Folly;
then what was they prepared by, but by the Power of God, the Word of God, which
is one, and nigh in the Heart: And I hid thy Word, says David, in my Heart;
What to do? that I might not sin against God. And the Preparation of the Heart,
if it be prepared aright, is of the Lord.

Now Friends, God prepares the Heart; while we are in these Bodies that must
needs be. Well, then we may say, (as it was said) Let not Sin reign in your
mortal Bodies. These mortal Bodies Sin is not to reign nor dwell in them, it is
to be purged out, that we may know the Leaven of the Kingdom, that we may come
to be Heirs of the Kingdom of God, that Christ may come to rule and reign in
us, whose Right it is, for there is no one has Right to rule in Man but he; and
as we know him to rule, and have the Dominion of his Rule, and Dominion there
shall never be an end; the Power and Rule of the Wicked one must come to an
end, where any come to be Witnesses in their own particulars of the Reign and
Government of Christ Jesus, who said, Learn of me, I am meek and lowly in
Heart, and you shall find Rest to your Souls. He gives Peace to all those that
truly learn of him, and follows him in the Self denial, and these can give the
Praise of his own Works to him that has wrought such a Good Work in them, and
for them; for, the Gospel has been preached, and is preached in our day, for
this end, that all People might truly fear God, and give Glory to his Name, for
the hour of his Righteous Judgments is come, and is set up in the Hearts of
many People to judge and condemn Sin, in the Flesh, in the Heart of Man, where
it has lodged, and does yet lodge, and will continue there, if the Judgments of
the Lord be not known to break in, and to be submitted unto; for, the strong
man armed has kept the House long, but when a stronger than he comes, and is
entertained, he binds the strong man, spoils his Goods, and casts him out. Now,
this strong man is the Enemy of all Righteousness, is an Enemy to all Good, and
is that Spirit that rules in the Children of Disobedience, and while he has
ruled, his Goods have been at Peace; and, What is his Goods but Sin and
Wickedness? Men and Women have been at peace with these Goods in their Errings
and Strayings from God like lost Sheep, and yet they have been at Peace, such a
Peace as it is, it serves many People, that takes liking to the Lust of the
Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and Pride of Life: But now this Peace will not
last, it will soon come to an end; there is a Judge that stands at the Door of
our Heart and knocks, he will soon break this Peace, for he never sends Peace
to People in that state, and in that condition, for we have his own Testimony
for it; I came not, says he, to send Peace on Earth, but a Sword. What Sword
but the Sword of the Spirit which cuts down Sin? Now we may read how God placed
a flaming Sword at Eden 's Gate, that turned every way; if a man had all false
Coverings of Professions, or the Fig-leaf Garments, or all the changable ways
of Religion that are in the World, this flaming Sword still placed it, turns
every way against him, that there is no way at all left for fallen Man to enter
or find out for Life in a state of Sin, if he changed his way never so often,
this still turns against him.

Now, in this state we may truly say, there was none to help but the Lord; and,
What did the Lord say to this thing, for he had warned Man and Woman, and had
given them a Command before, and a very large Privilege too, if they would
have been contented; Of all the Trees of the Garden thou may eat, save that
only of Knowledge of Good and Evil: And yet after Transgression, the Lord, in
his great Love that he had to the Workmanship of his Hands, says on this wise,
That the Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpent's Head; here is the
Promise of the Lord, this is the way that God promised to restore Mankind; And
this Seed was Christ, he is the Way to God again. Now it is very like many will
be ready to conclude, that Christ is the way to God again, but that they
suppose they may do by Tradition, and never come to know the Seed to bruise the
Serpent's Head in them; but until this is known, Men may make a Profession of
God and Christ, and yet know little or nothing at all, of the Work of that
Eternal Power and Spirit of Christ to renew, to break down Sin and Satan, and
to renew and restore them into the Image of God again: Oh! what need have we
all to wait, as they did of old, until we be endued with Power from on high?
But some may say they had a Command for so doing; and does not this Command
reach to us? I hope none will deny it, for says the Prophet, They that wait
upon the Lord, shall renew their strength; these are all they that come to a
true waiting State upon the Lord, for he is worthy to be waited upon, and he
will be waited upon and sought unto, by the House of Israel; and truly if
People had a true regard to the Spirit of Truth, that Christ said the Father
would send in his Name, People would be more watchful and more concerned in
waiting upon God, then they are: for I cannot but take notice many times how
loose and careless many People are, though not in pursuing after the things of
this World that pass away, and comes to an end, but very loose and careless in
Religious and Heavenly Matters and Things of far more concern, then the Things
that are here, which we can behold with our outward Eye, for the things which
we behold with our outward Eyes are Temporal, but the things that are not seen
thereby, which we ought to behold, with our inward Eyes, are Eternal: Oh! that
all People might hasten out of Sin, even as Lot hastened out of that sinful
Sodom that the Lord was angry with in days past: Come, Friends, it is the same
in our day, the Sins of the People of England cry aloud; and the Lord has
spared this Land of ours many Years, though sometimes visited with Judgments:
Oh! that all People would lay to heart the great Mercy, the continued Mercy of
the Lord to this poor Land wherein we live, and how the People have provoked
the Lord with their Disobedience, for Disobedience is as the Sin of Witchcraft;
and the Disobedient dwell in a dry Land, they know not when good comes. But the
earnest Cry of my Heart to God is, that all People may come to amend their
Ways, and amend their Lives by coming to Unfeigned Repentance, and turn to the
Lord, to his Grace that has appeared to all Men; Where has the Grace of God
appeared? In the Heart where Sin has appeared: For what end? but that Sin may
be forsaken, destroyed, and wrought out, and everlasting Righteousness brought
in instead thereof, For righteousness exalts a nation or a people, but sin is a
shame to any nation or people: And why will People love that which is a Shame
to them, and a Disgrace to all that are found in it; indeed we may say the Lord
found many of us therein, but there has been a day of Washing, and a day of
Cleansing known inwardly where this Pollution lay, there has been the Word of
the Lord as a Fire, and as a Hammer, to burn it up and consume it Root and
Branch.

And thus, Friends, we have learned true Religion, and to bridle our Tongues,
that we might not offend against the Lord, and a Stay to our Minds that we
might not wander any more, nor be bewildred any more, nor turn aside any more.
Oh! the Lord grant that all People may come to walk in the Light of the Lord,
and then we are sure they will walk in that which pleases God: And the Prophecy
of Isaiah will come to be fulfilled upon us, That the time should come that
they should say one to another, Come and let us walk in the light of the Lord,
let us go up to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his
ways, and we will walk in his paths: For how do People linger away their time
in sinning against God? How easily are they overtaken, and persuaded to live in
Sin term of Life, but they are not so easily persuaded to forsake Sin, although
when a Sinner does repent him of his Sins, or forsake them he shall find Mercy;
the Lord will have Mercy, he will abundantly pardon: But now instead of Men's
forsaking of it, they are daily adding Sin to Sin, and pulling it upon them as
with a Cart-rope, Men of perverse Minds, of ill Minds, and of ill Lives, their
Lives bespeak whose Children they are, and whose Works they are a doing, even
the Works of the Flesh, which is Sin the Works of the old Enemy that is shut
out for ever, he upholds his Kingdom in Disobedience; and so do all that loves
Sin, and pleads for Sin; there is nothing so hurtful as Sin is here; Men has
lost their Belief, they have lost their right Senses, talk of believing in God
the Father Almighty, and in Jesus Christ his only begotten Son, and yet believe
Sin must Reign, as if there was a necessity for it so to do; but we have
learned better things, Glory to God, and things that do accompany Salvation; we
know that of whatsoever a Man is overcome, of the same he is brought in
Bondage; I write, said John, unto you little children, that ye sin not, and to
you young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and
ye have overcome the wicked one; then there was a possibility of Victory,
therefore let none be faint-hearted, but look to Christ who has all Power in
Heaven, and Earth, and is Alsufficient; and truly the 3d Chapter of the first
Epistle of John, is very full, And ye know that he was manifested to take away
our sins, and in him is no sin. -- And whosoever abides in him sins not; --
and whosoever sins has not seen him, neither known him. -- And then little
children let no man deceive you, -- he that does righteousness is righteous
even as he is righteous: He that commits sin is of the Devil, for the Devil
sins from the beginning: for this purpose was the Son of God made manifest,
that he might destroy the works of the Devil, -- Whosoever is born of God does
not commit sin, for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin because he is
born of God. Now this is the Testimony of John, and set down here to persuade
all to come to the Work of the Spirit, of Truth, in their own Hearts, that
through the same they may come to please God, and leave off those things that
displeases him, for we according to our Measures that we have received, would
have all People come to be saved, and to see how far they are saved from Sin,
and also to come to learn Righteousness by the Spirit of Truth, that leads into
the way of it, for in the way of Righteousness there is Peace and Assurance,
and that for ever; and herein we are owned of the Lord, he owns us as his
Children, and gives unto us a Portion or Measure of his Spirit, which he gives
to them that truly ask it: Truly, this is a Portion indeed more to be desired
than all that this World can afford; and therefore, that all may be good
Stewards in the manifold Grace of God, for God's Love has been manifold, his
Mercies has not failed, to those that are found in their Duty to him, and
continues as dutiful Children, always observing what the Lord requires of
them; and as we are found obedient, he gives us our Portion of Meat in due
season: He is the Rewarder of all those that truly seek him; he does not long
hide his Face from these, though sometimes he is pleased to try them in the
Furnace of Affliction, it is that they may come forth as Gold tried in the
Fire, that is more pure, more weighty, more solid, more of the nature of Truth
may appear in them, and through them, that others beholding their good
Conversations, may come to glorify their Heavenly Father, for He is worthy of
all the Honor, Glory, and Renown by us all, both now, henceforth, and for
ever, says my Soul.

Now Friends, something relating to the Spirit of God, how it wrought in former
times, even in the Beginning, and also to several Generations.

In the Beginning the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the Waters. Here is
something of the Spirits moving, for before it was said, that Darkness was upon
the face of the Genesis 1. 2.
Deep, and holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

The Spirit of God strove with the old World, to reclaim Genesis 6. 2.
them from their Wickedness, else how shall that place be understood, when the
Lord says, My Spirit shall not always strive with Man, because when Men grieve
the Spirit of God by continuing in that which the Lord is angry with, therefore
the Lord said, his Spirit should not always strive with Man; we all of us ought
to mind the day of our Visitation, while the Help and Means of the Spirit is
afforded to us, or else Man's Destruction will be of himself.

Thou gave them also thy good Spirit, to instruct them, and Neh. 9. 20.
with hold not thy Manna from their Mouths, yet nevertheless they rebelled
against thee. Oh, how many Mercies, both spiritual and temporal, has the Lord
showred down upon Englands Inhabitants also, and yet they evilly requite the
Lord, -- Yet many years did thou forbear, Neh. 9. 30.
and testified against them by thy Spirit in thy Prophets, yet would they not
give ear, they still retained the hardness of their Hearts, for which cause the
Lord thus complained of them, and testified against them by his Spirit; and it
is the same to this day, notwithstanding the great Pretensions of many, as not
being under the Law, but under the Gospel.

Thus says the Lord, he that created the Heavens and the Isa. 42. 5.
Earth, he that gives Breath to the People upon it, and Spirit to them that
walk therein, the Breath and Spirit which all People have, meet for Body and
Soul, is given them of God, and all People ought to mind his good Spirit, that
their Souls may live to him.

But there is a Spirit in Man, and the inspiration of the Job 32. 8.
Almighty gives Understanding: That is, Spiritual Understanding of the things
of God, that are hid while Man is in Disobedience, for the carnal-minded man
knows not the things of God, neither indeed can he, and the reason renderd,
because they are spiritually discerned; and there was some that neither knew
the Scriptures, nor the Power of GOD; this must needs be for want of taking
heed to his Spirit or Divine Inspiration.

Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? or, whither shall I flee Psa. 139 7.
from thy Presence? There is no hiding from the Lord, he sees and beholds all
the ways of the Children of men, and their Works, of what sort or kind soever
they be; He is an All-seeing God, and will not be mocked, such as every one
sows, must they such reap, and the Spirit of the Lord pursues the wicked and
the ungodly man, for his Wickedness, and all his ungodly Deeds, though acted
never so secretly.

Teach me to do thy Will; thou art my God, thy Spirit is Psa. 143. 10
good, lead me into the Land of Uprightness. This is a good Confession to the
Spirit of Truth, both as a Leader and a Teacher, to do the Will of God, and a
Leader into the Land of Uprightness, then out of the Land of Darkness, and out
of the Land of Unrighteousness: We would to God all men were thus taught, and
thus led.

Until the Spirit be poured upon us from on high, and the Isa. 32. 15.
Wilderness be a fruitful Field, and the fruitful Field be counted for a
Forest, -- Here we may see what we are without the Spirit, though our
Professions may seem green and fruitful, yet when the Spirit of the Lord is
poured forth upon us, they will be but little accounted of, that can turn our
barren Wilderness of Profession into a fruitful Field; and, blessed be God, it
has done great things for many.

And the Spirit entered into me, when he spoke unto me, and Ezekiel. 2. 2.
set me upon my Feet, so that I heard him that spoke unto me. -- Here was the
Entrance of the Spirit witnessed; and it was said, that the entrance of thy
Word gives Light: The Spirit and the Word is one; and by the entrance of the
Spirit he heard the Lord speak to him, and his words are Spirit and Life.

Then the Spirit took me up, and I heard a voice behind me, Ezekiel. 3. 12
saying, Blessed be the Glory of the Lord from his place. Here was the Work of
the Spirit, in which God is glorified, for it is his own Work that praises him,
and glorifies his great Power and excellent Name.

And all the while my Breath is in me, and the Spirit of God Job 27. 3.
is in my Heart, my Lips shall not speak wickedness, nor my Tongue utter
deceit; my Righteousness I will hold fast, and will not let it go; my Heart
shall not reprove me as long as I do live. It appears, the Spirit of God in his
Heart was able to preserve him, and is it not now the same as ever it was, from
everlasting to everlasting, God blessed for ever.

The Spirit of God has made me, and the Breath of the Job 33. 4.
Almighty has given me Life. This he experienced, has given me Life, he knew
both what the Spirit of God had done, and what it was then a doing, a state
beyond all Lifeless Forms and Shadows that are in the World.

And I will pour upon the House of David, and upon the Zech. 12. 10.
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, and they shall
look upon him whom they have pierced, and mourn for him. -- It is not in vain
then to wait for the motion of the Spirit, to supplicate the Lord, but many vex
it, and grieve it in themselves, and others also it may be said, they crucify
to themselves afresh the inward appearance of the Lord of Life and Glory.

And it shall come to pass, after those days, says the Lord, Joel 2. 28.
I will pour out of my Spirit upon all Flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters
shall prophecy. If the Lord has said it, great reason for men to believe it
and wait for it, and not to be offended at it; for, who shall stop the Mouths
of those the Lord opens?

Woe to the rebellious Children, says the Lord, that take Isa. 30. 1.
Counsel, but not of me, that cover with a Covering, but not of my spirit, that
they may add sin to sin. Here is a Woe pronounced to the rebellious Children,
and that from God, that cannot lie; they had taken Counsel, but it was ill
Counsel, it was such Counsel as to be rebellious, and truly such Counsel is
taken by the greatest part of Mankind: But the Lord would have People to take
Counsel of himself, and be covered with his Spirit, for they that are covered
with Profession, and with the words of other men's Experiences, be but like the
Fig Leaves or Fig Tree that bore no Fruit, it was blasted and withered, and so
will all be that add Sin to Sin: Therefore it is high time for all to come to
Repentance and amendment of Life, not to talk so very much of it, but to come
to it, and live in the self-denial of all false things, and false ways, and ill
words that offend the Lord.

Says the Lord, Behold my servant (speaking of Christ) Isa. 42. 1.
whom I uphold, mine Elect, in whom my soul delights; I have put my spirit
upon him, he shall bring forth Judgment to the Gentiles. The Spirit of the Lord
was poured upon him without measure, and the Lord delighted in him, and would
have all People to behold him, that they may receive a Measure of his Spirit,
whereof Christ testified, saying, He shall take of mine, and give it unto you;
and the least Measure of it, if taken heed unto, is sufficient to make a man an
upright man.

For I will pour Water on him that is thirsty; I will pour Isa. 44. 3.
my spirit upon thy seed, and my Blessing upon thy Offspring. -- A very large
Promise! and in this Gospel-day we ought to look, wait, and hope for the
fulfilling of it; here is the free Love of God to the Children of Men, that
hunger and thirst after Righteousness, they shall be filled, they shall know
the pouring forth of God's Spirit, from Generation to Generation.

As for me, this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord; my Spirit which is
upon thee, and my Words which I Isa. 59. 21.
have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth
of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed, says the Lord, from
henceforth, and for ever. -- Many are the Promises of God to the Children of
Men, which are yea and amen in the Seed, which is Christ, this Seed that
bruises the Serpent's Head, and delivers the Soul.

When the Enemy shall come in like a Flood, the spirit Isa. 59. 19.
of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him. How full is the Scriptures
of Truth, and how many times over the Lord has said and promised to pour out of
his spirit, and the wonderful Effects that it would bring forth for the Sons of
Men, both in former Ages and also in our Age. I have set down some few of them
here, in great love to my Native Country, that all might believe and see them,
as recorded in the Scriptures, though one of the least, whom God has reached
to, yet by his Grace I am a Believer, believing that it is not in vain to wait
upon God, for the fulfilling of these many precious Promises, that are left us
in the holy Scriptures.

I shall set down a few more, and for no other end, but that People may
endeavor to reap the real Benefit thereof.

Jesus says, Verily I say unto thee, except a man be born of John 3. 5.
water, and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. -- This new
Birth here spoken of is not that Birth which is after the Flesh, but the Birth
which is after the Spirit, which no one can know but by the Holy Spirit, and he
that believes therein, as the Scriptures have said, Out of his belly shall flow
rivers of living water: But this John 7. 3.
spoke he of the spirit, which they that believed in him should receive.

Now let us try our Belief, if true, then we shall know the Promise true also;
for, the Promises of Christ and of the Spirit, which he said he would send, is
to be expected, or otherwise our not believing nor expecting of them, hinders
us from partaking thereof, as it does all them that do not expect the
appearance of Christ in Spirit.

For the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers Joh. 4 23.
shall worship the Father in the spirit and in the truth; God is a spirit, and
those that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth. -- Now let all
the Worshippers in the World see what they worship, for Christ said, (of the
Temple-worshippers) And to such as said in this mountain, ye worship ye know
not what; and truly we may see by Christ's own words, that all the Worshippers
in the World that do not come to the Spirit, are no true Worshippers, and
therefore no true Receivers of the Promises of God, made to those that meet in
his Name: There is therefore now no condemnation to them which Romans 8. 1.
are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit. It
appears he knew when there was a time, and State of Condemnation, and it was
before this time that he now speaks of; this Man, Paul, knew several States,
having been a zealous Man, and a Persecutor, and then the Lord met with him and
smote him to the ground, and said to him, Saul, Saul, why persecutes thou me?
Insomuch as he did it to his People, he took it as done to him, and without
question knew great Condemnation for it, and went through a great Warfare; and
tells us how it was with him in his Warfare, he found a law in his members,
warring against the law of his mind, and led him captive; but afterward he
says, now there is no Condemnation; But to whom? to those that are in Christ;
and who are they? Even those that walk not after the flesh but after the
spirit. --

For the law of the spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, has made me Romans 8. 2.
free from the law of sin and death. Here he tells us of a Freedom, how he came
to be the Lord's Freeman, this was while he was in the Body, and a sound
Testimony against all that plead for Sin term of Life.

For they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh, Romans 8. 5.
but they that are after the SPIRIT the things of the SPIRIT: Here he makes a
great difference between these two, as if they comprehended all Mankind, and
the one so contrary to the other, that which of these we joined to, we either
please or displease the Lord: For they that walk in the flesh cannot please
God, but they that walk in the spirit shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh.

Now if any man have not the spirit of Christ he is none of his: Romans 8. 9.
Here is a plain Demonstration that this Apostle reckons the Spirit the main
means of our being his, and that a Man may so have or not so have the Spirit,
in his account, is as he walks in it or obeys it, or not walks in it, or obeys
it, for his Servants we are to whom we obey; now if we obey not the Spirit of
Christ, we loose that Privilege of having it as our Guide to our comfort, and
yet may have it as to condemn and judge for Disobedience, and then we have not
the favor and love of it, because of Disobedience.

But if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead Romans 8. 11.
dwell in you, he that raised Christ from the dead shall also quicken your
mortal bodies by his spirit that dwells in you.

There is a Testimony of the Spirit that it raised our Lord Jesus from the
Dead, and how it was to dwell in his People, and how it was to quicken them
whom it dwelt in. I would all People might know a quickening to God by it, Romans
8. Romans 8. 13.
13. For if ye live after the flesh ye shall die, but if ye through the spirit
do mortify the deeds of the body ye shall live. -- Now who are they that live
after the Flesh, but those that live in Sin, for the word Flesh is
comprehensive of all the Works of the Flesh and of Iniquity; but now the Spirit
is to mortify all these deeds, and this is the way to live, for People cannot
tell us, what Sin it is that this cannot mortify and bring under, if any think
they can, let them show it us. --

For as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of Romans 8. 14.
God. And truly if People were led by the Spirit of God, they would not be at
such uncertainty, nor so unstable in their ways, for the end of being thus led
is to bring the Sons of Men to be the Sons of God: Romans 8. 15. For ye have not
received Romans 8. 15.
the spirit of Bondage again to fear, but we have received the spirit of
adoption whereby we cry Abba Father: Here he makes mention of two Spirits, the
one is the Spirit of Bondage, wherein are its Children, and there is a Fear
attends it, a slavish Fear, from inward Guilt, a Fear of Punishment; the other
that the Children of God had received, was the Spirit of Adoption, whereby they
could call God Father, and gave them evidence that he was their Father: Romans 8.
16. The spirit it self bears witness with our spirits, that we are the
children of God. A certain evidence of God's Care to his Children, that they
need not be tossed hither and thither with every windy Doctrine of Men, and by
the sleighty ways of Men's Invention, but that they may come through the Spirit
to a settled stayed Mind, from among the Lo here is and Lo there is, to have this
Witness in our selves, and this Seal in our selves, that the Lord knows who are
his.

Likewise the spirit also helps our infirmities, for we know not Romans 8. 26.
how to pray as we ought, but the spirit it self makes intercession for us
with groanings that cannot be uttered: Then we ought to mind the help of the
Spirit in drawing near to God, least when we ask, we ask amiss.

Howbeit when the spirit is come, he will guide you into all truth, John 16. 13.
for he shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear that shall he
speak. They that run, and the Lord never sent, does not profit the People at
all; And why? because they speak and the Lord speaks not by them.

This I say then, walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the Gal. 5. 16.
lusts of the flesh: How full the Scriptures are, and how many Admonitions left
us, from time to time, to walk in the Spirit, and yet many People make a Mock
at it.

But the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness,
Gal. 5. 22.
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, against such there is no law: Here is
the Fruit of the Spirit made mention of, and what Fruits is to be brought forth
by it in the Sons of Men. Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom ye also trusted after that ye
heard the word Ephesians. 1. 13.
of truth, the gospel of your salvation, in whom also after that ye believed ye
were sealed with the holy spirit of promise. This Seal of the Holy Spirit is to
be waited for, and trusted in to receive the Promises of God, which are Yea and
Amen, for ever in Christ Jesus.

For the spirit searches all things, even the deep things of God: 1 Cor. 2. 10.
It searches Man's hearts and Women's hearts, and with out it the things of God,
and of his Kingdom, cannot be found out, Verse 12. Now we have not received the
spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God, that we might know the
things freely given us of God: Now they that are in the Spirit of the World,
sees not nor perceives those things, but the things of God are made known by
his own Spirit.

Not theives nor drunkards, etc. shall inherit the kingdom of 1 Cor. 6. 10, 11.
God, and such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but
ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God:
He tells us here who shall not inherit God's Kingdom, and how they had been
such, but now they were washed, and sanctified, and justified in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, and that by the Spirit of God. But the manifestation 1 Cor. 12.
17.
of the spirit is given to every man to profit withal: The great Love of God to
us in giving such manifest Tokens, I desire we may all consider the intent and
end in giving of it to us, it is that we might know a Soul's profiting by it,
Verse 13. For by one spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether Jews or
Gentiles, bond or free, and have been made to drink into one spirit: This is
the true substantial saving Baptism, and it is of the Spirit, they that witness
this Baptism has the Witness in themselves, even the Spirit of God bearing
witness with their Spirits that they are his Children, and that they are
baptized by this one Spirit; for it is not the washing away the filth of the
Flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience toward God; this is that Baptism
that burns up the Chaff, and subdues the light vain airy Mind in Man and Woman,
and crucifies them to the World, and to the Affections and Lusts of it, for it
cannot be said that Men are truly baptized by this One SPIRIT while the evil
Lusts and Uncleanness remains in their Hearts; for said John, (speaking of
Christ's Baptism,) He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire; His
fan is in his hand, he shall thoroughly purge bis floor; that is, Peoples
hearts, that their hearts may be set on heavenly things, and he may dwell
therein, for if ye be risen with Christ seek those things which are above,
where Christ sits at the right hand of God.

The first man Adam was made a living soul, the second man 1 Cor. 15. 45.
Adam was made a quickening spirit. Oh! that all People would come to be
quickened by him who is the Repairer of Breaches, and the Restorer of Paths to
dwell in; Now the 2 Cor. 3. 18.
Lord is that Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty: He
is that quickening Spirit that quickens the Soul to God, and proclaims Liberty
to the Captives, and to those that have been in the Prisonhouse of Sin, to
come forth and show themselves.

For we through the spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by Gal. 5. 5.
faith: This was a blessed waiting indeed, and they waited in a degree of the
Spirit, and of Faith and Hope for more thereof; and they who feel this Hope,
need not be ashamed to wait upon God for an increase. Gal. 6. 8. But he that
sows Gal. 6. 8.
to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting: And many more
faithful Testimonies concerning the Holy Spirit and Man's Duty to obey it, are
in the Holy Scriptures of Truth, of the Pourings forth of it, and of the Work
of it: I have set down these few out of the Old and New Testament, that all may
regard the same Spirit, and thereby see, learn, and believe what God has done,
and what he will do, and also what he is a doing by his Spirit and Power, and
reap the Benefit of it, and the great Advantage that is by it; and for no other
end have I labored in this thing, but that all might believe in it, and come
to the knowledge of the Truth by it, and be saved.

In the Beginning God made and created Man for a purpose of his own Glory, in a
state of Uprightness and Innocence, wherein he was capable to serve God, but
the Enemy being subtle, beguiled, and betrayed, and drew Man and Woman into
Disobedience to their Maker and Creator, for which the Curse and the Woe came,
and still remains upon all the Children of Adam to this day, that remain in
Disobedience against God, for by one man's Disobedience Death came upon all
men, but by the Obedience of one, even our Lord Jesus Christ, the Free Gift of
God is come upon all men, and Life is preached to all men, for in him there is
Life, and this Life is the Light of men, and all that ever come to Life, must
come to him. Many make great Professions, and yet want Life, and the Reason is,
they abide in Death, and they will not believe; but many will say, We do
believe; yes, but it is but historically. There is a Belief in the World, that
is received by hearsay, of a Savior and a Redeemer, without receiving him,
and they not saved by him: As if he would save People from Hell and Punishment,
and not from Sin, that is the cause of it. Surely the one is as possible as the
other, For his name shall be called Jesus, he shall save his People from their
Sins, that Man may come to glorify his Maker, and know his Redeemer. For Job
said, I know that my Redeemer lives: And because He lives, we live also.

Now, we must not think to live to follow the Devices and Desires of our own
Hearts, Lusts, and do those things we ought not to do: This state we have lived
in when we knew no Redeemer, when we lived without God in the World, but surely
this was not the way to know our Redeemer; because we were not redeemed by him,
we did not know his Blood to sprinkle our Hearts from an Evil Conscience, and
him to wash us as with pure Water, but the Temple was defiled, diverse Lusts
dwelt, and Uncleanness dwelt therein.

But now to know our Redeemer, is so to know him, as to be redeemed by him, out
of the World's corrupt Ways and Fashions, and ill manner of living, that is,
not to live loosely and wantonly, for they that live after this manner, live to
themselves, and will have the Reward of their own Doings from the Hand of the
Lord.

But now the thing that I would have all People to mind, is the Redeemer and
Restorer of Mankind out of that fallen Nature and Spirit, that so much
prevails, that so they may come to glorify God, and know him to be their
Redeemer CHRIST JESUS, to redeem them from an evil State and Conversation, that
he may present them to his Father, without Spot or Wrinkle, or any such thing.

And truly Friends, we are to glorify GOD with our Bodies and Spirits, they
are the LORD's, we were created for this end, and we are bought with a great
Price for this end; we are not our own, though we have in times past girded our
selves, and went whither we would, or where our own Spirits led us, yet now
there are many that know another to gird them with the Girdle of Truth; and it
was good Advice to gird up the loins of your minds, watch, and be sober, and
hope to the end: It is a good end that crowns all; they that endure to the end
in well-doing shall be saved; and the way both to begin well and endure to the
end in well-doing, is to have an Eye to our Redeemer, he has all Power, to him
it is given, and he gives Power to his People, and Faith to his People, for
Faith is the Gift of God, and they who think they have Faith, and have not
received it from him, but by Tradition, their Faith is very much to be
questioned; for, as a Body without a Spirit is dead, so Faith without Works is
dead also.

Now let all People try their Faith, show us their Faith, whence it comes, and
what it leads to, for Faith is of the Operation of God, by his Spirit and Power
in the Heart, and they that have not known it so, that is Faith to be wrought
by the Power of God in the Heart, have not known Victory, their Faith has not
done much for them, for true Faith is a very victorious thing, it will remove
Mountains, if you have but Faith as a grain of Mustard Seed, ye shall say to
this Mountain, Be thou removed and cast into the Sea, and it shall be so. What
Mountain may we suppose this to be? Sin is the biggest Mountain between Man and
his Maker, and wants most to be removed, and if we had but true Faith to remove
this Mountain, what a glorious day would it be then! The great reason why this
Mountain of Sin is not removed, is for want of Faith, and that we see plainly;
for, if we ask one or another, they will tell us plainly, they do not believe
it possible. But now they that have the true Faith, believe it is possible, and
that all things are possible with God and Jesus Christ, the Author of the true
Faith.

And so, Friends, let us go on with our Eye fixed in our holy Head, CHRIST
JESUS, he is able to destroy all that has been sown or planted in the
Nightime by the Enemy, and to build up a spiritual House to God, that God may
have his Glory from us all, and by us all; for Moses, as a Servant, was
faithful in his House, and desired rather to suffer Affliction with the People
of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of Sin, which is but for a season. -- But
now Christ Jesus, as a Son has Power, and Rules over his own House, whose House
we are if we hold fast the Confidence in Christ to the end.

And we may remember the Parable of the Woman that had lost a piece of Silver,
but when she lighted her Candle, and swept her own House, she found it, and
called to her Neighbors and Acquaintance to come and Rejoice with her. And
truly, the Love of God has been so great, that many are calling out to their
Neighbors and Relations to come and taste with them; here is a Feast of Fat
things, Wine well refined from the Lees: Oh! that all would come away, Oh! that
the poor Prodigal might now bethink himself of returning to his Fathers House
for Relief. For Christ Jesus (when he was in that Body, prepared of the Father
to do his Will in) says on this wise, in my Fathers House there are many
Mansions if it were not so, I would have told you; and so let all return to the
Fathers House, that have been spending away their time Idly and Carelessly, and
not further trifle away their precious Time in things that are of no Profit to
the Soul, for we have a time allotted us in this World to serve God; let us see
that we answer the End of our Creation, and if any have been remiss in this
Duty, to be so no more, but come to know their Redeemer, to be come out of
Zion; it is he that turns away the Ungodliness from Jacob, he shall sit as a
Refiner with Fire, and as a Fuller with Soap. Now People may easily know,
whether or no, they have known him to sit so, and to Refine them, and if not
turn in, it is there he washes, and cleanses, and purifieth, the inside must
be made Clean, and then the outside will be Clean also. Oh! come home every
one, and see what dwells in your Hearts, For if the Heart be polluted, It is no
matter what Religion thou professest? For there are many that make that as a
Cloak or Cover to hide themselves, but it will not do; the searcher of Hearts
is come, he that sees through all the outside Religions in the World, though
they seem never so fair to outward Appearance, yet if they want a good Bottom,
or if Men do not build upon the true Foundation all is in vain; Their Golden
Cups will not do, their fair outside Shows and Professions without Life, are of
no value, they are Judged, if the Heart be unclean, as it was of Old; for he
said, ye draw near to me with your Mouths and with your Lips, but your Hearts
are afar off: Now the Name of Religion is very little, if a Man's Heart be far
away from the Lord, for it is the Heart that the Lord looks at: And without
question, there were such in former Times, that seemed to be Religious, and
knew no Bridle to their Tongues, for the Apostle says, if a Man seems to be
Religious, and Bridles not his Tongue, his Religion is vain. Now, What was Man
to know a Bridle to his Tongue for? but that he might not offend with it, nor
speak ill words with it, for it was said by one of Old on this wise, my eye
shall be upon the Faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with me, for the
Wicked shall not dwell with me, he that tells Lies shall not tarry in my
sight; now lying and Swearing, and evil Communications, spring from an ill Root
and ill Bottom, and ill Nature, for though such may get the Name of Religion, yet
they are not worthy of that Name: But now Friends, we would have all People to
come to Learn of Christ Jesus, he Teaches the best Things, he teaches
Obedience, and leads out of the Disobedience; he Teaches how to behave our
selves in things that are of gooo Report, and things that are honest and true,
we are to think on these things, and the God of all our Mercies, will be with
us, and blessus, as we are in the well doing, and followers of that which is
Good; Then who can harm us?

FINIS.

