The Case of Major Edmond Rolph, truly Stated.
HAving, to the utmost of my understanding and ability, with all faithfulness,
served the Parliament and Kingdom, ever since the beginning of the late unhappy
differences, under the Command of the ever to be honored Lieutenant General
Cromwell, and of late under the Governor of the Isle of Wight, but being there
(in the discharge of my duty, and by the wickedness of perfidious men) rendered
a faithless man in my duty and trust, and made not only subject to the cruelty
of merciless men, but the object of many men's hate and malice, to whom the
cause thereof was not known; and whose passionate affection, or too easy
credulity to the lying and false suggestion against me, would not give them
leave to examine: And lest the extremities I have since suffered should beget
in them an absolute conclusion that they have been deservedly inflicted upon
me, and that I may not be judged before the time, I thought my self bound, for
their information to publish an unfaigned and impartial Relation of the root,
growth, and fruits of the continual occurrences which have happened to me by
means of some ill-disposed persons, which is as follows;

Master Osbourn being Gentleman Usher to the King, and Master Dowcet Clerk of
the Kitchen, with others, had entered into a conspiracy to betray the person of
the King out of the protection of the Parliament, and to that end had corrupted
several Soldiers; which was discovered to me on the 28. of May, 1648. which I
immediately told to the Governor: the night following, the time when the said
design should have been executed: (In order to which Osbourn was gone out of
the castle to provide Horses for to convey the King from the place of his
residence, by the Authority of Parliament; And receiving the Alarm of the
discovery (being near the Castle-wall waiting for the Kings coming down)
immediately fled and hid himself in some secret corner for the space of 30 days
after, (only Dowcet was taken prisoner that night in the Castle, and Floyd, one
of the Soldiers who upon examination confessed the truth of every particular
touching the said design before discovered by three other soldiers that were
engaged also but never mentioned the least word that ever Osbourn or Dowcet had
so much as pretended that the Kings person was in danger but some days after
that the discovery was made, the said Osbourn sent a Letter to the Lord
Wharton, wherein he did charge me with speaking words to this effect; viz. That
I should say, That to my knowledge the Governor had received Letters from the
Army, intimating that they desired the King might be removed out of the way by
poison or otherwise, etc. which Letter the Lord Wharton sent unto Col. Hammond
the Governor of the Isle of Wight.

The Governor having examined Dowcet and several other soldiers that were
parties in the design, (Dowcet having affirmed in the presence of many (as will
be proved) that he knew of no such design, though the very rope by which the
King was to go down was found in his Chamber) sent them to London, where being
brought by a guard, and by the way hearing of Osbourns Pamphlet and the Charge
contained therein, professed openly that he was confident that there was no
such thing as that the Kings life was in danger, neither did he know any thing
concerning me, and that he did believe Osbourn would never appear to make good
his Charge, or if he did appear, yet he would never be so wicked as to forswear
himself.

But Osbourn appearing (having first capitulated with the Houses for a
protection from the Laws for his traiterous practices as aforesaid) the said
Dowcet clean contrary to his former averments, gave under his hand a paper,
wherein he declared that Osbourn had told him, That the Kings life was in
danger, etc. And that when he was in prison, I had in a jeering manner asked
him why the King came not down according to appointment, and that I should say
that I stood under the new platform with a pistol in my hand to receive him;
although it will be easily proved that I was all that while in my Chamber,
until the very time the Governor gave me order to apprehend the said Dowcet.
Osbourns Letter coming to the Isle of Wight on Wednesday 21 of June, I
immediately that night, though I had been sick a week before by reason of an
impostumation in my lower parts, took my journey toward London, and came to the
House of Commons on Friday 23. 1648. where at the open Bar I declared what I
knew in every particular: from which time I attended upon the House of Lords
until Tuesday after, when (by reason of that bodily distemper then upon me,
increased by my journey) I was necessitated to keep my Chamber, and forbear any
further attendance, only leaving Notes of the place of my abode with several
persons attending the Houses, in case I should be enquired for, as was affirmed
by the Speaker of the honorable House of Commons.

Upon Tuesday June 27. the Lords upon these false informations made an Order
for my Attachment and Commitment to the Gatehouse, Westminster; not so much as
ever calling me before themselves, or sending me before any legal Magistrate as
by Law they ought.

The day following, being the Fast day, (though I had received information of
their proceedings,) yet I could not receive satisfaction concerning the truth
thereof, the House not sitting till Thursday, being the 29. of June. 1648. On
which day I sent to know the truth thereof: the said warrant being not yet
executed upon me, (as I conceive on purpose to give me time to run away) hoping
that I might prove so cowardly as not to stand to it, having such great men as
the Lords to deal withal, and such a heinous crime as treason laid to my
charge: But contrary to their expectation on Friday being June 30. I sent a
Letter to the Lords certifying unto them my condition and place of abode,
(which I am confident they knew well enough, though they would take no notice
thereof;) and my two Chyrurgions also, to the end they might attest (as they
afterward did) that it was indeed a bodily distemper which occasioned my
non-attendance, and nothing else. Yet notwithstanding this clear evidence of my
integrity the Lords persisted; and their Officers in the execution of their
first and second Warrant, exercised such cruelty as has not been manifested to
the Kingdoms greatest enemies: neither taking notice of the weakness of my
condition, (attested by my Chyrurgions) being not able to turn my self in my
bed; nor the invalidity of the Charge brought against me by criminal persons,
there being no crime in Law laid to my charge, nor one legal accuser, insomuch
that my life was by my unseasonable removal not only by my sickness, but also
by the violence of an inconsiderate multitude, to whose rage I was exposed, and
from whose fury I was with great difficulty by providence preserved.

Being thus cruelly hurried to the Gatehouse, I was as tyrannically used there,
having a sentence of close imprisonment passed upon me, by reason of which my
Wife, Friends, and Chirurgions was kept from me, to the hazard of my utter
ruin; where, (had not the Honorable House of Commons timely interposed) I had
certainly perished.

Two months I have remained a prisoner without either legal Warrant, legal
crime, or legal accuser: And now in order to the further prosecution of their
design, (not only to ruin me, but also to blast the repute of the Army and all
other well-affected persons) they have framed an Indictment upon the said
scandalous informations, and have ordered the same to be transmitted to the
next Assizes held for the County of Southampton.

Now to the end that you may not be left unsatisfied touching the absolute
illegality of my imprisonment and the invalidity of the Charge, I shall offer
unto your view these following Considerations, grounded upon the Laws and
Customs of this Realm:

1. If a suggestion be made to the King or his Council of any crime committed,
the party ought to be sent with his suggestion to the Lord Chancellor or to the
Justices of the one Bench or the other, there to find sureties to prosecute his
suggestion, as appears in the Statute of the 38 of Edward the third, chap. 9.
And forasmuch as by the great Charter, the Petition of right, etc. It is
enacted That no Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, or be diseised of his
freehold or liberties etc. or be any other way destroyed etc. but by the lawful
judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land, viz. by Indictment or
Presentment before Justices, or matter of Record, or Writ original, according
to the old Law of the Land.

Sir Ed. Cook in his Exposition on the 29 chapter of Magna Charta, tells us,
That by the Law of the Land a man can be taken and imprisoned before
Prosentment or Indictment but two ways; first, either by the Kings Writ: or
secondly, by due proceeding and Warant, either in deed or in Law, without Writ;
which Writ must proceed from some Court of Record: and the Warrant from some
lawful Judge or Justice of the Peace, or else it cannot be legal. And if this be
the Law of the Land, as cannot be denied, then sure I am that there has not
been one legal step in all the proceedings against me: For first my Accusers
were never sent to any legal Judge or Justice to be examined or constrained to
put in security as by Law is directed, neither was there ever any legal Writ
from any Court of Record or legal Warrant from any lawful Judge or Justice,
issued out for my Attachment or Imprisonment, neither was I to this day (though
I have been a Prisoner two months) ever so much as sent for, or examined, or
had any particular crime laid to my charge, being only committed for high
Treason, during pleasure, contrary to all Law, and particularly contrary to the
Declarations of Parliament, who have declared it to be against the rules of
Justice for any man to be imprisoned upon a general Charge, when no particulars
are proved against him: Generals being no Crimes in Law.

Besides I stand committed during their pleasure, when by Law, all commitments
ought to be in order to a trial at Law: But leaving this, I shall proceed to
examine the matters laid to my charge, viz. That I should say, that to my
knowledge the Governor had received Letters, intimating that the Army desired
the King should be removed out of the way, by Poison or otherwise, etc. To this
Master Osbourn offers to depose: and Master Dowcet says, that I did in a
jeering manner ask him why the King came not down according to appointment;
and that I should likewise say, That I stood under the new Platform, with a
Pistol ready to receive him: And this the Lords contrary to Law have adjudged
Treason, although it be enacted in the Stattute of the 25. of Ed. 3. that in no
time to come any thing be adjudged Treason, but what is literally contained in
the said Statute: Now all offenses which are contained in that Statute, may be
divided into six heads.

The first concerning death, which is either the compassing or imagining the
death of the King, Queen or Prince, and declaring it by some overt deed, or a
killing or murdering some Officer of Justice in their places doing their
offices, as the Chancellor, Treasurer, Justices of the one Bench or the other,
Justices in Oyer, etc.

The second kind of Treason is the carnal knowing of the Queen, the Kings
eldest Daughter, or Princes wife.

The third is levying War against the King.

The fourth is adhereing to the Kings Enemies, within or without the Realm, and
declaring it by some overt act.

The fifth is the counterfeiting the great Seal, the privy Seal, or Kings Coin.

The sixth is bringing in counterfeit money to the likeness of the Kings Coin:
now without an offense be under one of these heads it is no High Treason: And
certain I am there is none of these crimes laid to my charge, neither is there
any proof offered of any such thing against me.

For first, Osbourne does not charge me with any design to poison the King, but
that I should report that the Governor had Letters intimating that the Army
desired it: So that herein (if what he had pretended were true, as it is false
and scandalous,) I did neither compass nor imagine the death of the King, as
having done no overt deed tending to that end; and therefore cannot in the
least be adjudged guilty of Treason by virtue of any Law of the Kingdom, and
where there is no Law, there is no transgression.

2. If what M. Osbourne did give in charge were Treason, yet M. Osbournes
single Testimony were no sufficient evidence whereby I can be concluded guilty:
Since by Law there must be two lawful witnesses sworn to prove each particular,
as appears by the 5. and 6. of Ed. 6. Chap. 11. The words of the Statute are
these: No person or persons after the first day of June next coming, shall be
Indicted, arraigned, condemned, convicted, or attainted for any of the
Treasons, or Offenses aforesaid, or for any other Treasons that now be, or
hereafter shall be perpetrated, committed or done, unless the same offender, or
offenders be thereof accused by two lawful accusers face to face, etc. Now it
is clearly evident, that there is not one lawful accuser that appears against
me; for if those things which they lay to my charge were Treason, and I really
guilty; yet they knowing thereof, and concealing the same for some months has
made them equally guilty: It being Treason by the Law for a person or persons
to conceal a Treason, as appears in the Statute of the 1. of Ed. 6. Chap. 12.
and 5. and 6. of Ed. 6. Chap. 11. So that they being persons concluded under
the same guilt, cannot in the least be taken as legal witnesses; for if that
were allowable no man could be secure; for if the single evidence of a guilty
person should be valid in Law to conclude innocent men guilty; what man might
not a malicious desperate villain destroy by an envious accusation? therefore
the Law requires legal accusers as providing against this evil.

And for what M. Dowcet seems to affirm, is of the same nature with that of M.
Osbournes, namely, of words spoken, and not of deeds done, and comes not in the
least under the guilt of Treason, if it were true, but it will be sufficiently
proved that there is no truth in it.

The Premises considered, and Circumstances duly weighed; I hope all men will
cease to judge before the time, especially those who shall be called judicially
to consider of the premises, as knowing that it is against the Law of God,
Nature or Nations, yea Conscience it self, for any man to pass a Censure,
Sentence or Judgment without good and clear grounds for the same, especially
when by such an unconsiderate act, the life of the innocent may be destroyed.

Gatehouse, August 23. 1648. Edmond Rolph.


