THE Serpents Subtilty DISCOVERED, Or a True RELATION of what passed in the
Cathedral Church of Rochester, Between diverse MINISTERS AND RICHARD COPPIN, To
prevent Credulity to the false Representation of the said Discourse published
by the said R. Coppin from MAIDSTONE Goal.

By WALTER ROSEWELL Minister of Chatham in Kent.

2 PETER 2.1. But there were false Prophets also among the people, even as
there shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift destruction.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Jos. Cranford, at the Kings Head in St Paul's
Churchyard. 1656.

To the RIGHT WORSHIPFUL WILLIAM PASK Mayor of the City of ROCHESTER; GEORGE
ROBINSON Justice of Peace and Alderman of the same City: WITH Captain SMITH
Chief Commander of the Military Forces in and about ROCHESTER.
Worthy Sirs,
THough I may not, do not exclude You from the number of those to whom I make
the general Address which follows; yet I cannot but think it convenient, and
(in some sort) necessary to premise this special Address unto Your selves
alone; partly to give a public Testimony of my due respects unto You all, for
Your ready compliance and assistance in a Regular, Peaceable way, to detect and
defeat so dangerous and desperate an enemy of Truth, Holiness and the power of
Godliness; and partly to give the world notice, That as You are able to Witness
against several forgeries and falsehoods in Coppin's Relation, so Your
consciences (besides multitudes more) can bear me Witness concerning the Truth
of whatsoever I have written in the following Narrative, as to what publicly
passed between us: from first to last You were present, and heard whatsoever
past either on one side or the other; and therefore I dare appeal to Your
consciences, and make You Judges concerning the verity of that account I have
given, my own conscience bearing me witness in the sight of God, That I have
dealt faithfully in it. I expect that Coppin and such as he is will be snarling
at me, when ence these lines are passed the Press, but I bless God I pass not
for their snarling, nor do I fear their biting. Magna vericas and praevalet. If
I lie under a general odium of heretical spirits, I cannot count it the least
dishonor, or be troubled at it. St Jerome was certainly very right in his
judgment, when he wrote to St Augustine, Quod signum majoris gloriae est, omnes
haeretici te dete. stantur. For my part I affect not the good words of those
that speak such evil words of my blessed Savior; let them bark against me,
that bark against the Truth of Christ, while they will: They shall neither hurt
the Truth nor me, more than barking Dogs do the Moon: Yet I doubt not, could
they get power into their hands, answerable to the malice which is in their
hearts, they would soon make mad work against all such as being fast friends to
Truth and Holiness, show themselves resolute enemies to their Heretical,
filthy Opinions and practices; Ingenium Haereticum est sanguinarium: Truly
Gentlemen I am persuaded You could not but observe and be, very sensible, how
Coppin made it his Masterpiece to mingle and wind himself into the bosoms of
(a many headed Monster) the rude multitude, having no mind to heed or answer
any Argument brought against him, but laboring to insinuate himself into the
affections of a deluded party, and engage them to a good opinion of him,
expecting (no doubt) to have found his interest so great and strong, as would
have born him out by club-Law, whatsoever might be alleged against him: Nor
can he have any better design in his Printed Pamphlet, which he has caused to
be dispersed in City and Country; so that in stead of the Title he gives it, it
might justly hear this Title, A Wile of the Serpent, or a Subtle endeavor
from Maidstone Prison, to increase and encourage a Deluded Party, advancing it
self against Truth and Peace in Rochester: And whereas he makes a noise about
four days Disputes with several Ministers in Rochester Cathedral, You all
can witness that for three of those days he would never stand to any Dispute,
but ran out into wild impertinent Discourses (and his fourth days carriage
to have been as wild, himself does witness in his own Printed Relation) so
that after that rate he might take upon him to Dispute with all the Ministers
in the world. I told You once and again, would he stand to any thing, I would
not doubt, by Gods help, without study, with what I knew already out of
Scripture, to answer him from morning to night. But I trouble You too much, and
hold You too leng, while I am raking into this dunghill: The good Lord in mercy
purge both City, Country and Studiers from the leaven of this man's Blasphemous,
Heretical and Atheistical epinions, awaking both us that are Ministers, with
You that are Civil Magistrates and Military Officers, with all Christian
prudence, zeal and courage in our Places and Caelings, to labor that the
Mystery of Godliness, being vigerously propagated, the mystery of Iniquity may
be profligated, and the foggy mists, filthy smoke of damnable Errors, Heresies
and Blasphemies being dissipated, the Su^ of Gospel Truth may break forth and
shine with greater luster, purity and power. Thus commending these Dedicatory
lines to Your candid acceptance, and the ensuing Narrative to Your perusal and
Patronage, I shall only subscribe my self, what indeed and truth I am,

Yours, Cordially obliged in any Gospel-service, WALL. ROSEWELL.

To all that fear God, love Jesus Christ, and have a care of their own souls
health, in Chatham, Rochester and the adjoining Parishes.
Dearly beleved Friends and Brethren in the Board,
IT is now almost nine years complete since it pleased. God by a special hand
of Providence to cast me upon this place, where I found most of you, and where
some of you (that came hither since) found me: Many changes there have been in
this our British world, since my first coming hither, under all which (I bless
God) I have been, am no Changling: My constant care has been from time to
time, to show my self a faithful Watchman over the Souls committed to my
Charge, and a faithful Witness for Jesus Christ, against those cursed Errors,
and other sinful abominations, whereby his glorious Name was dishonored, and
the precious souls of his people were endangered. My rejoicing has been and is
the testimony of my conscience, etc. 2 Cor. 1.12. and yet my Prayer with
Nehemiah, Neh. 13.22. my complaint the same with the Evangelicall Prophets,
Isa. 6.3. and my present confession it is, 1 Cor. 2.3. I cannot confidently
say, I know, etc. Act. 20.29. but truly, truly, my dear Friends, I much fear
it, and I have but too much cause for my fears: this I know by sad experience,
that while I have been with you, grievous Wolves have come among you; yea, and
amongst your selves have ri^en up men speaking perverse things, to draw
disciples after them: I cannot but fear that (...), The Antichrist, may succeed
(...), Many Antichrists, (as in his first rise, so) in his resurrection amongst
you; and what my fears are concerning all the Churches of Christ, not only
through this other world, but through the whole Protestant world, if the
removing of the (...), That which lets, do not make way for the Resurrection,
as well as the rise of Artichrist, my conjectures fail me; and if the loose
Doctrine of unconscionable Liberty of Conscience, prove not a back door to let
in Antichrist, Reverend Mr Cotton was deceived, and so am I also; yet (with
that transcendent Magazine of Learning and Piety, Dr Usher) I am of opinion
that the prevalency of Antichrist will not be so much in a way of fraudulent
seduction, as in a way of violent and bloody persecution: The measure of
Babylons sins will be made up in blood, before her final ruin, and just with
God it should be so, his Churches deserve it; but woe be to the man by whom they
are betrayed, and woe, woe, woe to Babylon, her fatal downfall is at hand; when
the Antichristian Gentiles or Nations are angry, the time of the Lords wrath
comes, Revel. 11.18. and after the Everlasting Gospel has been again openly
preached, and the downfall of Babylon clearly published, woe to all wretched
Apostates that comply with Antichrist: You may read their dreadful doom,
Revel. 14, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Arm your selves with the patience of Saints,
that keep the Commandments of God, and the Faith of Jesus, as it follows, ver.
12. mind and meditate on what is added, ver. 13. For my part, I have often by
word of mouth, warned you, and now I am in a manner necessitated to write unto
you concerning them that seduce you: It is not long since I did publicly,
face to face, appear against one of them, many of you being present, and
hearing with your own ears what passed between us; little did I then think of
appearing in Print against him, having brought the Mole above ground, and
gotten him to appear naked in his own shape, I supposed the least of the Flock,
the weakest Christian would be sufficiently Antidoted and armed against him
able enough to deal with him; yet since he has told such a tale for himself as
he has done in Print, wherein he impudently lies, both against me and the
truth, I am persuaded to think it necessary (in some respect) though not to
give a formal Answer, to one that is Copiofissime delirans (as St Augustine
speaks of a Maniche) yet to draw up some true Narrative concerning this
Seducer, and what indeed passed between my self and him; that not only you, but
others also may the better judge between him and me, and that my testimony for
the Truth may be as public, as his has been against it; Accordingly I have
drawn up the following Narrative, wherein my Conscience does witness with me, I
have represented the truth, and nothing but the truth, whatsoever the
adversary, or any of his impure fraternity may grunt or bark against it: I can
appeal to many of your consciences also for whatsoever I have written
concerning matter of Fact, and for Judgment, let all that are Godly, Wise and
Judicious, judge of it. I have yoked a pair of Seducers together, that I might
not white two walls with one brush (as the Proverb is) but, that with one coal I
might set a true mark on two white Devils, whose most specious Opinions and
Doctrines are as black as hell it self. I shall therefore crave leave to
present you with the ensuing Narrative, and with my Judgment of the parties
concerned in it: and thus commend you to God, and to the Word of his Grace, I
conclude what at present I have to say, with the advice and doxology which you
shall find, Jude v. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. and so take my leave, Resting,

Yours, (though not in person, yes) in affection inseparably, WALL. ROSEWELL.

TO THE READER.
READER,
THou art desired to take notice, that when the following Narrative was drawn
up, Coppin was lying prisoner in Maidstone Goole; his removal since by a
Habeas Corpus, with other things that have befallen him, the Narrator is not
concerned to take notice of them; had he not abused the Narrator and the Truth
in his Printed Pamphlet, this Narrative had never been thought of. When I first
met with and read over his Relation, I was resolved wholly to slight it, as an
impudent piece, which refuted it self, and could not do the least wrong, either
to the Truth or Me, with any impartial Reader, which might possibly come to
have the reading of it: but when I considered that he had taken the boldness to
present it to the Judges of Assizes at Maidstone, (as a preparative to his
supposed trial) and that multitudes of Copies were dispersed in City and
Country, which might stumble some unstable souls, ignorant of the Truth, of
Coppin, and what had passed betwixt me and him, I thought it my duty to draw up
and publish this Narrative, which now at length presents it self to thy view.
Christian Reader, let me request thee to maintain in thy soul a holy revevence
of sacred Scriptures, with a sincere love of the Truth as it is in Jesus, and
then thou art safe for ever from the least danger of any hurt from this or any
such like noonday devil For not receiving the Truth in the love of it men are
abandoned by God to believe such damnable lies and blasphemtes. The truth is
Coppins practical impurities begin to break forth so notoriously, that I hope
is will awaken some (at least) of his seduced followers, to be sensible of his
Dogmaticall impieties and Heresies. I am persuaded that as his Doctrines are
the Doctrines of Nicolaitans, Gnostics and Borberits, so his deeds are and
will prove answerable: Filthy doctrines and filthy practices being (through the
just judgment of God) mutual causes and effects one of another. But we must
all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ ere long: Reader (whoever thou
art) believe it, mind it, and prepare for it: So I leave thee to judge of me
and this Narrative as thou please.

W. R.

IT is now some four or five years since one Joseph Salmon came first into
these parts; and after some flourishing discourses made in Chatham, Stroud,
Margrets, and Rochester Parish-Churches, at length he set up a course of
preaching every Sabbath day in the Cathedral at Rochester; where his manner
was to Allegorize the Scripture, and make a nose of wax of it, forcing some
Allegorical sense on the plainest Historical and Doctrinall passages of Old
and New Testament: He decried all forms whatsoever, in Religion (not excepting
the form of sound words, 2 Timothy 1.13.) he desperately undermined the whole
mystery of godliness, and sowed the seeds of Ranting Familism; yet managed his
devilish designs so slily and cunningly, that it was not easy for an ordinary
hearer to discover them, though to a judicious ear, they were discernable
enough; his language was smooth and taking, especially with carnal auditors,
that delight more in Play-books, then in the Book of God. What St Augustine
writes of Faustus the Maniche, Confess. l. 5. c. 3. sec. 1. I have often thought
with my self, might justly be applied unto him: That he was magnus laqueus
diaboli, and multi implicabantur in eo per illecebram suaviloquentiae, (i.e.) a
great snare of the devil, and many were entangled in him, through the
allurement of his sweet language. Now about Midsummer last, this Jo. Salmon (on
what account I know not, whether because his stock was spent (for it was
observed he fell from preaching twice, to preach only once a Sabbath, and some
of his admirers began to complain, they had the same Crambes on several texts)
or because he feared the negative Oath, which some suspected, though I think
and partly know he feared no Oath: or because his Proselytes did not answer his
expectation in their contributions to his maintenance, or on what other account
I know not, but he) leaving Rochester, and betaking himself to the Sea; not
long after, one Richard Coppin was brought down from London, by Hills the
Searcher (which Hills, with Robert Cosens, and John Phinehas, Carpenters, had
been principal fautors and followers of Salmon.) This Coppin presently takes
upon him to preach twice every Lords day, in the Cathedral, where Salmon was
wont to preach, before him; and being exactly of the same principles with his
brother in evil, that preceded him, he began to play his game, and to express
himself for the substance, in his strain, venting the same errors, but more
openly, and with less Artifice of words, than the other had done; indeed Salmon
told him at his going away (as I am informed by a Salmonist which heard it)
that after he was gone, he would be so open, that he would be laid hold of,
which accordingly by Gods providence is come to pass. Coppins doctrines were so
gross from Sabbath to Sabbath, that they were in the mouths of many that heard
him: Whereupon (hearing what a Preacher was come amongst us, and perceiving
what a resort of Auditors there was to him) one Sabbath day, about the later
end of September, or beginning of October (as I remember) I went to hear him;
his Text he then treated on, was Job 19.25, 26, 27. his whole Sermon was a
cursed gloss that corrupted the Text, he had scarce one sound passage from the
beginning to the end of his Discourse, he then affirmed, That Christ the
Redeemer was a sinner, in respect of his humane nature, that all mankind was
the body of Christ, redeemed and to be saved by him; That neither Job in that
place, nor St Paul 1 Cor. 15. did speak of the resurrection of the body, with
many more pestilent errors: I confess my spirit was much stirred at the
hearing of him, and I took occasion to manifest my detestation of his errors
and blasphemies to one that stood by me, resolving in due time to witness
against them, both publicly and privately, as I had occasion: His Discourse
being ended, I immediately went out, not thinking it fit at that time, in that
Auditory, to object any thing against him; though in the close of his
Discourse, he invited any man to do it, that was not satisfied in what he had
delivered: but very shortly after, preaching in Rochester Parish Church, I took
occasion to witness against what I had heard in the Cathedral; warning the
people to take heed of such Doctrines, and the broachers of them; whereupon (as
I was informed) Coppin renews his challenges every Sermon he preached. That if
any were offended with what then, or at any other time he had delivered, they
should object, and he would answer for himself; complaining of those that would
speak and preach against him behind his back, but never object any thing to
his face. Hereupon (that we might countermine this underminer of Religion, and
vindicate the truth of Christ in that place where it had been so much
contradicted, and blasphemed) Mr Sandbrooke, Mr Acworth, Mr Peglar, and my
self, agreed to preach a Lecture every Tuesday in Rochester Cathedral, for the
benefit of the Soldiers especially, and such others of the City or Country as
should come to hear: Captain Smith readily complying with us to bring his
Soldiers, the Mayor of the City likewise approving of the work, Mr Sandbrooke
began the Lecture October 9th, and so we continued it from week to week; every
Lecture we preached more or less declaring our selves against some of Coppins
errors; he likewise continued his Sabbath days Discourses, with a very great
resort of all sorts to hear him; with open mouth he railed against the Priests
that told people of their sins, and would make them believe, that God was angry
with any of them for their sins; he continued his challenges of any that
would, to object against his Doctrine; and November 4. (being the Lords day) he
gave notice, that next day ( being the 5th of November) he would give his
Auditory a Sermon, and be ready, after his Sermon, to answer whatsoever should
be objected against his Doctrine, either then, or formerly delivered;
accordingly next day he preached (or rather prated) according to his manner, and
when he had done, he called upon his opponents (if any were there) to speak what
they had to say against him; when yet he could not but know that my Brethren
and I who had declared our abhorrency of his heresies and blasphemies, were not
then at leisure for him, nor had he any reason to expect us. After when I heard
of those dog-tricks, Tuesday November the 27th (preaching Mr Peglars turn, who
had been sick, and was not yet recovered) after my Sermon on Jobs Creed, with
the Preface to it, and the use his unkind friends should have made of it, Job
17.23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. I took notice of Coppins challenges, and of his
tricks to delude the people, giving the present Auditory to understand, that on
the Tuesday following I would be ready in that place, to object against him,
and in case he did not appear to answer for himself, or give a reasonable
account for his nonappearance, it should be interpreted for a tergiversation
and confession of the badness of his cause: To leave him without all excuse, I
promised to intimate thus much in a few lines to him under my hand, accordingly
that afternoon I drew up a few lines to him, which were left at his lodging by
a sure hand, but he was gone to London, and came not home till Saturday night;
next day being the Lords day, I received three or four lines from him, wherein
he signified his receipt of mine, at his coming home; and (withal) that since
he was not at home to meet me on Thursday, he would next morning ( which was
Moonday the 3d of December) not fail to meet me at nine of the clock in the
place appointed; proclaiming amongst his Auditors that day, his undertaking for
the next day, that he might have as considerable a party of his own proselytes
at the meeting, as was possible: The next morning by nine of the clock was a
great concourse of people in the Cathedral, and Coppin (before either the
Mayor or Capt. Smith were come) possessed himself of the Pulpit, where (ad
populum faciendum) he took upon him to make a prayer introductory to what was
to follow, as if he had been a very conscientious devout man in prayer, when
God knows, and those that know him, know him to be a man that takes himself to
be such a high Attainer as has gotten above prayer, which he looks upon as a
needless and low form, to the use whereof he does rather condescend for the
infirmity of others, then conform out of any necessity of his own: His prayer
being ended, and Mr Mayor, Mr Robinson, and Capt. Smith, with a very great
assembly, being present, after a short prayer that God would appear for the
vindication of his truth, and detection of errors, I propounded this
Proposition to Coppin: He that persuades the people to believe that Jesus
Christ was a sinner, and that the humane nature of Jesus Christ was polluted
with sin, he is a perverter of Scripture, a blasphemer of Jesus Christ, and a
venture of damnable heresy: Having laid down this Proposition, before I
proceeded to the Assumption, I thought fit to require his judgment of the
Proposition, which he needed not have stuck at, had his judgment been sound,
but being conscious how heavy it would fall upon him, if granted, yet not
daring to deny it, he spent many words to no purpose, neither granting nor
denying it, till at length being weary of pressing him to give his answer in
that particular: when the Assumption was on my tongues end, it pleased God,
that in stead of granting or denying my Proposition, he gave me a clear and
full proof of my Assumption, before I could bring it forth, declaring it to be
his judgment, that Jesus Christ in his humane nature was a sinner, and that
the humane nature of Jesus Christ was polluted with sin: Whereupon
(acknowledging and admiring the good hand of Gods providence) I added my
Assumption to the former Proposition; That Rich. Coppin was a perswader of the
people to believe that Jesus Christ was a sinner and that his humane nature was
polluted with sin, and so inferred the Conclusion, That he was a perverter of
Scripture, a blasphemer of Jesus Christ, and a venture of damnable heresy, but
then being pincht with the Syllogism, he denied what he had spoken in the
hearing of so many witnesses, which not only Mr Head did witness to his face,
but many more were ready to witness, and are ready to testify upon Oath, if
called to it; yet in effect, he did afterward avouch the same blasphemy,
though in other terms, and more covertly. Being charged with the Doctrine of
universal salvation, he at large avouched it, adding, that all the good works
that men did, should do them no good, and all the evil works which men did
should do them no hurt. Being charged with blasphemy for asserting, That Christ
was a cursed Goat, for the Geats at the left hand, he made a long discourse to
justify that assertion by Scripture, wherein how miserably he did abuse
Scripture, is to be seen in part, by what himself has printed: Several other
errors at this meeting he openly asserted, which were so gross, that I am very
confident, all that feared God and heard them, could not but have their spirits
moved with just indignation against them, and the broacher of them. I shall not
now trouble the world by giving any further account of what further passed
between Coppin and my self at this meeting, only thus much I must needs say,
and it is well known to many I speak but the truth in it, Coppins printed
relation represents neither the title, nor (for the most part) the truth of
what I spoke; there is no man of any judgment that knows me, and reads his
Pamphlet, but will conceive so, by what he has printed; for his own speeches
he mis-reports them to, leaving out and putting in what he pleases, he uses
those terms of Art, and distinctions in print, which neither I nor any man else
that heard him, heard from his mouth at that time, nor did he seem to have any
knowledge of them, what tale soever he now tells for himself, which yet is bad
enough. In the conclusion of that meeting it was some content to my spirit,
that God had made me instrumentail to unkennell such a Fox, and make him so to
stink, that all the sheep of Christ which heard him, or heard of him, would
thenceforth take heed how they came near him, or had to do with him; one thing
by the way I may not omit to mention, When I had ended this days contest with
Coppin, Mr Gammon came to me, and thank't me, telling me I never did better
service for Christ in all my life, to which I answered, I should have a time
for him to, and so left him. The next day being Tuesday, Mr Sandbrooke having
preached his Lecture, propounded two Queries, which he was resolved to maintain
against Coppin the Thursday seven night after; and that Coppin might have
notice of them, they were fixed upon the Church-door, but before Thursday came
about (by Mr Robinsons means) it was agreed that Coppin and I should have
another bout, and Coppin having choice of his day, pitched on Tuesday December
11. Sabbath day December 9. Mr French came to the Cathedral, and had some
Discourse with Coppin, whereof Coppin himself gives such an account, as does
abundantly discover, that he then betrayed many of his damnable errors,
concerning Heaven, the ascension o^ Christ into heaven, and his second coming
to judgment; though I make no question but he was more gross in his
expressions (...) that time, than his Printed Pamphlet makes show of, which is
gross enough, and clearly discovers his Fanaticall Familisticall spirit: When
Tuesday was come, there was again a very great concourse of people in the
Cathedral, and Coppin by ten of the Clock or before, possessed himself of the
Pulpit again, as before he had done, though at that time I should have had the
Pulpit to preach mine own turn in the Lecture, having preached that day
fortnight another turn that was not well; yet I was content to pass that by,
without taking notice of it, having a design so to manage my Arguments against
Coppin, as in my Propositions to lay down the Doctrine of the Scripture,
contradicted by Coppin, and then to adde^ pregnan^ Scripture-proofs, with^^^
vindication of those Scriptures which were wrested by Coppin, before I added my
Assumption as a charge upon Coppin; and this I did the other desire to do,
because at the former meeting I saw that Coppin would not be held to a Dispute,
but was resolved to word it out in a wild discourse, wherein for the most part
I did but follow him from one thing to another, to pump out and bring to light
his pestilent poysonfull opinions, which for the present I did not think worth
the while to resell, nor had I time or opportunity to do it, he was so
voluminous, and took up so much time in his ramblings, multiplying quotations
of wrested Scriptures so thick, as if the devil himself had prompted him, which
I am persuaded he did. Well then I was now resolved by the grace of God, and in
the strength of Jesus Christ, to establish on a Scripture-foundation some of
those precious truths which Coppin (by perverting Scripture) had endeavored to
undermine; to this end, desiring in the first place to ascribe righteousness to
my glorious Maker and gracious Redeemer, I produced several Scriptures to
demonstrate that the humane nature of Jesus Christ was never polluted with the
least spot of sin original or actual, but was from the first conception
perfectly holy, otherwise it had been impossible it could have been assumed to
Hypostaticall union with the holy Son of God; and this holiness of Christ's
humane nature I derived not simply from the Virginity of his Mother, but from
his Conception by the holy Ghost of a Virgin Mother, the holy Ghost perfectly
sanctifying that part of her seed, of which the humane nature of Christ was
formed, from the very first moment of its conception, wherein it was also
assumed into personal union with the holy Son of God, the second person in the
blessed Trinity; who ever since has been, and for ever shall be God and man in
one Person; for this I alleged and improved Heb. 4.15. and 7.26. Joh. 14.30.
2 Cor 5 21. Luke 1.35. showing the horrible and damnable blasphemy or the
contrary assertion, pulling the Crown from the Head o^ Christ, destroying the
Godhead of Christ, satisfaction for sin, and salvation by Jesus Christ: I
vindicated some of the Scriptures abused by Coppin against this particular,
showing that Christ is said to be made sin for us by an Hebraism, because he
was made a sin offering; every where in the Old Testament the Hebrew which
signifies sin, being used to signify a sin offering, and so it is used at least
forty times; besides Christ is said to be made sin for us by imputation of our
sins to him (not inhesion of any sin in him) as his righteousness whereby we
are justified is imputed to us (never was or shall be inherent in us) After all
this, though Coppin with an impudent face denied that any man ever heard him
contradict what I had proved, yet with the same breath almost, by and by, he
did again deny it, affirming that, that very individual nature which Jesus
Christ did take upon him, was sinful and polluted with sin; and thinking to
ensnare me, demanded of me who that High Priest was, mentioned Heb. 5.1, 2, 3.
to which I answered, Aaron and his successors, which in some things only were
types of Christ: but then another (whose voice only I heard, but knew not who
it was) very unwisely (at best) made answer, that it was meant of Christ out of
doubt; which answer I was so far from approving of, (having declared my self
to the contrary before) that I openly professed it was the answer of some
Prevaricator, that was resolved to gratify Coppin in betraying the truth; yet
Coppin having gotten this answer from another mouth, did own it as the truth,
and did over and over assert (as his judgment) from that Scripture, that Jesus
Christ did not only offer for the sins of the people, but for his own sins;
however he is pleased to mend the matter in the relation made by his lying
Pamphlet; nor did God suffer the devil to remember him of that other Scripture
which he has foiled into the margent of his printed relation, and would no
doubt have made use of it at that time, had it come to his mind, Heb. 7.27.
which at first view to a superficial reader, might seem to make much more for
his wicked purpose; though it be clear, what Christ is said to do once, is not
to offer first for his own sins, and then for the sins of the people; which
were a contradiction of the former verse, (where Christ is represented without
any sin at all of his own) and to it self, for to offer first for his own sins,
and then for the sins of the people, were to offer twice at least, and not once
only; but the meaning is plain, that in stead of many sacrifices which the
typical Highpriests (being sinners themselves) offered daily, first for their
own sins, and then for the peoples, Jesus Christ the great High Priest (being
holy, and having no sin of his own to offer for) did only once for all offer
himself up in his humane nature, a spotless sacrifice for the sins of his
people: Well, having in some measure, through Gods mercy, asserted from
Scripture and vindicated the spotless purity and holiness of Jesus Christ
(which Coppin blasphemously denied, adding a further blasphemy, that Christ
offered for his own sins, as well as for the sins of the people,) I proceeded
(from Job 19. and 1 Cor. 15. the example of Christ, and other arguments) to
vindicate the resurrection of the body; alleging this (which Coppin would not
take notice of) that the bodies of believers were the members of Christ, 1 Cor.
6.15. and therefore should be raised to glory, Phil. 3.21. but Coppin still
harped on a spiritual resurrection, thereby seeking to elude all that could be
said for a resurrection of the body; whereupon I desired it might be
considered, whether he did not revive the Heresy of Hymeneus and Phyletus, and
whether that Scripture might not be applied unto him, 2 Timothy 2.16, 17, 18. Upon
this Coppin having put me to give an account what I did conceive of Jesus
Christ, which I readily did, in several particulars, Of his Natures, Person,
Offices, and Estates, of Humiliation to the Cross, and Exaltation to the
Throne, on which he shall judge the world: Then of his own accord he took upon
him to give some account of his own apprehensions concerning Christ, whom he
asserted to be all the three Persons in the Trinity, affirming the three
Persons to be but three manifestations or appearances of that one God which is
Jesus Christ; when afterward I alleged what Christ speaks concerning the sin
against the holy Ghost (amongst other Arguments) against his Hell-hatcht
Doctrine of Universal Salvation, he asserted such monstrous opinions
concerning that sin, that (for my part) I shall not blot paper with them, his
printed Pamphlet speaks so much, that every sober conscientious person may
easily perceive how miserably he does pervert the meaning of our Saviors words
concerning that unpardonable sin, whereof I am afraid he is but too deeply
guilty, he does so desperately contradict and blaspheme the clearest truths of
the blessed Gospel of Jesus Christ, whereof (being so conversant in Scripture
as he has been) his conscience cannot but be convicted; he now showed himself
tooth and nail for his darling heresy of Universal Salvation; disclaiming any
other Judgment but what does pass upon men in this life, asserting no eternal
destruction of any man's person whatsoever to be mentioned in Scripture, with
several other things of the like nature, wherein I was content at last to give
him rope enough, and let him run himself out of breath (if it had been
possible) that so all present that feared God, might be convinced from his own
mouth, of his desperate and devilish doctrines vented by him; but at length
perceiving the patience of the Auditory quite tired, and being wearied my self
to hear the Word of God so wretchedly and wickedly abused: In fine I resolved
never more to have do with him, unless I should be called to it by such as had
authority, and required to vindicate the truth against him; supposing such a
full discovery of him to be now made, that there needed no more to be done to
that purpose: I then only urged two Arguments against him as the result of what
had dropped from his own mouth; the first was this: He that is a false Prophet,
and prophesies lies in the Name of the Lord, he is an enemy to the State; But
Rich. Coppin is a false Prophet, and prophesies lies in the Name of the Lord;
Ergo, Rich. Coppin is an enemy to the State. The second was this, or to this
purpose, He that causes divisions contrary to the received Doctrine of
Scripture, serving not the Lord Jesus, but his own belly, by good words and
fair speeches, beguiling the hearts of the simple, ought to be avoided by
conscientious Christians, as they would avoid Rocks and Quicksands, Romans 16.17,
18. But Rich Coppin is such a one: Ergo. Then what followed after this, I need
not mention, nor will I trouble my self with Coppins relation: after I had made
a short address to God in prayer, the Congregation dismissed, and so I
departed. The Thursday after, December 13. appointed by Mr Sandbrooke to state
and maintain his Queries against Coppin, there was again a great resort of
people in the foresaid place, and Coppin (as before) placed himself in the
Pulpit, Mr Sandbrooke took the opposite Pew, where after his prayer, waving his
first Question, as sufficiently cleared and vindicated before, he insisted only
on his second; and having premised a few words only by way of supposition, he
laid down his Argument, the scope whereof was to prove Coppin guilty of highest
blasphemy, for affirming Jesus Christ and his Apostles to be evil spirits, in
affirming, That whosoever told people of their sins, and of damnation for their
sins, were evil spirits: This he could and would have proved against Coppin,
but the truth is, Mr Sandbrooke soon perceiving that Coppin would not be held
close to any thing in way of Syllogisticall Dispute, but diverted to Queries,
and took occasion to leave the main Controversy which should have been
prosecuted, withal finding himself extremely disadvantaged, by the thickness
of his hearing, and lowness of his voice, with other distempers, which at
present oppressed him, he soon gave Coppin off, thinking it but lost labor to
have further to do with him: now truly for my part, it was once in my thoughts
not to have been present at this days meeting, conceiving Mr Sandbrooke had
done him too much honor in vouchsafing to encounter him afresh, after such a
discovery as himself had made of his own shameful nakedness; yet upon second
thoughts, I could not but conceiv that God in his wise providence had offered
me one opportunity more, wherein I might give in my testimony more clearly and
fully against this wretched blasphemer of Jesus Christ, and then I resolved not
to neglect the opportunity, accordingly I came to the meeting, and joining my
self with Mr Sandbrooke in the same Pew, when he had ended, I stood up, and
addressing my self, not to Coppin, but to the Magistrates of the City, Officers
of the Army, and the rest of the auditory, I gave them to understand, that I
came not there to succenturate my Learned Brother, who was abundantly able to
make good what he had undertaken against Coppin; but my design was to take this
opportunity of speaking a few words for the benefit of the people then
assembled, I told them I had seen so much of Coppin, that unless I were called
to it by such as had authority, I was constant to my resolution of meddling no
more with him; yet on all occasions I should be ready to witness against his
Heresies and blasphemies: and whereas he had at the former meeting, December
11. maintained, That the Doctrine of the love of God in the salvation of all
men whatsoever, was the most effectual Doctrine to restrain from sin, and
promote sanctification; I gave them to understand that indeed the true Doctrine
of Gods special love to his people, it was a most effectual means to promote
sanctification in the children of God, that have a child-like gracious
disposition in them; but the false doctrine of Gods general love unto all
whatsoever, is so far from being a means of sanctification to any, that it
opens a gap for all ungodliness, strengthening the hearts and hands of all
ungodly and wicked men, that no man should return from his wickedness; with
much more to the same purpose: and because the Doctrine of Universal
Redemption, as it is held forth by our Anabaptists (who thence infer Universal
Salvation of all from Original sin) is a dangerous doctrine, near of kin to
Coppins doctrine of Universal Salvation, I therefore hinted some things against
that doctrine; affirming, that the Elect of God are not actually saved from
Original sin, before they are effectually called, but are dead in it, and
therefore those that are never effectually called, are never saved from it, but
whosoever are damned for actual, are also damned for Original sin; yea I made
no question but many Infant-children, never guilty of any actual sin, might be
damned to hell for that Original sin wherein they were conceived and born: And
whereas Coppin had suggested, against me, I was an enemy to the State, upon the
account of my opposing him in his Heresies and Blasphemies, I minded the
Auditory how that there were some entrusted in the present Government, who
would count it a dishonor to be represented as countenancers of such a
Blasphemer, and discouragers of his conscientious opposers; hereupon I craved
leave to read a List of some of his errors, which he had at the two former
meetings vented; and so I read this following List: 1. That the humane nature
of Christ was polluted with sin, and that he was a sinner in his humane nature.
2. That Jesus Christ offered for his own sins, as well as for the sins of the
people. 3. That all mankind shall be saved. 4. That a man can have no
assurance of his own salvation, unless he believe this doctrine; for if there
be but one in the world to be damned, he might suspect himself to be that man.
5. That all the good works that men do, can do them no good. 6. That all the
evil works men do, can do them no harm. 7. That the Scripture speaks only of a
spiritual resurrection, and there shall be no resurrection of the bodies of
men. 8. That Jesus Christ is all the three Persons in the Trinity, the Father,
Son and holy Ghost, and that all the three Persons, are but so many
manifestations of God. 9. That the everlasting Torments of hell shall have an
end. 10. That hell is within men before they believe, and that there is no such
hell as is commonly believed, to be a place of torment to any after this life.
11. That the doctrine which affirms no redemption out of hell is false, That
there is redemption out of hell. 12. That there is no eternal judgment to
come, wherein Jesus Christ appearing in a visible way, shall judge the world.
13. That the Doctrine of Universal Salvation, is the most effectual Doctrine
to promote sanctification.


These devilish doctrines (which yet were not one half of what he had vented)
being read in his hearing, he did not, could not deny one of them, but spent
many words to justify the third, and the last of them, adding several more at
this time, this among the rest, That Jesus Christ himself was that one Leper of
ten, who being made whole returned to give God thanks; quoting many Scriptures,
but allegorizing and wresting all against the truth; insomuch that I could not
but declare my judgment, that if St Paul were present, he would bespeak him,
as once he did Elymas, Act. 13.10, 11. and that with like success, causing him
to grope his way out of the Church; and because I knew we had a very ingenuous
Gentleman living near, who had been stumbled by Jesuits, not to acquiess in
the sufficiency of Scripture to determine all Controversies of Religion;
supposing this Gentleman might be present, and that the horrible wresting of
Scripture by this wretch, might be no small offense both to him and others,
furnishing the Jesuits with some advantages to insinuate the necessity of some
other Judge, besides the holy Ghost (speaking in sacred Scripture) to decide
Controversies in Religion; therefore I desired any Jesuits whatsoever that
might be present (or their friends) to take notice, that there were hundreds of
godly learned Ministers in England, whose Books I was not worthy to bear after
them; and yet I should not doubt (in the strength of Christ) to encounter any
Jesuit of them all, in maintaining that great point of Doctrine, That the holy
Ghost speaking in Scripture, is the supreme Judge to determine all
Controversies of Religion; adding other things to the same effect; taking
notice of the wiles of Jesuits, who being beaten out of the field themselves,
by their Learned Antagonists, did now seek to baffle us out of our Religion by
a company of ignorant, impudent praters, that take upon them to be Preachers of
the Word of God: and whereas Coppin had again and again suggested, that we
Ministers did envy the knowledge of the people, desiring to keep them in
ignorance, I professed I heartily wished that all men knew as much of God in
Christ as my self, provided I knew no less then I did; and if I knew any way
more effectual then other to improve the knowledge of others, I should readily
take it: In fine, I desired those that had given any countenance to this
blasphemer, to be humbled for what they had done, and do so no more, promising
both by Preaching and Catechizing, to endeavor that all sorts (even children)
might be Antidoted against his errors; and Coppin having pretended that the
right hand of God signified the Gospel, and favor of God, under which all
mankind should at last be brought, I alleged and paraphrased on that place,
Psalm. 21.8, 9. with special reflection on Coppin and his errors; but Coppin
was resolved, let me say what I could of him or his opinions, he would say
something after me, though nothing to the purpose, but only that like the
Author of the golden Legend, he might show himself to be a man Plumbei cordis
ferrei oris, I might add, aeneae Frontis. When I had ended, and was resolved
to speak no more, Coppin declaring himself against all water Baptism since the
death of John Baptist, as having neither precept nor example in Scripture:
Gammon he stands up, and would fain have been saying something, but Mr Robinson
(I well remember) told him, he was a very fit man to encounter Coppin, for he
had good lungs, and his tongue was well hanged, but now the time was spent, and
they could stay no longer: When I saw Coppin would never end, I took my leave
of the Assembly, with that of St Paul, Grace be with all that love the Lord
Jesus Christ in sincerity, Ephesians. 6.24. and so I went out; What Gammon said
afterward I know not; I easily believe what Coppin prints of him, may be the
truth of what he spoke, for being a great dipper, I know him to be dipped over
head and ears in many dangerous errors, and therefore no wonder if his bolt be
so suddenly shot against those earnall Priests, as he calls them, whose weapons
are too spiritual for him with his carnal opinions and practices, as will
appear (I doubt not) in due time. These several public Discourses with
Coppin being over, and he having now openly discovered himself before
multitudes of sufficient witnesses, to be such a notorious blasphemer, and
monstrous imposter, notice being given to Major General Kelsey of him, he was
pleased to direct his Warrant to Captain Smith, December 19. requiring him to
take Coppin into his custody, etc whereupon Captain Smith, December 22,
apprehended him, and accepted security for his true imprisonment; but the next
day (being Lords day) he set a Guard of Soldiers in the Cathedral, with Order
to hinder Coppin from preaching there, in case he should attempt it, though he
and his security were engaged to the contrary; yet so eager was this prater to
be still spitting forth and spreading his poisonous opinions, and so confident
he should have found a party of Soldiers and others that would have tumulted
and mutined for him, rather then suffer an interruption of his deluding
Sermons, that when he saw he could not be permitted to preach in the Cathedral
(which he endeavored) he then attempted a public prating, first on a
Tombstone in the Churchyard, and after that on a joined stool in the Common,
where he wanted not for Auditors to flock about him, but Captain Smith (in
pursuance of his Order) soon silenc't him in both places, and dispers't his
followers, confining him to his quarters, causing him to keep himself private
there, and to be forth coming when he should be called before the Major
General, the next day being Moonday, December. 24. General Kelsey came to the
Crown in Rochester, accompanied with two or three Justices of the Peace, where
upon examination of several witnesses upon Oath, Coppin was found guilty of so
many intolerable Blasphemies and Heresies publicly avouched by him, that his
Mittimus was made, and he was that day sent away unto Maidstone Jail, where he
still continues prisoner; it was expected he should have been brought to his
Trial the last Assizes, but it seems it was not thought fit to proceed so
far against him, what will at last be done against him I know not, only this
I verily believe that Prophecy of Enoch recorded by Jude, will in due time
take hold of him, Jude v. 14, 15. for my part I bless God his madness is so
far manifested (though not to all, yet) to many, that I hope he shall
henceforth prevail no further in this place; and truly if I were presently to
quit my station, not only in these parts, but in this world, it would be some
content unto me, that before my departure, God made me an occasion (at least)
of restraining and hindering such a pestilent emissary of hell, from displaying
a banner for the devil in Rechester Cathedral, especially considering the
course is taken to prevent either him or any other, from doing the like for
time to come; yet thus much I can freely profess to all the world, that when I
first undertook to appear against Coppin, and all along, in what I did or said,
I never so much as dreamt the issue would be what it proved, nor had I
intentionally the least hand in informing or engaging the Major General
against him; what was done in that kind, was done by others (I know not whom)
without my persuasion or privity; yet I confess when it was done, I could not
but approve of it: I conceive the Major General did both himself and the State
some honor in taking the course he did with him, and though I was not bound to
witness against him at the Assizes, yet being desired by two Justices of the
Peace, I was there, resolving had he been brought to his Trial, and my
testimony required, I would have been ready to give it in, on the behalf of my
King and Savior, against such a black-mouthed foul enemy of his Person, Crown
and Dignity, as this Richard Coppin proclaimed himself to be; concerning whom,
my judgment (upon serious examination and experience) is this, That he is
(...), self-condemned in his damnable Doctrines, speaking lies in hypocrisy,
having his conscience seared with a hot iron; being a Jesuited Familist,
tutored by Jesuits, prompted by the devil, who has hypocrisy, confidence,
impudence, Atheism, and malice against truth, enough to make him a sworn
brother of the Ignatian fraternity, only he seems to want for Learning, whereof
most of that society have but too much, though many have nothing so much as
they pretend to: yet Coppin seems to be as well learnt in the black Art of
equivocating and lying, as some of them; in perverting and wresting Scripture
he is nulli secundus, inferior to none of them: it is great pity but he and his
elder brother Joseph Salmon should be sent for a present to their holy Father
the Pope of Rome, that so his holiness may bestow his fatherly benediction upon
them, for their good service they have done him, in undermining the very
Foundations of the Protestant Religion, and persuading Protestants to believe
that there is no Antichrist in the world, but what is to be found in the most
zealous Protestant Ministers, nor any other Whore of Babylon, but the Reformed
and Reforming Protestant Churches of England, and consequently the Pope of Rome
is not Antichrist, the great Antichrist, nor the Church of Rome the Whore of
Babylon, the Strumpet of Antichrist: that the holy Scriptures are a leaden
Lesbian rule, a nose of Wax, a mere Cipher, which may be made to signify any
thing, according as his Holiness (who is the supreme Enthusiast) shall please
by his spirit of infallibility to interpret them; These, with a world of such
like opinions, have been so bravely propagated by those Jesuited Apostates
from, and adversaries to the truth (when Jesuits were at a loss, and could
scarce tell how to play their game any longer in their own shapes) that truly
these by blows of theirs deserve to be created, not fratres, but patres
Ignatianae societatis, and to be sent forth tanquam legatos e latere, to
propagate the Faith of Rome, whose Faith is Faction, whose Religion is
Rebellion; they are true Babel builders, Church and State Levellers, mortal
enemies to an Orthodox, Learned, Godly, Protestant Ministry, and no better
friends to a Conscientious, Religious, Righteous, Protestant Magistracy; they
are Fidei simul and Legis nostra ludibrium, Ecclesiae and Reipublicae
incendium, Religionis and Reformationis Anglicanae opprobrium; from them, with
Popish Priests and Jesuits (their Confederates and Councillors) together with
all their false Doctrines, Heresies, Blasphemies, and bloody Cruelties, Good
Lord deliver us.

FINIS.

