CHERUBIMS. CHERUBIMS.
When Man first transgressed and was driven out from God, God placed
Cherubims, and a flaming Sword, to keep the Way of the Tree of Life: Mark, to
keep the Way of the Tree of Life from the Transgressor; for, against him that
did transgress, was the flaming Sword and the Cherubims, which God placed to
keep the Way of the Tree of Life; for then man had no right to the Life, but
Condemnation; the Cherubims and the flaming Sword is against him, through which
he must come before he comes to Life again. Now Moses (who was commanded to do
all things according to the Pattern which he saw on the Mount) when he
prescribes a way to God, and to the Mercy, even in the first Covenant, he
speaks of the Cherubims, and describes them to be two, beat out of one piece of
Gold, and made of the Mercy-Seat: Now mark, that out of which the Cherubims
were beat, out of the Mercy-Seat, to over-shadow it; and the Mercy-Seat is
over-shadowed while the Cherubims remain (while the Transgression is) and the
Condemnation to the Transgressor; for that spreads it self over the Mercy-Seat,
and the Mercy-Seat that is not known, nor the Golden-Pot where Manna is, while
Man continues in the Transgression: for the Seed, which is the Seat of Mercy
(was figured forth by the piece of Gold, and the Mercy-Seat of Gold, out of
which the Cherubims were) that lies under, and the Tabernacle of the Testimony,
or witnessing for God (out of which the Judgment, and the burning which
delivers from the Transgression comes) that is not known, and the Way unto the
Tree of Life again, is by that which brings out of those things which the
Cherubims and the flaming Sword were against, which remained even through
Moses; for the Ordinances and Service which he prescribed, could not take away
Sin to the purifying the Conscience, for which cause the Cherubims
over-shadowed the Mercy-Seat; for the way was not yet prepared, until Christ
came: So, though they had Ordinances of Divine Service, and a worldly
Sanctuary, and the Tabernacle of the Testimony, which was called the Holiest of
all; yet notwithstanding these things, (which were but shadows of good things
to come) the Mercy-Seat was over-shadowed, (the Vail remained over peoples
hearts, and they could not approach near unto God without a Sacrifice for Sin,
for fear of Wrath) and they could not see through the Cherubims of glory, but
perished in that they abode in Sin, and that which the Cherubims of glory,
(...) Sword was against, that which the Law and the Condemnation was against,
which keeps them from the Tree of Life: So they being out of the Righteousness
and Obedience, they were out of that unto which the Mercy is.

Well, but some men may say, These things were indeed added after
Transgression, and spoken of by Moses, but since Christ came, they are taken
away, so that we have the Seat of Mercy, and can see it with open face.

To thee, whosoever thou art that shall say thus, I give answer; The Apostle,
who spoke of those things, said, the sum of all is CHRIST; and that which was
directed by Moses, was but the shadow of good things to come, but the Body is
CHRIST. Now mark, Christ says, I come not to bring Peace on Earth, but a
Sword, and a Fire; and what will I, if it be already kindled? And this is the
condemnation, that LIGHT is come into the World, Joh. 3. 19. So that his
coming, is not to destroy the Law, but to establish it, and to destroy that
which the Law is against: Now the Curse of the Law is taken away by Christ, for
them that believe; but the flaming Sword and the Cherubims remain in the
Condemnation; for the Cherubims are two, made of the Mercy-Seat, even the
Condemnation of the Law and of the Gospel, which remains, and are continued and
established by Christ, against Transgression; and none can have the Mercy while
they continue in their Transgression: Alas for thee, that think these things
can be taken away, so long as Sin remains; thou can not see into those things
which concern thy Peace; for the Condemnation and the Death will take hold of
thee while thou art in thy sins, and the Seed thou can not see, which is the
true Seat of Mercy, and the Tabernacle of the Testimony for God, which the Law
and Moses spoke of, which is the fulfilling of all those things, and the way to
God, and the Life which is to be come into, through the condemning and
destroying the sins, and the sinful part; So by the Gift of God, all these
things are seen, and read through; which gift is Light, which as all come to
see, and wait in it, in Obedience to its working against Sin, it will make way
into the Holiest of all, and raise up the Seed, which is the Seat of Mercy, and
the Tabernacle of Witness for God (in which the Life is, which is the hidden
Manna, answering to the Golden Pot, in which the Manna was, and he is the
Minister of the Sanctuary, and the true Tabernacle, confirmed by a greater
thing than Aarons Rod which budded, by him that said, The Lord Swear, and will
not Repent, Thou art a Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchizedec; and
this is He alone, which God has chosen for Salvation; who consecrateth a new
and living way into the Holiest of all; even through his Blood by which he
sanctifies) even for Him of whom the Mercy is, who said, I will have mercy on
whom I will have mercy. This is that which brings through the Cherubims and
the flaming Sword, unto the Life, and through its working brings out of the
Transgression, the cause why the Judgment and the Condemnation was first set to
take hold of Man, and to keep the way of the Tree of Life; which no man can
come to feed of, but through the witnessing that to be wrought out, which the
Condemnation and the fiery Law first passed against; for which cause Man was
first separated from the Life; and being separated, they are changed from the
Garden, into an howling Wilderness and a Desert, and a dry and thirsty Land,
having Death and Condemnation passed over them. But the Lord promised the
Wilderness and the Islands of the Sea should be converted, and he would make
Rivers in the Wilderness, and Pools in the Desert, and the Wilderness should
become as a fruitful Field, and as the Garden of God: But alas for me, I am as
one almost amazed, for I look and see that multitudes are not yet come to see
themselves changed, from being the Garden of God (in which he dwelt) to be a
Wilderness and as a howling Desert, and a dry and thirsty Land, bringing forth
nothing but briars and thorns, who are rejected, and nigh unto cursing: And how
should they seek to be converted unto God? or, how should they seek to know the
Rivers in the Desert, or Springs in the Wilderness, and themselves to become as
a fruitful Field, and to be replenished as ^he Garden of God? for Ignorance
has over-shadowed them, so that they are not yet come to know the flaming
Sword, and the Cherubims, even the Condemnation to take hold of them, which is
glorious, and works for the destruction of Sin: nor to know the gift of God,
to work unto Condemnation, and unto their purging and cleansing; that the Seed
which is the Seat of Mercy might be raised up, and spring forth as Rivers;
which Christ said, He that believes in me, out of his belly shall flow (...)
^^vers of Living Waters; and the Waters that I shall give him, shall (...) him
as a Well of Water, springing up unto Eternal Life: but no (...) to know this,
but they that come to wait in the Judgment, (...) Condemnation for the Gift of
God, that works unto Judge (...) so long as the S^n i^ given place unto and the
Transgression lived in: So, who come to know the gift of God, CHRIST the SEED,
they must wait to feel Obedience brought forth, and Righteousness lived in,
else it will work unto Condemnation; and the flaming Sword, and the Cherubims
will remain, which keeps the Transgressor from the Tree of Life: So the way
through the flaming Sword, the Cherubims, the Condemnation, is the Obedience of
the Life, and the Obedience will bring through the Condemnation, to see the
Seed, the Seat of Mercy raised up, and to behold it with open face; And in this
the Tree of Life is, and the Testimony of God, and the pleasant Springs of Life
and Virtue: So the Obedience and the Righteousness being dwelt in, then the
Gift of God works unto Life and Virtue, bringing the Soul and the Creature
out of Sin, the cause why the fiery Law and the Cherubims was placed against
Man unto Condemnation, and brings him through these things, unto GOD, the Life
of all, and to feel him unto Consolation.

And now all you that know the Gift of God, wait in it, that you may have unity
with it, and unity with the Judgment and Condemnation (which is of it) against
Sin, and so ye may be kept out of those things which it condemns, and then the
Way will be opened freely to the Tree of Life; and the Condemnation which is
glorious, that will pass away, and the Glory of the Life remain, unto
nourishment; which none can feel, but as they dwell in that, which the
Condemnation cannot take hold upon: So let all wait to have unity with that
which condemns the Sin, and every appearance of Evil, that the Gift of God may
be retained unto Life and Immortality, and to the Mercy which continues beyond
the Condemnation, the Cherubims, and the flaming Sword.

Great and wonderful are thy Works, thou King of Saints, and thy Ways past
finding out; Oh the depth of the Wisdom, and the Riches, and the Glory that is
in thee! Lord, how do all the world grope like blind men, and have not the
knowledge of thee! but thou manifests thy self to thy Servants, so that Hand is
not able to write, nor Tongue to express the multitude of thy Revelations; yet
thou fillest thy Children with good things.

GEO. ROFE.
Written in Barbados 29th of the 7th Month, 1661.
And is to go abroad into the World.
LONDON, Printe^ for Robert Wilson, 1661.


