JEGAR-SAHADVTHA: AN OYLED PILLAR.

Set up for Posterity,

Against the present Wickednesses, Hypocrisies, Blasphemies, Persecutions and
Cruelties of this Serpent power (now up) in England (the Our-Street of the
Beast.) Or, a HEART APPEAL to HEAVEN and EARTH, broken out of Bonds and
Banishment at last, in a Relation of some part of the past and present
Sufferings of JOHN ROGERS in close Prison and continued Banishment, for the
most blessed Cause and Testimony of JESUS; the sound of the Seventh Trumpet and
the Gospel of the seven Thunders, or holy Oracles ( called railing by them in
Power) sealed up to the time of the End.

From Carisbrook Castle in the third Year of my Captivity, the Fifth-Prison,
and the third in Exile, having been hurried about from post to pillar, Quia
perdere nolo substantiam propter Accidentia.

Genesis 31.36, 37. What is my trespass? What is my sin, that thou have so hotly
persued after me? -- Set it here before my Brethren and thy Brethren, that
they may judge betwixt us both! Lam. 4.3. The very Sea Monster (or (...) Tannin
the old Serpent) drawn out the Breast, they suckle their young ones (or
Protected ones from the root (...) gur, he sojourned with or dwelt under) the
daughter of my people to a cruel one, as the Ostritch in the Wilderness. Lam.
3.52, 53, 55. Mine enemies have hunted, hunting me like a Sparrow without Cause
(or grace of (...) chen) they have cut off my days in the dungeon, and cast a
stone upon me: I called upon thy name (O Jehovah) out of the under dungeon. Non
Vindicta sed Victoria. The poor Prisoner, Pilgrim, and Exile in
Caines-br-Castle, from the top of Amana, the top of Shenir and Hermon, from the
Lions dens, from the Mountains of the Leopards; To all his fellow-Citizens in
Sion, and fellow-separates out of Babylon, and to such as are not ashamed of
our Chain, especially in that Church society, whereof the Holy Ghost has made
him an Overseer.
Christians, Readers, Friends and Brethren.
COuld the trumpet talking with me, be heard with you, the distinct sound to
all of us (as one would be come hither, but oh! how few can hear it? hear it,
or receive it: If you be our fellow waiters, or Witnesses of the Kingdom of
Christ at hand, then I may say of each of you as of Joseph, Luke 22.50, 51. He
was a good man and a just: the same had not consented to the counsel and deed
of them (that persecuted Christ) for he waited also for the Kingdom of God.
But oh, how many have acted, or at least consented with the sins of this
Generation? and how many are monstruously and most wilfully ignorant of this
Kingdom? which we suffer and wait for, in the new world; yea, libenter
ignorantur liberius peccant, they had rather be ignorant, then in the pure
light thereof, to loose the great things of this wicked world, or their great
lusts (which they must do that follow the Lamb,) ly (with the 24. Rev. 4, 5.)
about the Throne, or look to rise and reign with him on earth in the thousand
years; the glory of which state, I have at large delineated (as the most lucid
and florid Dogmaticall Discovery of this day,) in my first Treat, called
Prison-born Morning beams, (if it be in being) demonstrating the truth, as all
the Orthognomones orthodox professors and Preachers maintained it in primitive
times; the Woman or true Church traveling with this Male-childe, leaping in
the womb of her, till she brought it forth (spite of the Dragon power that
persecuted it) Rev. 12.2, 3, 5. Who was to rule all Nations, but (the Beast
hindered and) he was caught up unto God, and the poor Woman fled into the
wilderness for 1260. days, or the 42. months, the period of which is upon
us. It seems this Doctrine of the reign of Christ on Earth, had at the birth
thereof, a most noble reception, both of the Christians (or few excepted)
Valentinian, Jovinian and others (as I have proved in that Treatise) being
Chronicled or Millena^ie^, or the reign of Christ on Earth, and this continued
indubitable till Pope Dama^us (by the means of Jerome, Gaius and others.) got
it anotomatized: Now we do expect this Man-child to come down again, and to
take his great power and reign, and the Woman with her seed to come out of
their Caves; for which prophecy according to the comments of the little Book
Rev. 10.11. Is it, that I am bound with these bonds and banishment, where I
have been (hitherto) these two years beholding the terrible things that are a
coming upon the World; and heaing the contents of the seven thunders, which
John in Pathmos was bid to seal up, as also was declared to Daniel, cap. 12.4,
9. should be sealed and shut up ti^l these times; and notwithstanding I
understand but little (for mul^o plura nescio quam scio, as Aug. says) yet so
much I understand, and will assert it, in the Lord and his truth with me; that
as some are wilfully ignorant of this great Gospel-Mystery of the Kingly Office
of Christ, which we contend for, so others are most brutishly ignorant thereof;
for want of a thorough search into the Prophesies and Scriptures; especially
the common and carnal Clergy and Rulers, and so they persecute and speak evil
of they know not what, and that most impudently too, and with very uncivil
courtship, inventing and deposing principles for us (which our souls abhor)
and then rendering us odious to the poor people, upon conclusions and deductions
of their own making and composing: But this I profess before the Lord, that as
I desire nothing more than a Christian conviction out of the word of God in the
spirit, power and authority of the Lord, where ever it shall light; so I see
plainly that our enemies are as much afraid of that weapon, as ever were the
Papists or Prelates; and therefore with them do fly to the force, fury, and
violence, sword and fire, persecuting, oppressing, plundering, imprisoning and
banishing as you see; and then (behind our backs) fall to lying, railing and
slandering of us, and our principles. But as Tully in another case said of
some, Mihi quidem nulli satis eruditi videntur quibus nostra sunt ignota; so
say I, I cannot take them for learned at this time of day (I mean sancte magis
quam scire, 2 Pet. 3.16.) who partake not the learning of the Fifth-Kingdome,
this hope of Israel, for which we are bound with this Chain. And because the
cruelty of this Serpent in England (whom our effeminate, lusting Eve-like
professors have fallen in, and fallen off, and down with) from whose face we fly,
till the time, times, and a divident, Rev. 12.14. is hardly heard of, known or
believed abroad; his horns looking so like a Lamb, but that ye may hear (a
little) how he speaks, and persecutes like a Dragon, I have held it a duty (for
further discovery of him and his spirit) to publish thus much further of his
Nimrodian tyranny and trading in this Dominion, since the late Apostasy. That
which I have seen and felt of his fury at Lambeth, for sa many months among
Monsters rather than men, so greedy of my blood: I omit here as being mentioned
in my Preface to Prison-born, but that men (if they will may see what an
unreasonable beastlike Monster this is, that rends, tears, and devours us so: I
have added this History of some passages since Lambeth; which I have suffered
for the sake of my dear Master Jesus Christ, in this his Cause, (all which put
together will clear it I think to any capacity, reason, honesty or modest of
man, that it is a persecution and no other which we groan under in these Coals
and Exiles, having no other law, sentence, judgment or execution, but the
barbarous Sword over us, or Thief-law; (For as Tacitus said, non utendum est
imperio ubi legibus uti possit; such power is not to be used, where good laws
have any great force) And that men may see how dangerous, yea, deadly, this
Relapse is, it spares the evil and malignant humors to fall upon the Vitals
(Fifth-kingdommen) and animals (upright Common-wealths-men) in this Nation, as
the Papists that would imprison for eating an Egg; qui autem totam dominicam
diem vacat temulentiae scortis and al ae audit bellut homo, as Erasmus said;
whiles, he is a brave fellow amongst them that will spend the Lords-dayes in
drinking and drabbing, whoring and roguing! and at this day, we see it,
especially in Carisbrook, that if a man draw but near on the Lords days, or
listen to hear us pray, etc. he is presently sent for, dealt with and
threatened, if not driven out of the Castle, and charge given that not any one
do show a kind look or word to me upon pain of casting out: But they may sit
the Lords days, (with the doors, (I would not say Whores) open for all to see
them) in the Alehouse, drinkings, swilling, drabbing and smoking tobacco (as
they do excessively) yet none dare reprove them for it: Mr. S. the Chaplain
being turned out for reproving, chiefly (I hear;) and my self beaten, buffitted
and abused, for an accasional reproving of blasphemy. (Blessed be my God, who
has given me a back and breast to bear it! Yea, who sees not that men of very
vain and corrupt conversations, flagitious and infamous for notorious sins and
crimes are taken into favor? yea, hoised up into high places? and at least
allowed to have their liberty? Whiles such as unfainedly fear the Lord, and
dare not willingly commit any sin! but make a most tender conscience of all
their ways, are very wickedly and irrationally imprisoned, exiled, hardly
handled, and almost hindered to breath in the air. Now I do declare it, as
before the most righteous and holy judge of heaven and earth, should any one
ask me why, I have been (that is as some say upon the civil account) so long
in prison, hard bonds and banishment, year after year (which long imprisonment
the Martyrs accounted worse then death:) I must acknowledge an absolute
ignorance in my own Conscience before God, Angels and Men, (let some Time
servers say what they please for themselves) without this be it, that I cannot
in Conscience turn with the Dog to the Vomit, and (in plain English) lie,
dissemble, for swear, and play the Traitor to Christ, the Hypocrite to God, and
the Knave with men as others have done: but (thanks be to God for it) for this
is a Cordial to us, that whereas by a just Law others are (or ought to be)
imprisoned for iniquity, we are imprisoned and banished (against all law, but
the arbitrary lawless sword) because we cannot, we will not, and we dare not
(though we die for it) fall in with iniquity: But so be it O Lord! thou Lord of
Righteousness; for as one sa^es, has epulas semper desideravi. I will not deny
but my infirmities been very many (which I think I could weep over the feet of
any that shall reprove me for them) and indeed my temptations here in close
bonds in banishment, would be more, were it not in an enclosed garden to me in
Christ (being as a man dead and out of mind,) but what I have done worthy of
imprisonment and banishment (them excepted) I know not. This I can say from my
soul, that (I think) as I preached, so I sought nothing but Christ and his
Kingdom! and as to the World I have formerly said it, with Sohinus to D.
Casimire, that I am bo^n rather for labors than for honors; and so I told O.
C. in my Epist. of Chapter Discipline (before these times) p. 10. I do profess it
from my heart the greatest temptations I fear are falling into honor, place,
preferment, esteem or estate to much for me, being best when poorest, highest
when lowest, most when least, and when I have nothing as possessing all things,
2 Cor. 6.10 Yea, if (as Jerome says,) that Woman is proved chaste that has
liberty and opportunities to sin, and yet will not; I may say it without
oftentation, as Heb. 11.15, 16. that we might have had our opportunities to
have returned to them, had we not sought a far better Country; and I think I
may say too somewhat like Thomas Aquin. when preferment was offered him,
Chrysostomi in Matthaeum Commentarium mallem, For I would say, I had rather
have one chapter, I could name in the Revelation, then the greatest relation I
could name to any crown in Christendom; so that these things (I thank the
Lord) I think I am above in him who has said as Jo. 16.33. Be of good cheer I
have overcome the world: But it may be, my reproving the rank sins of these
rude times, have provoked the rough hands of Esau upon me, and Nimrod to hunt
me; but if so, it is no new suffering for such a Cause (if we ask the Prophets
and Apostles (as w^ll as our Savior) and such have the two Witnesses been in
all ages: Zuinglius preached against the sins of the times, and the mercenary
pensions of them that served the Princes of the earth: (in my judgment more
clearly then Luther) and so did Bucer very freely: but the last were never so
hardly handled as we are for it; besides Corolestadius went further, for he
reproved the very constitutions of their Government, and the very color which
Luther had to oppose him was about Civil Laws, saying, he would have all
Magistrates to rule by the Judicials of Moses; as these men say of us, vide
Speech to Parl. Sept. 4, 16. p. 16. so that it is no new Doctrine, though they
so menstrously misreport of us and our principles. Canutus King of England in
those thick times of Popery did confess to all his Lords about him no mortal
worthy the name of a King, save he to whose back heaven, earth and Sea, by his
laws eternal are obedient [Hen. Huntington]: and shall we (in these days,
after such solemn engagements for a Theocracy as I have proved) admit of any
other King? Lord Protector, or Lawgiver to ravish us with their lusts! (God
forbid. Wherefore, for Christ's sake, stand fast, unmovable; and abounding in
the work of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. and I do profess for my own part, seeing
the Lord has honored me hitherto with this Chain for this his Cause (though I
be a poor weak worm) yet with his grace sufficient for me, I will abide by
it; for as one of the Martyrs often used Vespasians saying, Imperatorem decet
stantem mori. It becomes as that are Kings and Priests to God, Rev. 5.10. to
dye standing not stooping to the lust of any man; especially now, the day of
Christ is come. Therefore let us all fall in, and on, and stand to it with the
Lamb, and the twenty four Elders, (or the twenty four orders of the Levites
about the throne, in this Cause, by which tribe of Levi are indeed to be
understood the Generation Saints, the firstborn, Heb. 12.23. first fruits,
Rev. 14.4. and therefore have they the precedence of other Saints as Generation
Elders, who like the Levites (before under a curse, Genesis 49.7.) obtained the
blessing for executing the judgment, Exodus 32.27, 28, 29. with the sword on
their brethren, and spared not: Now of these in David's days were the twenty
four (both Rulers, Singers and Ministers) 1 Chronicles. 29.25. So that such, such
Generation Saints (the twenty four) shall join in one work, and song with the
Lamb, and with all the living creatures about the Throne, and with the holy
Angels, Rev. 4.9, 10, 11. and 5.11. and altogether in one Hallelujah, Amen. as
Isa. 52.7, 8. which he waits for, who is buried with the body of Jesus in this
new Sepulcher, where the soldiers seek to keep down his Resurrection, and the
hope of,

your Brother John Rogers

Morning-beams: OR, The Vision of the Prison-Pathmos.
LIB. I.
(...) CHAP. I. Hagah. The Introduction; with the Cause Accidental of the
following Discourse upon the present Truth and Testimony.
IT is none of the least part of our Prison-Threnodies, in the present Tragedy
which the bloody BEAST (by a new Guize) has acted again upon the Stage of
Great Britanny, The general Introduction, by Lamentation.
the trampling under foot the present Truth and Testimony of Jesus, (in this
last Scene of the holy Citie's suffering, as I may say, for the forty two
months) so, as that scarce one Interpreter of a thousand durst entertain or own
it simply; which at best has but a Pasport from Many, and so is whipped away
from one to another, from post to pillar, till it come to the place where it
was born; but there it has a being (blessed be Jehovah:) else it is hardly
handled, according to the Court-Law; for a Vagrant, with Warrants like to Pope
Engenius's hoc esse verum si ipse velit, sed non aliter. This or that is true,
if he (his Holiness, or Highness) will have it so; but not otherwise. Who then
can find the faith or conrage to expose his life (or at least, his liberty and
estate) to so prodigal 2 Hazard? as he must do, who will fetch it from under
the Beast's foot, and feel the acrimony or cruelty of his sharp clunch, claw,
or horn, piercing him to the very heart. O this is as hard a task (in a sense)
as to rescue the Lamb from the claw of the Lion, or paw of the Bear. Therefore,
Isa. 59.4. (...) There is none that passes his word for righteousness; nor is
there any judgment for the Truth: O sad! (...) what, not one? Well may our
Prisons sound and resound with exaggerated Nightgroans; for the Court and
Country increase in lying and transgressing, and falling backwards;
perpetrating iniquity at so high a rate, as will suddenly fill up their
measure: this I see evidently from my Iron bars; as v. 13, 14, 15, 16. and yet
None intercede for the Truth, (...) not one will run after it, follow it, meet
it, or to the face of All own it: (...) O what a Lamentation is this! If one
does, like Wisdom's child, a little justify it; yet where is he that does
(according to the Hebrew) intercedere intercedens? for, he that does so (as it
is in the text) exposes himself to be spoiled, plundered, imprisoned, and made
a prey to the ravenous Beast, that eats bones and all, Zeph. 3.2. Yea, although
he (...) that departs from the evil of the Times, is sure to suffer so; yet,
for all that, it is a Wonder to me, how we can hold in, to see what officious
servants Charles Stuart, this Court, or any carnal Interest, have to run and
ride on their Errands, to venture and engage life, liberty, limbs, estates, and
all, for them and their Interest; but the Lord Jesus (ah! alas! as if he were
the worst Master of all) can find few faithful that will venture half so far
for him and his suffering Cause at this day; especially perpending the point of
Time, the progress of the Testimony, the approach of the Period of the Beast's
dominion in this street, of the forty two months, and of the rise of the
Witnesses, with the little Stone, or the remnant of the Woman's seed, who must
strike the Image-Government of England all to pieces; the terrible Earthquake
which shall rend them up by the very roots. Also, when I advert the advantages
of the Saints in this street above any other (of all the great City, or Beasts
dominion) the forwardness of the Work here, the height of the Controversy
already between the Lamb and the Beast, (precious blood of Saints having sealed
thereto) and the Vials so lately poured out upon the King, Lords, Prelates, and
corrupt Powers of this Seat; also, our late zeal against Common Prayer,
Crosses, Painted Windows, Rails, Surplices, corrupt Ministers, Magistrates, and
the like; O! my soul even bleeds within me, to behold the present apostacy of
Spirit, Principles, and Persons, not only among Mercenary Professors, but the
Little Remnant; whose Coldness, Cowardliness, and Carelessness is (almost)
incredible, at this time of Day too: and were it not to fulfill the Word of God,
Rev. 11. (that this present Death and Darkness is upon us for these three years
and an half) I should be so astonished at it, as not to know what to make of it.

But when I am venting my burden with these like words or passions, Lord!
where is the Spirit of old! yea, the Spirit, and faith, and courage, that we
our selves had, some ten, twelve, or fourteen years ago, among the good old
Puritans? yea, the spirit of Englishmen, and rational men among us? O! what a
Change is this! What sheepishness, what sleepiness! what deadness, what
darkness! what timorousness, and what tameness is now seized upon us? The Light
arising in Darkness, does put an end to such Reasonings and Syllogizings;
giving rest to my Spirit till the time of the end, which is at hand.

Now if ever there were a time to hear the Grave-groans of the living and the
dead; of those who are in Prison graves, and of those whose skulls and bones we
left behind us in the Field, and of those under the Altar, who cry, How long,
O Lord holy and true? Rev. 6.10. yea, the shrill heaven, heart, and
earth-tearing Call of Saints past, present, and to come, (from the days of Abel
to this day) to maintain their Cause, to revenge their Blood, (and the Lamb's)
and to be UP AND DOING for the Lord Jesus the King of Saints (to purpose;) it
is NOW within a year or two, as we shall show you.

WOE to them that are at ease! Amos 6.1. yea, to the very women that are
Careless! Isa. 32.9, 10, 11, 12. for they shall lament! and if ye will be All
silent, the very Graves shall open, the Dead shall live, the dry bones shall
live, the stones of the street shall speak, and the beam of the timber utter
it; the Witnesses will arise, and the earthquake come to take vengeance against
this Apostate generation of sour Professors.

But, say some, (seeing the Prisons are so deeply sensible, and bear so heavy
a burden for us) how falls it, that before now your exonerating groans and
sighs got not a free passage abroad in the Nation?

To which I must answer, That for above a years Imprisonment (now) partly more
at large, Why the Prisons are so silent.
and partly close, I have lien under pressure of Spirit (as if my heart would
break within me) at times, to see so servile and degenerate a Spirit (as yet)
among the Saints; yet with patience purposing to wait, and possess my soul, as
unwilling to write what few (if any) we able to bear, (though most honorable
Truth:) I kept in as long as I could; not knowing but there might have been
(before this) a kindly recurrence (among some) of those retrograde motions
which so tremendous and fearful a Wrath as I easily foresee follows the heels
of: (Melius est recurrere, quam male currere.) Besides, so great is the servile
spirit and fear which possesses the hearts of men against this glorious Cause
and Controversy of Christ, (for which we are imprisoned, plundered, exiled, or
persecuted) that what we write to ease our hearts and consciences (with the
greatest sobriety and simplicity) we cannot carry through the Press, or get
Printed, upon any terms (almost) in the language, life, and savor of the
present Anointing from the holy One, which is upon us, and teaches us All
things. That newfound Engine of the Beast (the Ordinance of Treason for words
and imaginations) has put them into so pannick and foolish a fear, that above
an hundred sheets preparing for the Press (to enlighten the Deluded and Abused
people of this Nation, as to us and our Cause, or rather, Christ's; while they
give out we suffer not for Conscience) have been either betrayed by
Iscariot-kisses, plundered from me, or stifled before they were born; and all
this, lest the people should have light into the sufferings of our Consciences,
or conscience of our Sufferings, viz. the truth of the fifth Kingdom; or
receive a right Information of the Apostacies Hypocrisy, Perjury Cheating,
Persecution* and unheard of Baseness of such as are gotten into Power; having a
form of godliness, denying the power thereof (from whom we are to withdraw* 2 Timothy 3.5.) and notwithstanding we and they declared this Tyranny in the
Bishops: the words are; To lock up the Printing-Presses against whom they
please, was in the Bishops time complained of, Vid. Guilford-Declar. p. 10.
as one of the great Oppressions. Yet this is revived upon us; which is the
reason the good people of the Nation are so deceived and prejudiced about us
and our Principles, whiles we are not suffered to publish the truth, and our
enemies false Reports of us pass cum privilegio, all over the Countries.

The Prisonopprobries, abuses and injurries, especially at Lambeth.
2. The marvelous Trials which I have encountered with in the flesh (since
Imprisonment) have much impeded my appearing in Public until now: and albeit I
have forborne hitherto, making public complaint of the worse then Roman
tyranny upon us, for the exercising of our faith and patience, that in all
well-doing we might suffer with joy, and that our consolation in Christ might
abound, and that Jehovah whom we serve (to whom vengeance and truth belongs)
might take the matter into his hands only: Yet because of the loud Obloquies,
lend Lies, Invectives, and ungodly reports which pass without examination, from
one to another, upon me, on purpose to reflect upon this blessed Cause and
faith we contend for; and for that some have greedily made such use of those
loose Tales, and do conclude upon it, that Silence argues Guilt, and gives
advantage to all sorts (good and bad) to accumulate their most amarulent and
uncharitable censures; some precious friends have prevailed with me (for the
Truths sake) the Lord knows, without the least desire to justify my self (for
I leave that to my Lord and Master) or delight to rake into the rank and sordid
excrements of men's mouths, or pleasure in their unhandsom nakedness; (for I
take little delight to inculcate their lapses or inciviliti^s to us in this
Cause;) and can be better content (my conscience bears me witness) to sit down
in silence, then to take so much as notice of the foaming and frothy agitations
of some pragmatick and unquiet heads these Times. But the Truth, Cause, and
persecuted Saints, do expect some Account at my hands (it seems) of the
particular harsh usage I and my family met with under this Power in
Lambeth-House (and since) where I was for above five and thirty weeks, and then
sent to Windsor-Castle, the 31 of 1 mon. 1655. with two Messengers, who
delivered me up Prisoner here a little after Noon.

I was fetched out of my bed the 27 day of 4 mon. in 1654 early in the morning;
and at night (after all day waiting) I was sent to Lambeth-prison, being very
ill and distempered with a Fever; yet for all that, at 11 in the night, did a
Messenger rap at the gates, called another of the Messengers who was going into
his bed, made him put on his clothes again to assist him; and so they came both
with Harding the under-Goaler, to carry me at that time of night I knew not
whither, (nor would they tell me:) but being very ill on the bed, and my wife
also unready, I told them I was not Able; prayed them to let me alone for that
one night; told them, The righteous man was merciful to a Beast; and were a
Beast of theirs (horse or Cow) so ill, or little able to stir, they would be
more merciful: with many other Arguments, I and my wife also desired them to
forbear that night: but they said they had Orders from Sergeant Dendy to remove
me presently, and I must not stay: one of them speaking very high, and
threatening. The issue was; They made me rise, and my wife to make her self
ready: and I (scarce able to go, my head being light with the fierceness of the
Fever) was forced, that time of night, to one Lead-beater's house (a Messenger)
into a little, low, dark room, where was very little air, (which I much
needed, and for which I rather wished to be in the other Prison.) The next day
at night, new Orders came, to carry me to Lambeth again; where I continued,
till Sergeant Dendy procured my Removal. Of which place I shall choose
principally (for the present) to give a short hint, or abstruse Account,
(leaving the whole History for a fitter season) that the obstreperous false
reports may be obviated, our Sufferings (a little) known and sympathized, his
poor sevants prayed for, their faith and patience owned, their God be
glorified, and his enemies found Liars, Worse then Heathen Tyranny to us.
and ashamed for their worse then Heathen tyranny to us: which appears in these
Particulars.

1. By the Law of the Heathens (the Romans) none were to suffer before the Law
had judged and condemned them; Uncondemned, and without Law.
nor before their Accusers were brought face to face, or the Accused heard to
speak for themselves in the matters laid to their charge: Acts 22.25. Is it
lawful for you to scourge a man that is a Roman, and Uncondemned? Then they
said, v. 26. TAKE HEED. Acts 25.16. Festus confessed, It is not the manner of
the Romans to deliver up any man, (either to imprisonment, death, mulct, or
punishment) before that he which is Accused, has his Accusers brought face to
face, and he have license to answer for himself concerning the crime laid
against him. This is a Rule of Reason; This is contrary to all or most of their
Declarations, where they call this Tyranny in the King and Bishops; and
incongruous with the Laws of God, of Nature, and of Nations.
contrary whereunto, our Persecutors now practice, having put us into Prison
thus year after year, yea, with worse usage, and more close, then the worst
Malefactors, Cavaliers, Plotters, Ranters, Blasphemers or Offenders they put
amongst us: For all the while I was by order from Sergeant Dendy kept out from
the air of the Common Hall, the wicked crew of Cavaliers, Plotters, Ranters,
Roarers; drinking, cursing, swearing, singing* fidling, gaming, and
blaspheming, day and night, had the benefit of it: yea, for above thirty weeks,
they would not suffer me to stir out of the gate for air; but the worst of all
other Prisoners had their liberty with their Keepers every day: and when order
was to let but three at a time come to see me, yea, not to suffer man, woman,
or child to come at me; nor one of my family to stir out for necessaries for
me; the worst of men besides had All that would, come to see them, yea the most
loose sort of people that could be, to sit up, healthing, hooping, ranting and
revelling with them at the highest rate, in a most hideous manner, about mine
ears. These had abundance of liberty to sin, for whom the Law was made, as the
Apostle says. 1 Timothy 1.9, 10. when we could not have liberty to pray together,
or to have any holy Assembly but at the Prison-grates, when I put my head out
at the Iron bars to my dear brethren and sisters in Christ, who flood in the
street. And all this, without any Law condemning, any Crime charged formally
upon us, any Accuser brought before us, any Witness against us, any Trial of
us, or License given us to answer in any open Court: only the sixth of the
last month* the last year, I was carried to White Hall into a Chamber, (where
what was objected was denied to be any Charge against me) and so remanded to
prison again, but by no other Law then Lust and Will, (the Beast's Law, Sic
volo, sic jubeo, sic pro ratione voluntas;) TAKE HIM JAILER being all the
Trial, Law, and Sentence: All at once, All in Will, with a worse then Papal or
Prelatick Arbitrariness; without signifying for what Offense, or by what Law;
(which the Popish and Prelatical Persecutors always did:) herein falling short
of the Roman righteousness, mercy, and ingenuity; and betraying, or robbing us
of our Rights and Liberties we fought for. But, the Lord knows, (let them
report what they will, to put a good color upon this Practice of theirs, and
to render us odious, who are almost buried alive in Prison-graves, and not
suffered to speak for our selves) we know no other cause but our very
Consciences, in the matters and Principles of faith, in the Testimony of Truth,
for Christ, against his Enemies: and yet they dare be so wicked as to say
about, We suffer not for Conscience; and there be none that suffer for
Conscience, for Christ, or for preaching the Gospel in England at this day. But
O! that the Truth might have a fair hearing!

2. Our Goalers wors to us, then the Heathens. A History of some few passages
for an instunce.
2. Under the Dragon-Power of Rome, the very Goalers (who are usually the worst
of men) were more civil, courteous and urbane, then ours are to us: for Paul's
Jailer let who would come to visit him, Acts 24.23. Acts 28.16. yea, their Acts
16.33. and made much of them: but our Goalers do add stripes, aggravate our
crimes (pretended) augment our afflictions, accumulate (into mountains) lies,
slanders, vilifying speeches and reproaches upon us; invent and inform what
they can (with any color) against us, (daily going to Whitehal for that
purpose;) and every way more cruel to us, then to the worst Prisoners they had:
At Lambeth we found it so, from the upper to the under, from the Master to the
Man-goaler; whiles others found very fair quarter, and civil Courtship, who fed
them with round Sums; which we could not buy at so dear a rate, and therefore
(besides other reasons) were forced to courser fare. For after a few weeks,
word was brought to my wife, that I must pay in fees somewhat more then 6 l. a
week; which I was not able to do, (having no estate in the world, and what I
had being all taken away from me;) and this for the rooms to Serg. Dendy. About
a weeks space after this, one of Serg. Dendy's men (old Meazy) came up (at
candlelight) into my Prison-chamber, in the name of Serg. Dendy, saying he came
from him, to demand the money which was due to him for his fees and the
chambers for so many weeks; saying I was to pay but 10 s. a day fees for my
self; for although though it was 20 s. a day, yet the Parliament put down 10 s.
a day of it: and for that Serg. Dendy would use me courteously, he would have
but 14 s. a week rent for the room where we kept a fire, (for my family, while
they were with me:) and for the little inward lodging-room, (where was no
chimney) where I lay, I should know that when I went out. I told him I was not
able to pay so much; nor did I judge it reasonable, being in prison upon will,
and nothing brought to my charge; and therefore those that imprisoned me, must
pay him: yet this I would do willingly; if Serg. Dendy will choose one honest
man, I will choose another; and what they think meet for me to pay, as God shall
enable me I will: saying withal, I would know the lowest which I must pay. He
said, 4 l. 4 s. a week was the lowest: at which I told him I was not able to do
it, nor did my brother Feak at Windsor pay so much; but, as I heard, but so
much in a quarter, as is demanded of me in a week: and that it was worse then
tyranny, to take away all I had to live on; turn my wife and children (poor
sucking babes) out of doors, (when the Lord allows a Snail a shell, yet my poor
wife and babes had not a shell to live in, but my prison:) yea, and to hinder
those that would, to minister to our wants, and to demand 4 l. 4 s. a week too,
was wonderful unjust. But the old man being teachy hereat, flew from me with
these menaces; You must and shall pay it, before you go out from hence.

But because the carriage of this business was so cruel, merciless, and
unchristian, Serg. Dendy was ashamed to own it to good men; stoutly and often
affirming, that neither he, (nor any for him) did ever demand it of me, or
threaten me about it. But with how little modesty or grace, and that you may
see what wide mouths ravenous fishes have; it follows under the hands of some
present in the Prison-chamber when the old man came for the money; two of them
being Church Members.)

We whose names are hereunder written, do certify to whomsoever it may
concern, that old Michael Meazie came (as he said) from Serg. Dendy (whose
servant he is) into the chamber where Mr. Rogers is prisoner now at Lambeth,
and in our hearings demanded of Mr. Rogers the sum of 10s. a day for fees for
himself, a prisoner to Serg. Dendy; and of 14s. a week for his Chambers; in
all, of 14l. 4.s. a week. And for that Mr. Rogers made scrupble to pay so much
at present, the said Mesey told him he MUST and SHOULD pay it, before he went
out from thence. This we witness by our hands, who heard him demand that Sum of
him, and can Depose it.

Dorothy Hill. Alice Lewis. Anne Evington.


Notwithstanding with so strange a face they denied this, and said I was no
Minister of Jesus Christ if I affirmed it; and they would publish in News-books
against me, and the like; I can show it under Sergeant Dendy's own hand, by
several Orders and Letters, that the not paying those fees and sums of money,
was one thing that made him so harsh to me above others. For, soon after, the
old man went to White Hall, and told his tale against me, (in his own mood and
figure) and then followed the ensuing Letter from Serg. Dendy to me.

SIR,
I took not my house at Lambeth to accommodate Families, but only such
Prisoners, as by Order of the Council stand committed to me: and therefore
whereas I hear you say, that Mr. Feak at Windsor has his wife and children
with him, and yet pays nothing; which is not altogether improbable, because
Windsor-Castle is the States proper house; but so is not Mine, nor the goods.
Wherefore, inasmuch as I am informed, that it is commonly reported you are at
6l. a week charge, (though I know not of a penny that has (as yet) been
received from you) and this declared on purpose to abuse the well-minded, by
provoking their charity toward you, (of which I wish you were as capable as
some others.) Further, your wife, at your first coming to my house, vapouring,
that she would give 5l. aforehand, so you might be accommodated at my house,
(which was more public then others of my Deputies, and so to serve your
Design was rather made choice of.) Upon these Considerations, having no
Allowance at all from the State to defray so great a charge as my house at
Lambeth amounts to, I desire you will remove your children and servants to some
other place more proper for them: to which end, I have ordered that you have a
weeks time from this day to dispose of them: and for your own particular, and
your Wife, if she be with you, to be treated with all civility, and have as
good accommodation as my house can afford. So wishing that you may be a
partaker of Christ's sufferings, rather than those of Evil doers, I rest,

September. 14. 1654. Your loving Friend, E. Dendy.


I confess I was much grieved at this Letter, for that I knew not whither to
send my poor Children from me, two of them being about a year old, and very
weak, and my poor Family being thrust out of All; only that Scripture refreshed
me, The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the Air have nests, but the Son of
man has not where to lay his head. Besides, the lines were fraught with false
reports (I perceived) of my Wife and me, and pitiful uncharitable censures and
suppositions; as, that I sought to come thither, and to abuse the well-minded;
whereas I knew not of my returning to Lambeth till Harding came with a new
Order, nor did I any otherwise desire it, but for air in the time of my
burning-feaver. I confess I did desire more air, and so my Wife said she had
better give 5 li. than be so choked up in a little hole for want of air (as
Lead-beaters was) but for any other purpose, the Judge of hearts best knows,
and will one day declare for me. But then came in consolation from Matt. 5.
Blessed are ye, when they speak all manner of evil of you. Besides the several
u^truths in the Letter, as that I said Bro. Feak paid nothing; and that of 6 l.
a week charge, and of having no allowance from the State, all which I knew to
the contrary; so that I thought it best to spread it before the Lord, and wait
with patience, and with the whole armor of God, the brest-place of
righteousness, and the shield of Faith, Ephesians. 6. to stand and withstand in this
evil day, v. 13, 14, 15, 16. And so I did, without any noise, as the Sheep that
is bit by the fierce teeth of the Dog, weeps inwardly most, and whines not like
a Hog. But ere long, he sends a most severe Order to the Under-Goaler, to take
away the Beds from under us, yea, to execute his Orders that night that one of
my Children lay giving up the Ghost; but because the Child was gasping, he
could not find the heart to execute it; and the Child dying that night, he
then said he would not have done it for 100 l. though his Master command him so
strctkly to observe his Orders. But for all this, and the death of one Child,
and the weakness, or drawing-on of another, their immanity (without pity) was
prosecuted upon me, so, that had not the Lord supported me, I might have sunk
under it: and to show it sufficiently, the Under-Goaler brings me these two
ensuing Warrants together.

William Harding,
I am informed one of Mr. Rogers his Children was carried away last night very
sick, and which for ought I know may be the Small Pox; which you cannot but
hear the City and Suburbs are much infested with, and none more liable to take
the Disease than Children: wherefore in regard of the Danger through multitudes
of persons coming to Mr. Rogers, I would have you once more let him Know, that
I expect that he remove his Children and Servants to some other Place; For I am
resolved not to endanger the health of my Prisoners any longer: therefore if
Mr. Rogers will not remove his Children after so fair and civil a warning, let
the Bedding be carried into another Room. Herein fail not. Yours,

E. DENDY.


The truth is, The Goalers Children were ill of the Swine-Pox, whereby we and
other Prisoners were in danger; but blessed be the Lord, not one of ours; and
the Child we sent away one night, for fear he should catch it in the house, the
next day we had him home again to the Prison (for we had not, nor have we any
other earthly home but a Prison now, so that my family was forced to be with
me, which was according to the Law of God and Nature) the Child being in good
health, nor was there the least ground to suspect such a Disease in my Family:
but had it been so, the sending of him away did not tend to endanger the
Prisoners, but to keep them from it; nor needed he to say any longer, for that
at no time were any in danger by any of my Family, (for the Disease was in the
Goalers Family, who it may be might report it in mine, on purpose to bring all
the vexation they could upon me, by incensing their Master against me.)

And indeed, the warning which he called civil, to send my Children from me,
(and the Lord knows, I knew not whither) I could not see civil or Christian;
and therefore rested rather contented to have the Bedding pulled from under me,
and to lie in pads of Straw with my poor Children, than to be so merciless and
unfatherly to them as he Commanded. Besides, there were very few Prisoners then
in the house, and abundance of rooms stood empty for want of Guests, they not
having the third part of the Prisoners (I hear) are there now: nor had we any
more Chamber-room than one Prisoner, who was in before us, (a Plotter.) With
this he delivered me another at the same time, which follows.

William Harding,
It Is not unknown to you the great Charge I am at for my house, etc. and
particularly for my Goods, for which I pay 7 l. a Month, which by the year is
91 l. All which I perceive Mr. Rogers and his Wife are not sensible of,
otherwise they would not take upon them to appoint what Lodgings my Prisoners
should have, as that they should not lie two in a Bed, but single, so as that
the Prisoners wives might come and live with them; which freedom I shall not
deny to any Prisoner, although I might do it: So I hereby again Order you to
remove Mr. Rogers his Children and Servants forthwith: And if the Mr. Chapman's.
Printers Wife do come, let them lie in the Chamber The Lodging-Room where I
lodged.
within Mr. Rogers, or in the outward Room, which he will; for I see no reason
that I should find Bedding for Mr. Rogers his Children and Servants when he
refuses to pay me for it. I do expect that my Orders should be better observed
by you, than hitherto they have been, otherwise I shall see that Directions be
followed more to my quiet. If you find that Mr. Rogers or his Wife will not
remove their Children and Servants, let me Know it, and I shall dispose of Mr.
Rogers to some other place, being resolved to free my house of such domineering
spirits.

Yours, E. DENDY.
October. 20. 1654.

Those two together sounded very harsh to my very heart, at that season too,
whiles another sweet Child was so near the grave too, very weak, (and died
within three or four days after.) I confess the trials were very great: had not
the new-Covenant-Comforts come with them, and made them full of the
Fathers-love to me, and of the new-Testament-blood in me, I might have fainted:
but for that I perceived this was a matter of Money, and nothing else would
stay the Surges and Sources of this raging SEA, I sent my Wife (after
Candlelight) to White Hall with five pounds, which I was glad I could get
together for him, not being able to send him more then: who carried it; but at
that time they thought it not fit to receive it, but to accoast her with course
Courtship and Dialect, and so to send her home to Prison again, telling her
that we domineered in his house, and took upon us to appoint Lodgings for his
Prisoners, etc. How such stories as these could be coined or invented, I
wondered; when for three, four, or six weeks together, I stirred not out of my
Room, or spoke with one Prisoner or Jailer, perceiving how they were set
together against me, (the Prisoners for reproving their sins (at so high a rate
day and night) when I had liberty to Preach and Pray:) seeing I was in Prison
with so wicked a blaspheming, cursing, ranting Crew, hominibus perfrictae
Frontis, with men of so much impudence, and immodesty; with raving Beasts, with
very Bruits, I judged it best not only to keep out of their company, but out of
their very sight as much as might be, insomuch that they could not tell (I am
persuaded, but on the Lord's days, or when I Preached or Prayed in Family, or
the like) whether I was in the Prison or no, (but by hearsay:) yet it seems,
the night before this last Warrant he sent me, Mr. Chapman and Mr. Spittlehouse
were brought in Prisoners, who supped with me in my Prison-chamber; that night
at the Table in discourse, they said they lay both in one Bed: I said, I
thought (if they would) they might have each of them a Chamber one within the
other, for that all the other Prisoners had so (that I saw) and for that there
were but few Prisoners in the house (not half full) so that there were Rooms
and Beds a many to spare: So I passed it over, not imagining any trouble could
arise upon this ordinary discourse at Supper; my Wife adding thus to Mr.
Chapman, You had best to have a Bed by your self, for your Wife may come to see
you. But the Goalers-Boy (listening, as some one or other frequently did for
stories at my Chamber Door) carried down (as unhappy boys use to do) what he
could make of it to his Father, who carried it, or sent it next morning betimes
to White Hall, which occasioned the aforesaid words, as I conceive; and because
he was so high against me, threatening my removal, and (as his Warrant
intimates) restless and unquiet till he had done somewhat or other against me
(and all that he can speak to his Masters at White Hall, being sure to be taken
for granted) till which he could not be quiet, as he says, seeming so much
offended too, for that his Orders were not executed (as before) to tear away
the Bed when the child was dying, and now also when the other weak Child was
dying; which wanted Roman ingenuity and reason: after I had made my complaints
known to my Heavenly Father, I put Pen to Paper, and wrote him these ensuing
lines.

Cousen DENDY,
I have received several Messages from you which have been very harsh,
unexpected, (and indeed, I think) undeserved. I had wrote unto you long before,
had not my Wife desired to come to you (as she did late last night) and had
done it long before, had not my Children been so ill, one of whom is dead, and
another very weak, and (having but two left alive) I did hope for more Mercy. I
beseech you, Cousen, be not too ready to receive false and unworthy reports,
which some (I perceive now) of malice invent and vent against me: The only
cause (as I know of) is, I cannot, I dare not approve, or join with the
Drinking, Swearing, Cursing, Roaring, and Ranting day and night here in Prison,
which I know you your self would be ashamed of: Preaching, Praying, and
reproving of Sin being the ground of all that malice, which the Devil forgeth
so many lies upon, against me: As for Civility, it is sufficiently known
whether I am so or no; yea, let mine Adversaries judge. For I have not (till
last night Harding gave me your two Notes) so much as spoke to him, or any of
them, I think this six weeks, nor been below the Stairs this three weeks,
purposely to avoid t^em and their malice. I told Harding I have but the same
Room for my Family that are here, which Mr. Brown the Prisoner for Plotting had
before me; and if they please to let me, I would have the use of my own Goods
and Beds; but I never refused to pay for them (as your Letter mentions.) Sir, I
could wish I were not so exploded, but that I might have liberty once in my
days to speak with you face to face, or else to let me hear all Informations
against me, that I might answer to their Les, which I am sure are very many,
and God will one day judge. But if they be received as men infallible, and none
be heard but them, none believed but them, none worthy of Favor but them, I can
Appeal to the Righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, who I am sure will Hear, and
none can hinder. It is a comfort to a Seaman in a Storm, that he has a Haven
to put in at; and I bless my God, I have. This is a time for me and mine to be
trampled upon and abused; but the Lord, who Bottles up our Tears, will hear our
Sighs and Groans at last. Therefore good Cousen, as Christians that wait for
one Redemption, let us walk by Rule; And put not thine hand with the wicked
(says the Lord) to an unrighteous Witness, Exodus 23. Time was, you had (I
believe) other manner of Thoughts of me. Yet if nothing will do, I will rest
quietly and patiently in the Dispensation of God, for his Rod and his Staff do
both comfort me, and there is no sending me from him, who will anoint my head
with fresh Oil; Sure I am of this, that the Comforter does, and shall abide
with me, and therefore I fear not what Flesh can do unto me. With our real and
true respects to my Cousen your Wife, and All our Friends with you, I wish you
all the same Glory and Happiness at the Day of Christ's Appearance, as my own
Soul, which I await for. These troubles of ours being b^^^he praeludia
triumphi, in these blessed Chains (fit only for Christ's Nobility) for our Royal
Master the Lord Jesus, with whom I hope to come, or to meet in the clouds, and
to sit with him on the Throne. I am

Your unfeignedly loving, though afflicted and oppressed Kinsman, Jo. Rogers.
Lamb (in the) Prison, viz. Christ in this Mount with me, October. 21. Postscript.
Here Harding denies that ever I, or any of us, Domineered, or said any thing of
the Prisoners, about other rooms or Lodgings. Dear Cousen, there be many
untruths (as ever were spoken) I hear you have received of me by some or other:
now all I desire, is, That they may but appear Truths, or as they are; or else,
that I be not so abused by them as I am: You remember Christ's Golden Rule, As
you would have others do to you, so, etc. Mr. Mesey also denies that ever he
told you, I said, Mr. Feak paid nothing.




I confess I wrote brokenly (my mind being so distracted) but not so, as might
minister any just occasion to use me and my poor Family as they did afterward,
insulting over us, and adding afflictions to our bonds daily: but we leave that
to the Lord, the righteous Judge. Many Tales the Under-Goaler and Keepers
carried, they would deny again, and sometimes say as if their Master made them,
(being themselves ashamed to own them.) And when any untruths were found and
proved to their faces, their only evasion was this, That they had Orders to
bring to White Hall whatever they heard any say of me, and they were not to
regard whether it were true or false; but says Harding, I must tell what I
hear to Mesey; and says old Mesey, If Harding tells me thus, I must tell it
(whether it be true or no) to the Sergeant, and I am here for the same purpose.
So that he sometimes went twice or thrice a day to White Hall to carry Tales,
which were received forthwith: whereby Truth (so anticipated*) could have no
entrance nor entertainment, nor would Serg. Dendy so much as put them to the
proof, or see me, speak ^o me, or come at me, when he came to see the
Prisoners, of Complement the Cavaleers.

A while after this Letter (which I heard nothing of) old Mesey came again for
Money, who had 5 l. of us (being all that we could then get him) which bought
our quiet for a few days; but then finding us unable to lay down the whole
price for it (as other Prisoners perhaps did) we lost the Mansion: And besides,
we bought our Provision, and had our Drink at the best hand from abroad, which
made our Goalers (upper and under) more enemies to us than before, (it seems:)
for the gain which Harding had, and which, it is said, he paies out of every
Barrel of Beer to his Master, is great from Prisoners, putting off what is bad
at the highest and unreasonable rates; so that now nothing but evaporating
wrath, Cursing, and Swearing to be revenged, we heard of; setting all the
wicked Prisoners upon us, who put their wits upon the tenter-hooks to that
purpose, inventing and coining new ways, and words, saying they hoped to see
me dance in a Rope, and swing in a Halter; calling us Hypocrites, Liars,
Deceivers, yea, Rogues and Queans, and Devils, and what not? (as Luther said,
ad Spal. Prorsus Satan est Lutherus, dum modo Christus vivit and regnat, Amen.
So say I, Amen! So be it. So Christ does but reign*) Affronting me to my face
(if I went but down Stairs; which made me seldom stir down for air, not above
once or twice in a Quarter of a Year.) Their words were wounds, Prove. 18.8. and
26.22. I shall forbear to particularize their Names, till I have a Call to it;
but will use the Psalmists words, as suitable to me, with much assurance in the
same God, Psalm. 56.3, 5, 6. What time I am afraid, I will trust in God, I will
praise his word, I will not fear what flesh can do unto me; Every day they
wrest my words, All their thoughts are against me for evil. They gather
themselves together, they hide themselves, they mark my steps when they wait
for my soul. Shall they escape by iniquity, O God? No! Isa. 29.20, 21. When
Paul was in danger of his life, his Jailer (the Captain) came and rescued him
from the Jews, and after loosed him from his bonds, Acts 21.31, 32, 33. and
22.30. but these are so far from pity, ingenuity, or Christianity, that their
frequent dialect is bitter, bloody, malicious, and menacing, (as if they longed
to have our blood) swearing to run me through if I offered to stir; putting
Cavaliers, Ranters, and Blasphemers upon it, to plot against me for my life, to
gather up Articles against me from what they overheard, or invented, from my
praying and preaching, or singing of Hymns, writing all down they could make
for their purpose; and then sending them to Serg. Dendy, or to White Hall to
Mr. Thurloe, against me. The first Informer they got up against me, was one
Abdy, a high Ranter, and Blasphemer, and Atheist, who was stabbed to death that
day that he was promised and expected his reward at White Hall, for his good
service against me; and his were some of the Articles they read against me at
White Hall, This Man did frequently Consult with the Devil, calling him his
God; and (as I heard) in the Chamber below me, Conjured him up in personal
shape. When he heard me at prayer in my family, he would come to the door,
shreeking, yelling, and screaming with a most hideous noise, thump at the door,
open it, and come in among us, singing, roaring, smoking Tobacco, cursing,
swearing, blaspheming, blowing horns, and the like, on purpose to disturb us.
When we sung Hymns, he would sing filthy blasphemous ribaldry, in bawdy
languages, and at every end of his sentence some desperate Oath. Three days
before he was stabbed, and after he had sent in his forged Articles (which he
gathered against me, to take away my life) he made a most blasphemous Song:
this Song he and some more (of the same sort) came to my door, singing it
together in the tune of a Psalm or Hymn; scoffing, laughing, swearing, and
blaspheming most hideously between whiles. Besides him, some other of the
prisoners were put upon this practice; and a little before I was called to
White Hall last, old Measy came (he said) from Sergeant Dendy, to bid them get
all their Papers they had ready: who said they would; and immediately went
together one day after another, until they had gathered up Articles into two or
three sheets (as I hear) against me, (bragging what they would do) and so sent
them to Serg. Dendy, and he appointed his man to carry them to Mr. Thurloe.
They were grown so high then, as to come into my chamber upon me, and invade
me, my wife and family there, with violent and most virulent invectives,
stabbing words and threats; (...) insomuch as they being desperate, our lives
(we thought) were in danger by them. They frequently sent the Keepers with
scurrilous messages, and cast or sent in notorious Libels; and still invented
somewhat or other; being stirred up or countenanced in all these (and a
thousand other affronts and abuses) by the Goalers. So that, I say, we received
not Roman civility, or so much as sober Heathen ^sage from them; and were by
many degrees more brutishly and barbarously treated, then the veriest miscreant
Cavaliers, Ranters or Blasphemers they had. For they had the liberty of any
room in the house, of any of their friends (though ever so rude) to see them;
yea, the Cavaliers at this day courted by Serg. Dendy and his wife, offering to
send Down-bedding, if they lie too hard; giving them liberty to go abroad when
they will, by day or by night; yea, to go to Taverns when they lift; yea, to
take the Key, and let who they will in, and who they will out; and to keep my
friends out (as if they were the Goalers) scoffing and mocking them by the name
of holy sisters and holy brethren; and what not? Whiles we were (the Lord
knows) contented to have lain in straw, would they have let us have been quiet;
but they would not; which made us more sufferers then men think for: but the
Day will discover.

And thus far for the second Particular, which I might have amplified in many
other Orders, Letters, Messages, which I have by me; and who will may see them
in the Original, and then judge of our Goalers what they think of them. 3. The
Prison-company with us, worse then in the Heathens ^ays.


3. They surpass the Roman tyranny, yea of Nero too in this, That Paul was
Prisoner in his own hired house two whole years, Acts 28.30. and he was
suffered to dwell by himself, verse. 16. only a Soldier kept him. So in Queen
Mary's days, Rogers, Martyr, prisoner in his own house a long time. But we are
torn out of our houses, like beasts out of holes, and brought as I was into
such a company and crew (at Lambeth) with them that were brought in there, that
for drinking, swearing, reveling, fidling, singing, roaring and blaspheming,
day and night* I never heard the like among the worst Cavaliers, or wickedest
of men; making the Prison to me a very Pourtraicture of Hell, and Horror, and
Hideous Blaspheming among the Damned ones, (as I may have a season to acquaint
the world with ere long: for now I do but hint and instance in things for
proof.) The 26 of 10 m. a Bawd came for G. (as the Keepers wife confessed) one
of the greatest Informers against me, and brought him a Drink; fetched him out
to a Whore; who came not in again till one or two in the night; and then was a
great falling out about it, raging and raving: the occasion of it the Keepers
wife said was, He had been with his whore. They were so wicked, that besides
all their most hideous mocking and contemning the Ordinances of Christ, and
foresaid living in sin day and night, they would assault my family, get the
Key, and solicit them to the Taverns if they could; take the children,
threaten them, and force them to swear, curse, and call vile names; and watch
after candlelight, when the servant went but down stayers, lay violent hands
upon her, three or four at once, pull her into a Chamber; one call for Sack to
stop her mouth, another holding her between his legs, and so offering to abuse
her: with abundance of such base villainies renewed; and we had no remedy
against it. Yet these were the Informers against, and Accusers of me, who were
so much countenanced, and received such extraordinary Courtship from all the
Goalers, etc. Though I expect to suffer the sharper for telling this little of
the truth; yet Jehovah is on my side, Psalm. 118.6. of whom shall I be afraid?
Psalm. 27.1, 2. Jehovah is my light, and the strength of my life. Ideo negare
non volo, ne peream; and ideo mentiri non volo, ne pellem: 4. To hinder friends
visiting and ministering to us, worse then the Heathens.
as one of the Martyrs said.

4. The Roman power (under the Dragon-Government) did give liberty to all
Paul's friends to visit him, and minister to him, Acts 24.23. that he should
forbid none of his acquaintance to minister or come unto him. But our friends
and acquaintance are forbid, as to their coming: sometimes they ordered not
man, woman nor child to come at me, and ordered no servant should be with me:
and yet then the Goalers were so cruel to me, that they refused to dress us any
meat (for money) in our need, (which they did do for others) So that my care
was then (expecting my wife to be put from me also, which was assayed by some)
to learn to make Colefires, dress meat, and make my bed my self, etc. at other
times they ordered three at once might come to see me; and at other times,
only such as the Jailer in his discretion did judge sober, and grave, or good
enough; and at other times six: and so is it now, as Arbitrary power is in the
mood. Sometimes they were made to wait, in wind, cold, and storm, many hours at
the door without, and then sent away at last, and not let in, though they had
no order against it. Sometimes they will make them wait long, and then let them
in, upon good pay for Key-greasing (as they call it:) and then sometimes
saluted with scoffs and mocks of holy sister, or the like flouts; and with many
other abuses. The 18 of the last 12 m. they let in a godly maid (after long
waiting to see me) who went into the Kitchen, (the way up to my chamber;) but
there they fell upon her, and beat her about the head and body most sadly,
whiles others looked on, laughed at it, and made them sport with it; and then
turned her (so abused) out of doors again (without seeing me:) this was on the
Lords day. Another they resolved to let in, on purpose to pump him; (several of
the Cavaliers with the Jailer having agreed it, as we heard:) but the man
hearing of it, prevented them, and never durst come to see me (there) after
that. A multitude of such things I might mention, to show how our friends
coming to us was and is hindered. 2. As to their ministering to us, they do use
very strange and incredible lies, reports, and means, for all that I can see,
to starve us, and keep others from ministering to us: for they have taken away
All, and yet exact heave Fees, and say they ask none; and report high mountains
of Lies, either to make us odious, that none might regard us, (going up and
down many of them for that purpose) or else (if a friend but come and dine with
us) reporting we fare so bravely, and better then their Lord Protector; and
that all the Churches in England had gathered for us; and that the Chapter of Hull
had sent me 30 l. at Lambeth: with abundance more of such abominable untruths,
on purpose to possess our friends with these reports, and to bind up their
hands from ministering unto us, who have (may they be believed) so little need:
and had they been believ^, the Lord knows we might have been starved, in
Reason. Serg. Dendy was very diligent to vent such Reports to such friends as
have told me of it again with grief, when they saw them so untrue. Sometimes
too they say we are kept high in prison, and it makes us proud; and that for
this reason, we will keep in: and at other times, That their Lord Protector
gives us a large Table, and liberal Allowance: the truth (or rather, untruth)
of these Reports, is soon known; neither does their Lo. P's charity reach to us
so far, as to allow us bread and water; (for all that he has taken away all
livelihood from us and our little ones:) which is far more cruelty then King,
Prelates, Papists or Heathens did show; for they gave an allowance to very
Traitors, etc. besides what friends ministered to them. Yea, Bonner, as bloody a
Beast as he was, sent provision to Mr. Philpot and others into his Cole-house.
But we know whom we serve; and he that has the fullness of earth in his hands,
provides for us: therefore as Paul says, Phil. 4.11, 12. Not that I speak in
respect of want: for I have learned, in whatsoever state I am, to be therewith
content: I have learned to be full, and to be hungry; to abound, and to suffer
need; and can do all things through Christ that strengthens me. Yea, when bread
fails, faith feeds hard. Psalm. 37.3. Pascere fide, as Junius reads it: for
faith fetched Daniel his dinner into the Den, out of Habakkuk's belly too, (if
the Story be true) whiles the Lions lacked: and so faith fetches in food and
raiment, and outward things for us, (sore against our enemies and Persecutors
minds, it seems) Psalm. 23.5. Psalm. 34.10. by opening the hearts and the hands
of some poor Saints to save it out of their own bowels for us, (though there be
but few, and those all poor, that dare or do own us at such a distance.) Dat
been, dat multum, qui dat cum munere vultum. Christ will take it well at his
hands, who has a heart for Christ in a Cup of cold water to his Disciples: But
I speak, for the discovery of that unreasonable Spirit which is in our
persecutors, who report every mite and morsel of bread a mountain, upon a
design to stay the hands of the Saints from ministering unto us; and so to
tire, and starve us into an Apostasy (an yielding) and from our Principles,
with them: But, fides famem non formidat: for, as one says, If these
persecuters and pursevants, tyrants and Goalers will take away my Meat, I trust
God will take away my Stomach; and so it is all one still. For this I am sure
of, That we shall be satisfied when our Enemies shall want, and be ashamed,
Prove. 13.25. Isa. 65.13. Amen! Says Faith, who fetches this in also! But thus
far for the Fourth Particular, which proves their inveterate malice and hatred
to the cause, and to us.

5. To hinder Preaching and Praying to poor Souls, is beyond the Tyranny of the
Heathens.
5. They fall short of Heathen civility in the Allowance the Romans gave (yea,
Nero, as notorious a Tyrant as he was) to Paul, Act. 28.31. Preaching the
Kingdom of God, and teaching the things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, no
man forbidding him; yea, and this at Rome, under Nero's nose: yea, the Martyrs
in Queen Mary's days, in the Compter, and in the Bishop's Coal-house behind
his Kitchen, they Preached, Prayed, and Sang together, none forbidding them.
But we are forbidden to Preach in Prison, and our Friends forbidden to come to
us, to hear us; yea, Serg. Dendy sent a Letter at large (which I have by me) to
forbid it: yea, the Church-Society I walk with, are not suffered to come at me,
to Pray or Exercise with me. And after they had an express Order to turn me out
from the air and use of the Common hall in Lambeth, because I Preached and
Prayed there; They said also, they had Order to keep Prisoner any man that
should dare to pray with me in my Chamber: The same day, when Jonathan Tailor
of Warwick-Church was with me, and Prayed, they gave warning thereof. And after
that, they took strict notice of any that looked like a gifted-brother, that
they suspected would Pray or Preach in my Chamber, etc. would not let him, of
Any, have access so much as to see me, unless he would engage to come down
presently again, (not to Pray, or the like, with me in my Chamber:) so precise
were they against preaching and praying. Here also at Windsor we have like
experience, having been beaten, abused, and clapped up close for it, as we shall
show ere long. This is doubtless so high a crime among Christians too, that
Nero shall find more mercy at the day of judgment; and it shall be easier for
him, then for these men, in this matter. But O! it is no little comfort, that
we can suffer this (and a thousand times more, we hope, by the grace of God)
with great joy, for his sake, who has made us worthy, Acts 5.51. Unto you
(says the Apostle, Phil. 1.) is given, not only to Believe, but to Suffer;
which all Saints cannot do. And as it is Acts 28.20. It is for the Hope of
Israel, that I am bound with this chain; as I shall show in this Treatise. Et
signum est mihi majoris Gloriae, ut omnes impii (fere) me detestantur.

I might mention other Particulars, wherein our Persecutors and Goalers are
worse to us then Heathens or Romans, (under the Dragon-Government) or Papists
and Prelates under the Beast's Government; as, in that they were allowed to
dispute the Truth with the Word of God; which we are not: and the like. But by
this you see it a true assertion, That we are under a worse then Roman
tyranny; of the greatest aggravation, By our brethren too, and for our
Consciences too, and at such a time too, and after such vast streams and
treasures of our blood, estates, faith, tears, and prayers too, to purchase our
undoubted privileges and immunities, (in another manner of liberty) too; and
to us too, who have all along fought in the field, raised men, spent our
estates, and ventured our lives, and for the very Truths, and upon the same
Principles we now suffer in, too: all this is the Aggravation of the Threnody.

Much might we say of Paul's Plea of Freeborn, Act. 23.28. and as we are the
Conquerors, and never yet the Conquered (though cheated and deceived) Side: and
much according to the Laws of the Nation, whereof the General was a Member that
made them, which are duly Enrolled, Proclaimed in due order, Acted upon,
Executed, and Unrepealed; to which have been many Solemn Engagements, Oaths,
Declarations and Wars: and much more I might say, but that the Sword (as it is)
has neither eyes nor ears; and therefore can neither pity us as Englishmen,
nor as Christians. The Soldiers counsel was, Acts 27.42. (and is it not?) to
kill the Prisoners. But stay! brother Red-coat, we Except against thee: for we
will have no Butcher for a Jury-man.

The main Causes which moved Serg. Dendy to be so long a Suitor (as I hear) to
the Council for my removal to Windsor (according to his several threatenings by
Letters, Messages, and Word of mouth at White Hall, that day I was before them)
was the Complaint the Prisoners made, being afraid to take that freedom and
excess in sin, night and day, as they would do, whiles I was there; and then
the Gains which he lost by my being there, both in Fees and otherwise; as Acts
16.19. When they saw that the hope of their gains was gone, they brought Paul
and Silas, and drew them to the marketplace to the rulers; and the rulers cast
them into prison; verse. 23, 24. yea, they were thrust into the Inner prison:
but there they sang Praises, and so do we our Antelucanos Hymnos; and so we
will, till the Foundations of this Earthly Government rend: Amen! Hallelujah.

Though for these Reasons, and for others more public, as for Preaching,
Praying, etc. Lambeth became inhabitable (to me) under the Torrid Zone of these
Persecutors and Goalers anger; yet I can tell them, (if I may boast in the
Lord) with greater comfort and confidence then they can look Christ, his
Saints, or Cause (which they have betrayed) in the face, or look for favor
from the Righteous Judge, That I live in the most Temperate Zone of heaven, do
what they can for their hearts, and with a better Conscience (which is my
continual feast) can look out at these Iron bars, and sing whiles the thorn is
at my breast to keep me wakeful, then they can at their Belcona's or rattling
Coaches, or ruffle in their gold and gaudiness, dyed in the blood of the
Saints, or gotten by Hypocrisy and cozening. It is a true saying of Aug. de
bon. pers. cap. 6. Tutiores autem sumus si Totum Deo damus; non autem nos illi
ex part and nobis ex part committimus: We are best and safest, when we give
God All, and not seek to share or part stakes with God; much less like the
Apostates of these Times, who are so far from giving God All, and they be
Nothing but what God will have them, that they Themselves will be All, (in
Civils, Military, and Ecclesiastics) and God (or Christ) shall be Nothing but
what they will have them: Therefore no wonder they are alarmed with continual
fears, whiles we (poor Worms!) in prison need none of their courts of Guard,
but can sleep sweetly and securely (in the warm bosom of Eternal Love) though
Madmen, Drunkards, and Devils are about us day and night; for with no little
sap, solace, and sweetness have I sucked in Luther's saying, (which is mine
now:) Ipse viderit ubi anima mea sit mansura, qui pro ea sit sollicitus fuit,
ut vitam pro ea posuerit: and therefore it is (by his grace) I will look thee
in the face, Thou proudest Tyrant! thou can but batter the vessel! thou can
but hurt the bark; but, my life is hid with Christ (O sweet word! they cannot
find it! it is out of their reach; for it is hid with Christ) in God. Amen!
Lord, and keep it there! that I faint not. Thus far for the second Reason
arising from my sufferings.

3. Another Reason why I appeared not publicly from prison before, was
impreparation, having been in the valley for the vision many days and months,
before I could come to this, in many travels, trials, and pangs of Spirit upon
me, before it could be brought so near the birth as now it is, waiting for a
safe and seasonable deliverance. This made me sit up (mourning) in the
night-season, (and laid me low in the flesh for many a week together) with
little joy of this life (as we say) though with no little joy of cheary faith,
and sweetness in divine life (and being;) waiting for the Anointing to bring
forth this little, being loath it should prove abortive, though but an Embryo of
what (I hope) will be born in due season. But some labor with more difficulty,
pains, and dangers, to bring forth a little birth (by reason of impediments)
then others do in the greatest: and indeed, because of the Times, a fixed and
clear judgment is so incumbent, that I could not content my self with the
speculation of the present Truths, Prophecies, and Visions which begin to break
out of Daniel and the Revelation with such dazzling and amazing light; but I
must be sure of a sound Practical judgment too, and principle in the heart,
which puts into one balance (with Christ and his Controversy) God and his
Commands, and into the other (with the Beast and his present Controversy) the
Sins and Apostacies of the Times, and of this Street; and upon poysing on all
Sides, and setting all it can cost me, before me, chooses my duty to God and
Christ against the sins and abominations of the Times or the Powers, which
occasions the hard Travel. And I must confess, I did deliberate with too much
flesh and blood at first; contenting my self more with the heavenly Prison and
presence of Waiting then of Writing, of Praying then of Publishing any thing to
the world; that so I might run the less hazard to life, liberty, fame, or
estate, etc. But I was soon rouzed up out of this Contentation, and kind of
Contemplation, (whether I will or no) by a loud Call to me for what is already
born of God in me, about the Work of this Age, yea, of the 45. ensuing years
(after this) wherein the Lamb's followers and sufferers under the Banner of
Christ, are to know their Places, maintain their Watches, keep their Motions,
continue their Marches, renew their Charges, till they rout Babylon, and
destroy the Beasts Dominion root and branch; yea, until they do Wonders in this
old world. For the years of Wonders (Dan. 12.6.) are now entering, upon the
descension of the Spirit of life from God. And in order I am to sound the
ensuing Trumpet to the Two Witnesses and remnant of the woman's seed* for it is
no time to dally: the danger is great, the day is come, and we are engaged
(there is no going off) live or die, stand or fall, fight or flight is at hand:
and Number. 10.5, 6, 8. When ye blow an alarm, then the camp shall go forward.
When the Congregation is to be gathered together, ye shall blow, but not an
alarm: and this shall be an indelible ordinance to you in your generation,
(...). So that after a long and humble attendance at the Throne for my present
work, The Order of the Author's Call to this Treatise.
I am put upon this, (whatever I must do or endure for it, so Jesus be but
magnified, my spirit is pitched) having so manifest and manifold a Call to it
in order, thus. 1. A special Message from the LORD, brought by a choice servant
of Christ and his Church.


1. A Message brought me the 10 of this month by our S. H.T. who had a weeks
close communion and conference with the Lord in heavenly Visits and Visions,
singing, praying, contemplating, communicating, and receiving, amongst other
things, a Message to deliver me in the Prison, which I had to this effect: That
the Lamb's book should be unsealed, and the Visions opened to me; bidding me be
of good cheer, for I should shortly know my own work, and what Israel ought to
do. This, I confess, was a word in season to me, and as suitable (at that
juncture) as if an Angel had come with it out of heaven on purpose; which much
raised and revived my spirit, as Solomon says, Prove. 13.17. A faithful (or, as
in Heb. a true) Messenger is health, in the Abstract: (...) I found it, when
the visions of mine head troubled me, and made me sick: it is medicina, as some
read it, Prove. 25.13. Besides, upon the first of the third m. last, after a
very solemn Fast all day, (with my con-Captive) to know our work, and what we
should do; the succeeding night, in my sleep, I thought I lay under the shadow
of a great Mulberry-tree, which hung full of great ripe mulberries: I lying
with my face upward, and mouth open, saw many of the boughs crowded together;
which I thought (by impression upon my heart (in my bodily sleep) to be the
Lord on the top, treading them down together; whereby, as the boughs, so the
(brave large) berries struck one against another, and brake one into another,
and ran all (that were so broken) by one stream, into my mouth and belly,
whereby I thought I was abundantly refreshed: and when I awaked, I was so
indeed, full of joy, and could not hold, but told my wife of it presently, and
afterward my friends. But before noone the same day, I received a Letter from
the foresaid person, with these lines: Truly, brother, I have seen you
frequently in the divine bosom, and have sung abundantly Hallelujah for the
Cordials which I saw poured down your throat, which made you (I apprehended)
like a Champion, and like a triumphing Conqueror! Go on! thou Champion: for he
has said he will stand by thee, who stood by Paul at his first answer, when
none stood by him, etc. Some may muse at my admittance of these things; but I
do assure them, it is neither to boast of them, (for what have thou, O man, to
boast of, but what thou have received?) nor to build upon them, which is very
dangerous; but it is to observe the concurrence and good effects of such
passages: for though I am as far from taking notice of, or having dependence
upon Dreams or Visions, as any man alive; yet I must not omit the
night-teachings of the Spirit, nor such Dreams or Visions which bring forth
blessed effects upon the spirits of men, or are ratifications of the truth and
mind of God; for that the great Promise of the Spirit must bring forth such
effects, and such Dreams and Visions in these later days, Joel^. 28. and so the
Lord taught his Saints of old.

2. The incessant expectation of the people of God.
2. To second that servant of the Lord, the very next day, (and since, many
days in a week) have men of much wisdom, grace, holiness, and integrity, come
unto me, to tell me that it is the expectation of the choicest Saints in Land.
(and some in the Country also) the remnant of the Woman, to hear some news of
the Prison-vision or voice which we have been under at Lambeth and Windsor,
(wondering at our so long silence:) yea, that they have kept Praying by whole
Days and whole Nights for that purpose; being very high to hear from us, and to
have our light breaking abroad from Prisonbars for public benefit; that they
who are ready to give proof of their faith in the Lamb (with us) in the very
same Battalia and Testimony against the Beast, might be provoked by us in the
present Work, VVatch, and Warfare: And therefore they waited with wide
desires, and fixed eyes upon me, for somewhat to be published, a fresh
quickening word, according to the fresh comforting Anointing that is upon me in
Prison; praying earnestly, that their (almost) hourly, and more then ordinary
expectations may not prove barren or abortive. Amen! say I, Psalm. 9.18. For the
expectation of the poor (and persecuted ones) shall not (always) perish: (...)
it may be frustrate for a time; (...); but the expectation of the wicked will
perish for ever, Prove. 10.20. and 11.7, 23. Isai. 20.5. Zech. 1.5. At the time
of the End (which is now) are many to run to and fro, that knowledge may be
increased, Dan. 12.4. And such as wait for the vision, shall find it, when it
shall speak, and not lie, (though it tarry its appointed time) Hab. 2.2, 3. So
the knowledge of wisdom will be sweet to thy soul; and when thou have found it,
thine expectation cannot be cut off, Prove. 24.13, 14. This is another degree of
my Call, viz. the eager desires, expectations, and invitations of good People
to publish this, which like the wind puts the Ship upon motion; but it is the
Compass guides it. And as Cicero did expect abundance of knowledge from his
son, because of his continual converse with Cratippus in his School: so, it
seems, the Saints at our hands (who are in Prison) expect Pathmos-discoveries,
the fruits of fresh, full, frequent, close, continual, early and evening, and
most spiritual and alone converse with Jesus Christ in this his Free School,
where our Father has put us for a few years, to learn hard Lessons (to flesh
and blood) out of the Lamb's book: and blessed be our most dear and gracious
God, it is the best School (within these Iron bars) that ever we were at in our
lives, though we be kept strictly to it: ( Schola crucis is Schola lucis:) for
the Lord is not a barren desert, or land of darkness (Jer. 2.) unto us: which I
believe every one in Prison for this blessed (though betrayed) Cause (with us)
can and will testify, una and viva voce, ere long. But,

3. The flying reports which pass and rep^ss at pleasure upon our Principles
and Practices.
3. The variety of Reports, and of unsatiable Reporters, which have run about
City and Country, continually to render us and this most admirable Cause and
Truth of Christ's kingdom, worthy of the worst contempt that people can put
upon us, (whiles we by a forced silence are buried alive in these Iron graves,
and not suffered to answer for our selves or the Truth) so that the tongues of
some men hang so much upon the hinges of the Times, that, like flying doors,
without lock or key they open or shut with the least blast of wind which
blows from the Court; yea, their very Preachers, to make us Monsters in the
eyes of the poor deluded People, report strange things of us; as they use to do
of dogs, first spread abroad they are mad, and then hang them: Thus are we
reported; and the inhumane Tyranny upon us, is (in the Pulpits) reported to be
no Persecution, but an act of Justice; and so have the Persecutors; Powers and
Priests said, all along this 42 m. that the Martyrs were evil doers, factious,
seditious Traitors; as at this day, the Duke of Savoy declares the poor
Waldenses and Albigenses: So that the bloodiest bruits that ever were, would
say so much for themselves, that what they did was Justice. But how any of the
present Friars, Chaplains, or Parsons, can prove our sufferings so, or dare
utter it with such boldness for Orthodox Doctrine, to their poor deluded
people, (had they not the spirit of the Beast, and forehead of the Whore newly
painted) I profess I should have wondered; or how the people can be willing to
hear so high Pulpit-lyes at their Priest's mouth, By Ministers in Pulpits and
out.
is as much to be admired, were they not such pitiful Slaves (in soul and
body.) For, can there be an act of Justice without a Trial? or Trial without
Crime? or Crime without a Law? or the like? yet without all or any of these, we
lie in prisons year after year, only for Preaching the Truth (as their own
Consciences can and do tell them, and all the world knows) and no formal Charge
against us to this day: So that the Prelates and Papists, who had a Law of the
Land, etc. had more color of Justice then these men. Besides, if to suffer out
of pure love to the Lord Jesus in a good Cause, with a good conscience, and by
as good a Call (as men can have to preach and pray, the Gospel of the Kingdom,
or Reign of Christ, and the downfall of the Beast's dominion; yea particularly,
that Civil as well as Ecclesiastical Sanction of the 4 Mon. in this Nation now)
if to suffer for a Fundamental Principle of Faith, by the mere lust, will, and
rage of man, contrary to the Word of God, and Laws of the Land: and if to
suffer with the most evident testimony of our Consciences with us, and of our
Christ; and of the presence of Jehovah owning us every day, and with a conflux
and fullness of joy in the holy Ghost flowing from the Covenant of grace, New
Testament- promises and Principles, etc. and if our Cause is so clear and just,
before God and men, that we can dare and do challenge our Adversary (the
proudest of them all) to bring it and us to any open (lawful) Trial, etc. if
any or all (and more then all) these things be an argument of a good Suffering,
or a Persecution that is upon us, and not any act of Justice (as the lying
spirit in the mouths of the false Prophets, reports) then we are under a
Persecution. And I wonder with what face men can pretend to be Ministers of the
Gospel, that go up and down with such uncharitable censures, untruths, and evil
reports, (of their poor imprisoned brethren, insulting over them in their
calamities (with calumnies) now they know they cannot speak for themselves)
vapouting abroad they will undertake to prove, They (meaning us in Prison for
this Cause) suffer not for the Gospel, nor for any Truth of the Gospel; and
doing what they can to make false report of our Principles and Practices: which
obliges me the more to the publication of this Treatise.

And by false brethren.
Besides them, and the forementioned at Court, there be others too, set awork
by Satan, viz. false Brethren of the Churches we walk with, especially two,
withdrawn from for scandal and sin; whose uneven walking, and imperious spirit
(formerly) did beat in the body like an uneven Pulse, which was growing up to a
very high distemper and danger, but that the Physician of the Church gave it a
Purge, and prevented: yet these two (whose names I am loath to make too public;
for who knows but they may repent, and be other men? which would be great
rejoicing to me) have most unchristianly reported (if not invented) such things
as my very soul abhors; which is publicly spread as far as Jews in Sussex;
yea, the Pastor of the Church told me, for all that he knew, as far as
Edinburgh in Scotland. And this makes me mention it ^he more particularly,
because no Author can be found for ^t, and the Cause of Christ is so much
concerned in it; which makes the Devil so busy at this day, by diverse
instruments (after the foresaid two) to report me to have played at Cards in
Lambeth-prison (a very vile Slander) the last Christimass, (as they call it:)
the Cavalier-Prisoners, and the rest of the Ranting crew in that Prison, did
play, drink and game, day and night, all the time; but for my part, I neither
saw nor touched a pair of Cards all the time, nor, to my knowledge, any one of
my family: and to take off all scruple, I have had a kind of antipathy to
Cards ever since my suffering with the Puritans (so called) by the Prelates,
(when I was yet but a child, being then led to it by their example, when I
knew no other reason) and cannot endure to see a Pair of Cards: and if I see
but any (anywhere) that I can lay hands of, I burn them: yet, as Metullus was
answered in the Senate, when he railed against Tacitus, It is easy to abuse
him who is not suffered to answer. But I will not fill my pages with such
unprofitable lines; only this, to take off all stumbling blocks from good
people, (who else might be prejudiced against me) before they read the
following book: and as I meet with any other material passages or reports (as
I come at them in order) I shall endeavor, for thy sake, Reader, to clear the
way for thee; knowing there be many, who, Shemaiah-like, would put us in fear,
as Neh. 6.13, 14. (...), yea, into a fright, lest we should go forward, (that
is the very reason) (...). But though we be but poor! vile worms! and meet with
as many discouragements on the right hand and on the left, as I think such poor
men can meet with, considering the corruptions of our own hearts, and thereupon
the Trials which attend us many times, as well as the Troubles which are added
to us, and our bonds, by the unhandsome mouth-purgings and reports of friends
and foes, good and bad, enemies and false brethren, yea, such as pretend high
with us too in this most excellent Cause for (and in) which we suffer with
abundance of divine support, blessed be the Lord: therefore we hope through his
grace we may say, We will sooner have our tongues cleave to the roof of our
mouths, our eyes shrink and sink into our heads with waiting, yea, and our
bodies rot in the Dungeons, then relinquish this glorious Controversy now up
for the Lamb against the Beast, (for which we are in prison) or yield an inch
of ground to our Enemies in these matters. Others there be, who report highly
of our Persecutors on purpose, as some did of Tobiah's good deserts, Nehem.
6.19. on purpose, I say, to discourage the brethren, and that they might have
Matter for an evil report (says the text) of us; which I hop^ they shall never
have (as they would) as long as blood is in our veins, and as long as Jehovah
supports, Christ intercedes, and Saints pray for us. Therefore let all these
Fame-bearers, good and bad, remember how Nehemiah prayed against such brethren,
as well as such enemies: Nehem. 6.14.
and see Number. 14.37. Even those brethren that did bring up an evil report upon
the land, died (every one) by the plague before the Lord: and so will these,
without timely repentance: nor can they enter into the thousand years Canaan.
But thus far for the third step to this Treatise by Call.

4. The Challenge of some of the Court-champions.
4. Another degree of the Call, is the proud, flaunting, and Goliath-like
Challenge made us by some of the Court-cathers and boasters: one of the late
Clerical Commissioners has twice pressed it upon me (in the prison) to print
somewhat; saying, he would warrant I should have free liberty to do it (without
offense) and without danger, print what I would; withal, that I should have an
Answer: which (with a kind of boasting and insulting) being urged so hard upon
me, for the Truths sake, was of notable inducement to point my Pen; for I hope
to find a little Stone fit for the purpose: which monstrous high Challenge is
(methinks) much like that of Gaal in his Champion-fits of Fury and Folly, Judge.
9. who dared Abimelech when he was absent, saying, ( Sultan-like) Who is he?
Increase thine army, and come out. But by and by, seeing his Army in earnest
coming (without increase) his Plumes fell, and he was terrified and amated at
the very shadows of them: and then Zebul mocked him, saying, (as't were, How
now man! where is thy courage?) verse. 38. Wherewith thou said, Who is
Abimelech? where is thy mouth? Is not this the people thou so despisest? Go
out, I pray, and meet them, and fight with them: which when he did, (as he
could do no otherwise, for shame) he was destroyed and smote before them. And
so some say to us, Come, if you dare! print! publish what ye can! etc. but,
Altitudo non est valida: Soft words, and hard Arguments, go farthest.

5. The many Cases of Conscience sent me, alluding to this Subject.
5. I found besides all said before) Cases of Conscience come thick upon me,
and sent apace unto me for Resolves in the work of the Day, about the
Witnesses; the time, the street, the rise; the order, and effects of their
rising; also, about the Vials, and about the Beasts dominion; the first and
second Beast, with their characters; and about the number of the Beast's name,
and who is the man that makes up the last character of the Beast, viz. 666. and
several Queries in all the points I herein handle: and Cases to be resolved,
which I may say some scores of Saints sent or brought unto me; whereby I saw an
evident call to give an account of those Cases and Resolves in this Treatise,
which others have experienced, and put their Probatum est, for the public
benefit of other Patients. But if these Physical ingredients work well, they
must be content to be sick (of the world, and of all sublunary affairs, as they
are; and to be redeemed fully from the earth, for the service of the Lamb) who
would be well. A good Conscience, and a good Cause, are like two bladders under
the arm-holes, which keep the poor heart from sinking, and the head above
water, do what men or devils can, as we in prison can tell by experience, while
Rich-men (poormen!) in the midst of their Honors, or ill-gotten Greatness,
will find at last, for all their Arts, Equivocations, and Policy, to put off
their Consciences with, That they have but stuffed a pitcher in stead of a
pillow, with feathers to lie down upon. And indeed, a Court-conscience (as
things are now) is worse then a common Goal, as the Apostates of the times will
find at the General Assizes; for thither the Lord chief Justice of all the
world sends his Malefactors; he makes his Warrants, to have them bound with the
cords of their own sins; and ere long (O lamentable!) they shall lie in
Little-Ease, without Bayl or Mainprise, deprived of the present Light, and laid
as it were upon the Rack (in examination) for their Apostacy, Perjury,
Hypocrisy, Persecution, Self-seeking, etc. till all their Villainy come out: O
it will be a terrible time to them! and this I look for, to light upon them
whom the Law must and will judge.

Now because many poor souls, whose consciences, like candle-snuffs in the
socket, flame up now and then, and then leave them in the dark again; so that
although by such a light, a man may see his book, yet he cannot see how to read
it; or he may know where it is, but not what it is; so he may see his pen and
ink, but not see how to write with it; so a woman may see her needle and work,
but cannot thread her needle, or see to work by such a light: So, I say, are
some men's consciences, sometimes in a little light, and then in the dark again;
they can see the commands, but not their duty; they can see Religion, but not
the work of the generation; they can hear of the downfall of Babylon, and of the
Beast's whole Government, but not bear it at home, or act in the ruin of it:
in the general, they can close with the Truth and present Testimony, but are
not able to come to particulars. Such as these (among others) have brought me
their Cases of conscience; to whom I must minister my light, in the ensuing
Treatise; having a sufficient Call (whatever it should cost me) in my place, as
a Minister of the Gospel, to answer All Cases of conscience, that I may be made
manifest (as the Apostle says) in the consciences of all. 2 Cor. 11.5.
My Lord and Master received all that came unto him; so did the Apostle of the
Gentiles, and all the faithful Ministers all along: yea, if the answer to such
Cases or Queries were ever so high against the Powers or Laws of Men (then
uppermost:) as Luther did in that grand Case of Conscience sent him by the
people of God at Miltenberg, when they were forbidden by the Powers upon pain
of death to appear publicly about matters of Faith. But so far for the fifth
Cause or Call.

6. The Doubts which are occasioned by contradiction of Doctrine in our absence.
6. The frequent News brought us, of that unsteadiness, darkness, and indeed,
malignity and contradiction of doctrine which is delivered at London, tending
to perplex, unsettle, grieve and stagger many precious souls, whose eyes and
hearts are upon the present Truths, Work and Testimony (with us in Prison) for
the Kingdom of Christ, viz. the little Stone, or striking part of that Kingdom
in the first place: sometimes asserting there is no such Kingdom; sometimes,
that the Stone began to strike, at or before the Incarnation of Christ;
sometimes, that the Witnesses were slain long since, in the Martyrs that were
burnt, beheaded, or the like; sometimes, that they are not yet slain, affirming
the Place to be in other Dominions, in Germany or France, Savoy or Rome, or
some other Popish Dominion, and not in England; and making the two Witnesses to
be two persons, or else the suffering Saints together, (who are the remnant of
the Woman's seed) and not the Magistracy and Ministry of the Witness; some
pretending the time of the slaying, and the end of the 42 m. to be afar off,
and wishing the Prisoners were not under a Delusion, in looking for Christ, and
his Kingdom and coming, too soon: sometimes telling them, that the mark of the
Beast is not yet taken, and that none of the Vials are yet poured out; and the
like. Whereby abundance of precious hearts have told me they are so confounded,
that they know not what to say; and can see no light in their Doctrine; which
makes them take so long journeys to the Prison for information, (and would more
and oftener, could they have admittance) for that some of our brethren, in
stead of snuffing the Candle, put it quite out, and so leave our (wonted)
hearers in the dark, especially since the death of Mr. Tillinghast, that
Lanthorn of light, that choice Saint, (who dying in the Testimony, became a
Martyr to the Truth and Cause we are in prison for, as if he had died on the
Scaffold;) during whose life (in so short a space) so much Light was ministered,
as was marvelous in London; he being of a more winning, humble, sweet,
attracting and meek temper; which was very needful for that season; according
to the Italian Proverb: Hard without Soft, the Building is naught: for, there
must be soft Mortar, well tread (an humble spirit well mortified) to hard stone
or brick well laid, (or as well as a zealous resolute spirit well grounded, i.
e. upon sound knowledge) to make up the Bulding that must stand. But, I say,
since the gathering in of that ripe (and rare) first-fruit, or setting of that
Morning Star, (that (...) for he was full of light: yea, that (...) for he was
a light whiles it was yet dark) they are left in the more dark for the present:
but it being a Morning-Matutine darkness, it does argue to me, the Sun is next
to arise, or the enunciation of such light, (and beams at first) as shall
enlighten the whole Land, Rev. 18.1. But now because we are bid ( Isai. 35.3,
4.) to strengthen the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees; and to say to
them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not, etc. and because the End
of a Gospel-minister is (according to the dispensation of the Spirit) to
establish the Saints and Churches in the present Truth and Work, (or, to build
them up) 2 Pet. 1.12, 13. Acts 16.3. 1 Thessalonians. 3.2, 13. 2 Thessalonians. 2.17. Col. 2.7.
I dare not omit my duty herein, to do all I can from a Prison, to dissolve
those doubts, and establish those hearts that pant after the Truth. For
Doubtings are like Quagmires; the longer men stand on them, the more they sink
into them: Sim.
and indeed, there is need of a Daniel's spirit and wisdom to dissolve All
Doubts, Dan. 5.12. and what man dare undertake it? (To loose knots, says the
Hebrew, (...) or open aenigmatical Scriptures and Cases; cut Gordian-knots with
the Sword of Gods Word.) Yet if the Lord will let me have so much of my
inheritance of his wisdom as I need for such a Task and Treatise as this is, I
shall be enabled to dissolve some Doubts, resolve some Cases, quicken, comfort
and establish some Consciences. So that by faith I I go about this Work, that
whereas others are always troubling, stirring, and thicking the Waters, I may
minister them (in those very Prophecies of Daniel, Apocalypse, and other
Scriptures) so clearly, as may refresh the spirits of the Saints. And therefore
help me! O Father! O Fountain of light! and O thou that have the seven Spirits!
that men may easily see, as in clear water, to the very bottom, where the Truth
lies, and what they would clearly understand; which they can never do, in
thick, muddy, and troubled waters. Sim.
And as the honest Draper is content to have his Ware brought to light, and
examined by the sunbeams; so shall I to have this Book. Therefore as when one
takes a piece of money, if he doubts the goodness of it, he takes it, turns it,
rubs it, views it diligently, and tries it every way whether it be sound or no,
before he puts it up, or rests satisfied: so do with this Treatise; believe not
what men say of it, but search and see, (lege and intellige) turn it over and
over, man! line by line! page by page! peruse it, until thou do even unspirit
it into thy self! pray for understanding! read without prejudice! and that
Doctrine which builds you up most in Christ! tends most to mortify you, redeem
you from the world! wealth! pleasures! honors, etc. to quicken you, and
establish you! to put you upon present work for Christ against Antichrist! to
keep you upon your watch! waiting! praying! longing for the day of Christ! to
enlighten you in the Prophecies and promise of his coming, etc. that take and
practice. But so much for the sixth.

7. Experience of fresh Incoms of Light.
7. I find (in few days) a sudden and sweet transition of a very Chaos of
Darkness and Confusion, by divine Command: and whiles the Spirit moves upon the
face of the waters, light breaks in upon me brighter and brighter, and shining
more and more unto the perfect day, Prove. 4.18. which will bring forth little
by little from me to the Saints abroad: and although the Light forces a passage
into my intellect, by a redundant and more then ordinary irradiation; yet many
a time it breaks out at a dark cloud upon my spirit; Job 37.21. Men see not the
bright light that is in the clouds; but the wind (of the Spirit, for so I
find it) passes, Expos.
and cleanses them (from all earthliness, caliginous thickness of vapors or
fancies; and so I trust, the Reader that hears and reads what the Spirit
says, shall find it:) yea, the most heavenly light is such a light, (...)
which few arrive at, or derive from: (...). Since a participation whereof, with
the fastening of some promises full upon my spirit, I can find no Truce within
me, without sounding a Call to the Lambs number, in order to their Muster upon
mount Sion, (or the New Covenant) and blowing a Trumpet in the ensuing Tract,
which (I hope) will give a more certain sound then has been hitherto: for,
unto the upright there arises a light in the darkness, Psalm. 112.4. (a sweet
word!) or, per nubilum tempus: (...) it arises by, xpos.
through, or in a dark and cloudy time, as this is; it does so to the faithful
Saints, whiles others grope at noonday (as the Prophet says;) caecutiunt in
luce. That also in Isai. 58.10, 11. is much upon my heart: If thou draw out thy
soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted, then shall thy light arise in
obscurity, (an odd word, to humane reason, flesh and blood, or man's wisdom)
and thy darkness shall be as the noonday; and Jehovah shall guide thee
continually, etc. O blessed word to my faith! for my very soul and heart-bowels
have been drawn out to poor hungry hearts, yea, to minister my daily bread at
the prison-bars to the persecuted Remnant: and I need no more (methinks) now,
to fetch me out of Prison (as I may say) to so public a work, wherein I was so
backward, because so darkward therein; yet I have many other promises upon
motion, as Isai. 42.16. I will make darkness light before thee: and that of
Dan. 12.4. Shut up the words, seal the book, even to the time of the end, (the
3 years and half end, verse. 7. when the Witnesses shall appear peditatim, and
the Little Stone begin to strike the Powers of the fourth Monarchy all to
pieces:) then many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased; yea,
light shall break out abundantly, Rev. 18.1. (which begins in the last three
years and an half of Daniel's 1290, and John's 1260 Prophetical days) I have a
more then ordinary confidence, (if not clear assurance) that the Visions of
Daniel's (sealed) and the light of the Lamb's book, Rev. 5. shall be opened to
me, as I am able to bear it, (by degrees) yea, be let out upon me like a
Sluice, and overtake me in full streams, if I faithfully pursue the Light
already given me; which, with the Lords grace, I will do, though I die for it.
He (says our Savior, Joh. 14.21, 22.) shall be loved of my Father, and I will
love him, and I will manifest my self to him; (...), Expos.
i. e. as by the light of the Sun: not by Parts, Arts or Sciences; but so, or
in such manifestations, as the world never had, verse. 22. in
New-Covenant-Light, or Truth breaking out with the brightness or luster of the
Covenant of Grace, and the Fathers love to him: such a one shall be like an
Angel in the Sun, Rev. 19.17, 18. or clothed with the Sun, in a fullness, body,
and subsistence of Light communicative to others who wait for the benefit of
it, who would be refreshed by it, and do the work of the day in it, which the
Light sets on foot, and is unto us a witness, call, support, comfort,
assistance, and assurance.

8. All temptations removed, and the way cleared with many sweet promises.
8. To name no more, I was somewhat dejected (yet not so as to despond, or
doubt of assistance) to see the most tremendous and dreadful wrath of God
(which is to begin within 2 or 3 years, upon this Apostate generation) to pass
before me: some temptation seized upon me, (through self-diffidence, and bodily
distemper) as at the apprehension of the inextricacie, depth, and
incomprehensiveness of those deep Prophecies which I have to ferry over, or
pass through; wherein so many (more Able) have sunk and fa^len before me; so at
the fierce looks, bellowing threats, and atrocity of the Beast now up in
England, who will not be able to bear the Tidings of his Destruction. But as
the first part of the temptation was obviated and deforced by the former
promises; so the other, by what follows. For this morning (being the 18 of the
10 m.) to make all the way clear, a full Commission was given me, and Quietus
est, signed and sent to me, thus: First, I saw in my sleep a great Dragon of
large size, with very large outstretched wings, very lively red, fire-sparkling
gogling eyes, and most terribly furious at his mouth, and violent in his claws,
with long fierce talons: but it was given me to believe he should not hurt me;
and I thought I feared him not. Soon after, I saw (I thought) a Tree full of
Dragons, with large wings and claws, (some 5 or 6 upon the tree having big
rolling eyes; but I did not fear them: and before I awaked, I thought I saw all
them, dead, and no more able to hurt then painted ones, or pictures of Dragons.
I speak not this, to take notice of a Dream, but of the effect: for when I
awaked, my spirit was full, and my breakfast very sweet: and consulting (as I
use to do, Many Objections made and answered.
as soon as ever my eyes were opened) with the Lord, I was bid to be Up and
doing, without more delay, (by a sudden and strong impulse of spirit.)

Call from circumstances, and Saints, etc. yet what have I from the Scriptures?

tumbling abundance of Scriptures and Promises one upon another; as Isai. 35.3,
4. and those I mentioned before; so also Isai. 40.1, 2. Comfort ye! comfort ye
my people (says the Lord) tell her, her warfare is accomplished, her iniquity
pardoned, etc. The voice of him that prepares is come: cry, All flesh is
grass, all withers, because the Spirit of the Lord blows upon it. Yea, that
of Luke 22.32. was flung in forcibly upon my Spirit: But I have prayed for
thee, that thy faith fail not; so that, when thou art converted, strengthen thy
brother: with abundance more.

particular Call have I (who am in prison) to publish to the world any thing
that reflects so sharply upon the present Powers, Persons, Armies, or the like?

Jam. 5.10. pearch'd upon me in that point immediately: Take the prophets who
have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an example, etc. for they feared not,
in or out of prison, the powers or persons of Kings, or the like. So 2 Pet.
1.21. Holy men wrote and spoke as they were inspired (or moved) by the Spirit:
and therefore begin (by faith) as they did, and I will be with you, (because
all true Scriptures or writings are first given by inspiration, 2 Timothy 3.16. Ah
then said I! Lord! let me have this Anointing all the way, both in the passive
and active part of this Testimony!

unfitness, fewness of years, smalness of light, shallowness of judgment,
weakness of faith, and the like; silenced with Gods words to Moses and
Jeremiah, suggested unto me, Exodus 4.11. Who made man's mouth? and the dumb to
speak? the deaf to hear? or the blind to see?) did not I the Lord? So Jer.
1.6, 7. Say not, I am a child: for what I command thee, thou shall speak (and
write) abroad: and be not afraid of their faces; for I am with thee, to deliver
thee, says the Lord. Do not I (the Lord) take when, where, and whom I will?
and give of my Spirit, power, and ability to whom I will? Now therefore arise!
and my Spirit shall be with thee the Pen of a ready writer: with which word, my
very heart did exult and leap within me, being as full as I could hold. But
Lord! said I, What is it that I must write? what message shall thy poor worm
have for the world? When presently, The Message in the bulk.
(before I asked, almost) much fell upon me at once: The day of the Lord is at
hand! it is his day! the day of his wrath! of his vengeance, and of great
destruction! upon the inhabitants of this world! upon this land, upon these
Apostates, and adulterous generation of evil doers! for they are all turned
aside! Blood cries unto blood! and the earth shall cover her slain no more!
The Witnesses shall up upon their feet, and the remnant of the Woman's seed do
wondrous things! for by the spirit of Eliah they shall restore all again,
Magistracy and Ministry as at the first; and recover the holy City from the
Gentiles, that have trod it under this 42 m. They shall assault the great City,
and climb up the wall like men of war: they shall pour out the Vials upon the
powers, Priests and Armies of the Beast, and on all his Dominion; and execute
the vengeance on all his Worshippers, and irrefragable Supporters, Subjects and
Followers, that have his name or mark upon their Foreheads; yea, the Earthquake
shall rend them up by the very roots, and the Little Stone strike them up by
the very toes; and none shall save them from the wrath of the Lamb that is come.

field, at Nazeby, Dunbar, Worcester? and will thou now reject them?

Scriptures together upon me, Isai. 10. Shall the Ax boast it self against him
that heweth therewith? or the Saw magnify it self against him that shakes it?
As if the Rod should shake it self against them that lift it up, or as if the
Staff should lift up it self, as if it were no wood. Therefore shall the Lord,
Jehovah of Armies, send among his fat ones leanness, and under his glory kindle
a burning like the burning of a fire: And the light of Israel shall be for a
Fire, and his holy One for a Flame, which shall burn and devour his thorns and
his briers all in one day. Besides this, that of Jer. 18.9, 10. At the instant
that I shall speak concerning a nation, and a kingdom, to build and to plant
it; if it do evil in my sight, and obey not my voice, then will I repent of the
good wherewith I said I would benefit them. But especially that of Jer. Tell
Coniah, were he as a signet upon my right hand, yet would I pluck him thence,
and give him into the hand of them that seek him.

With these things I was satisfied, and flesh was silenced, and Faith so
supported, supplied, and well raised, that I fell (forthwith) upon this Work
(by faith and prayer) in the Name of the Lord; which is to beat out into the
leaf, the Message which I have received in the lump. Wherein, according to my
illumination, I must desire leave to differ from many of our dear brethren,
whom I highly honor, that have put us and the present Work at too great a
distance, having sent it to Germany, (or to other places;) from whence it being
sent back again to us into Great Britanny, (as I can show by Letters from
foreign parts, where I hold correspondence with the choicest Lights, who see
the rising of the Witnesses, and ruin of the Beasts dominion in this our
street first:) I must crave leave to minister my L^ght and Opinion upon the
ens^ing Subject, without giving offense to any whom I differ from; whose light
in other things I esteem above my own, (or rather, that measure of the Lord's)
which I must thankfully, and with due honor to them, esteem, as of great use
and advantage to us in this Treatise of the Two Witnesses, the Lamb's
Government, (in Ecclesiastical, Military, and Civil Sanction) and the Beast's
dominion. Thus far for the Call to it.

It may be I may be judged none of the Wisest, to make so much ado in the Entry
of the Discourse, We accounted Fools and Mad men; and how we are so.
to make so much ado in the Entry of the Discourse, and to tell such a Story of
my Call to this Treatise, which few men will heed or hear. Notwithstanding, it
is not labor lost; for one may learn wisdom by looking upon a Fool: and
indeed, I do grant, that I am instructed, and study it every day more and more,
to be, and speak, like them whom the Wisemen of the Times repute Fools, (i. e.
in all plainness, simplicity, and experimental language) and not in the wisdom
of words, or Arts, as the World would have us, 1 Cor. 2.4.) I have studied to
be wife, (as well as others) but now I am learning to be a Fool, which none
will look after, because such are the Lord's instruments, and by such he will
confound the wisdom of the Wise, and the great ones of the World, 1 Cor. 1.27.
Isai. 29.14. So Romans 10.19. I will provoke you by them that are no people, by a
Foolish nation I will anger you. Yea, such Asses and Idiots as we are, (by
grace) the King of Saints shall ride upon into his Throne: for, as one says,
Asinos and Ideotas Christus eligit, etc. And indeed, I write to and for such
Fools, and not to the Wise, whose wisdom will perish, 1 Cor. 1.20. 1. Cor.
4.10. nor yet to them that profess themselves wise, Romans 1.22. or are so in
their own eyes, Romans 26.12. for there is more hopes of fools, then of them. But
to such fools whom Jehovah has made promise to, Isai. 35.8. that they shall
not err in the way, I write: for so the Prophet is a fool, and the spiritual
man is mad, (so accounted at this day.) And who but such Madmen and Fools (in
the worlds opinion) would oppose Powers, Armies, Kings, Councels, Priests,
Lawyers, or the reigning Corruptions of the raging Beast, as they do? who but
they, will run their lives, liberties, estates, etc. into such apparent hazard?
or who but Fools would despise Preferments and Places, 200, 300, or 1000 l. a
year, and tread gold and silver under their feet at this day? Who be they, but
Fools or Madmen, that dare be so bold against great persons? etc. as to utter
all their mind at once, though they die for it? Prove. 29.11. and who but such,
will be meddling so? Prove. 20.3. who but Fools and Madmen that will venture
with a Gideon-Army of 300, against an Army of 30, or 40, or 100000 men? and who
but Fools that build upon things not seen, Heb. 11.1. nor likely in reason to
come to pass, as if they were already present? and who but they, that look on
the ends of the earth? Prove. 17.24. Yet among these Fools (for Christ's sake) I
am content to be numbered; and for such Fools and Madmen I calculate and
inculcate the ensuing Discourse: so that, as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 11.21.
Wherein any is bold, (I speak foolishly) I am bold also. Therefore let our
Wise-enemies at Court, or in Country, give me leave, for once, to speak like a
fool, without stirring up their anger, seeing, as Paul says, 2 Cor. 11.19. Ye
suffer Fools gladly, (not angrily) seeing you your solves are wise. Therefore
expect no excellency of speech from me: for that becomes not a fool, says
Solomon, Prove. 17.7. whose mediocriter is optime: nor any flattering Titles to
men; for that is left to wise Parasites and Favorites, who study the Alphabet
of Great men's dispositions, Job 32.22. which Fools do not; but as Solomon says,
Eccles. 20.12. (...), the graces of fools are presently poured out. And such
Fools and Madmen we shall be, by the grace of our God, though they bray us in
a m^rter, Prove. 27.22. And if the Wisdom of Solomon were not all Apocrypha at
Court, I might put them in mind of Chap. 5.1, 4. The righteous shall stand in
great boldness before the face of him that has afflicted him, and made no
account of his labors: then they say, This is he whom sometimes we had a
derision, with a proverb of a reproach: we fools accounted his life madness,
and his end to be without honor: but he is numbered among the children of God,
and his lot is among the Saints. Therefore you that are wise, will be more
solid, sure, then to be troubled at what we fools say, to put us into prison,
or to have us in derision, as you have; seeing it is so unnatural to laugh at a
Natural, and the highway to become such. Therefore, for shame, take not such
counsel as ye do, how to deal with a fool or madman, (as you say I am) who
surely should not offend the wise, if he play the fool: but such a Fool I
confess I am, as wants, and therefore waits for wisdom of God, or more of that
which you count Foolishness: and if it pleases God to discover the present
Truth by me unto any, it is of mere grace, because it pleases him to show his
strength by weak ones, and his wisdom by fools; and so take it, ye wise men^
yet, it may be, some of the best wisdom may drop from these lines, seeing many
have been the wise speeches of Fools, though nothing so many as the foolish
speeches of the Wise.

But thus I have paved the ground, to lay a Foundation, in clearing my Call and
Encouragement to proceed, let it cost me ever so deat, seeing I am out at the
King's (the Lord Christ's) charges, and not at mine own; 1 Cor. 9.7. For who
goes to warfare at his own charges? Praefat. in 3 Sermon. 4 Tom. Hieron. p. 408.
I have been a little tedious, which I confess, with Erasmus, is my fault as
well as others: multi mei similes hoc morbo laborant ut cum scribere nesciant
tamen a scribendo temperare non possint, and this is a disease (then) they are
apt to fall into, that think they shall never write more, to write much (as
once for all) especially since this TREATISE will be so large, and the matter
of it so lively and important, and seeing the opposition of our Persecutors,
and of those that ((...)) are Cromwell fied, have necessitated so much for an
INTRODUCTION. Now in the name of JEHOVAH-TSADEK our JEHOVAH-JIREH, who will be
seen in the Mount, am I ready to present and publish these Apocaliptick
Accounts Documents and Prophesies to all the True (yet few) NATHANIELS of our
Times, that wait with a high Faith, and holy Patience (in all well-doing and
wel-suffering) for the approaching Day of Christ, and his Kingdom work;
especially to the spiritually enlightened Churches and Saints (those of them
that are left and kept faithful) Pastors and others of the same hope with us,
separate from Babylon, (whole Babylon) as well Civil, Military as
Ecclesiastic; (and so growing up together into ONE, a one Body, a
Temple-state, or the Tabernacle opened in heaven, where the Viols or Vengeance
of the Lord, of the Lamb, of the Martyrs, of his Saints, and of his Temple,
must Issue out shortly; and upon whom the Day of the Lord is come. I see from
Mount Pisgah it is begun, yea already begun (as 1 Pet. 4.17.) by purging,
sifting, trying, separating, discovering, quickening, afflicting and refining) I
say to those DEAR ONES or Jewels of the Lord and the Lamb, with all the Love,
Life and Light which I received from above, with the abnegation of all that I
am from below, and so with the grace and humility of both, I most heartily
offer a few years pains, search and teachings from the Holy one, unto them, and
lay my judgment at their feet in these weighty matters of Christ, (if I may
but get them published) in all the blessed properties, principles and
prophecies of the Kingdom (to be revealed on earth in these last days) for
which we now contend, and trust shall unto the END with Triumph and Rejoicing.
Even so Amen.

Rouz up, O Remnant, setch a shout!
O Saints, O Churches sing!
For such a Light is breaking out!
Will make your ears to ring!
O Glorious Ray! ah Blessed Day!
Which the Anointing shows!
For thus the Saint in Covenant
Shall have the Present Truth.
From a Friend to a Friend.
THe BOOKS mentioned by the Author of those public Prophecies out of Daniel,
Revelation, Prophets and Apostles of old, and New Test. the fifth Kingdom,
prepared in Pathmos (or in Prison and Exile Teavels) among ^is sweetest visits
and visions of God (and in the still voice,) are very strangely (it seems)
miscarried, without Time and Providence do recover them, and so discover him or
them that had a hand in hindering or stifling of them. Only the Introductory
part to the first Treatise (or Prison-born Morning-beams) are preserved, and
gotten together, as the occasion of his falling upon so large a Systeme (so
some part of his suff^rings at Lambeth until Winsor, which therefore we have
added unto his Heart-appeale (having been hardly kept and collected) that the
view of present persecution may be the more clear, and this History the more
complent, though (to my knowledge) many things are omitted, passages left out,
fleeced and sheered round, as they lifted that had them to do, before we could
bring it to this pass (in public;) besides much more which in time may be
added (if need be) as some of us hear) of several reasonings between him and
O. P. him and Soldiers, him and Ministers, him and many Adversaries, upon the
matters of our faith in the things of Christ, this his betrayed cause, and
Kingdom-work; besides what sufferings have been added since these Papers came
from him) to this CHAIN. But in the mean time it may appear by this, what the
servants of the Lord do pass through at this Day by these powers of the Beast,
such fore trials, remarkable passages and experiences of Persecution as may
make them (that have said it is no Persecution) now very Mutes for very shame;
and their ears tingle to hear of such a height of tyranny, profaneness, and
impiety among them, as may awaken our Friends and favorers of Sion to their
Work and Watch, and as may revive once more amongst us the blessed memory of
the (yet) bleeding MARTYRS, and the Cloud of Witnesses whose examples are
before as in this Cause; that we also may be made FAITHFUL unto death therein.
His cup of Affliction has been deep (for this Day and Nation) but yet sweet;
and if so be the report of ONES suffering do sound so, what would the WHOLE do,
of all the suffering ones this day in England? (for the good Cause, a good
Christ, a good Conscience?) but another a new Book of Martyrs? a fair Garden
full of purple Roses and pure Lillies, which the Beloved is gone down to
gather, Cant. 6.2. But the Cain-like cruelty keeps off the report at present,
till the blood of Abel be heard out of the earth; I mean them of whom the World
is not worthy, that have witnessed with such boldness to the Kingdom, Work,
Cause, and Principles of Righteousness.

Now upon these Papers (at last) produced (and extraordinarily preserved out of
the Catch-pole Clutches) can we now be thankeful to our heavenly Lord and
Father for them? and for that some are yet kept constant and faithful (through
Christ) in sufferings? for to you it is given, says the Apostle: every one in
his place, as he is called to contest against this (the last) Beast, Rev. 13.
Some tried, some tempted, some plundered, some prisoned, some barbarously used
and set upon by the enemy, some hurt, and some maimed, and many immured and
injured; yet others ready to succeed them, and to bring up what is behind, the
Lord assisting, supporting and sweetning all unto them. Yea, methinks the most
High says to each one of those Sufferers, Well done! thou good and faithful
Servant! and as Mat. 24.46. Blessed is the Servant, who when his Lord comes he
shall find so doing! for now I have proved thee! I have tried thee! I have
fifted and shifted thee! now I know that thou love me! and fear God!
Wherefore I have sworn, by my self, that in blessing, I will bless thee; and
in multiplying, I will multiply thee, etc. And mine oaths are not like Men's.

It may be these sufferings may work upon some that hear them, they have on
some that saw them, yea, even amongst the Soldiers; for we hear that one of
them (formerly busy) is now wounded and touched in Conscience for it; and
others have already left them for their cruelty to these: Whiles the Cavileers
can have liberty to drink, swear, whore, or any thing (it seems) and live as
they list, and thus (say the Soldiers) may our Friends too, so they he for
their Lord Protector, and his G -- Whom the Lord protect us from, and from
their wickedness in high places: And whiles they proceed from evil to evil,
teach thou us, O Lord, to grow up in thy strength! from faith to faith, in the
Grace, Power, Knowledge, Purity, and Holiness of our Head (the Lord Jesus) and
^f his Kingdom and coming, which we all wait for! even so, Amen.

The chiefest Erratas to be mended.
IN the Introduction, page 2. line 25. read (...) p. 4. l. 21. r. were able, p.
6. l. 36. r. abstract Account, p. 10. l. 12. r. 4 l. 4 s. p. 12. l. 15. r.
commanded, p. 16. 24. r. Lies, p. 19. l. 35. r. door with, l. 30. r. language,
p. 21. l. 36. r. ne peccem, p. 24. l. 7. r. (and yielding) from our, p. 27. l.
26. blot out of, p. 30. l. 19. r. for the Lamb, l. 30. r. (...) p. 41. l. 4. r.
(...).

In the Epistle to the Reader, p. 1. l. 9. r. Come up hither, l. 10. r. bear it
l. 17 r. ut libere peccent, l. 35. r. Anathematized, p. 2. l. 1. r. hearing, l.
11. r. deposited, l. 23. r. quam site.

Errata's of the Heart-Appeal, which the Author had not to correct when he writ
the Necessary Word to the Reader, p. 1. l. 3. r. [Whiles the, p. 2. l. 11. r.
Posterity, l. 21. r. [whom and, l. 22. r. subtilly] l. 24. r. Dendy, so l. 31.
p. 3. l 15. r. were raised, p. 4. l. 15. r. there Orders, l. 16. r. appears we
are. p 5. 29. r. withdrew and, l. 34. r. but were often, p. 7. l. 6. r.
exercise it, and where too! p. 8. l. 5. r. holding up a Brick, p. 10. r. Ben
Shephattaiim of Shaphat, l. 26. r. poly pragmoseene, p. 11. l. 22. r.
contemptible, p. 13. l. 37. r. Breast, p. 14. l. 1. r. and thus am I, l. 16 r.
were put, p. 15. l. 12. r. this Recusation, p. 16. l. 12. r. to rake, l. 30. so
to do by, l. 33. r. impeach us with, p. 19. l. 36. r. Whitest Leprosy, p. 17.
l. 19. r. surreptitiously, p. 18. l. 14. r. laid for, p. 21. l. 25. blot out
and, p. 22. l. 3. r. yet we were, l. 36. blot out yet, p. 24. l. 7. fratricide,
l. 21. r. lateres, p. 25. l. 36. r medereris, p. 27. l. 6. r. Officers, l. 26.
[being weak rode] but once was, p. 28. l. 18. r. Atopoi, p. 40. l. 8. r. a
Desighn, l. 9. r. When we desired, p. 42. l. 27. r. the Protector 's BVLL, p.
43 l. 30. r. ever we knew, l. 39. r. he would or no, p. 45. l. 10. r. Milites,
l. 26. precious, p. 50. l. 5. r. corporal, p. 52. l. 9. r. minor, p. 61. l. 23.
r. to have there company, pp. 63. l. 6. r. that happy, l. 39. r. Atopoi, l. 33.
or breathing should ruin there, p. 56. l. 17. r. fautors, p. 70. l. 8. r.
finishing Testimony, p. 73. l. 25. r. this street too, l. 33. r. the Motions of
Christ, p. 74. l. 15. come and see to. l. 21. r. and 4th. Monarchy, p. 113. l.
14. r. mundani, p. 117. l. 3. r. at their desire, p. 119. blot out all the
second line, and half the first, and half the third, r. the Soldier said he
should, but he seeing no remedy, etc. l. 6. blot out and so outrun him, p.
121. l. 20. r. Corporal, p. 125. l. 10. r. cast out, p. 127. l. 5. r. deriding,
p. 128. l. 21. r. till they had, p. 133. l. 38. r. have their Arms up in our
Blood, p. 138. l. 36. thy Sons, O Sion! p. 141. l. 27. r. Apostatick, p. 142.
l. 10. r. burn within us, p. 143. l. 17. r. their Chambers, p. 146. l. 14. r.
can say it to the teeth, p. 148. l. 8. r. Tns. l. 10. r. 666. l. 13. blot out
the first Phe Chereb, and read thus, Christ's men of War [not the Phe Chareb,
or Sword, p. 149. l. 33. r. estote, p. 150. l. 30. blot out are, p. 151. l. 35.
blot out vis. l. 36. r. ut respondeatis coram Altissimo, p. 152. l. 2. r. the,
Amen, l. 6. r. Tns, l. penult. r. makes.

In the Necessary Word to the Reader, p. 5. l. 12. r. Coptick Tongus. l. 19. r.
Shephatajim, l. 24. r. debar tob. The points, Parentheses, etc. are left to the
Readers care and observation.

FINIS.
A HIGH-WITNESSE, or a HEART-APPEALE, etc.
I Think Tertullian had a good occasion to write de Corona Militis, at the
Christians Soldiers wearing his Crown upon his hand, whiles the Emperor
Severus's pagan Soldiers, put theirs upon their heads, in a triumph) saying, a
Christian non adhuc Coronari is not yet to triumph, or take his pomp; but also
for that his joy (which shall be like theirs that devide the spoil, Isa. 9.4.
( won before worn) must be in a militant before a triumphant estate; and
because as Arnobius said, persecution brings death in one hand and life in the
other; a cross and crown at once, I am content to show you the Crown of my
hand, and leave the Lords day to declare the Crown of my head, which is hard at
hand, i. e. the great triumph and Sabbatisme of the sufferers for the testimony
of Jesus, the Rear of which we are in this Age and Nation to bring up by Gods
grace, Mat. 24.14. blessed be Jehovah, who is the head of us, and his glory our
Rear-ward, our Mahershalal-hashbez!

Upon this occasion of the crown in my hand, whilst the Cross is upon my
shoulder, having him for my example, who endured the cross, despised the
shame, and is now at the right hand of the Father, making intercession for me
(by whose strength of grace I am sure to overcome and triumph, Hallelujatica
victoria, and then to have the crown upon my head) I shall take up a f^w of my
subcisive hours (for the public good) in giving a short and succinct account
of some few more of those barbarous brutish acts (of this Beast now up in Great
Britanny) upon my body, since my removal from Lambeth prison to Winsor, and
into this Isle of Wight; where I am now a poor Pilgrim, Prisoner, and
(forsaken) banished man! (but for thy sake, O sweet Jesus! blessed be the Lord!
As a Preface to prison-born, (or my former Treatise out of Prison) I gave a
Narrative of some part of my Lambeth-sufferings, and as an introduction to this
banish-born (I intended it) I shall proceed so far as I do think it my duty,
and a debt which I ow the choicest Saints of Christ in this generation,
(according to the Primitive practice of Martyrs and Sufferers!) seeing it is
for my Christ's and their sake, Ephesians. 3.1, 2. and 4.1. Col. 1.24. Phil. 1.7.
That I am bound with this double chain, or double Honor of imprisonment and
banishment from year to year; it being in their cause (and not in my own) and
for the kingdom of the Lord Jesus purely, that we are thus persecuted, and not
for any carnal interest of men, yea because we dare not in conscience (had we a
milian of lives to loose for one) strike in with a carnal kingdom, or cursed
thing of man, it being for the faith and truth of the gospel of the kingdom
(preached for a Witness, Mat. 24.14. and of the little book; yea, for the hope
of all the Israel of God, whether Christians or Jews, who wait for the Messiah
and his kingdom, that I am bound thus, beaten, banished, and so barbarously
handled (being one of the weakest and unworthiest Vessels of those gracious
ones of the Lord, my dear con-captives and co-exiles that are thus used, for
the kingdom of Christ's sake) I cannot, I dare not, I ought not to bury all
with me in this iron-grave or exile; but for the public use, (for the truths
sake) yea for the prosperity to come, I would publish a a little more (for a
Prologue to this piece) of that persecution which is upon us, and so contract
all into a few conclusions or experimented observations, and then fall upon the
maine matter of the banished-mans Vision in this Isle; out of the little Book,
Rev. 10.10. and from the Voice of the seven thunders, the Lord assisting me.

But as Ignatius said, (...), the more pain the more gain. They brought me into
the wide jaw of Winsor Castle, the 31. day of the first Month, 1655.
delivering my body up to that Den of Leopards according to this order from
their angry Masters, procured by Serj. Denby, whom the Draggon has given a
power unto for a time, and times; and a divident; but he acts like a Serpent
full subtly, Rev. 12.14.

These are to will and require you to receive into your custody from the hands
of Edward Denby Esquire Serj. at arms attending the Council or his Deputy, the body
of Mr. Joh. Rogers, and him safely to keep prisoner in Winsor Castle, until
you shall receive further order from the Council; hereof you are not to fail,
and for so doing, this shall be your sufficient warrant;

Given at Whitehall this 30th. day of March 1655. To the Governor of Winsor
Castle or his Deputy. Signed in the name and by the order of the Council, Hen.
Lawrence, President.


Thus Serj. Denby by his great sedulity and industry to execute his and the
other Goalers anticedanean threats and malice (upon monstrous reports of my
preaching out at the prison grates) got this Order (by solicitation) and to
screw up his power to the highest peg of severity, he sent strick orders to his
under jailer, that neither man, woman, nor child should come at me, nor any
one of my Family stir out, so much as for food, money, or any other necessaries
whatsoever, insomuch much as my friends who came to visit me, were forced to
stand in the street, (with soldiers at their heels to hear what we said)
whiles I spoke out at the Iron bars unto them; and in the night (when no one of
my friends or acquaintance might hear a word thereof) he sent a Messenger very
late to bid me be ready by six in the morning, for I must be carried on the
other side the Water, this (being the first notice I had of their secret
design) nor would he tell me whether, to whom, or for what, nor (as then) show
me any order for it, nor would he suffer any one of my friends to know of it,
which was the greater trial at the instant, I being unprovided with
necessaries, if they should carry me away, or put me to any journey; but to my
great astonishment, I heard some calling under my prison-winddows almost all
night, and by daybreak very much, whom we thought our enemies, (till the
morning discovered them to be our friends,) who by a special hand of
providence was raised out of their beds, and had heard a rumor that I was to
be carried away that morning by daybreak, so they came to see; for it seems
(as close as they carried it unto us) a man, (and an enemy) who heard of it
that night at White Hall (by one who told the other of it with very great
privacy) could not keep it in, but when he came to the three Crane-wharf in
London, he told a good woman (or her daughter of it) for news, what he had
overheard at White Hall, not knowing that friend had any relation to me (if
she knew me) who indeed (as my heavenly Father ordered it) was a Sister of our
Church Society, so that she could not reft, but went to some others of the
Church; and thus in the night one called up another at a venture; and by the
blessed hand of the Lord, several of my Friends came to hear of it, and waited
at the prison gates, where I was to come out, with many tears and prayers, and
supplies of my wants; but the Ruffians struck, shoved and pushed them away what
they could, and hurried me from them, and so carried me to Winsor Castle.

That day word was given before to the Governor of the Castle, and by Orders
the Soldiers were set on both sides, with their Arms and Matches light, to
receive the prisoner coming, but when they saw me come in, some of the
Officers told me they were ready to sink down in the place where they stood,
they expecting some Cavaleer or lewd person rather, and not me (as they said)
to be so dealt with (some of them knowing me both in this Nation and in
Ireland) and looking upon one another with amazement, saw it an apparent
persecution (as they said) upon good men for their consciences and the Cause of
Christ: After a longer attendance; I was put into a little room, which had one
little window, and which did so excessively smoke, that the wind and the
stink of a house of filth made it worse than a prison (if in that cold season
we would keep a fire) the very coals thereof being blown into the room about,
but I ran to the door to ease my eyes a little, and to take some air, thinking
to have walked (a little) in the yard, but it was denied me, the Sentinels
standing at my door to keep me in; yet afterward for very shame, and
(perhaps) pity, I had more liberty and the sentinels were taken off, which
continued till the 6th. of the third month ensuing.

But a word or two to the Order: you may observe as in this, so in the former,
and all the rest of their Orders concerning me (that ever I could see) the
Coppies of which are by me, there is not a tittle of any CAUSE mentioned, why
they have so persecuted, imprisoned and since banished me, nor have they any
color, but what they would (I think) blush for shame to put into any of your
Orders or Warrants, ( viz. for Preaching and praying) whereby it appears ye
are imprisoned, persecuted, plundered, banished, and thus barbarously used,
upon mere will, lust, and arbitrary power, and tyranny, (sic volo sic jubeo)
without the least color of a Law, a crime, or Justice; herein exceeding the
arbitrary process of their Predecessors (in this practice) the very Prelates,
Papists and Heathens; so that to this Day, (we see) they do not tell us the
cause, or crime, nor can we have the liberties of Conscience, Law, Justice, or
Process; but yet the Lord of Righteousness stands by us, and is with us, for
all that, and laeti simus sed non securi; gaudentes in Domino, sed caventes a
Recidivo.

The Order is signed by H. Lawrence President, once a Pastor of a Church (I
hear) but one whom (long since) the work of God had laid aside and spewed out,
yea, he had laid it aside as an Enemy, or at least no Friend to it, with some
Others that were before Vomited out, or could not be Digested for their
Crudities; but this G. (for want of others) has licked them up again; nor is
this Council altogether unlike the Duke of Alva's bloody Council, or the
Counsel of Trouble, (in flemish Bloat-read) so called in the Netherlands, as to
the manner of their proceedings, (putting down thereby the greater and the more
lawful authority of the States) to persecute, imprison, oppress, tax, levy,
confiscate, banish, apprehend, or put to death at the Duke of Alvas pleasure
and lust, being merely arbitrary and without Law, all being directed by the
Duke himself, whose meaning was, that his Council should be but consultive, and
not absolute, (for that he left to himself alone, whereof J. Vergas was the
President, as H. Lawrence of this, of whom it was said, that the Netherlands
needed so sharp a knife as Vergas was to cut away their dead flesh; and so it
seems (by O. P's. speech to his Parliament September 4. p. 14, 15, 16. Where he
stirs them up to punish (that is presecute) us three several times, as worthy
of the Magistrates consideration, most sadly abusing that Text in Jude for it,
so that these men look upon us as without life; that they lash us, wound us,
cut us, and so cruelly and continually cut us, with this their sharp knife, for
no other reason, but for our Faith, consciences and affections to the Lord
Jesus and his kingdom, declining and disowning their's that lies upon the
skuls, blood, bones, lives, limbs, liberties, and tears of the most precious
Saints, persecution of Christ, blaspheming of the name and spirit of God; and
infamy and reproach of pure Religion an undefiled; but thus for their arbitrary
order, whereby I was delivered into their Den at Winsor, though a delightful
garden to this merciless hole (as from men) where I now am; yet blessed be the
Lord! With a tolerable modesty and humanity they admitted me the liberty of the
Prison, and access to my brother Feake's chamber for one month without
interruption, where we worshipped the Lord together; but upon the 29. day of
the second month, being the Lords day, in the absence of the Governor, two of
the Officers, viz. Capt. Weston and one Pepper an Ensign, the latter (being
lately fetched out from a common Soldier, and lifted up with so sudden an
excessive pride, conceit and ambition, zealous of higher promotion, and
therefore striving to exceed (and so to supplant) his superior in his cruelty
to us) falling out with the other for admitting us to meet in the worship of
out God together upon the Lords days, (although privately in our prison
chamber) and to amend so great a mistake and foul a crime (as they took it)
they forthwith forced a Sentinel upon the door (watching their time,) to
hinder me going up to my fellow prisoners chamber, (whiles they with drew; that
least their so unchristian commands in the matters of God should be reversed)
which when I saw, I was desired by the Lords people present to begin there, and
so I drew out my Bible: at the door several of our friends with my Brother
Feak being by, we begun in an Hymn and Prayer, proceeded on with the Text, but
was often interrupted by the Soldiers, and the hearers driven away with
violence; at last the aforesaid Officers admitted we should go into the chamber
(as before) and took off the sentinels, and so we continued together with much
comfort (a few of us) in praying, singing and exhorting one another until late
at night (according to the Primitive practice of the persecuted Saints) but the
Devil did not like this; and therefore against the next Lords day following,
he had made ready his rage, the day before which the Governor himself (being
come home and instructed with the matter by his Ensign Pepper) sent for us two
Prisoners (who were together to keep up a duty of Prayer in my lodge) with a
peremptory sword-power of coram nobis, who (after we had looked up to the hills
from whence our help comes) went readily and cheerfully, the governor
assaulted us feircely (with some other of his Officers like fell beasts)
indeed, and as brutish as the soldiers were to Brentius, Anno 1547. charging
my fellow prisoner with a foul fault in his child (of three or four years
old) that he should call O. C. fool, at which my brother F. said, that he would
affirm niore, viz. that he is a Tyrant; which made them high in their rage
against him, with whom I thought I was bound to bear my witness modestly, but
the governor brake out into such bitter rage, that he was meet anger without
ears or reason; threatening to lay me forth with into the Hole, if I preached
against his Master; (as he said) at which I rejoiced. Quia plura pro Christo
sunt toleranda, as Fulgentius said in his sufferings, and said; yea, do Sir!
with all my heart! I am as ready to suffer it for my Master, as you are to do
it for yours: And I tell you Sir, I fear not the worst you men can do! and with
the grace of my God, I will preach for my Christ against Cromwell, or any other
that oppose Christ, though I dye for it! if I have but a peeping hole, or a
hole to breath out at, I shall preach (if you do not suffer us to do it, in our
prison lodges privately) for my commission is not from man but God; and my
authority is greater from above than thy power; in the interim, be it known to
thee, I fear neither thee nor thy sword in these matters of our God. The next
day (being the Lords) they began to put their hell-begotten plot into practice!
for our friends that came to visit us from London, they kept upon their guard,
and would not admit them to us, which when my con-captive heard (unknown to me)
he went into the Chapel, and (with the peoples leave) he began Prayer in the
Pulpit, which they were attentive unto, I hearing thereof (whilst I was
pleading with the Governor in the yard, for our Christian Liberty upon the
Lords day, to meet together in our chambers, to pray and worship; who was
called from me to fetch soldiers) I went into the Chapel, where he was
praying (without the least touch of the times or government:) I stood at the
Pulpit-doore, but by and by came up a file or two of soldiers armed, and ready
as if they would have discharged presently upon us, lead up first by the
governor, and then by a Sergeant, one Baker, all very imperiously, and with
their ^ats on: this Baker till then seemed unsatisfied with such unchristian
preceedings; but upon his rise to the preferment of an Ensign, he became very
rigorous like the rest; he came up to the Pulpit door, where I stood between
him and my fellow-prisonner (still praying!) and laying hands on me to pull me
down and him out, with that violence; I sp^ke softly to him, saying, O will
you! (a great professor! and one who seemed smit in conscience for such
cruelty:) exercise it! and hew too! when he is a praying! let him but pray out!
tarry but a little! What? (says he) will you justify him? Oh, and alas, said
I, and should I not? is he not serving of a good Master? doing a good work? and
dare you disturb him in it? Surely I have more cause to stand by him in his
masters work, then you have to stand by your master in this work: And therefore
do not fight against Christ so, O do it not! let him but conclude his prayer:
Pull him down, pull him down, (says the governor) I said, sir, let him but
pray out, a quarter of an hour, but till the minister come: but then said the
rude soldiers to Baker, do you not hear the Governor? pull him down? and up
came the soldiers, like raging Beasts, (the governor standing under the
Pulpit to see the execution?) then the first soldier of the file with his
Musket struck at my brother Feake (whiles he was yet praying!) but I standing
between, received the blow, the governor still pursuing his command, so that
Baker (being prejudiced (as has been gathered by his words) against brother
Feak, for his judgment against dipping, which this Baker was so riggid unto;)
and the soldiers pulled and tore me (who held the pulpit door) with such
bitterness, eagerness and roughness, that they (therewith and the blows
struck at us (that fell upon the pulpit door, brake it in pieces, and so
pulled me down, and laid violent hands on him, and carried us away with very
great abuses both in word and deed: Pepper with one party soldiers sent with
me, who did drag, hale, punch, and pull me on way to my prison-lodge, and
another party of soldiers carrying him another way to his prison lodge: Our
friends who seeing us so bruitishly handled, offering to intercede, or speak
for us, were beaten, threatened, and put quite out, and not suffered to visit
either of us: After a little breathing (being thus haled in and kept close with
Sentinels set at our doors) my brother Feake began to preach out at the prison
window, which I heard at my prison door, (the day being very calm!) where the
Sentinels stood to keep me in, and when they beat up the Drums to drown his
voice at that end; I (at my end,) was stirred up, upon the same subject and
Text to proceed, until the Drums ceased, and then he began again. In the
afternoon (at the door) on the same subject, I proceeded, some few of our
friends that came from London having gotten into some holes and corners in the
yard, where they were hid to hear, but in my Prayer was a Sergeant with
soldiers sent up to drive me in and stop my mouth, a little feirce man, who
fell to it with great fury; as I was yet in prayer, (holding up a Brick in the
wall) desiring with tears the Lord to open their eyes and consciences, and
still praying with my whole heart and spirit in the Lord, some two or three of
the poor soldiers were struck in their consciences, and though commanded,
could not fall on (in that duty) but with tears desired the rest of their
fellows to let me alone, and saying, they would to prison first; but the little
feirce green Dragon, (the Sergeant with some others fell on the more
barbarously, laid hold on my throat (as if to have strangled me,) tore off my
cloak and rent it, and me, my arms and clothes, still I praying and looking up
to my God, whiles they were beating, bouncing, tearing, and thumping me: And
then I said, yea, strike on, strike on, for thus did the soldiers deal with
Christ (my Master) him they beat, haled, thumped, spit on! and the disciple is
not better then his Master; beat on, beat on, sirs! O blessed blows! but thus
they cast me in, and shut the doors upon me, and set other Sentinels upon me;
so after a little breathing (being so cruelly handled) I continued out at my
prison-window preaching, singing, praying, and praising my most dear Lord and
Father in Christ, who has made me (so poor a sinful wretch) to be numbered
and accounted amongst them that suffer for Jesus, and his kingdoms sake!
rejoicing and triumphing abundantly in this high dignity and degree of his
heavenly calling and Election: Thus to you, Phil. 1.29. not to all is it given,
(...) (of mere grace) not only to believe but to suffer! notwithstanding they
would drive away (with soldiers, swords and Muskets) all from the sound of my
voice; yea, to the very little children; forcing all away with great violence:
In this close imprisonment (though nothing so close as now it is) I was (though
very ill, and sore in my body) stirred up to exercise every morning (as I use
to do) in my Family, at the window of the Prison, for the benefit of the poor
Sentinels, who stood under in the yard, expounding the scriptures, and Praying;
and upon the third day of the week, which was the eighth of the third month
1655. as I was praying, my brother Feake (with two soldiers at his heels,
passing by to ease nature) as he came back stood still to hear me pray; but an
Irish Ensign, then Captain of the guard (formerly I hear a Cavaleer) commanded
them to bring him away, and not let him stand, but he said, let me alone a
little, I am much refreshed, pray hear, says he, etc. But that Ensign sent up
more Soldiers who press^d much upon him, but he said he was about a good
work, and wished them also to hear prayer, but C. W. said it was forbidden
fruit at that time; and desired one to come to me and speak to me to be so
civil as to forbear praying, but the party refused so to do; the Ensign
called upon them to bring him away without delay, and to take him by head and
heels, but a poor Sergeant (an Officer) sent up for that purpose resused so to
do, and said he had rather go to Prison, and could not in conscience so do; for
his standing there was only to hear prayer; yet entreated B. F. to come away,
and when he found his argum^nts of no more force with him in that duty; the
Sergeant was returning, but in the way this wicked Ensign (whose feet were
swift to shed blood) saluted him as an enemy, (for not tearing him a way by
head and shoulders) at first with sword and scabbard, struck blows in such
strength, that the iron thereof cut through his skull, and brake his brain-pan;
so sadly gashed, mangled and wounded (the blood spinning out a great distance
from him) he with much ado reeled to a seat, where he assayed to break his
sword and throw away his scabberd (with a witness against them, to wear it no
more in such service) but in the mean-time this enraged Morster with his naked
Sword laid about the rest, who now ran away with B. F. as with a light burden,
and so like the D^^gge in the Smiths Forge, they that would not stir at the
many strokes upon Gods anvill (whiles we were at our work) could run now at the
sight of a wand; yea, with wind in their wings lift up their (Ephah) Zach.
5.9. Work poor whetches! Such miserable slaves are they all! According to the
Arabic Adage (which for want of characters the press omits) Men' la
a-rifo-lchaira mina-Isecri alhiqho bi-lbeha ima, they that cannot discriminate
are company for beasts: The Sergeant was conveyed into a house, and as it was
(by the Surgeon himself) supposed mortally wounded (and a dead man) for
after h^ had taken out two or three pieces of his skull, he concluded him
doubtful of recovery, (if not beyond it) it being so contiguous and ambiguous;
for at last he found it but a hairs-breadth between him and death, being hewed
to the Caruncles and concavity of the head, and should have utterly despaired,
but that the Cerebrain-skin was marvelously kept from the cuts: Thus blood was
shed in their rage against Religion and the Worship of God, who formerly (and
when it was their interest) have with blood contended for it; yea, the Blood of
War in the time of Peace, 1 King. 2.5. And as tame Foxes once loose do the
most miscriefe, so do these; Et ad extremum, lupus manebit, etiamsi inter
homines educatus fuerit, as the Persians say, Wolves will be Wolves though
brought up amongst men, or put into sheeps clothing, Mat. 10 But the Avenger
of blood will pursue these sons of Belial; and woe unto them that build their
City in blood, Isa. 1.5. for when their plague comes, the name of their place
shall be Kibroth-hataavah, the Graves of Just, for whiles the flesh is between
their teeth the Lord shall smite them; in the interim consider.

First, That we lie as yet among the pots in the hot kiln* (the iron furnace of
Egypt) Lam 4.2. How are ye precious ones of Sion (compable to solid gold)
accounted as earthen potsheards; yet with the reversion promised us we will not
part, Psalm. 68.13. Though ye have lien among the pots, as the wings of a Dove
(oppressed of Janah made a prey) overlaid with silver, and her feathers with
beaten gold (of Charatz cut a sunder) for though we be Chenshe phatta of
shaphattariim ordered and disposed) between the very hearths where the fire is
kindled, in the hottest Urn among the Tile pots (I mean in those Ovens of men's
wrath, viz. Garrisons of Soldiers) to be scorched; far exceeding (in that
sense) the common Goals and Prisons; yet praised be our God, for his presence
is with us, which was with the three Children in the fiery furnace, and as
Psalm. 66.11, 12. Thou laidst affliction (such as comes from oppression of Gnuk)
upon our loins, thou have caused men to rid over our heads (or beginnings of
rosh) we went through fire and through water, but thou have brought us out into
a wealthy place (or larevajah) to an overflowing and afulnesse of moisture, and
anointing, (as Psalm. 23.5. where the word is) and herein shall we yet more
abundantly rejoice, for such earthen pots (as we are) in the Lords house, shall
be like the Bowls (or B^sons) before the Altar, Zach. 14.20. that is, ever
full of the hott blood o^ the Sacrifice; which is our sure mercy and
N^w-Covenant-Comfort in this State of patience.

Secondly we may see the e polupragmoseume the pragmaticall proclyvitie and
activity of the Cavalerish spirit, to prosecute and execute the rage of the
Beast upon us under this Sword sovereignty, with the same Antipathy and
principle they had in the Kings d^y^s, though under a show of more religion,
refinedness^ and zeal; like Bal^k Numb. 22. and 23. that to curse the Lords
people, and get power over them, with great readiness and real, ran to the
worship of the true God (as if he had renounced his false God Chemosh) when in
truth he retained still his old principles; and yet with them he seemed a new
Proselyte; he offered seven Oxen, and 7. Rams; so far exceeding the true Saints
in his seeming zeal to the true God; and stands by his sacrifices, fasting and
praying, (and his Princes too) with so great devotion, and why so? why, all to
get Power over the Lords Chosen ones. So these have seemed to have laid aside
their old principles of enmity, hatred, animosity, revenge, persecution and
opposition, so of profaneness, Atheism and open wickedness of that kind,
thereby to get a power of revenge over us to curse and diminish us for our
faithfulness and constant adhaesi^n to the good Cause, both now and in the
late wars; this also lying in the road of their preferment so to treat us; for
the Cavaleers highest Counsels ar this day are to fall in with this Power, in
order to the bringing of Chapter Stuart ruining us, and precipitating of them; and
all this by their old principle.

3. It appears a conviction of Conscience, is a capital crime with them, and
merits cut^^ng, slashing and shedding of blood without mercy; for as the Jews,
Jo 9.22. Had agreed that if any man did confess that he was Christ, he should
be put out o^ the Synagogue: So have these agreed to cast them out from amongst
them, that acknowledge the Lord Jesus in Power and truth, according to the
dictates of an enlightened Conscience, for a blind men restored to sight they
will not endure amongst them, who in such a mixture and complication of
sinister interests prefer butchery before the liberal arts (as they say of the
Jews) yea, revenge above Religion, and Coin above Conscience; calling the touch
of conscience contempt, melancholy and madness, and punishing of them: they
themselves being ^eared, and having made shipwreck thereof; whiles we (as Paul
says) 2 Cor. 4 2. Have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking
in craftiness, nor handling the Word of God deceit^ully; but by manifestation
of the truth commend our selve to every man's conscience in the sight of God.

Fourthly, It is evident we are under as barbarous a Spirit of the Be^st as at
this day exercised in any part of the world, and as miserable a servitude as
among the Turks, for in all places they will use their Prisoners civilly, and
not multiply afflictions upon them, every day as these men do and study to,
much less so monstrously and murtherously hack and hew men for making
conscience in their unreasonable commands; but to make us yet in a more
Turk-like slavery, and that what is now our cause may quickly be the case of
others, and of all if need be: behold! the Bashaws and Begler-begs sent down to
settle there D^vans and Mili^i^ in to every country? with the Timariots also
and Zaniachs or Debuty-Bashaws under them: besides the Janissaries, Gemoglanies,
and Spahies, or Guards about their Grand S. at White Hall; and in the Army,
there are also their A^hingies (Hindes of the Country) or new Militia. Troops
too, to forage up and down for prey, and to keep the Lords Lambs from me ting
and feeding together upon Christ's Commons; now next I expect, these Janissaries
(like them at Constantinople under the Aga) will be employed in the room of
Constables, Serjants, Clerks of the Markets, Warders of the Gates and Officers
of that kind, and in case of injury no public justice may be ministered upon
them; is not this a new Turkey then? (let them palliate all with as good words
as they will) yet as their proverb is, Soltan^n bila adalin kanahrin bila ma^a,
their Soltan with out justice will befound but like a Brook without water, and
neither his Soldiers nor multitudes can save him when the time of his
judgment is come; Islahho -- rraiati abphao min kitsrati-l chonoudi.

Fisthly It is certain too, these red Esaus must have red meat, I mean blood
to feed on, and I easily foresee with what greediness and design they do
provoke poor simple plain Jacobs, honest hearts, by ex ggerating and
accumulating violencies and iusolencies upon them, to sum rising or
(untimely)* action of defense for them to have a full blow at them; their
belly-fulls of the Saints blood, which they so much threaten and thi^st after;
that their Shebna himself said he could freely have his arms up to his elbowes
in their blood; but thus is this horn to make war with the saints (his time,
times (in the duall) and a divident yea he has done it and is at it, (as I
have largely proved in my Treat. of the two Witnesses and two Beasts, etc.
Whose Sword as yet prevails over us; and as Balaak by hireing Balaam but to
Curse Israel Number. 22. was said to make war against Israel by so doing, Josh.
24.9. thus have these Warred against the Saints; but their divination shall not
prosper. Nor their offerings be accepted? and Balaam their Prophet shall fall
by the Sword Josh 13.22.

Sixthly, It is our comfort that all they can do unto us, is but to drive us to
our God and Father with our perfumes unto his altar of incense within the vail;
from this Altar of slaughter without the vail; and so from one Altar unto
another. Psalm. 66.13. I will go into thy house with burnt-offerings. Psalm
45.12. ubat tzor be miuchah the daughter of (izor) Strates and afflictions with
an offering (yea a meat offering) a most excellent privilege, and provision?
wherein we have the provision of the things we wait for in the light of the
seven Lamps that burn before the Throre, Rev. 4.5. and 5.6. thus whiles others
are (as Psalm. 2.2. Rulers are called Rozenim) lean ones, and leanenesse is in
their Souls Psalm. 106.15. we are fatt (as Sons of oil) Isa. 55.2. and
flourish in the truth, Cause and Covenant of Christ; like Arons Rod Number. 17.8.
'which brought forth buds, bloomed and yielded Almons, (whiles all the other
rods were dry and Sear) and therefore v. 10 was it laid up before the
testimony: Indeed since I am driven thus close to my burnt-offering, and with
Moses and Aaron at every fresh provocation from them to y unto the Lord Number.
11.2.11. and 14.5. and 16.4.22. with my complaints? I have also found such food
and meat offerings as I would not part with for all the world, which makes my
heart (as Psalm. 45.1,) Rachash boil up within me in the matters of the King,
and my tongue as the pen of Sopher Mahir a quick Accomptant or Numberer of the
times; for a testimony whereof I must refer to that beam of light which lead me
into a most lucid and facile supputation; proved and illustrated in my foresaid
Treatise; having found very excellent food from the roots of the Hebrew,
(Chaldy, Samaritan, Syriack) Arabic (Persian) and Ethiopick tongus which I
dialy converse with, and reading the Scriptures by, thorough the teaching of
the Anointing I find a hidden Manna wraped up in the Dewes of Heaver, and can
say it is Angels food.

Seventhly We are now in the School of Patience, Rev. 14.12. wherein besides
our dearest Lord Jesus, his Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs; says John, Rev.
1.9. 'I also am your Brother and companion in tribulation, 'and in the Kingdom
and Patience of Jesus Christ, was in the Isle of Patmos; and in such company we
must needs run this race of ours with sweet Contentment, Serenity, Calmness
of Spirit, what ever our enemies maliciously report of us Heb. 12 1. and our
experiences teach us that Arabic Adage Assabro miftaho-l pharahi va-l
a-chalato miphtaho-unidamati, that patience is the Clavis Gaudij, whiles a
murmuring and impatience is the Key of sorrow and repentance, so the Key of
David which shall open unto us (all the treasures Isay. 22.22. and sealed
truths of heaven, Rev. 5.6. and 10.4, 7) and none shall shutt, and which shall
shut (our enemies) our, that shutt us in, and none shall open to them; this Key
is given to us (as promised) in this state of patience Rev. 3.7.10. blessed be
the Lord. Zammeru Elohim zammeru. Zammeru lemalkenu zammeru.

Eighthly, And because the 'Prince of the Kings of the earth has loved 'us and
washed us with his own blood, and made us Kings and Priests to God, Rev. 1.5.6.
we do and yet will rejoice in our blessed portion which is the waved (the
lifted up, or offered up) Beast, and the Right-shoulder Numb. 18.18. Levit.
7.32.33. whereby to bear all that men can lay upon us with a heart lifted up to
the Lord; this is not the strangers portion Lev. 22* 25. but the portion of the
Anointing Levit. 7.35. and thus am powered out (as the word (...) is Psalm.
92.10.) with fresh oil, or beshemen Rag^auan green and fatness before the
Lord; and v 11. mine eyes shall see (what I look for) upon mine enemies (or
observers of my ways, that strictly watch for me of Shur) and our joy shall be
like them that divide the spoil Isay. 9.3 4. when Jehovah shall turn again
our captivity as the streams of the South Psalm. 126.4. or parched dry
wilderness where the Aphikim or strong Currents and Torents of waters (as the
word is) are very welcome; yea the captivity, of the captiety is already
deforced and turned back by the force of these refreshing streams. Psalm. 46.4.
which the Lord is unto us; and broad rivers Isay. 33.21. So that v. 16. our
waters will be sure Teballel jah Hallelujah.

But to proceed; Upon the 16. day of the 3. Month 1655. were Commissioners
sent from White Hall, in a color of justice to be done for our diversified
injuries, which (by this) had made aloud noise in the ears of men, so as the
Courtiers was put to this policy for a shift; and in pretense of wrongs done
unto us, and to enquire after the matter of fact, we found the integrall of
their negotiation to be against us, that all the informations they could
squeeze out of any sorts of people, Soldiers or enemies, might be modeled and
formed up together against us, and so presented to their Lord Protector: The
Commissioners that fat upon us were Mr. H. Mr. Wood, Mr Cresset, Mr. Carier,
Mr. Woodard, Mr. B. Mr. Oxenbridge and Angelo: The first day they sat I was
interrupted in the duty of expounding and praying, (in the morning) and from my
sweat (out of that exercise) taken away by the Marshall (in the company of my
Broth. F.) to be cooled (in the other.) When we came before them (in the
Governors lodgings) they told us their errand by the mouth of Mr. Holland; we
desired to see their Commission and to hear it read, which their Clea^k did;
and as on the one side it signifi^d some wrongs we had received of the
Soldiers, so on the other side (and which was the main body of the business)
Upon complaint against Mr. Christopher Feake and Mr. John Rogers that they
stirred up the Soldiers to S^dition and Mutiny against their Officers and the
Government. Those whose names were under written by the foresaid Commission
were authorized to examine and make report to him; given under his Seal Manual,
and in the head of it O. P. When we heard it read, the design was obvious unto
us, under the color of hearing a little of what we should say, to hear all
they could possibly scrape up, or that any could forge or find out against us
(for indeed to this day, what ever they say, they want sufficient matter to
bear out this abominable and brutish handling of us, (these years together)
Brother F. first spoke and I Seconded him, we both told them, we were in the
capacity of prisoners, and that close; but if they had power to right us, we
required our do liberty, at least to be in Statu quo and to have the liberty
of the Castle, as the Cavaleers and all Prisoners (but our selves) had to
breath in; but that denied, we demanded a copy of their Commission, that we
might be the better directed, when we rightly understood their Rules and
Instructions; we were bid to withdraw, and after a long debate called in again
with his recusation, that we did not own the Government, and therefore they
could not allow us a copy of their Commission, without we would own the power
that sent them: We told them, that was not the point, nor was it now the matter
in hand; yet we could assure them we should not own them as they are
Commissionners, for so our lives would be in jeopardy, and our liberties
betrayed, (and as much as in us lies the liberties of our Country and brethren)
for that what they were to do, was as Justices of the Quorum, to hear, examine
and prepare matters for the Oyer and Terminer, in order to a definitive
sentence and future issue; and therefore they were (to make it more concise) to
give their prepared papers and examinations to their Lord Protector, whereby he
may pretend we have had a trial, depositions taken, and nothing rests to do,
but to hang or head us; therefore we did not intend to be involved into such a
snare, nor to be thus treated with or tried in a hole: Answer was made us they
had no such design, but we told them they had not the intentions of their Lord
Protector in their hands however, and thorough our simplicity (and it may be
theirs too) he might make his game; but although as Commissioners we would not
meddle with them, yet as Brethren or Friends in an amicable way we were ready
to give them, or any other an account of our faith, hopes and sufferings;
Answer was made us, they were our Friends and Brethren too, in which capacity
we told them, we could discourse freely with them; but they said they were sent
for our good, and satt to hear what injuries we received, we told them whether
for our good or hurt, we excepted against the matter, the form, the rule and
the end of their Commission, and could take no cognizance of in the capacity of
Commissioners; for matter (I said) in that some men as Mr. Oxenbridge etc. were
parties concerned, and therefore not fit to sit as Judges or Justices in this
case; as to form, they were an illegal court nor ought they to take the
prisons, for informations against poor prisoners, to palliate their past
proceedings with new pretenses and colors put upon them: But first, they were
to try us for the offense (if they had any) perpetrated, upon which we had lay
so long in prisons, and either to acquitt or adjudge us for that; and then they
might proceed and enquire for new; but to immure us so long, and barbarously
and now to stir every stinking puddle to find matter for it, is not fair; but
like the Tyrant that did first hang the man, and then hear his Cause; or the
Constable (as the P. calls himself) that first knocks the man down and then
bids him stand; besides as they were incompetent Justices and no authentic
Court, so the end for which they satt (let them shape it as well as they can)
was wicked and unchristian, to rake up informations and depositions against us
in the matters of our faith and consciences; They told us, they were to take
report of matters of fact, which we desired them to extricate according to
their Commission; but they refusing so to, by the ill success of our request
(reaching but to the Superficies of an obtuse Nerve) we saw it encumbent to
deal plainly with them, and to tell them the utmost our enemies had to impeach
us, was but for words, in preaching, praying, or Christian conference with us,
which we knew to be words of Sobriety and truth, though our enemies call them
dangerous and seditious; Mr. Oxenb. answered that words were matters of fact;
with that we knew their meaning; and Mr. H. said he must needs confess the
Charge against us was very high, yea, said we in your (Calendar or) Law you
make it Treason to do such things as in your Commission seems charged upon us,
but we vallued not that, yet insisting upon a copy of their Commission; Mr.
Oxenbridge answered, they could not, for that we had denied the efficient cause
thereof, we told them he did us wrong, for that we had not once entered upon a
debate of the efficient, viz. O. P. or his Seal; but yet for further
satisfaction, I desired of them the extent of their Commission (as to time)
whether for two days or tenn; they answered for the whole space of time since
our imprisonment; by which it became so evident (that themselves were beaten by
it) under a show of doing us right, they must do us wrong, and so we told them
that at first they said and pretended it was grounded up on the complaints our
friends made of wrongs done unto us, for the space of two weeks before, to
enquire after that matter of fact; and yet now confess it intended the whole
space of our imprisonment (for many months) to find out matter against us, and
that (as in the Commission) grounded upon the complaints of our foes (that are
our Goalers and seek our blood) and therefore possitively refused to take
notice of them in that capacity; there was much more to this effect and in
propinquity tossed to and fro of transitive matter not worth mentioning, nor
were they more propitious at other times, as in the afternoon and the day
after, wherein we were quiescents as before, without altering or sounding after
them; yet as to brethren or friends (not in Authority) we were free to tell
them a story of our sufferings and unhandsome usage, whereof there was so clear
witnasse; but (said we freely forgave them) not desiring they should be
punished, (which they never intended doubtless, but to fortify their hands
(rather) to such ugly circumstances and abuses, as appeared for) the next day
these Loco motive Commissioners adjourned to Frogmore (the Governors house
beyond the town) and there satt to hear, receive and examine all that would
come in with any accusation against us; which we in (close prison) were kept
ignorant of; yea the Officers took great pains not only by Clandestine
meetings (to compare their minds and prepare their matters together) but with
coincident endeavors suborned the Soldiers (who must obey Orders) to that
unworthy service, so base that as some of the poor creatures rejected it, so
some of them were threatened by Pepper (as one of them told me) because they
would not go in and testify against us, things they never heard spoken, and
which they told him they never heard; yet because they would not assert and
depose to what he said, they were not only menaced, but upon easy m^tters and
other pretenses (afterward) suffered: The next day early Mr. Br. came to me
(who had preached the day before a little too reflecting upon us, but being my
worthy friend I am tender of him, and entirely respect him) he desired me to
forbear my exercise, which I did that morning, and we were hastened again
before these Gentlemen (with a friend or two then with us) they offered (then)
to read the accusations and informations, they had taken up against us, if we
would consent they should report them to O. P. but we said as before, our
minds were the same, and they were the same, so that as Commissioners we would
not so much as here them read to us, or reply a word to them, with which they
were offended, but we renewed our exceptions against them (both gray and black
M^ssionari^s) the Ministers having no such rule from Christ left them, to fit
in Commission (thus) against their brethren, nor had the other either Law or
conscience to commend them to this employment and particularly in that some
there present were constituted members of the High Court of justice, for the
punishing them with death that should declare Chapter St. or any other person
chief Magistrate in the three Nations, etc. and this they had solemnly sworn
to, so I drew out the Act of Parliament to read it to them, and offered reasons
why we could not in conscience take cogniscance of them, but they were deaf and
obtuse of hearing; yea two or three of them ( viz Mr. Wood and Oxenbridge) rent
away from the rest in discontent, and so after a little discourse with some of
the other about the Fifth Kingdom, they dissolved, and left us in our close
prisons and cruel hands where they found us; they went home with a Flea in
their ear, (it seems) but well frought with informations against us to their
Master, who has doub^lesse laid them up with the r^st for a timous and more
terrible treatment; and whiles with Joab; 2 Samuel 20. they say Brother with the
one hand, they stabb us with the other hand under the fi th ribb, and shedd out
our bowels in the dust, but the Lord will raise the dust of Sion, Psalm. 102.
And in general we may note;

First, That Apostates are the worst and subtellest sort of persecutors; and of
all people the most brutishly bent to their own ways, in spending the
Egyptian spoils, Exodus 32. setting up false worships with a carnal noise,
Exodus 32.18. quite loosing the Lords presence (with the former signs,) Exodus
33. and lying open to enemies, Exodus 32.25. Yea notwithstanding all professions
they are found against God, Number. 14.35. and are disinherrited (of all the
promises of the good I and) by God, Numb. 14, 12.

Secondly, That more justice is to be had from a downright Heathen Government,
than from an Apostate interest (which lies in deceit and Hypocrisy) whether
that Heathen Government be Millitary or Philosophical, and for the proof of
this all History is redundant; in the Persian after Cyrus Cambyses, was so
strict that he caused a Judge to be flayed, and set up his skinn for a
monument, because he was corrupted and executed wrong judgment; yea of late,
the King of Persia centensed the Governor of Casbin for his wrongs done to men,
that all his goods and lands should be sold for satisfaction to them that he
had wronged, and if that would not do, the King condemned himself to fatisfie
the rest, or that (in his Office) he did the wrongs, and that this Governor
(for his cruelty) should all his days during his life wear a yoke (like a
hoggs yoke about his neck) and have his ears (so ready to hear tales) cut off,
and he get his living with his own hands, that he might feel the want he had
made others to feel; yea among Turks at this moment is much more justice to be
had (than is now in England) where any cause is heard, tried and determined in
three days; but here we may lie three years in prisons rotting, without a
trial or face of justice (or know for what) as is our case. Yea in China (that
Philosophical Government) the Choli and Zauli (men of moral principles of
Philosophy) will (at this day as is well known) admonish and reprove the King
(or Emperor) sharply, if any thing be done contrary to the Law, and will not
spare to do it, by public libells, not dissembling his faults, nor the
greatest Magistrates in their Nations, which they continue, to the astonishment
of other Nations round about at their integrity and liberty, nor will they
cease their witness one moment, till there be a return and remedy; yea (as
Purchase Pilg. chapter 18 lib. 4. says) this every private man may do, and not
suffer for it: But these in England, persecute, plunder, banish and imprison
them that witness against public wickedness (and that by better principles
too) notwithstanding Gods word says, Levit. 19.7. Thou shall in any wise
rebuke thy neighbor and not suffer sin upon him. Wherefore in this it will be
more easy for the Governments of Persia, Turkey and China at the last day than
for this; and the whilst Leprosy is the worst, Numb. 13.2, 4.10. Unclean!
Unclean! as they are!

Thirdly, That the justice of God does ever avenge with the Sword upon an
Apostate Interest, Levit 26.25 And I will bring the Sword upon you that shall
avenge the quarrel of my Covenant. So Exodus 32.27. Now this Apostasy is that
which immediately preceeds the rise of the holy Camp, or Sword (in this one
street first, Rev. 11.3. Dan. 7.22, 25, 27.) at the end of the 42. months,
which I take to be the outer Court, Rev. 11.2. For the Lords Camp of old in the
Wilderness had three parts, or rather it was a threfold Camp (as the Hebrews
write) viz, 1. The Camp of Israel, or the 12. Tribes mustred, Numb. 2. and set
in their quarters under their own standards (all that could bear arms) and
this was the outward Camp pitched found about the Tabernacle, which was four
square, and said to be 12. miles long and 12. broad; that is without fraction
united and not easi y broken; this is the outer Camp which we expect to arise
every day: The 2. Camp was the Sanctuary-Camp or of the inner-Court, Levites
and Priests musterd and set in their quarters and wards, under the charge and
care of Eliazar and Ithamar, Numb. 3.4. But the inner Camp has continued with
the two Witnesses, and with them that have gone out of the Tabernacle of the
Testimony against the Beast all along this 42. months, Rev. 15.5, 6. The 3.
Camp was called the Camp of Gods presence, to save and protect his people,
within the veil and in the holiest of all, from whence came all their orders to
fall on, and which first began to move, viz. in the sigues of his presence, the
Cloud and pillar; etc. This is the Malechild that Sions travel will bring
forth now immediately, and begin to move us; yea the sound of the 7. Trumpet
gives the Alarm, and the 3. Woe is now at hand; only this caution love as your
lives, as not to stay behind at the call, so not to stir untimely least you
fall before your enemies, like them, Numb. 14.40, 42, 44. and they be
heightened against you; but be first united the inner Court and the outer. Yea
these called Fifth monarchy men, and Common wealth men must unite too, upon the
principles of Righteousness to all men, (which may easily be obtained) and
then March, for the signs are upon us, and the Trumpets sound, horse, horse
and away.

Fourthly, Whiles our incense burns within the wail, and the Piguls of our
enemies (their feasts and tears) are an abomination to the Lord, Mal. 1. Isa. 1
And from them we are cleansed through the water of separation (made of the
ashes of the red Heiser, i. e. Christ our Sacrifise) Numb. 19. Whiles our
waved-sheafe (even of green corn and unripe) is accepted: And note from hence,

That it is a very subtle specious insinuating Spirit, which is now as work to
persecute the Saints.

2. That seeming Brethren and Professors are the Persecutors, who pretend love
to us in the bloodiest and most cunning designs against us.

3. That whiles they report all over the Nation by Printing, Preaching and
every way, there is no persecution, they persecute us in holes and corners,
(where none can see it but the God of heaven) not only for Consciences, but
purely for praying, preaching, and the worship of God, though we meddle not
with the Government, or the Times.

4. Whiles their Clergy cry out upon us, as meddling with matters beside the
Cushion and ^^^h Civil affairs, they themselves are the Busy-bodies, made
Judges and Commissioners in Civill-matters, and indeed the greatest medlers in
other men's matters.

5. For want of matter to color over their ungodly imprisoning, Plundering,
Robbing, Spoiling and Barbarous abusing of us, they rake up the Prisons for our
infirmities, and to find matter (if they can) to make us odious, and to take
away our lives, so they did at Lambeth, ( vid. my Sutrod. of Prison b. Morn.)
so here at Winsor, not regarding how surreptiously or shamefully they get,
forge and invent it, so they could but find matter against us. One matter
against me I remember was that the Brethren of the Church I walk with, sent the
poor desperately wounded man twenty shillings to relieve him (as a deed of
charity) he being a stranger, his Family in Ireland, his pay short and his want
great; which charity they interpreted a design in me to draw him off, from
their service, though no such thing was ever thought of or propounded; but this
they devised and make it a great crime, with several other of the like coin;
forcing men to affirm any thing, (as we heard before) but yet the Lord has
delivered us for his great namesake from these unrighteous Judges and suborned
Witnesses both at Lambeth and here.

6. We may also see what eminent testimony has been borne from heaven against
these practices of theirs, for at Lambeth the great Accuser Abdy was starb'd
that day he should have been rewarded by them for his good service, and an
other one Porter spitting upon my head (when I was Preaching with my head out
at the grates) killed one of their own Officers, for which he lies in the
Gate House, if he be not executed, and here at Winsor Mr. Wood one of our
bitterest enemies amongst the Commissioners, pleading much for the Governors
and Soldiers in the wrongs they did us, has not enjoyed himself since, (as it
is reported) but was presently after snach'd away by a sudden hand of God. So
the that in the way of thy judgments O Lord have we waited for thee, the desire
of out Soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee, and as Judges
5.31. So let all thine enemies perish O Lord! but let them that love thee, be
as the Sun when he goes forth in his might! Amen and Amen.

My imprisonment in Winsor continued until the Second day of the eighth Month
1655. by which time I had been delivered of a hopeful vision, or prison-born
endeavors and discoveries in the work of the day, about Generation-Truth, the
two Witnesses, the supputation of the times, Rise and Ruin of the two Beasts,
order and nature of the Vials etc. And present state of great Brittany in this
Grand Apostasy and Turn which is put out to nurse, but being a Male-Childe is
most miserably threatened, and laid to be destroyed, if not bereft of life; but
it being the fruit of faith, prayers, inward pangs, contemplations, travells of
Spirit night and day, and indeed the very marrow of my prison-contemplations,
perhaps it may be hid of God from their bloody hands that seek to cut the
throat of it, and I do hope so, for that the seed of a Banish born, is brought
into the womb also. Upon the first day of the eighth Month in the evening a
Cornet of horse came to Winsor with Orders from White Hall (or hell rather as
from men but, indeed as to us from heaven!) to carry us away with him to
Sandham-fort, and so he gave us time to prepare till the next morning, and we
must not dispute it; my difficulty lay in the managing of this so sudden news
to my poor wife, who was very weak and in Childbed ready to fink upon any
sudden motion in so dangerus a condition as she was, being but 4. days (not 5.
full out) in Child bed, after so hard and sore a labor as gave her up (in the
judgment of them about her) for a dead woman, or at least the child; but that
the God of prayers, yea our prison God, the great Jehovah that appea'rd in the
mount Genesis 17.22. and last minute of need (almost) beyond expectation saved
both; but yet so as the least trouble, grief, or sudden fright, would probably
have endangered her as much, or more then before, this made me look up to him
in whom I center, who giveeth wisdom and upbradeth not, Jam. 1.5. (weighing
her weakness) for a space of time, I was treating with her upon the promises,
especially to the persecuted and suffering ones for Christ, with the special
presence which they have had to support in such cases, instancing in the
examples of our blessed Captain the lord Jesus and his most noble file-leaders,
or van-Soldiers, the Apostles, Prophets and primitive Martyrs, who are all for
our examples, Jam. 5.10. And so was I first insinuating, preparing, warming and
affecting her heart with the precious truths and promises, before I could
break the matter unto her, who notwithstanding received it with tears and
troubles of heart, not knowing whether they would bannish me into Barbadus or
such like place, or else Barbarously murder me before we see the faces of one
another more: and not having time to provide for wife or children, or the poor
prison-bornebabe, I was the next morning notwithstanding I wanted necessaries,
and had not riding-Coat, Boots, or things fi^ for such a journey, yet with
Musketeres and Officers they fetched me out of my Chamber by violence, and rent
me from my weak wife in childbed, and weeping babes and children about me; but
I bless the Lord that I had first some sealing refreshments to my inwardman,
for in my sleep before I waked in the mornings, the Lord met me, at which I
said, (as Gerdius did in his torments) Jehovah is on my side, I will not fear
what flesh can do unto me, with which I awaked fell to prayer, and arose
preparing my Family with prayers and exhortations to all that were about me
(and conveying a few of my papers into the bottom of my Stockins at the soals
of my feet, to preserve them from their hands and searches) I was brought away
to my Bro. F. so by force we were brought to horseback and with the Troopers
led like the flock of thy slaughter O Lord Zach. 11.4.5. Whose possessors and
persecutors hold themselves not guilty, yea and they that sell us (our Lives,
Liberties and Bodies to Barbarians, that are skill full to destroy us! for a
little money, places and preferments) say, blessed be the Lord Isa. 66.5. The
poor people on both sides of the streets, standing weeping, listing up their
eyes, blessing, pitying and praying for us as we passed thorough, to see us so
carried and hurried into banishment for the name of Christ. I bless my God I
much rejoiced, though I was so harshly rent from my dearest relations and
worldly commodities, not having one foot of land, house or estate in the world
to live upon, but only the providence of my God (which feeds the Birds, clothes
she Lillies and numbers the Sparrows) to depend upon, and yet I sang I say (in
this blessed suffering) for joy like the bird of the day, or the Nightingale at
the thorn. Yea Dum ova in gremio sunt.)

The first night we reached to Farnham; the next morning was very cold,
blustering, stormy and bitter, yet before I was fully ready they had taken
horse, and I was called away and stayed for, so I hasted and we road thorough
great rain, storms, winds and very sore weather to Alton (I think they call
it;) where we about noon (being soaked quiet thorough our clothes; I and some
others bitterly ill, feavourish and weary) had leave to refresh a little, with
fire and provisions for our selves and horeses, so we all tarried there a small
time hoping it would hold up, the weather yet continuing as bad as before, and
the way which we had to go being worse, which made the Cornet and his company
of Troopers, well content we should tarry until the next morn, and my self
being very violently afflicted with the head ach and in a high burning
feavourish distemper, did much desire it, as also did our friend C. D. (now
Epaphras our fellow-prisoner) he being (likewise) somewhat troubled with the
pain in head, so I laid me down upon the bed, (Bro. F. and his wife being both
well through the goodness of God) yet some of them would be going, (although
we were so ill and the weather and ways so exceeding bad) but then I did beg
in that bitter distemper to stay but one hour upon the bed, only until I had
took a little sl^mber hoping to be a little better by it; but I could not
obt^in it, notwithstanding some did entreat it for me, yet to no purpose; for
away they went, took horse, and left me behind with some Troopers to follow,
in that violent bad weather which I was but ill provided against; which when I
saw, I was forced to arise, muffle my face about with a scarf, and ride after
a great pace, not only to overtake them (which I soon did) but to get to some
Inn as soon as I could possibly, that I might ly down and ease my afflicted
head; the Cornet straight ways appointing the place we should go unto that
night, which was a little Village, 3. or 4. miles short of Porch-mouth, whither
(I bless the Lord that enabled me though with pain) I reached (some of the
Troop^rs and the Cornet himself being with me) late at night, yet a little
before B. F. and some others came, (being exceeding ill in my head) I called
for a Chamber, which the Host brought me into (a little poor pitiful room)
and made a fire, I laid my head a little on a bed for ease, yet I entreated the
man to make a good fire, and provide a room for my B. F. and his wife who were
near; the which he did, and Six, yea Six, were forced to ly in my room, (for
want of room) all that night, and some 4. or 5. the next day and night when we
came to Porch-mouth, so ill were we accommodated in lodging the Troopers not
providing any room for me.

The next day being the fifth day of the Eighth Month 1655. we were in the
morning called away with the tide to transport out of our native Country into
Exile, which was some trial to the flesh, not knowing their further design
therein, but whiles I was committing it unto my heavenly Father, I was called
away; and the friends that were with us, so we went to the water side, and upon
the Seashore I put my B. F. in mind of our Lord and Master's practice, upon
the Sea-sho^e, Mar. 4.1. Mat. 13.1. to the people; and of Paul's practice at
such times to preach; whereupon he agreed, and began, speaking until the tide
came up very near us, than I assayed to exhort the people which were gathered
about (and did affectona^ly hear,) out of Acts 28.20. showing what the hope of
Israel was, for which we were thus bound and banished; but the Cornet forbad
me, and interrupted me often, with the tides rising upon us, and the peoples
increasing, so I was broken off abruptly in the midst of the Application; at
which the people showed abundance of affection, by tears abundance, prayers and
earnest cries to the Lord for us; some laying hold on my hands, some on my
garments, and so we parted with this lesson left unto them, that for Christ and
his Kingdom (only) for this their and our hope was were thus banished and
barbarously handled; (how much soever our enemies did falsely report of us in
all places;) the people looking after us upon the shore a long time, and so we
were carried away to Ride tossing (but a little) on the Seas, and there horsed
away, and conveyed to Sandham-fort; a mile before we came at it, the Ensign who
was the keeper, being at Brading, and knowing who we were, rode galloping and
over took us, but gave no respect at all, he kept on before us prisoners very
full, and fell (it seems) against us, (at a venture) speaking such bitter and
enraged words as made us wonder; the and Goal being as black (as the Jailer)
and as threatening an Earth-hole, without shelter, tree or house about it, upon
the Sea and boggs, it looked already as if it were the end of the world unto
us; in so much as the very Troopers were troubled and wept (some of them) to
see it; (a little description of the place I gave in my Post-scirpt of the
Prison born Treat and so I shall forbear here) but when we came to it, we were
carried into the Fort (or rather Dungeon lately made out of the Earth) so bad,
as the worst prisoner or Cavaleer that ever they had, they never cast into it,
(though M. Bull speaks of one C. Kern put there) nor was ever any prisoner (as
the Ensign himself said it often) put there before? and for many nights (6.
nights together after our weary journey) they made us ly in our clothes
(notwithstanding they had bedding locked up in a room) allowing us neither beds
nor straw, thus turning us into the Hole like Beasts, but little regarding to
provide for us; this continued until the noise thereof about the Island stired
up some honest people in Newprrt to send us beds, which was a great refreshment
unto us, (blessed be the Lord) yet we was sweetly affected all that time with
the sense of Primitive Saints sufferings, and such as lay in Dungeons and Yrons
for righteousnesse-sake; in Caves and Dens, Heb. 11.38. yea of Nebemiah his
Brethren and his Servants, chapter 4.22.23. that lay in their clothes so long; and
I considered withal, how we were (by faith prayer and patience) laying fiege
to Babylon, which would require hard duty. So that our De^^ God made these
trialls a delight unto us, and indeed as Vincentius the Martyr said of his
sufferings, I have always desired these Dainties. For other things also we
were sorely put to it, the B^ead we could get for money (which was not easy)
was very bad, of bad savor of worse taste, but good enough for poor prisoners;
nay not bad enough in a sense, if we went ad Carceres, as ad Epulas et Nuptias,
as the Martyr used to do with great joy: And the Water we drank was of a very
filthy ditch, (with out we caught some rain now and then) brackish, black and
very unwhosome, if not venomous; much more I might say, but I shall forbear;
seeing this is nothing to what the Holy Seed (whom we succeed) of the Woman
have suffered, and been glad to drink their own water in former ages, though
this is almost incredible at this time of day, in this nation, and from such
men too (as the present Ophitae, for so I may call the Persecutors in this
matter that serve the Serpent, Rev. 12.14.) seem and pretend to be; during this
Siege, and sore trial of faith upon us, we fed much upon the Martyrs meat and
drink, when they were without meat and drink or sustinance for nature, and
since the (yet higher) sufferings in this Castle where I now am, I have
heartily fallen upon John's fare (methinks) of 'Locusts and wild honey, (as men
esteem it) for, ut tanquam medicamenta sic alimenta sumpturus sum; that of R.
Samuel Minister and martyr in Q. Mary's days coming much to mind, kept in
Clole-prison, chained, standing on tipto, so with out meat and drink for many
days, that he would have often drunk his own Water, but his body was dried up
and he could not make one drop; and I would thus as (much as may be) extenuate
in my own mind our sufferings, as nothing for my Lord and Masters sake, (and as
much as our enemies do or can) yet I must say, this has been the more trial
to the flesh, yet the more subtly men have carried it, and the less noise it
has made* Now to obviate this report of our hard usage, which brake a broad
about the Ears of the Court, they cunningly caused an Order to be printed which
was cried about London streets, and the report thereof spread about the Nation
(to stop the other report of their inhumane Tyranny and bad usage of us,) that
we were removed to a private house for better accommodation; the contents are
as follows, of the two Orders.

Friday the 28. of September 1655. At the Council at White Hall. ORDERED,
By his Highness the Lord Protector and the Council, that Mr. Feake and Mr.
Rogers now prisoners in Windsor-Castle, be for^h with removed to Sandham Castle
under the command of Cap. Boreman in the Isle of Wight, there to be secured in
safe Custody till further Orders; to which purpose warrants are to be iessued
and it is referred to Com. Genesis Whaley to take order for appointing a Guard to
convey them accordingly.

Upon this Order and other Warrants, as if were we Fellons or fearful Villains
and Miscreants, we were carried into this Banishment, but that saying of our
Savior has sweetly refreshed me, Luke 22.52. Be ye come out as against a
Thief with swords and staves? When I was dally with you teaching, ye streched
forth no hands against me, but this is your Hour and the Power of darkness.

The other Order follows.

At the Council at White hall, Tuesday the 9. of October 1655.
Whereas his Highness and the Council are informed, that Sandham Castle in the
Isie o^ Wight, where Mr. Feake and Mr. Rogers are at present Secured; does not
afford them Convenient Accommodations: Ordered by his Highness and the Council
that the said Mr. F. and Mr. R. be removed from the said Castle to such part of
the West of the Isle of Wight, as Maj. Boreman shall judge meet for
accommodation of their health, and with respect to their security and privacy.

The pretense of this Order they also printed and spread about, that the Cornet
Str. who brought us thither, upon his return made report of the badnesse of the
place, and of the want of fitting Conveniences, (as if they knew it not
before) and thereupon they printed it, October. 12. 1655. that Order, was
immediately sent for our removal into some private house, where we might be
lodged, and have air and things fitting for our health. Now this
Counter-report pretending love and pity, almost quashed the former, of their
Cruelty to us, but for all this High noise, there was no such matter really
effected for such a removal, but the people were deluded, and gulled and lulled
with a good opinion of these Persecutors for this pretense of their Charity to
us, and then the enemy could take a better blow in Cruelty at us, and with
less noise than before, as he did indeed at me (as fully as fowlly) in my
removal to this Monstrous Theater of Tyranny, where I now am under the roge of
wild Beasts rather then rational Creatures, looking when to be torn a pieces,
trampled under foot, yea murthred by them, should the Lord whom I serve suffer
them to be let loose. For if ever there were such a people as Philastrius tells
us of, (in Lib. de Haeres.) called Cajiani from Cain, whom they honored for
his Fradricide, saying he had the greatest power, but his Brother Abell the
least, and they would serve the greatest Power: Sure these I am now amongst (of
all men that I ever saw) are such, and their Castle may be called not
Carisbrook, so much as Cains-brook Castle, for they serve his Power and
Principle; nor could they pretend Accommodation in the least to remove me
hither, but all on the contrary, being worse here then ever in any Goal for
that matter, but for all their pretenses, there we continued in that worse then
Bonners cole house until the 31. day of the eighth Month, and notwithstanding
the Lord visited me (like a Father) with a sore and fearce feavour in this
hole, I was (with that on my back) carried a way through sad storms, ways and
weather, by Order from the Court with Soldiers and the Ensign from this Fort
further into banishment to Arten-house, of Freshwater Island; an Isle within an
Isle; an exile within exile, etc. ubi latares duplicantur; and about this time
did some of the Sisters of the Church-Society go to White Hall with a demand of
me; refusing to petition or send in a parer, but after long tarrying, and with
much difficulty, word was brought them from O. C. (with a great asseveration)
that Orders were sent down to open the Prison doors for me, and let me out,
but if I would not, then to accommodate me with all conveniences in the
Prison; but, Pectus Satan^ mendaciis foe cundissimum est, there was never any
such matter (that ever I heard off) but this policy was invented to pack them
away, by those that have made lies their refuge. They asked why the Brethren
came not, and why my wife came not, but I had indeed sent letters to her to
keep off, least parlying with the Serpent she should be ensnared. With me, I
carried about my papers in my Clothes (and other ways) as the Martyr Tyndall
did his, (which doubled both his and my labors;) hiding them (at Arten house)
inholes and walls, and potts and panns to preserve them from the enemy, and so
Mr. Fox carried his about; and it may be these my poor prison-labours may
minister to the public (one day) as theirs have done. But in this prison also,
being near the Sea, I had Nazianzen's sight of sad shipw racks, as they have
done with their Faith and Consciences that banish us; and of the Sea working
(like the wicked enemies who foam nothing but si^h, mire and dirt;) and and as
in a storm it cast up light and empty things, but not things solid and heavy,
so (as he appli's it to afflictions and trials in persecution) light and empty
spirits are soon turned over, and tossed up and down (by the present foaming
enemies) and keep not their constancy: but solid spirits (like the Rock) stand
firm endure their rage out, and will not stir an inch for them; (in B^nnishment
or Bonds) but as Mr. Buroughs says in his Moses Choice chap. 6. Men know not
their own hearts, they find them otherwise (then they thought for) when the
trials come; they never thought they had so much pride, impatience, unbelief,
coveteousnesse and self as they may see they have then. But in this House was
I guarded with a fierce company of Herodians (Soldiers) for as they who handled
my Lord Christ so cruelly would fancy Herod to be the Messiah ( Epiph. Haer.
20.) from Jacobs prophecy that the Scepter should not depart from Judah till
Shiloh came, wherefore Herod (a stranger) possessing the Scepter, they took him
for Shiloh; so these who handle us so hardly (some of the best) fancy their
Lord Protector C. to be the man on whose shoulders the Government of Christ
lies, accerding to Isa. 9.6. (and Blasphemous speech to his Parliament Jan.
22.1654. page 31, 32.) But these sat up day and night to watch me, and yet
indeed it was a much better Prison than the other for air, and other
accommodations; for diet, lodging, etc. Thither came my poor wife with 2.
Children unto me; Upon the Lords-daies because I preached, were 4. Soldiers or
sore biting Leopards set a fresh upon my bones; but upon other days but two,
who were renewed upon me day by day, and followed me so close with their
Herodian rudeness, that some of them would force within my Room, at unseemly
seasons, and that with very irrational bruitishness indeed; yea dog me much
immodestly, when I eased nature, added withal (very often) words and threats
if I stayed any thing, long, and that without any provocation: Two or three
Gen^lemen and my dear friends from London, who came to see me, were there
assaulted, (after they were suffered to see me, and one of them two coming
purposely from London to bring me physic for my feavour, but the Lord was my
Physician before he came, as Rollock said, es tu Deus mede eris mihi) and more
Soldiers of the fiercest sort were fetched from Yarmouth (a mile or 2. off) to
feaze upon them and their horses, carrying them prisoners before the Deputy
Governor, (for no other reason but for visiting me) having taken no offense
at them neither by word nor action, so that friends were scared from coming ^o
sivit; I shall pass over the daily wrongs the people had in whose house I was
kept prisoner: the Soldiers put on to it by Officers. Some poor people of the
Island that creep'd in, to hear me preach on the Lords-daies, were wonderfully
mennaced by the Soldiers, yea their names taken and carried to the D.
Governor, to be ordered, or committed; yea some of these brutish Bears were
sent abroad, before the poor Creatures that came to hear the Word) were at the
house to force them away, and not suffer them to come near, least they should
hear me preach. A Lieutenant came to tell me, if I would not preach nor meddle
with his L. P. in my sermons, I should have liberty to take the air a mile or
two on the Downs, a Soldier or two atending me, to whom I said, that liberty
was my right, but to take it upon such terms I would loose my rights first,
and as for preaching the Word I had a better commission and Authority for it,
then any of them had to hinder it or to wear their swords by their sides; for
your Authority was from the world, but mine from him that made the world to be
subject unto his son, whom I preach and declare; and so far as his L. P. or any
alive should stand in a way or interest against Christ, I would contend for my
most dear Master Jesus Christ against him, (with the help of God) yea if he cut
my tongue out of my head, or me limb from limb, and leave me but a stump, that
stump should stand against him and them to their teeth, that oppose Christ and
his kingdom; much more to that effect I spoke unto him, who doubtless told his
tail. A poor Soldier who pitied my condition under such hardship for my
conscience, would comfort me, and confer with me out of Scriptures, which
being perceived he was soon cashiered, and cast quite out; this only for his
civility and honesty, (poor creature, but he had comfort in it) and the worst
Churles they could pick were appointed to watch and ward me day and night, but
this prison being too commodious, where I might see friends in the yard, if
they came to see me; and too good (as they accounted it) for me, it being a
good air, and in its self well accommodated, I was removed from thence, with
a company of Soldiers upon the 5. day of the 10. month, to Carisbrook-Castle,
or rather Cains brook-Castle where I now am; and indeed they did show a most un
Christian inhumanity in the manner of removal of me; the the days being so
short, the ways so bad, and the weather so bitter, and (to boot) by reason of
so long and lamentable an imprisonment, my body so unused to it, and yet with
poor little horses, at 2. a clock in the afternoon (so late) they called me
out, and a way; which when I bogled at it, being so unseasonable an hour (for
such a journey in a dark cold night, over bleak Downs, dangerous w^ies, scarce
going by one house till Carisbrook) for my weak wife and two Children; the
Leopards consulted together, and one of the Offices concluded to pull me out by
the ears, and so by force and sury to fetch m^e away; but when I saw I must go,
(knowing their bloody disposi^ions) and that by no means I could be permitted
to tarry until the morn, I required of the chief Officer the Serj. a copy of
his warrant, who showed me his, (although the other Officers as they used to
do) s^id to some other his sword was his warrant, pointing to it by his side,
which when I heard I said in good time, is it come to that? And thus every
thief in the highway says, but in this Isle it is the constant and common
answer of the Soldiers, when we ask hy what Law or Order, to say by this,
drawing their sword, or laying hand on the hilt, the Order was to convey me
hither; within one hour or little more the night was come upon us, the ways
were exceeding glib and rough with ice, and frosts, the winds high and sharp,
which blew the snow out of the clouds full upon our faces, the night was very
black, dismal and dark, without Moonshine or Starlight until we came at
Carisbrook town, the road being unbeaten and over high mountany Downs, up and
down, so that we did alight often in the dark and footed it as far and fast as
we could; for as Origin said, when the Emperor sent for him in his Chariot,
that he would go on foot for his Master (Christ.) My wife (being weak rode but
once) was very ill, with the unusual (black) night air; I (also) was at last
overcome, and I fell down twice in the way, but with hot waters I was refreshed
a little, and forced to trudge in the dark again, until with a very dangerous
difficulty (contemplating the hard travails of the Primitive Saints and
Martyrs) after several hours in the night we were brought into a poor house
in Carisbrook, and there lying upon a bed, I was pretty well refreshed after an
hour or two, and then a Serjant came to me in the deep of the night with a
copy of the Order from the keeper of the Castle to receive me his prisoner,
under Scobells hand, Cleark of the Council in White Hall, not signifying for
what Cause or Crime, nor has any Order so done to this day, (that ever I could
see) but only their will and pleasure.

The Orders are as follows.

In pursuance of an Order of the Council of the 28. of November last, you are
hereby authorized and r^quired safely to convey Mr. Rogers from the house of
Mr. Vrry at Afton, and so to deliver him to the Commander in chief at
Carisbrook-Castle to be there secured till further Order from his Highness or
the Council;

Given under my hand at Brook this 4. of December 1655. To Sergeant Nol^ard
the^e. Thomas Boreman.

Wednesday the 28. of November 1655. At the Council at White hall. ORDERED
That Mr. Rogers now restran'd to a private house in ehe Isle of Wight be
ramoved to Carisbrook-Castle, and there secured till further Order; and that
the Deputy Governor of the Isle of Wight do take care that he be removed
accordingly,

Henry Scobell Clerk of the Council.

Here is no Crime nor Cause I thank the Lord, which minds me of that, in Jer.
50.20. 'Their iniquity shall be sought for, and there shall 'be none. Now could
their juggle of accommodation be now pretended, it being because of the
accommodation rather in Arten-house; and because of the incredible cruelty and
tyranny of this castle that I was brought hither: So that the Lord my God saw
it meet to bring my body under harder discipline, for as Tertullian says,
Nimis delicatus es Christian! etc. Christian, thou art too delicate for me,
who must have thine ease, thy peace, thy pleasure and delight in this world;
and so in an other place (de fugea in persec.) speaking against them, that will
shrink, comply or fly for fear of harder persecution; says he 'non potest qui
pati timet, ejus esse qui passus est. He that is afraid or runs away from
sufferings, can be none of his who has suffered so much; and indeed is has
been very teaching to me, to set Christ upon his cross before me; Heb.
12.2.2.10. The Captain of our Salvation, being made perfect through sufferings.
And can we think to be perfect without sufferi^gs for Christ? No surely.

But to proceed.

In this pitifully distempered estate of Body, I was sent for from tha^ poor
house (...) the Commissary and some others being ready to convey me (with the
foresaid Sergeant, Corporal and Soldiers,) into the Castle, and for my
encouragement they told us the Moon was up, but perceiving their resolution and
importunity, I desired liberty to prayer, after which we were carried up into
the Castle; as I came in at the first Gate I made a stand, resigning my self,
(Soul and body) into the hands of my most dear God and Father, through Jesus
Christ? not knowing that ever I should come out alive; I said aloud (to them
all) in the name of the Lord do I enter here, and for the sake of Jesus, which
they all witnessed unto, as well enemies as others; I was guarded thorough the
Musketteres, standing on both sides with Muskets, pieces and matches light, I
was with my wife and two children put up into a very little, poor, smoking,
cold Garret, upon the top of all, (which was a common Soldiers room) and
although it was a little trial to my wife, not having a Chair to sit on, and
so little that we could not readily turn or stir about business in it, the
bed-stead (which was borrowed) taking up the most part, and the smoke of the
chimney turning all into the Room at some times, so as we could scarce see one
another, yet did much rejoice to be so pent up, (for the Son of man had not
where to lay his head,) and in an upper Room too; from the consideraton of our
dear Lord Jesus, his choosing an upper room to eat the passover which his
Disciples in, when his time was at hand; that night I was so Exceedingly
distempered and ill, that I was forced to betake me to some rest, in such
lodging as we could get; the next morning came my dear con-captives (for this
most noble and excellent Cause of the King of Saints) to see me Maj. Genesis
Harrison and Mr. Courtney, who were a long time kept up in this close Goal,
where now I was brought to be their companion; some part of our time which was
spent together was in praying, instructing and praising our God, not omitting
this his merciful overruling sweet providence which had brought us together
into one Goal (as well as one Exile,) for one and the same Master (the Lord
Jesus) and in one and the same Cause, Testimony and Truth; and this too by
those very men, that not long before would not let me come near this Castle,
least I should once have seen these servants of the Lord, but upon the walls.
Upon the Lords-days I preached in my room as I used to do, and who of the
Soldiers would had liberty to hear me, for two or three days; yea Bull
himself the grand keeper hereof, which did indeed refresh the hearts of some
p^o ^ souls, who got in also to hear me, but this liberty at first, was to
find out matter against me, for a color of their preintended future
Tr^gedy, tyranny and intrenchment; I was also (soon after) removed into better
rooms, which Mr. Bull now braggs of, where I now am; but the be doing we had in
the Garret was taken from us, and we forced to some want therein, until some
at Newport sent some in unto us, for which (with what we hire) we bless the
Lord; notwithstanding I told Bull that I was well contented to ly on straw, or
else (if they would not allow me straw) on the bare boards, only I pitied my
wife being not well; but for all their cruelty to us, our kind Father provided
for us. Some honest people of the Country did desire me to minister to them,
some light of the kingdom of Christ, and of his Second coming, so that we kept
every fifth day in the after-noons for that purpose, and poor people came in a
pac^ many miles about to hear me, who with tears, prayers and blessings of God
expressed great affection, refreshing and rejoicing thereat, saying O Sir! O
not you, not you, but we are the Prisoners, etc. yea some Prestbiterians who
came out of novelty, or with no good will, when they once came brought others
with them the next day so that the noise was great round the Island, and the
Priests raged, (it is reported) least their Offices should be left unto them
desolate, Mat. 23.16. John 7.33, 34. Many of the people believed in Christ and
his Doctrine, and his good report began to ring in their ears, the chief
Priests sent Officers to take him, so these it seems could not rest to see the
people to flock after and believe this doctrine of the Reign of Christ, and
therefore some Officers came to hear, with a purpose to catch matter of
accusation against me, but went away with approbation, as ver. 46. blessed be
the Lord therefore, for thus was the Son glorified in their eyes, by his
Spirit which spoke and showed them of the things to come, John 16.13, 14. Yet
the enemy could not rest thus, but finding nothing which they could six upon
against me, and the people increasing, upon the twenty seventh day of the
tenth month, Bull went forth of feasting, and left men of most bruitsh
spirits, to manage his new plot and orders in his absence; setting Sentinels
upon my door, driving away the people, who came to hear the Gospel, (though
the enemy had nothing to say why so; no not one word so much as against their
Government, but even what they say they allow, as the pure Gospel of Christ in
us, and of the power of godliness,) though they could not ^ow bear it, I
preaching such points as the godly people and their Teacher Mr. S. proposed for
satisfaction in, and light upon,) some poor people got in, and stood under my
prison-window; the Herodian-Soldiers not suffering them to come into the room,
saying they had orders to keep all from coming to me, and they must obey
orders, but we asked them if they meant all Orders of men good or bad, they
said yea^ for if they were evil let their Officers look to that, for it would
be their Officers sin and not theirs, and what they commanded them to do, they
must and would do, what ever it were; we told them that this was a dangerous
and indeed a Soule-damning principle; for so the Soldiers that nailed Christ to
the Cross obeyed Orders too, and so do the Turkish Janissaries at this day, and
so did all those Soldiers and Executioners, that murdered, mas^^^r^d and
marty^ed the Saints in all Ages; besides we prayed them to consider the case of
Judas when his con^cience smitt him, he thought to have said the sin too (as
they say) upon the Captains and Priests that set him a work, and gave him his
pay for it, Mat. 27.4. But they said, what is that to us, see you to that? and
so he fell desperate and hanged himself. Lord! then (says a Sergeant) would
you not have us obey Orders, we answered not all orders of men; and prayed them
first to advise with the Word of God, for such as were against Gods Word they
ought not to obey, for that Christ's death has freed them from such a servitude
of men, 1. Cor. 7.23. Gal. 5.1. 1.10. And Ephrahim was broken for this, Hos.
5.11. And now as they were Christians they had but one Lord, the Lord Jesus who
was to be their Lord, Acts. 10.36. Romans 14.9. and Law giver; for else what were
the difference between them and Turks, Infidels or Heathens? But in things
honest, good and lawful they must obey their superiors as an Ordinance of
God: But then said the Soldiers, if their Orders be against Gods word, let the
higher Officers look to that, for that they would obey them, and so fell upon
the poor people very roughly, being far more brutish, irrational and
disingenuous (if not irreligious) then many of the Papists, Pharisees, Priests,
Heathens and Turks, and in the very Massacre of France, we have it upon Record
Fox voll. 3. of Queen Elizabeth page 64. Anno 1572. That the common Executioner
of Troys, whose name was Charles, being commanded by Bellin and the Magistrates
of the Town, and that in the Kings name too; and by his Commission answered;
that it was contrary to his office to execute any man before sentence of death
had been first pronounced by the Magistrate; if they had such sentence of death
to show against the (Hugonites) prisoners he was ready, otherwise he would not
presume with out a warrant (of Law and Justice) to bereave any man of his life.
So that this bloody Popish wretch who was used to shed blood, would not obey
all Orders, no not of the King or Magistrates without due process of Law, or
sentence of death upon the prisoners; yea Perennot also, their Jailer as bloody
or worse than he, answered the same men in the same case; that he could not
undertake to obey their Orders, fearing least in time to come, justice might be
do^e against him by the Parents or allies of the poor prisoners, after they was
dead or made a way with; and yet he was commanded by the Kings Commissioners,
Magistrates and in the Kings name. Now would one believe men professing
godliness too in England, should be of worse or more wicked principles, to
obey all Orders; the Lord (then) have mercy upon us for the plague increases
then: But we bad the Sergeant consider these things seriously how that the Jews
blind obedience to their Leaders brought the curse upon them, but Lord says
he, I never heard of such men, what should we not obey Orders; we told them as
before not in things unlawful; but this it seems that we said was a great
offense to them, and made Bull report (and probably send to his Masters, for he
is a fit servant to such men; blessed be God therefore that we have such a
Jailer of so sharp, but short horns) affirming that we would draw the Soldiers
from their obedience; only for our instructing them in that obedience which
they ow to God, and which to man. But some poor souls having got into hear
this discourse, did occasion a desire from them to hear me preach, either in
the yard out of the window, or any where, but for this once; but the rude
Leopards began to rave and roar at that motion, saying they would not suffer
it; and when any reason was asked, they said they was not bound to give us any
reason, but this that they would not suffer it; nor could we have any other
reason but this, that they had Orders and must obey them. But we told them we
hoped man would not forbid what Christ (our King and Lord) had commanded, then
we opened some Scriptures both in the Old and New Testament un^o them, wherein
we were commanded by God to assemble together, to pray, profit and edify one
another in the most holy faith, and asked of them, if at any time they had
heard any thing delivered which was not profitable and teaching to the Souls
of men, or dissonant in their own judgment with the Word of truth, for they all
knew and confessed I had not (the honest people so desiring it) meddled with
their Government or the like, that this liberty (in the Ordinances) might have
been continued us, and no offense or occasion be offered them) they all said,
they could not say, I had delivered any thing but what was good and sweet,
profitable and to edification, and wished they might hear such men, and said
the Sergeant I had rather here him then any man alive; and did hear him as long
as I durst, but now we have Orders against it and we must obey them. But then
we prayed them to remember the blood of Jesus Christ which has bought us,
these blessed privileges and no man ought to take them from us, Gal. 5.1. And
therefore hoped they would not offer to fight against that which they confessed
was the pure and true word (and way) of God; but they said they must obey
Orders be they what they would that their superiors put them upon, or else
they must be hanged, and this Doctrine tended to have them hanged, so that they
were sorely incensed uttring as we say, December pedalia and sesqui pedolia verba!
or Vperolcha. But I, Maj. Genesis and Mr. C. withdrew, with words of Consolation
to the poor weeping people about us, into my lodge, and after a little space,
I began in prayer and fell a little to preaching out at the window, to the
poor people (who desired it) and some came under the window, the whiles they
had sent word to their Governor Bull, who was feasting not far off, with his
wife and others, sufficiently trampling over us, and insulting over us (the
prisoners) among their cups and repasts, as we heard by them present; and
because some few of the Soldiers were touched in Conscience and could not
exercise their commanded Cruelty, they took, as Acts 17.5. Certain Jude fellows
of the baser sort, and so set upon us, and the poor people hearing under the
windows, who weeped, cried and prayed that for this once (now they were come)
they might hear, wringing their hands bitterly, and tears running down (rifely)
their cheeks, with their Bibles in their hands; but the brutish Soldiers,
haled and furiously drove them away with their swords (the Law we are now
under) men and women, Acts 8.3. shutting and shoving them out at the Gates, yea
threatening to put the poor hearts into their Hole or Dungeon only for their
unwillingnesse to leave hearing me, although I did so ply the rough Bruits
with Scriptures, entreaties, and tears (as the Lord did melt me then
exceedingly, that I think I might say with Aug. Ad pedes prociderem and flerem
quantum Possum etc.) for Christ's sake, his truths sake, and their own Souls
sake, to hear me but one word, one word! merely for their Souls, their inward
man, their Salvation; but to consider for this once the blood of Christ, our
blessed Jesus who died for us to give us this privilege, and for his sake to
let the poor sheep alone for this once; yea but a little, a little, seeing
they came so far and so many miles about, eight or nine miles a foot, (poor
hearts) many of them, and yet these Soldiers would not hear me, (only one or
two who heard, were weary of this work of the Devil, and others fresh and
crank to it recruited them;) They had turned away that day (before this) many
great companies, round the Island; and Mr. S. a godly Minister told me, at
least 500. had come from round about the Island, could they have had liberty to
hear the noise of the Gospel of the Kingdom began so to spread over all this
Isle. But by and by, came Bull in, to make a thorough execution of this
persecution, he took some of the Soldiers to task, for not doing violence
enough to the Lords flock of slaughter, Zach. 11.4, 5. Threatening them, and
making a speech to the rest to play the men (or I may say beasts rather as the
word is, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. Atopos absurd, insolent) and if any of them were
resolved to hear me, he required them immediately to lay down their arms and
be gone; two or three of them making conscience wept, and went into a little
discourse with him professing they never heard any thing from us but what was
good, profitable and to edification in Christ, and said they had heard before I
came hither, and that they had fought for this liberty of conscience, and ought
to hear the word of God; but he told them they were weak, and were soon
deluded, and what ever I said of Christ, I meant no such thing, but had some
other design, and the Castle would be in danger to hear such a one as I was;
and he would not suffer it: After a while the Maj. Genesis Mr, C. and I did look
up unto our Maker, and Father, and with fixing our eyes upon the holy one of
Israel, Isa. 17.7. we proceeded (from such an access) to some discourse with
Bull, who was worrying of the poor Soldiers (that were not yet in full
compliance with him) when we came near he brustled up fiercely, through a
forced complement (which he has learned the art off) the Maj. Genesis first spoke
unto him by whom we demanded his grounds to deal so injuriously with us and the
poor people, or rather with our Lord Jesus; and that of such a sudden too,
without giving any notice of his dislike in the least; but he (in a quandary
what to say though his tongue is too volluble and violent with lying and
slandering) he hammered out at last, that he did it to prevent inconveniences,
saying the people had itching ears after novelties, and might soon be deluded,
but I asked him (seeing he had heard me) whither I had at any time delivered
any Doctrine which was dangerous, or tended thereunto; or whether I preached
any thing but Christ and him crucified, with the power of godliness; or
whither any thing against their Government or affairs to the people, etc. He
said, that I had preached we must press forward, and not plow always in one
furrow, which he thought tended as much as to say they must not walk in the
ways of their forefathers who were wisemen, and good men, and saved; and
there was but one way of Salvation, and therefore he said that was dangerous
doctrine to put them on to novelties; and as for preaching Christ he confessed
he had heard me preach very good things, but he believed I had a design in
time to insinuate into the people against the Government, and to throw down his
Lord Protector and to set up Maj. Genesis (notwithstanding I preached Christ) yet
that was the thing he perceived I drove on, and with words to that effect he
fell into to a very bestial fury of rage and railing upon the Maj. Genesis but yet
as very grossly flattering me to my face as abusing me behind my back, the first
of which might more trouble me then the last, as Paul was grieved, Acts 16.18.
at such an unclean Spirits praise; but we told him we drove on no design, (the
Lord our God knew) but the pure design of God himself to exalt Jesus Christ
only, nor had I the least word or thought (ever yet I bless God) of throwing
down one man to set up an other, much less Maj. Genesis H. but this was his own
devise; and if I had offended he ought like a Christian to have told me of it,
which I should have been thankful for; before any such violence had been used,
besides it was that (now) common Government of Hypocrisy which we engaged
against in others, yea and were now in bonds for our witness against it, and
if we our selves were such men, the Lord whom we appeal to, would judge us for
it, but the Lord the righteous Judge knows how our very Souls abhor any such
thing; and as for that Doctrine of growing in grace and pressing on to
perfection of light, and holiness of life which was all I urged; it was far
from dangerousnesse or evil design, (unless to the Devil and his Kingdom)
nor did we think they were to be content in the state of their forefathers,
for then they should be yet Papists or Lutherans, but although that there was
but one way of salvation ye^ there were several steps, degrees and grouths to
be taken in that one way, (Jesus Christ) and this was the thing preached upon.
And thus this pitiful ignorant, but (as he carries it) a most proud
Sultan-like insulting Orbilius, and indeed a most conceited wretch of wrath,
who had a little before, with most abominable lies, and conceptions of his own
creating, devising and inventing against Spiritual Doctrines and truths;
complained at Court and put out a precious godly Minister (the Chaplain of this
Garrison, and then after denied it I hear, as ashamed of what he had done;) for
not complying with their lusts and sins, but for preaching the power of
godliness, and against their continuance in open and known sins, as of
Drunkenness, etc. (which the godly people in this Island have informed me; He
now as fowly falls upon the pitiful poor (miserably) inslaved people of this
Island, as well as upon us) but for hearing of me; and yet could not find a
color for it, but only his own pure (or rather impure) invention and fancy of
a danger which might accrue thereupon in time, and surmising (or pretending so)
at least, a sign (which the Devil told him off, that we had in preaching
Christ to the poor souls! and when he desired to see his Orders, he denied to
show us any, but his absolute Will and sword sovereignty over these poor
slaves and us exiles and prisoners: falling into most fool, irritating
unsavory provoking language; with his wonted impudence and open faculty of
lying, slandering, bearding and abusing (for which he is so notoriously famous
in this Isle) that we went (for shame) from him, surdis auribus sed oculis
intentis in Christum; and so left him to that spirit that possessed him: but
after that, the soldiers were examined (such as were well-given) whether they
would hear me; if so, then to lay down arms forthwith and be gone; there must
be no disputing it, only one or two (I think) had liberty given to consider
upon it one day. Soon after this Bull made (or procured) a muster, and provided
a Barrel of Beer for such of his soldiers (which they say he never did
before) as would readily obey his Orders; but others he required to lay down
their Arms forthwith, and so read an Engagement to them for their present
government. Thus like the Priests (as Jo. 12 9, 10.) they endeavored to put
Lazarus also to death, because that Jesus had raised him up to life: least the
report hereof should offuscate and obscure them. Upon the Lords day after, some
men of the ^sland came into the Castle, to hear on that day; but the sentinels
at the door drove them off again; and turned them into their own Chapel; the
poor people of this Island being such absolute pure slaves under the long
sword, that they durst not hear the Word, but where they will. Yet I preaching
near the window, and my voice heard through, some poor people would steal under
the wall and in holes to hear, but were soon discovered and driven away; yea,
Bull himself, when he came out of the Chapel did bestir him, and lay about
him, and because some of his soldiers would stand behind the guard door, or
make as if they walked about business in the yard, to hear (as they did at
Winsor, often make as if they lay on the grass and slept) he drives his
soldiers into the guard, and there keeps them in himself till I had done: as
the Bishop of L. used tell K. James a tale in the Sermon time, when any good
man preached against the Hierarchy or Ceremonies of their Church, least the
King should over-hear them, and so receive the truth preached; talking to them
of Cocks and Bulls as we say, least any should over hear a word of the Sermon.
In the middle of the week he came to me, and threatened to deal with me, and
remove me out of these rooms, etc. if I let my voice be so loud as to be heard
out at the window more, to their disturbance (as he said): but I told him as
Chrysostom the Empress Eudoxia when she threatened him, Nil nisi peccatum
timeo. I should obey God and not man in that matter, nor was he, but Christ to
me the Lord of the Sabbath, Luke 6.5. Christ only is my master in preaching,
bidding him do his worst; then he bid the bed I had to lion be taken away,
which was done; at which I demanded of him straw to lion, but the good people,
especially Mr. B. a well affected honest man, at whose house the godly people
meet at New port; kept me from lying on the boards, or any such hardship as
they would have brought me or mine unto in this Goal; but it seems to their
sufferings, for this Bull does bellow out with most bitter malice and rage
against them also; especially against Mr. B. whom he highly persecutes to this
day, (I hear) sometimes sending up armed soldiers, with swords and mu^kets, to
bring him away pri^oner out of his own house to him in the Town Corporation;
threatening and troubling him, breaking open his letters that came from London,
to his great hinderance ( Bull himself being a trader) and going up and down in
person to hear what one or another can say against Mr. B. and what not that is
arbitrary and tyrannical? So that by this we may see,

1. Their horrible dissembling, lying, and undoubted Hypoc^isie, whiles they
manifest such monstrous hatred to us, they pretend to imprison us out of love
to us; and yet I think it is more out then in.

2. How we suffer at this day for the word of God, Gospel of Christ, and power
of Godliness purely; whiles they most falsely possess the poor ignorant
people in the Nation, that now there is no persecution for conscience; for
preaching the Word; or for Religion; but only for other matters: and that a man
may be as holy as he will, which are lies in Hypocrisi^.

3. That they are such a greedy sort of persecutors as our persons, lives,
bodies, liberties; blood will not serve their turns, but they persecute our
very souls also; for hearing, praying and worshipping of the Lord, yea on the
Lords days; nor suffering us to have so much a^ upon the Lords days any
communion with the Saints, or people, or worship of God as much as in them lies.

4. And they are the most impudent ^ould faced Persecutors (I think) that ever
the earth bore; for they justify and dourish the foulest evils with the
fairest Colors that can be; yea pretend so highly for the Lord in all they do,
saying let God be glorified, Isa. 66.5. yea, as Zach. 11.4, 5. 'Whose
Possessors (Keepers of Go^lers) sl^y ^^e^ and hold themselves not guilty, and
they that sell them (for nice, pay, places, or preferment,) 'say blessed be the
Lord for we are rich (by it.) Such a pack of Apostates sure were never heard of
for craft and cruelty; policy and lying pretenses; and indeed it is no ^ore in
my judgment then the face of the Serpent, from w^^^ we must and do fly for
^^ree days and an half, Rev. 12.14. B^^ the Bal's bitter ^age is out begun
here; he must now make a ^^^^^tive of his faithful service, and most noble (or
rather ignoble) feats ^ad aten^^vements to his Masters at Court; by frigating
them with a ^raught report and ^n invented story of us as dangerous persons
(...) of de^g^es and according to ^is armed fancies and obsequiousnes^ to them
(his Masters) to ^all on us, when their commands shall come; requicing with all
an Or^e^ (or at least a ^icence) to prosecute his ^ell-begotten graceless
victory further, and to the full; by pouring more contempt on our dear Christ,
his Word, his Gospel and holy Spirit; and ^s the poor prisoners, exiles and
wi^nesses of Jesus; as our most righteous as God, the elect Angels, Churches,
Ministers, S^^nts and other men, yea the Word and Spirit of God, the three th^^
bear record in heaven with our ow^ consciences, do d^ly bear us witness, what
ever our enemies have the face to say, to deceive themselves and others with.
Wherefore upon the 21. or 22. day of the 11. Month the Popes Bull began to
roar and goa^ again more fiercely than formerly, (without any cause shown why)
kept us up close prisoners with incredible cruelty, and (I think among
Christians) a most unheard of usage in bani^hment, suffering none, man, woman,
nor child to come at us; nor our victuals or necessaries to come to us; or any
of our families to fetch it in for us, nor any letters to come freely in unto
us, or go from us; but we were in our close prisons as ignorant of the thing as
of the Cause till we tried it, (not imagining it had been in men at this day,
so far to exceed the very Pagan-powers in their persecutions in banishment, and
yet to pretend there is no persecution) is they do in their extraordinary
Hypocrisy; the Lord pity us! but ^hen we would have sent out for provisions
the servants was stayed by ^he Cap^ain of the Guard, and told none should go
(which he had Orders for) nor any provision come to us but by there hands; which
when we heard and knowing already the declared principles of the present
Soldiers, whom he had packed out and moddeled (by this time) for his very
purpole, to do what ever he bid them do, (those which had any remorse or touch
in conscience being cast out or kept out) we perceived clearly their design
began now to destroy us, starve us, murder or massacre us, for to make us
comply with their lusts, and thus they laid siege against us to conquer us to
their side, i. e. to play the Hypocrites, Apostates, perjured wretches and
Beasts with them. But we ^ought the Lord our dear Father of heaven and earth,
according to whose Word, Spirit and example of all holy men we resolved (with
his grace) to die, or be starved with a good conscience, rather than to live
without; yet we sent a servant to Bull to demand a copy of his Order for this
his unheard of tyranny (in an exile) which he refused, and bid complain if we
would, but alas! we had none to complain unto (which he knew) but unto Jehovah
the righteous Judge: (our only refuge and helpor) Yet at length he said he had
Orders from his Superiors at White Hall, but would not show then; in this time
it pleased God my poor wife was forely ill, for whom we could not have what
she needed, nor any one be suffered to fetch them for money, yea if any woman
came but to see her, the Sentinel and Soldiers would not suffer it, and when
one Sentinel was desired but to let one poor woman come in to see her, he said
O! what good will it do you to see me killed before your eyes, I shall be
hanged Presently if I should; for I am charged upon pain of death not to let
any one come near you, or in unto you; yea some friends (at times) coming long,
tedious and chargeable journeys, of 20, 30, 40, 60, or 100. miles, some out of
the Island and some out of our native land, but to see us and to minister to
our necessities, were not suffered, but turned back again at their outward gate
(after so great and chargeable journeys) with tears; and some of them before
even we knew of it, yea some that we know not of to this day; (pretending it is
like they would comfort us) and the Maj. Generals man being sent from his own
house, dear relations and Family in England to visit him, and so at Newport to
buy victuals to bring in unto us (it need were) was carried before Bull, to
whom he said he was sent to see his Master; but Bull said he was (...), but
without he would sign an engagement which (by this time) ^^ll had drawn up, he
said he might be gone again, for he should not so much as see him; and so
turned the poor man back again, but that he had a key to let him in whether he
will or no, which till then this Bull did not know of, and thus in an
unexpected way he got in to see his Master. But to return to an aliquid amplius
which i^ an aliquid altius their sword-Law and orders against us; so strait was
this siege they said against us, that one Mrs. C. getting in but to a pair of
staira near our lodge, was forced away least she should see my wife, and
threatened if ever she came but into the Castle again, they would be her death
and break her neck; and now behold what a providence of our Father (who takes
care for the Sparrows and Worms, cloatheth the Lillies and feeds the Birds,)
did minister unto us in this great strait; there was sent in to the Maj. Genesis
by a knight of their own party. not of their make, nor of the post,
(peradventure in pity it being the first and last of that kind) a little
Lamb; and to my poor wise bound up in brown papers (and so undiscovered) a
neck of veal from New port, which was most seasonable provision from our
gracious good God; yet after all this was gone, and we in wants as before, we
prevailed with a little girl of one of the Soldiers, for a piece of money to
fetch us a little bread, (we being without) but upon her return they took her,
carried her into Bull's hall, and there examined, frighted, roughly handl d,
and threatened her, and would have forced her to say she had earried out a
letter too, but the girl knowing that she had nothing but a bit of silver to
fe^ch us a loaf of brown bread, said she had nothing else, but they yet like
rude Soldiers said she had; bid her confess, or else that she and her friends
should suffer for it, but when they could not compel her to ly they left her,
and kept her from coming into the Castle any more, to bring us so much as
bread. But that, there might be some better color for this cruelty, this Bull
with two or three of his f^ll Creatures and Serviteurs had drawn up in
Engagement to bind us or at least our servants in a kind of recoguizance and
an owning of them, and their ways, and then they should (after they had
subscribed) have the liberty to go out for victuals, thinking (it may be) by
this time that we either were or that we saw we should be starved into these
condition^, but when we found how insuff'rably barbarous and tyranical they
were, that they would impose this upon our consciences for the very bread we
should eat, or provision we should buy for our money; or else that we must
suffer the utmost they could do against us; we were of the Lord and his holy
Spirit persuaded every one of (...) to mantain our ground in Christ, with his
principles of grace, (without yielding in the least to such dish nourable
terms of capitulation) by a lively faith, expecting to be relieved from above,
(or him that sits on the Throne, Isa. 6.1, 2.) and so their conditions
imposed were refused though we starved, rather than eat their swines flesh
possessed of the Devil, as we should have done, by so unworthy a treaty or
composition, nor are we (besides the testimony of our own consciences) without
witnesses and examples before us in this case, as in Q. Mary's days we do
find the Persecutors imposing such terms upon conscience, for the lives and
liberties of the Martyrs, (but never so high as to their meat and drink they
eat, before they have it) as these new sort of persecutors do at this day, and
yet they would be reputed no persecutors forsooth, but friends; (O semper
fallaces and Millites millies Mendaces) Mr. Bradford Martyr writes to L.
Saunders ( Fox voll. 3. foll. 321.) Ah! good Brother pray for me, I think we
shall be shortly called forth for now legem habent and secundum legem, etc.
otherwise will they not reason with us; and I think, their shoot-anchor will
be, to have us subscribe, the which if we do though with this condition (so
far a^ the thing subscribed to, repugneth not Gods word) yet this will be
offensive; therefore let us vadere plane and so sane, I mean let us confess
that we are no changelings but reipsa, and therefore cannot subscribe, except
we will dissemble both with God, our selves and the world. Thus he, and yet
this Wretch would have us Changelings in these matters of our faith and
conscience, to sudscribe before we shall have a servant go out for bread for
us, or before any friend shall see us, etc. and that without any such condition
or clause as good Bradford speaks of, viz. (so far as repugneth not the word of
God) and yet they have the face to print, publish and pulpit it, that this is
no persecution; but by this (as prescious Bradford also said Fox voll. 30. p.
320.) so may we see evidently, if we will not adorare Bestiam we shall nevre be
delivered (it is to be feared) but against their will, nay we shall not so much
as eat, or write to any of our sad condition in the flesh; but fides famem non
formidat, faith fetches bread from heaven Joh. 6.51, 58. which the Son of man
gives ver. 27. for him has God the Father sealed. Even so Amen. O my hearts
this makes John leap in my womb and grace in my heart, under so great trials,
but sweet teaching Fatherly providence and dispensations, as Basil said of
Barlaam, he delighted in his close prison as in a pleasaut green meddow, and he
took pleasure in the several inventions of cruelty, as in several fragrant and
redolant flowers. But the trials which my poor wife was pinched with made it
much the greater to me in this lone condition, and yet am not left
comfortless, for the Lord is with me, sends his ministering Spirit unto to
me, and keeps me hitherto above all, in him who is listed up to draw all men
after him, Job. 12.32. and therefore as my dear Lord Jesus said, I hope I may
say in my little measure and capacity, Joh. 8.29. 'He that sent me (hither) is
with me: the Father has not left me alone, 'for I do (I trust through his
grace) those things that please him. So Job. 16.32. 'And yet I am not alone
because the Father is with me, and the cup which my Father has given me
should I not drink? yes surely with a hearty draught. Upon the 25. day of this
11. month (our wants increasing with their cruelty) I had much comfort in my
Spirit, with patience and joy bearing this Cross of Christ, and indeed in
wardly glorying therein, (for as Cyprian says Ep. 5. Gloriosa voce Deum
confessi qui in Carcere, etc. The most glorious voice is in prison) but this it
seems was to fit me for an encounter with these cruel Leopards, ^aging
Herodians and Beasts of Ephesus, thorough whose hands (or whose handlings and
leavings) we must eat, and be dieted, or not at all by their wills; but this
was good physic to our souls, blessed be our God. This day did a godly
Minister Mr. S. of New-port get in, to a lodge of C. F. with exceeding desire to
see us, and^ friend of the said town had sent us a cold Pie, but the honest man
which brought it was carried before Bull, with his Pie, with whom he had for a
long time pleaded, (near an hour) for liberty to come in to my lodge and bring
the pie, but at last, and with much difficulty, he obtained leave for a quarter
of an hour, with a Corporal at his elbow to peep into our prison upon us, who
(poor man) with tears and troubles did deliver it, and left this with us
before the Corporals face, that these cruel persecutors so far exceeding them
(in this matter) that we read of in the Book of Martyrs, had (by all he could
perceive) some bloody design against us, and that this present tyranny upon us
was but in order to it; but he prayed us to be ^h^arfull in the Lord, for they
could but kill the body; I hearing of the minister of Christ steped to the
lodge where he was, and the Soldier at my heeds, but they put him out again at
the gate presently, and would not suffer us so much as at the ga^e to see one
another, though at a distance and with Soldiers between us; so I was returning
in again to my own prison full of comfort in my Spirit at all this, and
presently I heard several at once (the Sergeant Corporal and Soldiers) falling
upon the honest man who had brought the Pie with very vile and blasphemous
language, for that (it seems) he, as he was going out at the gate, with tears
did exhort them to take heed of what they did, and to beware of persecuting and
offending of Christ little ones, etc. but they brake out many at once what?
what? preaching? we will have no preaching, no sermonizing, none of the Spirit,
begone abouty our business? what you turn preacher too? all preachers now? with
much more of such ungracious and unsavory stuff, at which I confess my heart
aked, and by a mear providence, hearing God and his ordinances so blasphemed
and mocked at; I could not but turn me (contrary to my intention or purpose)
to them, and particularly spoke to one King saying, O Sirs! O I am sorry to hear
such word from you, indeed I did hope better things, then so to scoff and mock
at preaching, at the Word, and Spirit; indeed I have scarce heard the like, or
worse from the worst Cavaleres, and will you immitate them in this also; O alas
Sire! consider what you do? whom you speak against and despightfully use? you
should do well your selves to be reading praying, and preaching to one another;
and not so unchristian like to blaspheme and scoff thereat? at which they were
incensed, and turned upon me, brustling like wild Boars whose tusks were
whetted in their own foam, and so fell bitterly upon me, and told me I was
their prisoner, and I did not know it; meaning (I suppose) for that I durst be
so bold as to reprove them. I told them I was the Lords freeman for all that,
and therefore could not but speak for the Lord, for whose sake I was willing to
suffer bonds, but said K. the Sergeant you are not in prison for the Lord, for
what then said I? nay! faies he they that sent you hither knows why, truly said
I, but I know not then, neither do they they that keep me here I believe; for I
am sure in none of their Orders, or Mittimusses that ever I could see yet did
they ever signify any cause why they committed me, and have kept me now in
several prisons near two years already, and in banishment; but as the
Town-cleark answered the hurly burly, Acts 19. Ye have here (in prison) men
that are neither robbers nor blasphemers, and yet you use us worse then the
very^st Rogues in Newgate Robbers or Blasphemers are used, for they if they
have money can send for meat to cat, or be ministered to, or receive Letters and
necessaries; but you hinder us most tyrannically and unjustly by your ungodly
Swords, even from our very necessaries, without Law of God, or Nation, Reason,
Equity or Conscience, wherefore, as Acts 19.38. If we are transgressors and you
have matter against us, the Law is open, why do you not try us? but if not, why
do you thus use us? who have done you no wrong? Nay and now too my wise being
so ill, and she that is with us for a servant lame, etc. O search into your
consciences! for you never treated the Cavaleres so bruitishly here with you.
Nay you could give the Cavaleres that were here, liberty to go abroad and ride
about, to Newport, and up and down to Alehouses, drinking, feasting, gaming and
commiting sin every day, and partake with them too in it, yet we must gnaw
upon the bitt and be kept without bread; is this righteous in the sight of God?
Corporal Haddiwayes answered me, that we were worse then the Cavaleres
therefore; and S.K. said in a scoffing manner give me money and i will go fetch
you things! Ah! said I to S. K. (for I directed my speech to one) now you have
declared your painciples to be to obey Orders whatsoever they be, you say so?
When if a Superior Officer do bid you in your ear, put two penny worth of
poysonor Ratsbane into the meat or what you buy for us, you must do it you say,
and the sin be upon them that bid or ordered you, no! no! it is dangerous
dealing with men of your principles; then I perceived their teeth were on edge
to be upon me, and one bad me be gone in, but being warm in my Spirit Quo
magis illi furunt eo amplius procedo, as Luther said, I told them that I was
doing no harm, and prayed them to consult with the word of God, about their
present condition, but then came out an old man and bid me be gone in, I told
him I was about the Lords work, and did no harm, nor was I ever forbid to
stand in that place where I stood, and I did think it as good ground to stand
on, as that in my prison; but now they began fierce upon me many at once, like
so many wide-mouthed Wolves to fall on, as if they would not have left the
bones until the morrow, and out came Bull, who imediatly without hearing me
gave them either the sign or the word, to fall upon me, notwithstanding I
cried out unto him, what have I done? only rebuked sin and blasphemy, etc. but
he was far more barbarous than the Heathen chief Captain of the band, Acts
21.31, 32. who as soon as he came they left beating of Paul, and he rescued
him, yea then the Captain and his Officers, Acts 5.26, who brought them without
violence; but this worse than Heathen was hot in his Gall and greedy, Surdis
auribus sed plenis faucibus; he commanded and encouraged them, and looked on
and directed them with his Cane to do it, and as soon as he came, the cruel
Soldiers armed as for a combat, fell thick upon me with their bent fists
bearing, and some haling as if they had intended my death forth with, Acts
21.31. Colaephis and verberibus pluentes and grandinantes, and after a while
two or three of them, espeially S. King the Cap tain of the Guard then, cried
out, let us carry him to the Dungeon, to to the Dungeon, to the Dungeon, to the
Dungeon with him, at which I was by some hawled and turned about that way; and
then I said as they were thrusting, pulling, and strikeing me: Yea, yea, with
all my heart, with all my heart, I rejoice more therein, for I shall find my
dear Christ there I am sure, it is sweeter than a Chamber for this cause; I
shall find my God there as well as in my Chamber, do what you can! and indeed
I was refreshed thereat; and now, now I think of John Careless his comforts in
prison, F^x voll. 3. page 716. I am disposed to be merry to sing and dance with
David before the Arc, (says he to Mr. Bradford) and though you play upon a
pair of Orgons i. e. in the Stocks) not very easy to the flesh, yet the sweet
sound that comes from the same causes me to do thus, that I may sing all care
a way in Christ: for now the time of comfort is come: (meaning by greater
afflictions for Christ) I hope to be with you shortly, for my old friends of
Coventry have put the Council in remembrance of me, saying I am more worthy
to be burned than any that has been burned: Gods blessing on their hearts for
so good report, God make me worthy, and hasten the time, etc. Thus in effect I
said, and my Spirit leaped; but when they saw my comfort and courage in it,
when they cried out to the Dungeon, to the Dungeon with me, they were daunted
at that, and then hawled me up a pair of stairs, at the foot of which came
some fresh Soldiers to help the rest who were weary with haling, and abusing
me; one Robert Jenkins, particularly with his fists ready bent, first held them
to my face to show me them, to whom I said Ah! I know your weapons, and then
he fell upon me ^main, these greedy bruits learning no other way of preferment
and favor with the grand Jailer Bull, before whose eyes he showed his valor
in violence, but by such exploits, as we say that when they cannot shoot men,
they will shoot Pigeons or any thing; Bull with others crying and following, as
Acts 21.36. and John 19.15. Away with him, away with him; Ah said I! So did the
Soldiers deal with my Lord Jesus, and the servant is not greater than his
Lord. But O thou Hypocrite, do thou profess the Word or read it, and yet
contrary to the word of God, Law, or Reason, bi^st thy men to abuse me thus
without any cause, the Lord will judge the for thy Hypocrisy and contempt;
does not the Word say to Soldiers, do violence to no man, Luke 3.14. etc. but
this renewed their rage and roughness, and then this Sergeant King as if he
had been at Cuffs for his life fell on a fresh with his fists, doubled his
blows about my head, neck and shoulders, so unreasonably that some of their
Creatures cried to him hold your hand, stay your hands, hold your hands; but I
said, Ah! Lord my God look thou down, but do you strike on Sirs, strike,
strike, strike, for my Lord Jesus Christ takes these blows (for his sake) well
at my hands, though I am sure not at yours; O it is sweet to be buffeted for
Christ, etc. But as they had often done before, they mocked at Jesus, pish
Christ says the Captain Haddyway, what talk you of Christ, O said I! that you
would talk of him and walk in him more too; yea and yet I will talk of him who
is my most sweet Jesus, and this is Christianity, thus to suffer for him. But
they (some hawling, some thumping, and some beating) had gotten me up a wrong
pair of stairs, and when they knew that, they never staid to let me come down
nor offered it, but some at my back thrusting, some at each side, and S. King
at my hands pulled me out at length, with the Corporal all at once pulled me
down (at one pluck) the stairs (as if they had rent mine arm from my shoulders)
but falling upon other Soldiers by the gracious providence of my most dear
Father, I was preserved; my poor wife being by (and the maid) schreching and
crying; and then they hawled me (almost spent out of breath) the other pair of
stairs, and at the door of the room wherein they with such cruelty carried me,
and where I now am. They renewd their violence with such redoubled strength and
atrocity, that several of them laying hold on me, some at my back, some on
shoulders, and some at sides, cast me headlong (who not knowing their design
could not prevent it) with such an united force, fierceness, fury and wrath,
as if they meant no longer to dally but dash me in pieces; so that the least
they could have conceived thereon, was to have broken my bones or put them out
of joint; imitating those Savage Spirits filled with wrath, which carried my
most blessed Savior to the brow of the hill, Luke 4.28, 29. That they might
cast him down headlong; but the same God that delivered him, delivered also me
(a poor wretch not worthy to be named, much less honored thus) and that by a
very mavelous appearance, for in the fall, my head and face were preserved
from the battery of the ground, by lighting upon the arms and shoulders of the
maid and one of my children, the blow of which threw both them also to the
ground but my face was so-preserved, though my body bruised with the fall,
which fall I perceived rejoiced the bloody spectators at their hearts, (and if
otherwise, it was I think that I was not quiet killed with the fall,) as Tully
says, Quia totum telum in corpore non recepisset; to whom I turned with these
words, passing thorough tears unto them: Well Sirs, now you have done thus; O
that I could entreat you but to search into the Scriptures and see if you find
any warrant there for this practice, if you do, then the Lord give you the
blessing of it; but it not then the most righteous God convince you of it, or
judge you for it; and this was all I said to them, knowing they were heardened,
and at these few words and tears they fell a scoffing, and there left me,
where I now am at the writing of this with very great consolation and joy
thorough believing, for as much as these verbera were ubera full duggs for my
soul to suck out of.

And 1. Methinks I now may say I begin to be the Minister of Christ (who is
indeed a Theologus Crucis) and the Servant of Christ Jesus, and companion with
Christ in the world; as Ignatins when he came to the Wild Beasts to be
devoured, his bones broken, his blood sucked, and his whole body crushed with
them. Now (says he) now I begin to be a Christian. It is nothing to be
accounted and go for current Christians (as all are almost in England) with
ease, pleasure, delights, estates and worldly enjoyments; so to become
Ministers of Christ with out the Cross or Trials; but for all that, they will
not stand for such before the Lord, who fall not in with the Cross of Christ
in the Generation-suffering, for the witness of Jesus; your dainty mincing
Professors who are afraid of sufferings at this day, shall be shut out in that
day when the Bridegroom comes, for Christianus is Crucianus and Lucianus says
Luther.

Obj. But we live not under such Persecutors as the former Saints did, who were
headed, hanged, burned, fleaed, braten, broken on racks, tossed on Bulls horns,
rent and torn of Wild-Beasts, broyled on Gridyrons, starved, stoned, etc.

Answ. 1. No! if you did, I do wonder where we should find a Christian then;
or them that would come running to the tortures as those Martyrs, wearying the
Tyrants with their faith, courage and constancy to their teeth, as they did,
when indeed ye are afraid of and faint at a little plundering, prisonment,
banishment, soft beatings, and easy deaths for the Testimony of our dear Jesus
who now suffers.

2. Yet we have such persecutors of Christ and his cause at this day, as would
not spare us, were we as high, as resolute, and of as noble a spirit for
Christ, as the former Martyrs; who had not learned the State Policy of
Professors (now adays) to spare themselves and comply a little, and not to run
themselves into sufferings, (for so they call it) but they rather can to them,
accounting it their glory, challenged and provoked (in a manner) the Tyrants:
Now it is not so much because our present Nimrods, and Oppressors, are better
than the former Tyrants, as because we (poor low Spirited Christians, and
white liverd milgsops) are worser and indeed a shame to the Saints and Martyrs
of former days, that we suffer so little for Christ our Lord, Ah, a las! we
love indulge, ease and pamper the flesh more than the former Saints ever did or
durst.

3. To answer this objection with Mr. Buroughs out of Salvian, I must say to
them then, the less they have to show of passive obedience, the more they are
to show of active, ( and plus ei fides and devotio nostra debet quia minora a
nobis exigit, etc.) and the greater faithfulness, constancy and courage in
the present trials, for as there was such a magnimity and Spirit in the
suffering Saints as made the whole world wonder, amazed, and think them mad,
desperate, and besides themselves, so is there to be in the acting Saints at
these days, who are to make it a sport, play and pleasure to them, to run
upon Cannon-mouthes, Sword-points, and on thousands for one, in the service of
Christ; therefore let us look to it, that we make amends that way; and that
the world may say of us also (for the active part) such men were never heard
off.

2. I had my singular consolation too, that the Lord has made it my lot to
fall into this fierce Bulls hands, of any; because he has not his fellow in
this dominion that I can hear of, for all manner of brutish and barbarous
tyranny, unreasonable and insatiable cruelty, so that Bonner I believe had not
a more apt Jailer for his turn in those times, (if Cluny or Alexander came near
him;) Wherefore let not my words be thought the complaints of a squeamish
Spirit, for I assure you I do heartily digest all he can do against thee, and
if it were said of Luther that pascitur conviciis, I may say it with no little
soul solace, that pascor conviviis in verberibus: And with Vincentius to one of
his Persecutors, never any man served me better then you have served, the Lord
be praised; for as B^enham said when the fire was kindled as his feet, Me
thinks you strew roses at my feet. I may bless the Lord for thee Bull, who
bidst them fall on me, for me thinks every blow is a b^^ast of milk to me,
whom thou and thy masters would starve, and will be a Crown of glory, Sic credo
and edo, propter te domine, propter te.

This is an honor so high to suffer thus, at the holy Angels are not capable
of, but those whom God will advance above the very Angels; wherefore sing and
shout, and leap for joy O my Soul, and all within me, What? that such a poor
sinful worm, and pitiful shrub as I am? should be called to so high and
holy a calling; Lord make me thankful, and fruitful, and faithful, Amen.

4. For that it is so teaching a dispensation, O it is good! it is good to be
beaten into more good, rather than be with out it; for these blows do make my
head ring with the musicks of heaven, as my heart and reins do beat after thy
will O God; for Ioe in the vollume of thy book ( a volvendo rolled up in my
heart) Heb. 10. it is written I come to do thy will O God: Therefore I say (as
I am persuaded) Zegedine's blows who was beaten so bitterly by the Kings
treasurers could not be so sweet as these: It is said that Dominicus his mother
when she was with child of him dreamed that she had a wolf in her, flaming
with fire out of his mouth. Such a flame came out of thy mouth, O fierce Bull,
as shall be sure to burn the up, (like Samsons Foxes) in the field which thou
thy self have set on fire; for thy wickedness burns as fi^e, Isa. 9.18. In
the mean time it is a most teaching dispensation to be beaten and buffeted for
Christ, which has made this prison so precious a School to me, that I think I
may say Mihi idem qui solemn fecit majus in Carcere lumen fuit. He that made the
Sun, has been a greater light to me than the Sun in this prison.

5. Nor is it fit we should loose such fruit as this is, by our sinful
silence; for as Solomon says, Eccles. 3.7. There is a time to speak and a time
to be silent, and Isa. 62.6. Ye that make mention of the Lord keep not silence;
to be silent in such a day of rebuke and blasphemy as this is, is a crying sin,
wherefore says Luther to Staupitius, When Christ suffers, is condemned and
blasphemed, it is not a time to be afraid, but to cry out aloud; yea says he,
let men call me what they will, Inveniar sane super^us avarus, Adulter,
Homicida, Antipapa, and omnium vitiorum rens, modo impii silentii non arguar
dum Dominus patitur. Proud, Covetous, Adulterous, or as monstrous a Miscreant
as ever lived, rather then I be found silent, when the Lord, his name, his
Cause, or Christ suffers. But I say I have the Seal of the Lords acceptance,
and Jehovah-Shammah is my company in this close bonds and banishment, to whom I
say, as Psalm. 69.19. Thou have known my reproach, and my shame, and my
dishonor; mine adversaries are all before thee.

But to proceed.

In this condition thus beaten and bruised I was laid down, and fear being that
my bruises were most inward, which as yet I but little felt, means was used (to
have liberty but) to send out for a little Parmy-Citterne and Snow water to
drink for an inward bruise, which they refused to suffer, with more barbarous
tyranny than the very enemies in war show to wounded prisoners; and nothing
nere to the compassion of that Jailer in Acts 16. who washed Paul's and Silas
wounds; nor to the kindness of the Barbarians to Paul at Melita, Acts 28. the
greater will be their judgment: When I began to be cold and stiff, I b^gan to
feel their blows sore indeed, but by a good providence of the Lords, the Maj.
General had a precious ointment and salve for such purposes as to outward
bruises, which I used; this horrible Tyranny of theirs took report round the
Island and into England (our own Land) quickly, notwithstanding their close
restraint of us and open reports against us; and this begun by the means of a
poor Barber then in the Castle, who carried the said news of this sad Tragedy
to Newport, where the next day being Market, It abounded and so spread of a
sudden; but this poor Barber was brought before Bull for it and hardly escaped,
yet the Truth (which is always best to stand to) set him free from them: Then
their work was to lay their heads together to kill this report, by spreading it
otherwise and denying that ever they abused, beat, or bruised me whiles they
kept us with our mouths stopped by close imprisonment, notwithstanding some
days after when I stirred forth again, I offered to show them the marks they
had given me, both my self, Wife, and the Maid being black and blew in diverse
places diverse days after on the one and thirtieth of the eleventh Month. After
this Bull sent word (with an engagement to them) we might send out for things,
which was the first time they offered so much to me, but I could not compound
with them in a Cause which was none of my own to compound in, and in these
straits we had another (seasonable) experience from our Father; for with the
compassions which Christians about the Island and in Newport had to hear of our
sufferings and want of provisions, they sent a man and we desired him to come
to the Prison gates with some provisions (as bread and meat, etc.) every
seventh day, and a woman once a week with Butter (...) us to buy, and although
they were threatened for coming, yet they made Conscience thereof and continued
it to the praise of our dear God in this our extremity; so that we had some
provision brought to us for our money at last, notwithstanding the vexation of
the enemie^ (for so they have declared they are) thereat, searching, handling,
tossing and tumbling our provisions in their hands up and down, yea, throwing
the very Butter in the dirt after we have bought it, and examining the very
bones of the meat for Letters (as they pretended) or some other secret
designs; such are the dreads of the Lord upon them; this has already
continued upon us above twelve weeks, and how long it may we know not, but this
we know; not too long so long as our heavenly Father has the disposal
thereof. Some may think us somewhat of stinate not to engage or subscribe unto
them, rather than be starved or so used as we are to this day; but indeed it is
a comfortable obstinacy then, and for my Christ only (may I say for my self)
whose Cause I cannot with a good conscience betray upon a composition with his
enemies (notwithstanding why says Bull? cannot you say, it was forct and so
not be bound to it? such is his Art) and besides the forenamed Presidents
before me, it is a memorable and wothy testimony of that godly Martyr
Shetterden ( Fox. vol. 3. Page 375.) to his Persecutors when they asked him, if
he would but promise to submit, and he should de delivered; says he, I am not
so much bound to you to grant any such promise: and again you shall well knew
that I would not promise to go cross the street for you: but if I did offend
the Law let me have the punishment, I ask no favor. And altough this was
accounted obstinacy in him, yet he chose to be burnt first, and so was rather
than accept of his liberty upon a promise: So Strigelius would not promise not
to preach (of one point about the Sacrament which his Persecutors desired) for
his Professorship. How many more might I name? and what is this obstinacy (if
they call it so) but the same with the primitive Saints, who would not cast one
grain into the fire to save their lives! and shall we? God forbid! but as Nich.
Shetterden said. He that kept off the bandog^ at staves end, not as thinking to
escape them, but that I would see (says he) those Foxes leap above ground for
my blood, if they have it: And shall not I for my most dear Lord, make these
gaping Leopards get it then saliendo, saliendo, by sweat and leaping for it
too? that all men may see they are greedy of it, whiles they give out they
desire it not; yea surely. Notwithstanding all this, their cruelty was yet the
greater to me in that they knew I had no estate, nothing to live upon, nor
would they suffer one to minister unto me or mine, nor one to come in; and such
as have sent in have (hitherto) miscarried; I have heard of some Letters with
tokens sent to me, and at one time of five or six together, but I never
received more than one (with six shillings and two Cheeses to this day, being
above this twelve weeks now) the tokens not only causing the Letters to
miscarry, whether through the hands of these Soldiers or no, I am not sure,
but Bull himself keeping some of them from me; and then they report about we
are bloody men, bloody men; laying ( Athaliah like) thereon guilt upon the
Lords poor innocent ones, saying; they intercepted Letters which show it. The
Maid went to this upper-Goaler for so me of my Letters after he had done with
them, read and shown them to many with much scoffing, but he said they were not
fit for such a fellow as I, but bid her tell me, when I was sober and out of my
frantic fits I should have them, she saying, why Sr. you have never seen him
distempered yet; he threatened to kick her down stairs, if she held not her
tongue, calling her mis-names, and afterward bid her pack up and begone forth
with that day for that none should live with us but of his choosing; my Wife all
this while being very ill, only our gracious God and Father in Christ, bears
up her spirit through their cruelty, which is so great, that a very Letter sent
to her for a Diet-drink he kept from her a long time, till much ado was made
for it; and so in his malice does he keep me either from sending or receiving
one Letter, though not a word be mentioned of the Government or matters which
they account offensive; and the Carriers of this Island are strictly warned we
hear, not to bring or receive our Letters for us but shall bring them all to
him: A Letter which the Maj. Generals man wrote to send out, after it had
passed his approbation was returned back again, writ upon in the sides (and
after so sent out) with a most ungracious unsavory spirit mocking and flouting
me therein by name; saying, I was in one of those fits which I was in, when I
was tied to my bed; by which he meant my condition (in the way which the Lord
took to my conversion) which he had read in my Book of Church Discipline, among
the Experiences of the Work of grace therein recorded, which he made so much
mocking and scoffing at, to such of the Clergy and others of the Soldiers that
came to him, as argues clearly the little Experiences which he has of the
grace of God in him, or of any soul-deliverance; but this so profane a
foul-mouthed Ismalite; this so irreligious a railing Rabshekah, may be so
miserable in soul and body for want of such experienc^s and deliverances, that
he one day, may (and shall if he make not have for paenitentia sera, rare est
vera) seek them with tears and find no place of repentance, to which judgment
I must leave him, accompting these reproaches greater riches to me than the
treasures of Egypt.

But for all this and an incomparable abundance more from day to day of our
sufferings which I might write, we are accounted no sufferers, nor this any
persecution by the present Apostates and Time-servers; yea, and notwithstanding
all this tyranny and cruelty to us my Wife and Children, and all the Family
kept close prisoners with such heavy and unreasonable provocations every day;
two Officers of the A^my did profess to us that in their hearing, Bull is much
blamed at White Hall for not being more strict and riggid unto us, and
suffering us so much as he does (which is but the very air to breath in) and
he does what he can to discontinue us in that; therefore o Lord God of
righteousness do thou declare whether this be a persecution or no! for as the
enemies report it, men will not believe it, though the Cavaliers, nay Newgate
Thieves and Whores are not so cruely handled at this day! and they pretend a
power too, and do easily forgive Adultry and such wickedness; only we o Lord
the Sheep of thy passure, the Flock of thine inheritance are thus rudely
handled every day! and they do never think they have done enough unto us, but
so be it for thy sake Amen! Amen!

It was deemed ridiculous as well as most rigorous in the hottest of the Wars
upon the worst of enemies, to have imposed what they do daily upon us, and yet
they have the face to justify it, as if it were nothing: Wherein we observe 1.
the exceeding horrible height of their impudence and Hypocrifie, of whom may be
said as Jer. 3.3. Thou had a Whor^^ forehead thou refusest to be ashamed. And
secondly Their cruel subtilty, whiles they are whipping and beating us, they
bid us be quiet and patient; like the tyrannical Step-dame that knocks, beats,
and makes the poor child to cry, and then whips him without mercy for crying,
and says he may thank himself; they call for patience and bid us be patient in
our sufferings, whiles they are laying on upon us till they make us cry out and
then they say, it is our impatience, such an unreasonable generation of men are
our Goalers, Persecutors and Murderers; yea, they pretend Plots, and do this
least there should be any ^^sings, when indeed by their unsupportable
oppressions, persecutions, and provocations they do all they can to stir us up
whether we will or no unto it, for the necessary preservation of our lives,
liberties, relations, Religion and consciences from their so monstrous
inhumanity, and persecution in hypocrisy. Thirdly, that they put us into the
worst Prisons, and hardest persecutions, yea, bait us with the wickedest and
worst persons they can find out, men of the most notorious debauched
principles, practices, scandal, impudence and Atheism; and all this too in
pretense of love to us, as appears in their Orders for removal from Sandham
Fort, and so they said in my last removal from Arten House, it was for my
better accommodation, but indeed it was for my more bitter affliction in the
flesh and worse usage (except my dear companions company) though my most dear
God makes the worst the best, the greatest the least, the bitterest the
sweetest, the hardest the easiest, the most afflicting the most refreshing unto
us in Christ; and herein do I rejoice, yea, and will rejoice more abundantly;
yet no thank to them who speak lies in hypocrisy having their consciences
feared with an hot iron, 1 Timothy 4.2. although indeed all my sufferings in the
Prisons in England were nothing to be compared to these in this most barbarous
wilderness and Kennell of wild Beasts. Fourthly, we see by this what it is to
be ruled by the sword, and it is evident by what Law their Cause and Government
stands, and what a miserable sad servitude those people are in, who are ruled
by the sword, which has neither eyes nor ears, but pro ratione voluntas. For
as the Dragon Heathens, Turks, and Papists do support their Governments by such
force, tyranny and imprisoning, so do these which stand no longer than violence
keeps them up; and which are as sure to be destroyed, when the house of Jacob
shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau for
stuble Obed. 18. Wherefore if any upright hearts among the Soldiers do yet
remain, they may remember the story of Marinus, who in a time of great
Apostasy for his faithfulness to Christ, had like to loose his preferment
which fell to him in the Army, at which he began to stagger being desirous yet
to hold his place, till Theodistus met him in the Temple and in the Name of the
Lord laid before him a Sword and the New Testament, bidding him choose which he
would have, for he could hold but one, and the other must go; at which his
heart was smit: so he blessed God, left the Sword and chose the Gospel. So
Soldier do I set before thee thy choice, for thou can not hold both (hower'e
thou deceivest thy self) or serve the Beast and the Lamb, both at once.

5. The impudent practice of the lying slandrous reports of us, breaks out
either immediately before an intended mischief to us, or as soon as they have
done it, to color over their tyranny with as monstrous untruths as the
Papists, who reported that Junius had cloven-feet like a Beast: Sometimes they
report us mad and frantic as Persecutors have done. And so does Bull and his
Masters make as if we wanted senses when we are fullest of the Holy Ghost,
witnessing (...) our dear Christ against their rotten interest and hypocrisy,
but as (...) said when the Prefect told him he was mad sed optome in aeternum
sic delirare, I wish I may be ever madd then, and sometimes as (we find before
of Bull) like Morgan to Philpot ( Fox vol. 3.572.) they fall a raving and
blaspheming of God and his tabernacle, and abusing us as if we were not sober:
So said Morgan, I ween it to be the spirit of the Butterie, which your fellows
have had that have be burned before you, who were drunck the night before they
went to be burnt, and I ween went drunken to it. But it appears (says
Philpot) you are better acquainted with the spirit of the Buttery than with the
Spirit of God: Wherefore I must now tell thee, says he, (and so say I to thee
thou raging Bull with the very same spirit and authority of the great Judge of
Heaven and Earth) thou painted Wall and Hypocrite, in the Name of the living
Lord (whose truth I have told thee) that God shall rain fire and brimstone upon
such scorners of his Word and blasphemers of his people as thou art: Thy
foolish blasphemies have compelled the Spirit of God which is in me to say thus
unto he, O thou enemy of all Righteousness, and I tell thee thou Hypocrite, I
pass not this for thy fire and faggots (or what thy bloody heart can do unto
me) neither I thank God my Lord, stand I in fear of the same: my faith in
Christ shall overcome them: But hell fire is thy portion and is prepared for
thee (except thou speedily repent) yea the hottest of hell for such Hypocrites
as thou art, according to that old Proverb which Math. Paris mentions in Hist.
An. Dom. 1072. Pavimentum inferni rasis sacrificulorum verticibus, and Magnatum
galeis stratum esse, that Hell is paved as the very bottom with the Skulls of
the Priests, and the Head-pieces of their Protectors (or the great ones) and I
leave thee in thine Hypocricy till the judgment come: At other times we are
reported fools, and that is a vepy pleasant reproach too, but as Lactantius
says, Lib. 5. c. 12. Contemnite, ridete, si libet; nobis enim stultitia nostra
prodest, non in videmus sapientiae vestrae hane stultitiam malumus, hanc
amplectimur, etc. go on, scorn, deride and flout us as long as you list, for
this (our) foolishness profits us, and we envy not your wisdom or principles
of policy, but had rather have this foolishness still; and so for all your
other reproaches which are chiefest riches, Heb. 11.26. wherein we rejoice and
make a jest of them and of all they can do unto us, and if so be I should give
no offense to a more serious spirit, in so good and serious a Cause as ours is,
me thinks I might put this Bull (who is so busy in lying, railing, and
slandering of us) in mind of the Majors answer to the people, who complained of
the ugly looks of the Rood, ( Fox vol. 3. p. 107.) Go you home (says he) look
on it, and if it will not serve for a God, make no more ado but clap a pair of
Horns on his Head, and so he will make an excellent Divill; for I am persuaded,
if the Divil be truly called Accuser, Slanderer, Calumniator, a little matter
more will make him one. I would not have used this liberty now, had not
Grynaeus (an Orthodox as we say) said true and seriously that Pontifici Romano
Erasmum plus nocuisse jocando quam Lutherum stomachando; Erasmus did the enemy
more mischief by jesting, than Luther did by his angry, stomachfull and yet
more solid resisting of him.

6. It appears a plain design to starve us, or reduce us to such extremity
as might make us to stoop, and so to betray our consciences and our Christ in
this Cause, as appeared by their imposing of conditions upon us and the
servants, for the meat we must eat, if they went out to fetch us in any;
besides as to my own particular, I confess their conditions were most hard to
me and my Family in the passive part, though my gracious Father made them easy
and sweet to be born; but they, knowing I lived by providence (having no means
Land, house, or estate to live upon) kept back not only all people, but all
letters from coming or ministering unto me, notwithstanding our Lord Jesus was
ministered unto, Luke 8.3. Joanna the wife of Chuza Herod's Steward, and Susanua
and many others ministered unto him of their substance, and so we find the
Heathens suffered this in Acts 24.23. He commanded a Centurian to keep Paul,
and to let him have liberty, and that he should forbid none of his acquaintance
to minister or come unto him. But yet this was and is a sweet time unto me, for
me thinks I am fasting, and sometimes filling and eating many a time with my
Lord Jesus, of his broiled fish, and barley bread blessed be his Name, who for
our sakes became poor, 2 Cor. 8 9. that through his poverty we might be made
rich. I also was made the more sensible of the primitive sufferings (as I said
before) and was as one with them in my spirit, insomuch as I chose rather to be
in such a condition even unto death and to want bread all my days (I have
sometimes thought) than to have been out of it, so sweet the Lord has made
unto me by his teaching presence, as I cannot express; and besides what
eminent Servants of the Lord have been forgotten by their Brethren (as our
blessed Jesus his own Disciples all left him at the Cross) yea, aad were
brought to poverty, as buried alive almost; so Musculus his poverty was such as
drove him to day labor, and to lie in straw, but I had neither; and Pareus
begged in his way as he went to the Palatinate, but what was this to thousands
of the Saints of old, besides of late Hooper, Cranmer, etc. all this upon me
being only because I would not perdere substantiam propter accidentia, loose
my Christ for a Crown, nor Conscience for Coin, which doubtless I might have
had enough in my own Country, if I had sought or accepted of a desire to O. C.
for his grace to remove me near to my Acquaintance and Friends at Londan, which
my poverty in the world might call for more than any others, who would not have
suffered me to want, which notwithstanding the Lord of his mercy prevented by,
the help of my honored Con-captivated Co-exiles and other ways, and of his
great grace gave unto me in this dispensation, least I should seek a carnal
Kingdom, or have such things in mine eyes, whiles the Kingdom of Christ (yea
none but Christ) is our continual cry, I remember Lots wife lies at the entry
of such temptations. 5. In that he that bids us c^st our care upon him 1 Pet.
5.7. and take no thought for our life, what we should eat, or what we should
drink, or what we should put on, Mat. 6.25. has done it for no by such
special providence in our greatest emergencies and extremities, yea and over
and above, ministered so much inward comfort unto us from himself and the whole
Creation, that for want of other outward company, he makes the very flies that
swarm in the air (and are an offense to others, and as in Egypt, so now in
Jamica such a plague unto them poor hearts) a refreshing unto us, which I am
glad to see I confess, and to have the company in this close prison-exile? but
besides these there be some other particular experiences as teaching to me.

1. In that I am all along so clearly and constantly under the Beasts rage, as
if I were (I think) more than others, particularly aimed at, for their goaring,
gushing, horning, worrying and grievous persecuting from one Prison to an
other, both in my Native Country and in Exile, especially since I have been
hurried about in this Island and put to Bulls and Boremans, who obey the Orders
of the Beast; but especially in the first's very brutish and indeed barbarous
(unreasonabl^) pushing sharp horns, so that it is evident I am thus used by the
Beasts Dominion and spirit; and I have indeed declared to the Court-creatures
more mercy to be in any Dungeon in England. I remember that Purchase in his
Pilg. chapter 10. tells us of one that did write of the first Creation of the
Chaos, and first confusion before the world was created, in which lived
monstrous creatures, having two or more forms, like Centaures; some Bulls too
that were headed like men and dogs. with diverse bodies, but I leave such
fancies to the Adamites, only I dare affirm in this Chaos and confusion (which
precedes the new creation) of new heaven and earth, men are very monstrous in
their principles and actions, and wild Bulls do bear the faces of men to
flatter with, in this serpent-estate of the old world, whose hired men are like
Bullocks, Jer. 46.21. but as Jer. 50.27. Slay all her Bulls: let them go down
to the slaughter, woe unto them for their day is come, the time of their
visitation, O Lord! rebuke the company of spear-men the multitude of the bulls,
with the calves of the people, till every one submit himself.

2. In that my most gracious overruling Father has made the enemy to imprison
and persecute me, not only is the same way and spirit, but in the very same
places where the Martyrs of old were imprisoned and persecuted, which did
refresh me indeed; as at Lambeth, that old Butchers shop and shambles of the
Saints, where so many (even Wickliff himself and all along since) have
suffered, their rings whereto they were chained remaining in the walls to this
day, which did affect me much to see: And after that at Winsor, where the
eminent Martyrs Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer were put in their way to Oxford in
bloody Queen Mary's days.

3. In that I am also instructed how to want, as well as to abound, and so in
all conditions, as the Apostle says, to be therewith content, Phil. 4.11. 1 Timothy 6.8. having passed through prisons, reproaches, tumults, beatings and
bufferings, often throwings headlong, banishment and spitting upon; yea,
spoiling of my goods, which has been much; one Letter has signified to me the
loss of an hundred pounds at one time, and in plundrings often, and in perils
of life, sickness, Feavours, storms, cold, snow and tempests, without bed,
without bread, in sore travells, and several other trials; yet all this,
which is the life of all, for my most dear Christ against Cromwell and the
whole Earth, blessed be Jehovah therefore: I wait but for Whitehall or the
Pretorium-hall.

4. In that the enemy though he has sought it greedily, yet (to this day) has
not found any just cause or color for my imprisonment and exile, nor so much
as signified why, in their Orders of commitment; which is my great comfort and
advantage, for as Paul said in his fourth defense, Acts 25.7, 8. and they utter
many and grievous complaints, which they cannot prove; for neither against the
Law of Christians, nor against the Temple, nor against the faith have I
offended at all: So Acts 24.12, 13. neither found they me in the Temple
disputing with any man, neither raising up the people, neither in the Synagogue
nor in the City.

5. In that the Persecution upon me has been (above many others) so sweet
(though sharp) a primitive-like diogmos, or chasing Persecution, from one
place to another, not letting me rest in our own Country nor in Exile, but
hunting me about like a Partridge, from place to place with Nimr^dian Tyranny,
like them of whom the Worl^ was not worthy, (although I am not worthy of the
happy number or race) Heb. 11.38. who confessed v. 13, 14. they were strangers
and pilgrims on earth, declaring plainly that they sought a far be^^^r Country.

6. For that this their spreading and hurrying Persecution did so
primitive-like, sow and advantage the Gospel of the Kingdom in all places
where I was carried; round about this Island the report of this Doctrine
running and inclining the poor people to enquiry, reading, and search, and so
was the Gospel at first spread and sow^n in all Asiae, Cyprus, Cappadocia,
Macedonia, and indeed over all Nations, by such a chasing Persecution, which I
praise the Lord for, that it fell out to be my lot in this Island to sow this
seed; Paul plants, Apollo waters, but the Lord must give the increase: And
indeed I dare not deny but our God has given a very great increase hereby,
insomuch as the very women, who have enquired into the very truth (as at
Newport) do profess openly this is the way of God, that we are imprisoned for,
and that they will part with all they have in this heavenly Cause (and Quarrel
between the Prisoners and the Powers) which is very much, considering in what
exceeding slavery people in this Island are kept by the sword: So that as the
Gentleman in Scotland told the Bishop Bettoun, upon the burning of that Martyr
Mr. Patrick Hamilton, My Lord, if you burn any more of them, you will ruin
your selves; if you burn them, let them be burnt in hollow Cellars; for the
smoke of Mr. Patrick Hamilton has infected as many as it blew upon; it may be
is the policy that our Persecutors have taken, to imprison, plunder, and
banish, and make no noise, no mention in news-Books of it, least it should be
known; yea, to coop us up so closse Prisoners in Banishment, and Cellar us up
from all noise of their cruelty to us, least it may be, our breathing, or as
Bull says, seducing, which is the old note of Persecutors and Goalers over the
imprisoned Martyrs: But as we know Beggars by their chanting, so do we Bull and
his Masters by their language, with the same spirit, lying traducing, and
opprobriously abusing, as those base Monsters both Heathenish and Popish
Goalers and Tyrants did, that were their Predecessors; but for all these
Atopos, absurd men, 2 Thessalonians. 3.1, 2. Shall the Word of the Lord have free
course and be glorified Amen Hallelujah.

7. In that the Lord has in this School, instructed me to Preach in tumults
and uproars, as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 6.4, 5, 6. and in all things to
approve my self the Minister of my God, In much patience in afflictions, in
necessities, in distresses in stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in
labors, in watchings, in fastings, by pureness, by knowledge, by
long-suffering, by the holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the Word of truth, by
the power of God, by the Armor of Righteousness on the right hand and on the
left, by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report, as a deceiver
and yet true; as unknown and yet well known, as dying and yet behold we live,
as chastened and not killed, as sorrowful yet always rejoycdng, as poor yet
making many rich, as having nothing and yet possessing all things: O blessed be
that bondlesse love and grace of God unto me herein; yea I tell you, he has
been teaching me a strange way of Preaching, as if I were a pouring ou^ of my
blood with my words, at once to seal the truth, and in expectation of leaving
my life with my Light, and of the dashing my brains about my Exhortations: O
this, this is me thinks to bear about in my body the dying of our Lord Jesus
indeed, who did preach thus and so did the Apostles; and thus am I become dead
to the Laws, yea to my own life by the life of Jesus and body of Christ (I
think I can say) sometimes most sweetly. Tossanus in An^olia had such a time of
it too among the Barbarous Soldiers, for he preached every Sermon not looking
to come out alive, and in a Barn too, where the Church met; Ah Lord let me thy
poor worm, be such a Preacher all my days, to speak in every Sermon as my last
words to poor Souls, yea as if I were sealing them on a Scaffold with my blood,
Amen, so be it Amen He had that honest saying of Seneca it seems often over,
Vir bonus quod hones^e se facturum putaverit, faciet etiamsi periculosum sit:
ab honesto nulla re deterribitur: ad turpia nulla spe invitabitur.

8. For that the enemies are very empty, dry and withered; whiles we are ge^en,
sappy and growing blessed be our God, as Psalm. 104.16. The trees of the Lord
are full of sapp; for we find our Spirits full, our hearts full, and hopes
full, and our faith full (in a sense) for this cause of our Lord Jesus, full of
comfort, of life, and of courage, and of peace thorough believing, which come
amain upon us, whiles our enemies are like the Hypocrites, Isa. 33. surprised
with fearfullnesse, yea Mager-mysabib is written about them, as M^stery is upon
them, Rev. 17.5. a sure sign to us, and a token for good.

9. In that on both sides the main body seems to be marching up, because the
forlorn hope is already so hotly engaged, with downright blows as on our side
with the truth and testimony, they or their side, with downright, point blank
blasphemy and persecution, so that not only the heads, Rev. 13.1. but the
whole body of the Beast, Rev. 17.3. is full of blasphemy, and both sides are
fallen on; so that the next news I am like to hear, after this forlorn, is a
fight, and fight of the main bodies, on both sid^^, or the ^ife of the holy
Camp (the holy City) trod on these 42. months, Rev. 11.2. and the pitching of
Maher-shalabhashbaz's great Tent, Esa 8.1. For the 3. great things which I wait
to see and hear, are the great Tent and Trumpet, Esa. 27.13. Deuteronomy. 23.10. the
great Bone-fire and flame, Rev. 19, 20. and 17.16. and the great Sun or light
(of seven days, with seven eyes, and by the seven spirits, Esa. 30.26. chapter
60.19. Rev. 21.23.

10. In that our new Covenant propriety in God our Father, continues unto us
sure and well ordered in all things, in all conditions, in Prisons, Exiles,
Plunderings, Reproaches, Dungeons, Wants, Death, and judgments in seperable,
etc. still we can say our God though a consuming Fire, Heb. 12.29. though Eli,
Eli Lamasabachthani, yet Eli, Eli, that is, we cannot fall the subjects of Gods
wrath, though of man's, no, not when the Violls come to be poured out; for none
are the in execution of them, but who are above them; but all and those only,
that are under them, shall fall as the subjects of his wrath, or the third Woe
which is at hand! now this is no little comfort to us, to whom God is Love,
yea, all Love and all together Love in our Prisons! But

Lastly, in that Sion is in travel of a male-child (which makes the pains the
greater, and the more difficult) for a man-child must be borne, Isa. 9.6. the
Son of God and heir of althings in heaven and earth, Heb. 12. yea the Son
of Abraham and heir of the Promise and Covenant, yea the Son of David or heir
of the Kingdoms and Crowns of the world; the Son of Mary, and heir of all
mankind; yea the Son of Sion and only heir of the Generation-Work; that of
this male-child is Sion now in travel with; according to Isa. 26.17, 18 Like
as a woman with child that draws near the time of her delivery is in pain,
and cr^eth out in her pangs, so are we in thy sight O Lord! We have been with
child, we have been in pain, but it is a male-Spirit, not a female, low, Fourth
Monarchy-Spirit, but a most noble, high, courageous, invincible heaven-borne
Spirit that must be brought forth by all these pains, persecutions and
travells; for in the primitive times when the woman was in her travel of this
male-Child, the Dragon Government did so persecute her, that he stood ready to
devour him as soon as he was borne, or brought forth into the world; and this
man-child of Government (Christ in the ministration of the Fifth Kingdom Isa,
9.6, 7.) was then caught up unto God and to his throne, Rev. 12.5, 6.4.2,
3.5.6, 13. and the Woman (or Spiritual Church) who after long travel and pain
brought forth this blessed truth (of the Reign of Christ on earth, or the Fifth
Kingdom) who was forced into the Wilderness for the 1260. days, so that now
at the end of the 42. months or 1260. days is the Woman to come out of the
Wilderness, and this malechild of Government to come down from God again, and
to rule all Nations with his rod of iron; it is true that he was traveled with
in the Heathen Emperors days, with great perils and pains as appears by the
Apologies of Justin Martyr to Antoninus Pius (which I read at Winfor) and
afterward of Tertullian and some others, but he was not born until the
Christian Emperors days, especially when Jovinian, Valentinian, etc. were
Emperors, who themselves were Fanters and Professors of the Reign of Christ,
and are chronicled for Millenaries, etc. (as I have proved in Prison b. Treat.)
but almost as soon as he was thus born, he was caught up to God, to be forth
coming again at the end of the 1260. days, and therefore Rev. 12.5. She
brought forth a man child, as mellei poimainein, who was about to rule all
Nations with a rod of iron, not who did it, (as some say it of Constantine) but
he was borne ready, as if he should rule all, but the Lord took him up till the
period of the Beasts dominion, or the 1260. days suffering were over, which
declares evidently that this male-Spirit will up again speedily for the Reign
of Christ with his rod of iron (sword and Laws) over all Nations; and the
overcomming Saints, Rev. 2.26, 27. or those that have victory over the B^est,
etc. Rev. 15.2, 3. shall take the Kingdoms for ever, Dan 7.18.22. and thus the
man-child must come down from heaven, from the throne, and from god only, in
that the God of heaven alone shall set up this kingdom, which shall never be
destroyed, but break all others in pieces, Dan. 2.44. and in that ver. 45. the
Stone is cut out with out hands; only fitted and brought forth from Mount Sion
by the Spirit of the Lord, the Mount out of which it falls Dan. 2.45. being
Sion, and the Mount into which it becomes being Moriah, Dan. 2.35. or the two
Mountains of Brass mentoned Zach. 6.1. Now the Spirit of the Lord and of the
Lamb (who has the seven Spirits sent forth into all the earth, Rev. 5.6.4.5.)
brings it down unto us, so that the man-child must thus come down from God and
his throne, who was till this time taken up to God and his throne! but as I
have had a little share, I bless the Lord for his grace, in these fresh
travells and pains of Sion to bring forth this man-child, Isa. 66.7. Jer. 30.6,
7. Isa. 51. So have I been abundantly in my bonds taught of the Lord the truth
of these things (which I have not time, nor utterance for at present) nay! so
good has my God been to me in this Pathmos School, that I think I could almost
say it (without the least Ostentation, and only to the glory of Gods rich grace
unto me) that diom non p^rdidi, I have not loft a day in the Prison, nor
hardly a day (wherein I had health or was not hurried about) without an
improvement of my search into these blessed and big-bellied mysteries, by
writing, treasuring up, and preparing for the public, as Ap. said Nulla dies
sine lined, for since my imprisonment, I have prepared I think, above 300.
sheets upon several subjects, to be printed, however it be that I am so
betrayed, or that they stick in the birth and the truthe^ ly buried, yet the
Lord knows (to whom I am thankful) that I have not been idle in the prison,
seeing Crux pendentis is such a Cathedra docentis to my soul; I have sent to
the press, upon Daniell, Apocalips and the Prophets concerning the Kingdom of
the man-child, and upon the Vialls, the two Witnesses, the two Beasts, the
time, the work and the truth of the Generation, the 1000. years, the
supputation of times, the personal Reign, the first Resurrection and the day
of Judgment, with an obvious prospect into the 45. years that are next coming;
but how they miscarry I know not, only this I know, that my judgment is with
my Lord, and my work with my God, Isa. 49.4, 5. who will reckon with them that
keep back the truth (from being published) when Babylon comes up in remembrance
before him; and though this Cross of Christ be to them that perish
foolishness, yet unto us which are saved, it is the power of God, 1 Cor. 1.17,
18. and here it is that I have had the clearest, freest, fullest, sweetest,
universalest, spirituallest and profitable teachings that ever I had, or
thought that this poor earthen vessel of mine could have ever received,
Hallelujah.

Before I leave of I must acquaint you with a few more of my general
observations from the chief of this Rock, and so I conclude this Introduction.

1. General Observation. There has always been in the world since the fall
of man two distinct seeds, and enmity set between them; viz. The seed of the
Serpent and the seed of Woman, Genesis 3.17. called in the Old Testament the
bondwoman and freewoman. So the house of Saul and of David, the one rejected,
the other received and established in the Covenant, Heb. 8.9. and so in the
New Testament the flesh and spirit; Sinai and Sion, the Dragon, and the Woman,
and the Serpent the Remnant, Rev. 12, the Beast and the Lamb, ch, 17. the first
were always the persecuting, and the last the persecuted; whereby we know we
are on the right and blessed side, under sufferings and persecution for the
Witness of Jesus and work of the day, but our enemies are on the cursed and
Persecutors side, and because they continued not in my Covenant, I regarded
them not, says the Lord, Heb. 8.9.

2. Genesis Obs. That the Governments of the world have been of the Serpent and
not of the Woman to this day, and that all along from Nimrod hitherto, they
have been (in Oppression, Tyranny, Persecution, etc.) the fruit of Adams fall,
and of Sin; but that Government which we look for in the world (which will
judge Nimrod and the Mount of Esau, Obed. 21.) is a part of our Redemption, and
a fruit which grows only in the Covenant of grace, Dan. 7.22. without which
our Redemption cannot be completed, Rev. 5.9, 10. So that it is part of our
Redemption, by the blood of Christ, which we contend for, in the fall of the
fourth Monarchy, and suffer for so long and so sore an imprisonment, and
banishment for (whatever our enemies say) this we are iure of, that this
present Government of great Brittany is Nimrodian, and not to be doubted by
discerning men, to be a fruit of Sin, and of a fearful Apostasy; and as
Purchase in 's Pilgrim. chapter 10. tells us out of Philo, how Nimrod was such a
hunter of men, by compelling men with a brutish force (as beasts are compelled
by mere force) to fall in with him, his way, worship, and Element, whereby
Babell was built; what force can be more brutish or compulsive, for the
interest of Babylon, than the long Sword, without the Laws of God, Reason,
Nation, or Nature, as it is this day in England?

3. Genesis Obs. There is a sure and a summing time to period, the Nimrodian
Dominions of the world, and all the Dominions of the Beast, so red and dyed
deep with the blood of the blessed Witnesses and Saints, when they shall endure
no longer to persecute, oppress, or afflict the Saints, but the Saints be set
free from all oppression, tyranny and injustice, and this is granted by all
men, therefore I come to the Fourth.

4. Genesis Obs. That all the Creation, visible and invisible, in heaven and earth
do groan with us after this blessed time of Restitution of all things, or of
full Redemption (actually) into the Liberty of the Sons of God, Rom 8.21, 22.
from this yoke of bondage and corruption, except only such vermin as rise out
of corruption, and are self-created (according to that Rule, Ex corruptione
generatio fit) which must be destroyed, amongst which, is this present Governmt.
now up in England.

5. Genesis Obser. That this Age and Generation wherein we live, or are entering,
yea, this very Nation of great Britain is a summing Age and Generation, and
Nation wherein begins the total of all before as is evident,

1. For crying sins, like the sins of Sodom, Genesis 18.20. Isa. 3.9. and 13.19.
all the summing sins of any Age in the world (if not of every Age) this is
guilty of, and most summarily in England, is the muttering in the Wilderness
and provocation of the Lord, their turning back to Egypt, so of the Apostasy
of the ten Tribes, their breaking Covenant and Engagement, after they had
engaged to be the Lords, and after so many appearances of God too; yea, their
Idolatrous worship after the manner of the Nations to be destroyed, and their
slighting of the pure ways, Laws, and worship of God; yea, their Cain-like
building, Genesis 4 17. and their violence and persecution too, as before the
destruction of the old world; so of the resting and relying upon their own
strength as the strength of Egypt; so also of the Hypocricy and yet Formality
(of the Jews, Scribes, and Pharisees) Priests, and Rulers, that Crucified
Christ by the hands of the Soldiers, and of their Pharoah-like height and
hardness of heart, after many signs and tokens; and so of the serpent-like.
policy, specious pretenses, reason of State, and subtilties in them which are
to period the 42. Months, or Beasts Dominion, Rev. 12.14. And indeed as the
Devil did not use a Lyon-like force at first in Paradise, to overcome Eve
with (which had then been bootlesse, says Purchase chapter 5. but a
serpentine-sleight of insinuation, as the meetest for his present projects; it
is so now, knowing he has to deal with a Generation that profess to be the
Lords own people, plain force and fury had not so prevailed for him, as
subtilty, art, and sophistry by lying, dissembling, evading, and breaking all
obligations, for as in Genesis 4.8. thus has Cain killd Abell with pretenses of
love, and thus has the Devil disposed the Serpents tongue to tempt, which the
Women (or weaker vessels) and more effeminate carnal spirits do listen unto
at this day, and by entertaining discourse are suddenly ensnared, beginning as
Eve, first to doubt of Gods truth and promise (the first sin of man) and then
to mince, mix, and extenuate in their minds, the threatening Commandment of
God, whiles they seem outwardly, to observe it, and plead it as Eve did, and
then to hear Satan by carnal policy, propounding worldly advantages, that they
shall be as Gods, and so inducing them to Apostasy, through disobedience,
unthankfulness, pride, ambition, covetousness, and unbelief, which brings
forth persecution and contempt of Gods truth; yea, a wanton lust and an
usurpation of what God has reserved to himself. All these are summing sins of
which (with many others) this Age and the present Generation in England is
guilty, yea, highly guilty, if not damnably guilty before God, Angels, and men.

2. But secondly besides this, it is a Summing Witness and Testimony now up in
England too, or the finishing Testament of the Kingdom, Rev. 11.7. Matthew.
24.14. which comprehends the sum of all the Prophets and Prophesies, from
Moses to this day, Acts 3.24. Luke 24.27. about the Kingdom of Christ,
especially of Isaiah, Ezekiell, Zachariah, Daniell, the Revelation, etc. all
seem to scope in and aim at this Witness, for which we are imprisoned, with
one concentricity, harmony, and consent, both for time and purpose, and now we
are to expect that dispensation of the fulness of times, wherein all thing
both in heaven and earth shall be gathered in one, even in Christ, Ephesians. 1.10.
So that as for the sins, so for the Witness now up against them, was never
such a time, Age, or Nation as this is.

3. It is also a summing up of the suffereings and persecutions of the Saints
and Freeborn Children by the Nimrods of the world; the Rear-persecution that
is for the Rear-witnesse is now upon us, and he will make an utter end,
affliction shall not rise up the second time, Nahum 1 9. we are entering the
haven of the 42. Months voyage, yea, reaping the harvest of all the blood,
faith, tears, prayers, lives, losses, and liberties of the million of Martyrs
from the days of Abell to this day, Math 23. for Rev. 18.24. in her was found
the blood of Prophets, of Saints, and of all that were slain upon the Earth. So
that to avenge their blood and Deaths, to answer their cries, groans, and
prayers, out of their graves, dungeons, rackings, flames, stocks, rivers,
caves, fields, urns, and most exquisite torments of all sorts, the Fifth
Monarchy Saints are now concerned in, to bring up the rear well, wisely,
courageously, constantly, and victoriously after Christ their Captain, and the
primitive Martyrs in the Van, for it was said to them, Rev. 6.11. That they
should rest for a little season, until their fellow servants also should be
fulfilled; or until we who were to bring up the rear, that is in the Gospel
of the Kingdom, for a witness were fulfilled, therefore as the eyes of the
whole Creation, Angels, and men, so especially of the Martyrs and Saints,
Abell Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the Jews and Gentilts, of all Tribes and
Nations, Prophets and Apostles are upon us at this day, in this Cause and
Testimony for the Kingdom, to see how we behave our selves herein; which they
all bore witness unto, believed in, longed after and waited for in their
measures and generations, as the sum-totall of all their sufferings (that the
Saints should reign on earth) which as I have at large proved in my 2. Treat.
and Travells, since my Bonds these two years, viz. Prison born and Banish-born
Morning beams (if they be not both stifled) to be the faith, hope and joy of
the primitive Martyrs, for some hundreds of years after Christ; so of late as
we find in The Plow man's Complaint in King Edward the thirds days, and since
in that precious Martyr Mr. Bradfords Letters at large, that they had their
expectations full of this Kingdom, thus in his Letter to Queen Mary and her
Council he says, It behooves them in Authority to know they are not Kings,
but plain Tyrants, that rule not for God, and all those Potentates with their
Principalities and Dominions cannot long prosper, but perish indeed, if they
and their Kingdoms be not ruled by the Scepter of God, that is with his Word;
the people also perishing with Princes, where the Word of Prophecy is wanting,
much more is suppressed as is now in England: Wherefore he ex^^orts them to be
no longer Slaves and Hangmen to Antichrist, to let Barabas lose and hang up
Christ, saying, the Doctrine they then suffered for stood invincibly above all
power, being not our Doctrine, but the Doctrine of the ever living God, and of
his Christ, whom the Father has ordained King to have Dominion from sea to
sea, and from the River to the ends of the world, and so will he Reign, that he
will shake the whole earth with his iron and Brazen power, according to that
which the Prophets do write of the Magnificence of his Kingdom, etc. Was not
this Fifth Monarchy-language then, among the Martyrs? and did not these meddle
as much as we do with the worldly Powers, and declare their downfall, with the
uprising of Christ's Kingdom on earth? Yes verily, and thus says Mr. Bradford
in many other Letters, as to Doctor Hill, to Mrs. Hall, and to his Wife,
wherein he says, That God the Father has vouch safed to choose us amongst
many, to witness and testify that Christ his Son is King, and that his Word
is true; Christ our Savior will have us bear record that he is no Usurper nor
Deceiver, but Gods Ambassador, Prophet and Messiah; so that of all dignities on
earth, this is the greatest, thus to witness as we now do. Thus then the
blood of all the Martyrs, Prophets, Apostles and Saints are with us in the
Witness of this day, which is the sum of all, that Christ alone may be
lifted up and exaltd King and, the only absolute single Person in all, over
all, and above all.

4. It is a summing time too in this Nation with respect to their present
Government; for all the Characters of Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2. of the second
Beast, Rev. 13.11, 12. and of the little Horn, Dan 7.8 21.22.25.26. and of the
Myery-Clay-Government, where the Stone first strikes the Image, Dan. 2.43. is
upon it, yea, as the fourth Beast, Dan. 7.7. was diverse from all the others
before is, as being a compound of all, and so to sum up all the other, Rev.
13.2. being partly a Leopard, partly a Bear, partly a Lion (and so far of the
three foregoing Monsters) and the rest of himself and the Dragon: So this
present Limb of the Beast, this Bastard of Ashdod differs or is diverse from
the foregoing Limbs according to Dan. 7.24. being as it were, patcht up and
compounded of all, to beging or make up the sum and period of all; it is
partly Spanish, partly French, partly Dutch, partly Turkish in principles, and
Janissaries; taking up fashions from one, principles from others, policy from
others, sovereignty from others, and so indeed does sum up all, not omitting
MYSTERY written on the forehead of it, as Rev. 17.7, 8. seeming partly of the
Lamb too, Rev. 13.11. to deceive with.

5. It appears too by the Signs of the times which are now upon us, by the
clear computations and supputations of the Numbers in Daniell and Revelations,
and by the several providence, the variety of dispensations, and the late
appearances of God in the three Nations, that it is a summing time,
notwithstanding the present Cloud and blackness, for the Unbelief and wilful
rejecting of the truth of the Kingdom at this day among us Gentile-Christians,
must make way for the Jews, in their room who are to be rejected, who are the
natural branches, as their rejecting the truth and unbeleif, did make way for
us Gentiles, Romans 11.20, 21, 22, 23. Be not high minded but fear, for if God
spared not the natural branches, take heed least he also spare not thee;
Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God, to them severely, to thee
goodness, if you continue in his goodness; otherwise thou shall also he cut
off, and they also if they abide not in unbelief, shall be graffed in, v. 25. I
would not brethren have you ignorant of this mystery, that blindness happened
to Israel until the fulness of the Gentiles; that is, their times Luke
21.24. which begin at the end of the forty two Months, the 1260. and 1690.
days, as I have proved at large in my forementioned Treat.

6. And lastly, it is evidently a^^summing time in the rejection of (and
judgments that must be upon) this professing Generation of men, as to their
Cause, Government, Laws, Ways, Works, Principles, D^signes, and daily
Practices, whiles they pretend so High for God, but indeed do reject his Christ
and Cause, and so did the Jews, but they rejected Jesus, Mark 8 31. Luke 9.22.
and 17.25. and therefore were rejected, and the judgment came. So was Saul
rejected for his not thorough or full obedience, and David taken up; and so
Jeh. was rejected and judgment came, for that his heart was not right when he
executed judgment on Ahab's house, and for that he got up into the same
Throne, and did the same things for which Ahab's house was destroyed, and still
he kept up the Statures of Omri and the works of the house of Ahab, Micha
6.16. yea as it was in Noah's and Lot's ^aies, so shall it be in these, and
with this Generation of men whose cause is rejected, Heb. 8.9. (whiles ours is
found in the Covenant of grace) so that on both sides, as to their rejection
and our reception (that is, in these matters in controversy) it is a summing
time and a summing Spirit as of Moses, Prophets, Martyrs and Saints to this
d^y, do we wait for; and such a one too as never was in the world before, Rev.
5.6. The seven Spirits of God sent forth into all the earth; wherefore look
about you, for I tell you that all other times and judgments were but signs
and figures of this; as of Noah's flood, Luke 17.27, 28. Mat. 24. Fire and
Brimstone upon Sodom. Luke 17.28, 29. 1 Cor. 10.11. Examples to us upon whom
the end of the earth, or last days shall come, and the judgments on Egypt,
Rev. 11.7, 8. and upon the Israelites in the Wilderness that would not go on;
and upon the Cananites and Kings in Josh. 10.3 and upon Babylon, etc. All are
but signs of the jugements now at hand upon this professing Generation of
Apostates with the Beast now in full, Rev. 17.8. and false Prophet, Rev. 19.20.
and Jezabill the whore Rev. 17.16. upon this sheet too, where the two Witnesses
are slain (as I have proved in Pris. Morn.) Rev. 11.8, 13. and upon the Kings
of the earth, Rev. 16, 14. Yea upon all Babylon, Rev. 18.4, 5, 8. and 19. Now,
the figured and typified in all respects, must needs be most plenary and
summary. So that they are wonderful and dreadful Mount-Perazim dispensations
that are at hand in England, Isa. 28.21. therefore look to it, O thou that
sealesi up the sum, Ezekiel. 28.12, 13. For the hour of thy judgment is come, and
the set time to favor Sion, yea, the sum of all is at hand.

6. General Observation, Lastly, The motives of Christ upon his redhorse,
Zach. 1.8. with his Saints upon their Speckled and White; which are very swift,
are at hand, who are to overrun all the Earth (of a sudden) I say they are
upon us, though as yet they stand behind the Myrtle and Mulberry-trees, Zach
1.8. with 2 Samuel 5.24. 1 Chronicles. 14. in thea Valley of Rephaim, Isa. 17.5, 6. or
Cave of Adullam, 2 Samuel 23.13. where the glory of Israel first begins, Mich.
1.15. to the Heir who is Christ! (by Myrtles being meant Fifth King Saints and
ministrations, as Isa. 55.13. and 41.19.) For we are under the Administration
of the fourth living Creature about the Throne, Rev. 4.7. Ezeck. 1. v. 10. the
fourth Spirit, Zach. 6.5. or the flying Eagle, who is called in Zach. 6.3. the
fourth Chariot, which came from between the two Mountains of Brass; or from
the mount into which the Stone falls upon the Image, Dan 2.45. to that Mount
into which the Stone becomes, Dan. 2.35. and in that space of time (I say) are
we especially under the administration of the flying Eagl, or the fourth
Chariot, wherein are Christ's red and speckled Horses (or those for his bloody
War against the Brast) that are to pass through the whole Earth, Zach. 6 7 in
this Vintage of blood, even unto the Horses Bridles, by the space of 1600.
furlongs, Rev. 14.20. or 200. miles. The contents of the Eagles ministration,
which he calls come and see, lo! Rev. 6.7, 8. being a power over the Earth, to
kill with the Sword, with Famine, and with death (diverse ways) and this is
the living Creature, who gives out the third Woe, or the seven Viols unto the
Angels, Rev. 15 7. (the Instruments and Executors thereof.) So that it is very
clear upon an insight into these scriptures that we are under this Eagle
Administrator, in the work which is to be done against the Beast and fourth
Monarch; and then we must grant that the motions thereof will be very swift,
soaring high, hidden, intricate and extraordinary upon quick sight, but
impregnable and incre^^ble courage delighting (Eagle-like) in the blood and
Carcases of men, that are to be slain: and thus far for a hint of these few
General Observations, which I have a very clear p^ospective off from these
prisons, Exiles, and Pilgrimages, in this mine Isle of Pathmos, and retired
estate with God on the mount: signifi^d to me by the spriit of the most high:
amongst many other things that are shortly to come to pass upon the whole
Earth from Jesus Christ, the faithful Witness, the Amen of all these things,
and the Author and Finisher of my Faith, even so, Amen, Lord Jesus, come
quickly.

But before I finish, we find a fresh assault of Satan upon us, in this close
Prison, perpetrated, to make our bonds the more heavy, I mean another Link of
Iron added to the concatenation of their cruelty constantly exercised in this
Exile, upon the 20 of the 1 month 1656: came Captain Floyd, and Major Strange
with an ORDER from White Hall to remove M: Gen: Harrison from us to High-gate
to his own house (a prisoner!) under pretense of the very desperate danger of
death his Father (the Colonel was in; as also his dear Yoak-fellow, so near
the time of her Travel; but our precious Concaptive (thus surprised) was in
great fears of the Serpents snares in this Order, and would not give them any
resolve what to do, until he had acquainted us therewith, assured us of his
jealousies, lest his further Liberty, company and outward comforts should be
any intanglement unto him, or let to his inward joys and prison-experiences;
knowing as Luther said that Vna guttula malae Conscientiae totum mare mundari
gaudii absorbet, the least drop of a troubled spirit swallows up the whole
Ocean of al outward comforts or delights, so that he did earnestly desire us to
set it before the Throne for a Resolution, which we agreed unto, and at the end
of that day came in the two again, who were to take him into custody, who
(after we had given him our apprehensions dealt very roundly and plainly with
them, that he could not thank them for their pretended Love, nor did he think
his Father or Wife would be worse by his continuance in this prison, but rather
the better, for he was persuaded they should do well, and for a Goal he had
rather have this then any for the cruelty thereof, and of BULL, who made so
little conscience of what he said or did, and who had indeed played the very
beast with us, so that (for suffering) it was the best prison we could be in!
nor would he make his house a prison! to this effect he spoke, and told them
that he could not declare his readiness to go with them, but if they would
carry him away, he could not help it! They said they did desire to serve him
with all civility and respect, and were loath to use any violence, but could
not go without him! and they were now to take custody of him, and so desired
him to prepare himself the next day, and to give directions which way he would
go? but he told them he would have nothing to do in it! but he was a Sufferer!
nor would he direct, nor bear any of the charges for he was a Prisoner, and so
for that night they parted: and we prayed (as we used to do together every
night!) In the night I was much troubled about his going, but the consideration
of the Work at hand, with that Word in Dan: 2.18. That DANIEL and his fellows
should not perish with the rest of the wise men of Babylon, gave a truce; the
next morning BULL delivered him up two the other two, who took possession of
him, we had much discourse, and indeed the Lord gave him a very noble spirit,
(though broken in himself) to deal plainly both with Bull and them; expressing
his unwillingness to leave us behind, or rather his desire to partake and carry
with us still in so sore bonds, but when we saw he must be gone we parted (as
the Sun through a watery cloud) with no little heaviness for a season, and I
said to C. Fl. Sir! Tell your masters or any that ask after us, that it were a
little more MERCY (if they had it) to put us into any DUNGEON in London (our
own Land) then to leave us here, in the hands of such BLASPHEMERS, and BRUITS
so skilful to distroy! but still we bless the Lord! for our Father makes it
sweet and best to us! We got upon a WALL and looked after them til they came
near to Newport, and then my dear fellow prisoner Mr. Courtney who is left
here, and I kept the rest of the day in prayer, easing our hearts, and emptying
our tears into the bosom of Heaven, being a little troubled for our loss of so
precious a help, so choice a companion as he was to us, another Vetius
Epigathus who was called the noble Advocate of Christians (amongst the Martyrs)
to the teeth of their Tyrants; but yet we had very blessed and fruitful
experiences of a presence from the most high every day (almost) since, which
has made his servants absence the more easy unto us; Et bonus es, Domine
(says Bernard) animae querenti, quid invenienti? O Lord! what art thou then to
them that find thee? who art so gracious to us that SEEK thee in bonds.

After this, we being like men out of mind! (in this Iron grave!) their cruelty
increased yet more upon us, to tire us out; and Bulls brutish modesty was to
have imposed upon the Maidservants Father, that his Daughter must tell, him all
the Tales that she could, if she heard us at Table, bed, or board, but speak a
word of O. C. or any of their cruelty, that she must betray her Master, and
bring him word of it; and would have bound her Father to it in a bond. To me
particularly was their malice monstrous, they put another Soldier and his Wife,
and sour Children into our other room, where Bull himself had put us, threw our
wood, and things out of doors, brake open the locks, and naild up the door from
us, with reproachful words to boot, (and this by Bulls command) but we let them
patiently (in our own matters) use any tyranny without taking notice! and me
thinks as Guy de Brez. said. The more SAVAGE they are, the more sweetly has my
soul obtained WINGS to sore ALOFT, above THEM all, into the blessed Rest! O
blessed be the Lamb that was slain, and is worthy! for as Cruciger said, GOD is
so near us, that he may be (almost) FELT.

Strict Orders were given, that no one dare to show familiarity unto us, and
the Woman with her four Children put into our room was charged (when she came
in) to beware of us, for if any of them were found to be familiar, (that is
respectful) or civil to any of us, they should be turned out of the Ca^tle
without remedy, or if any should but listen or stand to hear me at pray^r, or
in duty to God, except it be such as were or la^e sent to listen under the
windows and into holes for that purpose, to catch and fetch some matter to make
a crime of, which above these two years they have been raking for (so good is
my God, who blinds them that they see not where my infirmities lie most, but
where the Almighty has armed me with his buckler of truth, his back-piece of
innocence, and breast plate of Righteousness, there they shoot their arrows to
hurt me.) So also, if any should speak but a charitable word of us, or give us
a good look, or give us the time of the day, it is accounted a heinous crime,
and is ( I hear) enough to turn them out of the Castle; but those who are most
malicious, dogged, brutish, and do invent ways of vexation o^ provocation
every day upon us, and that spy out tales to carry to Bull, are the only men
made much of by him; encouraged; and rewarded; with whom he will be familiar to
laugh and scoff at us, rejoicing to hear the height of their insolency and
violencies done to us; but others (who are but few) are sorely snibd, put upon
hard duties and threatened; a poor old man amongst them was but saying of us he
thought we were honest men, and one went in and told BULL that Tale, who sent
for the man (I hear) at nine a clock at night, and rated them with high rage,
bidding him be gone then, and go to us, if he thought us such honest men,
threatening to turn the poor silly fellow out, who spoke it with simplicity, and
thought no harm in that word, not so much as justifying us, or saying more, ye
a he was threatened (we heard) that he should be whipped; Another of them, that
had formerly been a bitter enemy, being a little convinced said to a Soldier,
if it be for their Consciences, and for Christ as they say; it is pity they
should be imprisoned so; but this tale wa^ also carried speedily and told to
Bull, who sent for him, upbraided him bi^terly, and charged him boldly (as he
used to do) asking him, if he were for such-men, (naming us reproachfully) who
answered no! not he and told him all he said, but then Bull threatened him, and
told him if he were a wel-wisher to us, he would turn him off, and so upon
account of his former merit (and future) he dismissed him with round words, and
exhortations to his Duty, (meaning in persecuting, and insulting over us;) I
believe 100 of such passages might be mentioned, and some such rididiculous
lies and tales, as would make us easily conclude, they can have nothing but the
names and shapes of men whiles they strive to exceed one another, in apish,
brutish (and at best but childish) practices, of cogging, telling, lying, and
informing of one another, as well as in abusing us, but indeed they do make us
good sport many a time to see what work they make to tickle the Bulls ears; and
to sharpen his Horns for a fresh goaring in our sides! but bless the Lord O my
soul! for Omnes tyrannisunt coqui mei, says Guel: Paris: they are all but
cooking me some dainty dishes, and prison food; and me thinks were my hands of
a light fire for this Cause (like Martyr Hewks his) I would clap them together
for joy in this triumph at Caines brook Castle, for as 2 Cor: 12.10. I take
pleasure in reproaches, in persecutions, and in distresses for Christ's sake.

As for their riggedness continued unto us in close prison, wherein they keep
me, and my Wife, and Family, not suffering one of us to stir out, nor man,
woman nor child to come at us, let them judge that know what belong to it; for
the like cruelty was never inflicted, nor conditions imposed, upon the worst of
men of late years in these Nations, neither among Papists, Prelates, nor to the
Cavaliers, Scots or Irish, nor in the worst of the Wars, that without
engagement or subscription to be on their side they should not see them, or
minister a piece of bread unto them. Many a sad story could I tell to men, (as I
have to the God that hears prayers) of their cruelty; for this M: Bull keeps
a book, to entrap all that come to see us, making them subscribe against their
Consciences; the form of the OBLIGATION is to do nothing directly nor
indirectly to disturb them (as I hear,) for Capt: P. newly come from Barbados
took this in the way, with his ship, with eager desire to visit us from himself
and some others, (being ignorant of the Snare) Bull brings out his book to
engage him, or told he should not see me and most fasly affirmed (amongst many
other notorious untruths as is his custom (that not one came to see us but so
did subscribe first (as the Captain told me himself) whereat he opened him the
book where one Man (who was a Surgeon at New. port, that my Wife had for some
Weeks (if not months) needed to cure her of a sore, which was great pain and
misery, but he was not suffered to come til he had subscribed; nor can we have
the means to help us in sickness; but this man's hand he shows the Captain for a
proof who had subscribed, whereat the Captain also subscribed, and came in to
see us; yet with little content I think to be so ensnared. But hereby such as
come long and chargeable journies out of England are sent away without seeing
us, and so others that else would come, are disheartened from assaying it,
reaping nothing from them (as the fruit of long and tedious journies) but
grievous words or blows from the soldiers, and very few in our days being like
those 2 Martyrs (and Soldiers too) whom Chrysostom (in Juven: and Max:)
commends for an example for that they would not be kept from visiting the
Saints in prison, although it was forbidden them with the greatest threats,
terrors, and torments of death; and as Paul says of Onesiph^rus 2 Timothy: 1. He
often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain, but he sought me out
diligently and found me; he got to me at last: Yet upon the ^4th of the 2d.
month were two brethren (sent from the Church at London to visit us, and
particularly to miniher unto me) not suffered to come in, the Jailer Bull and
his accomplices (being hard at bowls,) yet had time to forbid it, and more too;
so that before they returned home to London again, I with my concaptive Mr: C:
got out at a hole upon the Castle-wal on high, and they two were let into the
Ramparts without the walls, and we spoke to one another on the walls, with tears
and joys, all their desire (being their teacher and overseer in bonds) I began
with a word of Exhortation to them out of Exodus: 40.36. and Rev: 4.1. at which
some poor people (in the houses a little way off) hearing; came running, into
the Highway; but presently Orders came from the bowlers to the Soldiers to fall
upon the Two Messengers, which they did pretty greedily, and so pui'd, tore,
and thump'd them who were standing quietly, with nothing but bibles in their
hands, out of the Ramparts into the Highway, but because they could not well
beat them out of the Highway (which was as far off as the Castle-wal as I could
well be heard with my lowdest voice) and for that I think 20 were by this time
gathered to hear me, (and almost all poor Women) they did no more then, but
threaten them, and send soldiers to oversee, and look what Women there were
that they might be troubled for it, and whither any were Soldiers Wives, that
either their Husbands might correct them (for that is an allowed practice with
Soldiers here to beat their Wives) or else their Husbands be turned out upon
it, such a severe sentence had this occasional speaking to the Churches
Messengers; besides; Soldiers passed under the wall up and down all the while,
looking up, and yawling, contradicting and blaspheming to disturb us, but
blessed be the LORD who teaches me to preach in Tumults, his presence was with
us, overpowered the enemies, and we went to prayer together with the power of
the Lord, after which the people desired to hear me again, and (praying me to
it,) we appointed that day senight, being the 1 of the 3 month, and so my dear
Co-exile and I took leave of our two brethren blessing the Lord that we had
seen their faces, and they ours, and spoke to one another, though the enemy had
set Pastor and people at such a distance; since which to the writing hereof
has not one come to visit me, but only from He^ven, whence our visits are very
sweet and raising, yea ravishing, so that I think I may say through the grace
of my dear Father in Jesus Christ, that Mihi maxim prosunt, qui mei pessime
meminerunt, Luth: ad Spal. They profit me most who mind me least (in a sense)
for they send me the more to him who minds (I may say) the veriest Dog of his
Family, and so I shall not want! for The Lord is my Shepherd, I will not fear,
Psalm: 23.1: 2 But before the day appointed, BULL and his men had laid their
plot deep, as well how to hinder the Word preached, (though they had not a Word
that we can hear of to object against it; nor indeed did they so much as listen
for matter, to pretend for their violence or displeasure, but fell pelmel upon
it at a venture with the vilest rage, as bruit beasts, sensual, Jude 10. not
having their senses exercised to discern good and evil, Heb: ^.14:) as how to
fall upon our persons if we attempted it, and withal to keep the poor people
from coming into the highway, and to make the more terror in the matter, the
poor man y^ stood sentinel at the outward gate (they said) listened to hear me,
(or at least was proclive unto it;) him they (for the present) sent packing
with big words, of hanging and punishing him, with whipping at the least which
made a great noise at Newport, his poor Wife being frighted at it; with high
and mighty threats of Bull and his Soldiers several days together; so that (I
hear) to this hour the poor wretch is put into fears, and looks every moment
to be thrown overboard, such is their tyranny to us, and the Word of God in
this CAINES-BROOK-CASTLE, (1 John: 3.12. As CAIN (that wicked one) who slew his
brother: and wherefore slew he him? because his own Works were EVIL, and his
brothers RIGHTEOUS!) All this while: we being close prisoners the plot was kept
from us, only we saw they meant us no good, for the hole (we went out at) they
stopped up, but pretended other reasons for it; nor did Bull or any forbid us,
or send word to us that they were offended, or would not have us come upon the
wall, (which we had the liberty of for a little air none forbidding it;) but
they left us (as they thought) very secure, and so as we should easily fall into
their hands to wreak their Cain-like and designed wrath upon our bodies and
bones, (if not our blood;) but by a providence we were warned (unknown to them)
for one of their Wives having more pity (then the bloody crew) could not in
conscience rest til she had hinted it to one in my Family, and besides one of
the Sergeants was heard to say with great joy what brave sport they should have
on Thursday (meaning on our bodies that day if I offered preach) we being by Bull
delivered up to their merciless jaws ponyards, and Swords. I think almost as
Cassianus was to the bodkins and penknives of his enraged Scholars, and for
ought (I say) I know the like effect (or were it) we might have found, had not
the Lord delivered us. The day being come to act their cruelty upon us and the
Word of God; BULL road abroad (leaving his pleni-potentiary orders with his
bloody crew behind him) that he might have (I believe) an excuse for himself,
had any sore mischief been done; the Soldiers were ready armed, and very jocund
only three or four (or some few of them) hrunk away, and would not be at it,
for which they must look to suffer: in the morning about 9 or 10. my dear
brother (in these bonds) Mr. Courtney to be a little retired at prayer and
reading, went into a little boarded place (as he used to do) upon the back
wall, none hindering or questioning him: but after a short space he was
interrupted by a soldier sent to keep the little narrow passage upon the wall,
(over which he came into his little house) that he might not come back again
that way (so greedy were they to be at their Work.) My brother C. came forth
(seeing who it was) to be gone back again to his lodge the way that he came but
the soldier kept the pass said he must not, bid him go another way (which they
had designed) but he refused so to do, whereupon the soldier said he should,
(...);) but he (seeing no remedy) gave the Soldier a sudden wrest, and (by the
Lords providence) got by the Wall, but the Soldier laid hold upon him furiously
pulled his coat, (which he rent) but Mr. C. unbutten'd it, and slipping out of
it, left it with the fellow, and (...), and escaped to his own lodge, (all this
while was I within in my chamber and knew not of it) 3 or 4 soldiers more were
coming to the assistance of the first, but my brother escaped them also, the
Sergeant and Corporal stood below in the yard looking on; but this sudden
alarm to us, (which was too soon for them, breaking out before they intended
it) made all that they hatched to our bodies prove abortive for that day; which
I do hear, has vexed them sorely; for this news soon flew out of the Castle,
up and down to New-port, and the poor (frighted) people hearing before of their
preparations, and now of their assaults upon this Gentleman, did faint, and
came not into the Highway to hear, (whither through fear or force, (or both) I
know not, but this I know, they are in miserable servitude;) the walls and
stairs were now guarded with soldiers, armed with swords, guns, and light match
to keep me from going up (if they had came,) and to execute their wills upon me
for reproving their blasphemy, drunkenness, and daily (yet allowed) sins; and
that day I was told they had intended to taste of my blood, but we sought the
Lord about it, and (for all the danger) did conclude we had a call, and it was
my duty to preach (though I dyed for it) if any of those that desired it, (or
any others) had but come to hear; but because not one came it was also
concluded our duty not to hazard our lives, limbs, blood, or bodies for nothing
to such as waited, and are greedy to this day of them; it may be some may think
I stretch my line to speak thus of them, but indeed (in my own conscience) I am
persuaded I do not, but write less then I might in many things, for as Luther
ad Nich: Hansm: said. Propositum est mihi neque vitam, neque mores tueri, sed
SOLAM CAVSAM CHRISTI; lacerent mores meos quicunque velint, etc. My purpose is
not to defend my own life and manner, but only my Christ and his cause (which
they persecute,) and who will, let them rend and tear me and my name to pieces;
for as the Apostle says 1 Cor: 15.30, 31. Why stand we in JEOPARDY every hour?
I protest by your rejoicing which I have in CHRIST JESUS our LORD I DYE DAILY;
and it is for Christ's sake, We are accounted the OFFSCOWRING, 1 Cor: 4.

Thus with this day (wherein I welcomed my honored brother into this blessed
School of Christ's buffets and marks, after the order of our dearest Savior,
Apostles, Martyrs, and most ex cellent Saints; though we be both of us (as yet)
but young striplings, and the lowermost of this Form, wherein we are learning
and pressing forward; I might break off this History of our sufferings (at the
present) for we hope the Winter is past, and the rain is over, and gone, ( I
mean for storms, though it may be we have some April showers yet to bring forth
May-flowers, or better fruits from us) Cant: 2.11. yea the singing of birds is
begun, it is heard in our Land. Yet I might say much more of their present
Tyranny upon us (to tear us, and wear us out!) since the M: Genesis was taken from
us. My Wife being very il to this day cannot have liberty to go out for the
means (if it were to save her life) not so much as to Newport to a Doctor of
Physic and so to return in again; and as for our diet you heard before how
hardly we are used; nay they will not suffer a poor Woman so much as to come up
to sell us a little butter, or the like; and yet they constantly upbraid us with
the abuse of our liberty (if we have it) by preaching, etc. but the Cavaleeres
and themselves may sit, swear, and swil from morning to night, and yet no
abridgement or abuse of Liberty with them; yea I am certainly informed by a
godly Gentleman that of late they sat drinking in Wine hot waters and other
Liquors to the rate of eighteen quarts to a Man at one bout; yea on the Lords
day (all day long) drinking, smoking, tippling, and swelling it, which I never
heard they were forbidden, only to hear me is forbidden with great vehemence;
yea many of them at once have I seen staggering and reeling at the Alehouse,
while their poor Wives come scolding for bread, and yet this is so far from
being adjudged an abuse of Liberty, that what these kind of Vermin would have
done to us, is done; whiles they are complemented, courted, and made much of;
and indeed (next to Lambeth) I never saw the like, and so openly I say, upon
the Lords days too, without any thing of Gods Worship some times, which is
accounted no crime; but to hear me Preach or pray, or in any of the Worship of
God, they will have that an unpardonable sin, and indispensable; though as the
Apostle says 1 Cor: 4.13. Being defamed we entreat, and as Alexander Hales
could say a Soul patient when wronged, is like a man with a SWORD in one hand,
and SALVE in the other, he could wound, but he would heal.

Besides all this, I shall add but a little more, and so I shall finish for this
present in this prison; where it is much, if every day do not produce some new
Tyranny and Tragedy upon our bodies. The 16 day of the 3d. month, two friends,
one from London, another from Berkshire came to see us, and by a good
providence got into the Castle yard but refused to subscribe, and so were to be
turned away again, and not to come up to our prison chambers. I seeing them,
and at first doubtful who they were at my window, yet soon guessed at one of
them, so that I went into the yard, spoke with them, and with joy took them
by the hand, desired they might come into my chamber though with Soldiers, but
that would not be suffered, because I had a few days before told their
Lieutenant for all their tyranny to tire us out, I feared them not, nor al their
masters, because I was above them al in this matter, and they were al under our
feet were they 10000 more for one; so that this was pretended against it the
Lieut: saying but I should not have the Castle yet, for all that! and til I
could behave my self better, none should come to me and the like; but my Wife
also came down into the yard, and my dear Co-exile, Q: G. C. so that we had
some little time to speak together, though with great interruptions and
abusive speeches, the very common soldiers (before their Offices faces, tossing
stones or brick-bats at us! and calling aloud to my Wife Mrs. Mrs. where is
your Gentleman Usher to hold up your tail? (meaning I suppose me, because I use
to lead her being weak and lame!) but we let them alone to abuse us! before the
Soldiers faces (who have sufficiently scoffed and upraided me, saying we lie in
prison to get money as Bull and all the rest do say daily!) they gave me Tokens
of their Love, and so left us; nor were they suffered to come any more into the
yard, which they tried and entreated. Within these few days it was reported
as if there would be some stirs in England, at which they rage against the
Indenpendent and Anabaptist Rogues as they call them, and then particularly
threaten what they vvil do with us upon it! Captain HAD: saying to his other
Soldiers that if he knew but one (of themselves) that were any ways familiar
(meaning civil in respect) with Courtney or Rogers, he would run his Sword
into his guts presently with his own hands. Their daily breathing seems to be
after our blood; and their words will break out at their lips do what they can!
sorto name no more the last 2d. day. Serj. King with some others took my
little Child (in coats) examined him about us, and with flatteries tempted the
Child to tell what we said, and did, and eat, or any thing that he could get
out! and then they gathered together a crew of them to vent their lusts and
malice; sometimes threatening, sometimes raging, sometimes scoffing, etc. it
seems they understood we had a joint of meat together to a dinner, and which
was but but one dish for us al, at which they raged, that their prisoners
should live like Lords (as they termed it) and that they themselves lived more
like the prisoners, and therefore they would have their major not to suffer us
to eat a bit, but vvhwat we buy of their Suckler, (that is one of their
Soldiers,) nor should we dress it our selves, but their Suckler, so that
(though we pay for it dearly!) yet we shall not eat, but what they allow us
to eat, and live upon which I believe should not be a biscuit a day, might they
have their wills, but the Lord restraines their rage! even so O Lord! O let the
Remainder of their wrath praise thee! This S. King is such another ambitious,
covertous, pragmatical youth, as was Pepper at Winsor! who soars high by his
impudence and cruelty to us! in company of our Friends he denies that he did
buffet, beat, and bruise me as is before mentioned; but amongst themselves he
brags and boasts of it! as the last second day he said ROGERS cannot abide him,
never since he paid him so, and boxd him so bravely (at which they scoff and
laugh) but (said he) as if nothing else troubled him, I might have cut off a
band or an arm off him as well as can be, for if I had cut off his right arm, no
Sizes, nor Sessions (says he) would meddle with me for it; and this they
conclude on as Times now are, which they al assented to: but still our trust is
in then ost high Jehovah! The Title this King gives to me is Faggot maker, and
so reports (I hear) that I was a faggot maker up and down, but indeed I may
live to make faggots by the King of Heavens appointment to bind up such stubble
as they are for the day of wrath if they repent not! He dos also rage
exceedingly that Qr: Mr. Genesis and I have our distinct rooms, and says he will
have Courtney to Rogers, or Rogers to Courtney that he may have the rooms, for
they shall not live so like Gentlemen, and thus they are every day insulting
over us at their pleasure, when we speak not one word unto them, that they may
not have the least color of any provocations from us, which is indeed our
comfort! for we let them alone without taking notice of their tongues or
actions against us, which indeed does vex them the more, poor creatures! for if
they do but see us! their hearts so rise against us that as Acts 7.54, 57. they
even gnash (some of them) as I have seen it with their teeth, and look as if
they were ready to ^un upon as with one accord. Notwithstanding we do endeavor
(when they do fall foully upon us!) to convince them with soft and sound words,
and when ^hey go by us (as big as they can hold) with civil respect! ministering
as ^e are able to their Wives (whom they keep poor enough) either in mo^ey,
clothes, or food, though they dare not be to know it! and so returning ^ood for
evil, and if one of them be seen by another to show any kind of ^espect to us,
to do any thing for us, or stir his hat kindly he is (as I said before) under a
public check, and upbraiding, if not in danger to be turned ^ut; BULL asks him
if he be our Pensioners, or if he will do more for us then ^or him, with a many
more such frivilous, captious, and quarrelsome ^uestions; and then threatens
him. These are I confess but trifles to what ^ight be mention, and to what we
see and suffer every day, blessed be the lord for whose sake we suffer al
things gladly and thankfully! yea to ^ention but yesterday, because it was the
last day of al (for every day af^^ds new matter,) and so I conclude with this
Tragical History at present, (...) Time do bring forth the Truth of all things,
and their (hidden) tyranny, (...) to open light! which I trust will be shortly!
The MAID that serves us had ^^erty to go out for this once, (she never stirring
out of the prison before!) to see her Friends; and yesterday (having traveled
al nigt!) very weary! she returned again! they let her into the gate, brought
her into the Guard! and kept her there above an hour! but would not let her
come in unto us! yet carried it fair to her, until they had prepared their plot
upon the poor lame Creature; and for all it was the Lords Day (wherein they had
no other Sermon!) they sent for Sergeant King twice to come away in have!) who
had sorely threatened her before (as well as Bull!) to be revenged for affirmming
she saw them beat and buffet me, when they would deny it to any of our friends
when they came! So this King came greedly of his Prey! and by his order (he
himself assisting)! two or three of the fiercest and most merciless of them fell
upon her with great violence, (without any occasion, color, or provocation in
word or deed! which they themselves deny not!) only because she belonged to
us!) nor had she (as she told them!) Letter or paper (nor did she carry out
any:) which they believed also; yet for all that they fell to a venting of their
malice to us, and of their Spirit against us, upon the poor creature, tore her
upon the ground, and dragged her in a most shameful, impudent, and uncivil
manner, (al at length) in the open yard, and about the dust, and abusing her so
unseemly that some of their own Wives ran out pitying and crying aloud; (but
were sharply rebuked by their Husbands, and bid to hold their tongue; these
Savages were now in their own Element, and very warm at their Work! (their
Sabbath work!) and so continued it! I called out at a window, and cried to them
to forbear for that she was already a poor lame Maid, and they had already
wreakd their Malice I though upon her, and with too much immodesty! but they
the more (for my speaking!) dragd, pulled, and abused her about the ground, which
when I saw, I was silent, and lookd up unto the Lord! until they had so draggd
her, and thrown her out of the gate! and then they got up her clothes, and
threw them after her! where the poor Creature is even now like Lazarus, (and
has been many hours!) lying with her lame limbs, and bundle at the gate for
admittance if it may be; but there she may lie yet many a day; they that go by
her (many of them) scoffing and abusing her bitterly! knowing al my Family is
il (Wife and Children) and not a servant that they suffer to live with us and
help us in this need! I askd indeed King by what rule he did this, and that on
the Lords day! saying, if he were a Christian, the Rule was Luke 3. Soldiers do
violence to none! but he made a scoff at what I said, and turned away in great
fury! and then I said well! the LORD will look down, and see all these things! at
which he turned and said pish! the LORD! what do you tell us the LORD! who is
the L: you are not the LORD a^e you? and so went on raging and blaspheming! and
the rest scoffing for company! as full of fury as they could hold! who indeed
have not the patience to hear the Lords name so much as mention! unless at
Alehouses and in sin; so sadly profane are they! and indeed, how can they be
otherwise, when men with wicked and idle courses have spent al their means,
and cannot or will not work! they get into these Garrisons to drink and guzzle
their Pay out before their pay-day comes; and for other misdemeanors deserving
to be chashiered, can find no way to secure their places but by their brutish,
premeditated, and barbarous cruelty to us! wherein they merit most that are
monstrous! and these things I declare (as in the sight of the God of truth!) to
be true! having read over again and again what I have written! and do not know
one line I have written too large, the Lord knows; whatever some may think, but
in many, that I have written too little rather; intending hereby to give but
hints to the Saints of the continued and multiplied Series of our sufferings:
especially to such at London as (through their ignoance, and our forced
silence!) say it is but a flea biting that we suffer, and not worth speaking
of; but it is a sign they have not a fellow feeling! for as the Lord said to
Ezekiel: 2.46. They are impudent and stiff necked, but be not afraid of them
though BRIARS AND THORNS be with thee! and thou art among SCORPIONS! and
therefore it is we are so torn and stung every day and indeed in a sense it is
a suffering worse then Death (as slight as men make it:) It is true in reproach
to us, the Soldiers (after they have beaten and abused us) bid us to complain
if we will; and if we do not like it help it! knowing that the cure is worse
then the Disease to us, and that we have none to complain unto, but the Lord,
who surely will hear us and save us at last, before they have wearied us out!
and broken our very heart strings, and which (doubtless) they design in one
kind or other before they have done with us; But matters of greater moment I
must refer to a fitter season! and bless Jehovah with us; O ye upright ones
(that sympathy with us!) for he has yet lined us with a good conscience
(within,) and a good cause without, and we trust We shall not fear what flesh
can do unto us, and pray for us yet more abundantly.

I had thought long ere this to have been at an END, and that this Persecution
would have added or imposed a Quietus est to my body (by death) out of the
continuance of their cruelty; but it pleases the Father that I should yet live
(as one always dying) under their immanity and now since that of the poor
Maids sufferings by their so immodest dragging her (al at length) in the yard
(before mentioned) I am entreated (by friends) to enlarge this sad History
(which I write with no great delight though I hope I suffer it with joy) a
little further; but I had rather a thousand times to set it before the Lord my
God, then once to make mention of it to any below; yet by reason of Friends
importunity (to whom I must not be ungrateful) I shall give you a short view of
this new link added to my chain since; that of Joseph (in his round (
Caines-brook-Castle or) Tower too, Gen: 3.20.) running much in my mind, for the
Lord was with him; and although I never read of such rigor in his bonds as are
in mine (renewed often) yet of him the Holy G: says Psalm: 105.18, 19. Whose
FEET they hurt with fetters: he was laid in Iron; UNTIL the time that his Word
came: the word of the Lord TRIED him; yea not only my feet have they hurt, but
my back, bones and whole body has been hurt, beaten, bruised, and are aching
every day with these heavy fetters and furies. Since the Maids such monstrous
usage (without any cause) and being last out at the gate with her clothes rent
and torn, where (besides that) she lay on the ground lame, (like Lazarus at the
gate) six or seven hours the next day for admittance, and at last was let in
again with no little stir and threatening; I had liberty to go in to my dear
Co-Exiles chamber (not knowing of any design they had upon me) which it seems
they watched for, (and had Orders from BULL as they say) to observe when I did
so, being now resolved to take their rage from the lame Creature (having little
credit of their cruelty to her) and to wreak it upon me and my poor weak Wife;
which they did (at present) thus; (but O Lord! let the remainder of their Wrath
PRAISE thee! Upon a sudden (after my fellow prisoner had invited me into his
Chamber) four or six Musketeirs with Swords, Guns, and light Matches were set
upon me there, and soon after more followed them; they set also Soldiers upon
my weak Wife and Family, (yea into the very room raging; which frighted her for
the suddenness of it) she being as ignorant as I of the meaning of this new
piece of tyranny; and so keeping us asunder that we could not come at one
another, see or hear, so, as to know of each others condition, or what the
matter was, which made it look like a bad business, (as bad as if forthwith
they had intended to murder me at least:) my Wives sickness subjecting her
(withal) to very frightful fancies, fears and apprehensions wondering what
would become of me, still asking after me, and what was become of me, or what
they had done with me; and besides to make it a through piece of a monstrous
matter to her, they set within her chamber the most uncivil, drunken, raging
wretches, stamping, threatening, grinding their teeth, calling, Jade, Queen,
Carrion, with a many such obscene names, bending their fists, striking,
tearing, thumping, rai^ing, (with their staggering) if any offered to go in the
room, not suffering them to stir for necessaries within the rooms, offering and
drawing the naked sword upon them (with asseverations) several times, without
any provocation given them in Word or deed; and soon after followed ten or
twelve more (as they inform me) and filled the room with such rude creatures
and doings, without any regard at all to Sex, sickness, or condition. As they
were at this inhumane sport persecuting my Wife and Family, those armed
Soldiers with me were not wanting with great violence and fury to execute their
Orders (as they called it) for I offering to go to the door with desire to see
my Wife, (being fearful of some mischief to her (though I knew not of this
cruel usage of her) in her so weak and sickly condition!) was forcibly beaten
and punchd in again, although I desired I might but stand at the window to see
her with as many armed soldiers to guard me as they would; but it could not be
obtained; which did augment our mutual fears and troubles for one another. (Nay
would any think these raging bruites to be so inhumane, and unnatural, as not
suffer me to go forth to ease nature, although the house were within a few
steps of the door?) but thus were they insulting over us, laughing at us, and
abusing of us here; whiles others of them were rending, tearing, and ransaking
in my prison Chamber with great violence and threats, ^ulling the very sheets
off the bed, so immodestly (as some Turks would abhor to a WOMAN so ill as my
Wife was) that the Maid asking if they were not ashamed, they even shouted at
her again; and she was answered that had they Orders, they would pull her
clothes off her back, and pull their smocks over their ears, and strip her
stark naked presently, had they but a Word for it; with much such impudent
ranting, and unseemly language calling her limping Carrion, Jade, Queen, and
what they pleased; and indeed I do think they said true, had they said to have
ravished them too, should they have the word for it; for their Officers (some
of them) could stand by, and look on for many hours, (rather laughing at and
delighting in their beast-like rudeness, then reproving them for it;) At all
which with infinite other taunts, incivilities, threats, and abuses by poor
Wife was (I may say) frighted (almost unto death, as has appeared ever since,)
and for some time (days and nights) her continual cry was, They would KILL HER,
they would be her DEATH, they will make an END of her; she shall never recover it
etc. Within this time the Commissary came to me, and told me I must be put into
a little hole, or the dark Chamber at the end of my Fellow prisoners chamber,
they would bring my things thither, but the bed I had allowed me to lie on,
they would take away, and so (it may be supposing they had sufficiently
afflicted my Wife and me for once, if I do not wrong them with charity, they
brought what pleased them into this Cave where I am now kept to feed upon, Heb:
11.38. Of whom the world was not worthy, they wandered in Deserts, Mountains,
and in DENS and CAVES of the earth, ver: 36. and others had trial of cruel
mockings, and scourgings; yea moreover of BONDS and IMPRISONMENT, this being
the 8th or 9th removal; the 5th or 6th PRISON, and the second or third year
(all which is true though it may seem strange,) into this little, dark, cold,
smoaky, stinking, and unwholesome HOLES they put me, my Wife, and Family guarded
hither to me; my family (which are five of us) cast into this one little room,
as if (like Beasts) we should be altogether day and and night, and in a room
too that would not hold two beds, (for one will take up the greatest part)
indeed too little a Cave for one body, the Soldiers (many of them) deciding and
making sport to see this usage, though some had a little reluctance, and
pittyed us; yea for all my Wife was so very ill they took away our bedding
(which a Friend had leant us) and carried it into their Lieut: chamber. who had
been a busy-body in this trajedy (as it proves to be) and there kept it, some
saying the boards were too good for us to lie upon, and what were we? that we
must have beds? we were prisoners indeed; they would have us to the Dungeon,
and we should live in that; and that we should know we were prisoners, and the
like: (although moderate men that have pleaded for them, yet confess where they
have put us is the very next degree to a Dungeon! and all they can say is
others have lived here, but then they consider not how it was accomodated,
hung, kept warm and fitted for others, and that never any family did or could
live in this hole, but had other rooms to live in that were lightsome, more
wholesome and tolerable, and but that my dear fellow prisoners man left a little
Garret for the Maid and Child to lie in on his bed; we must have lay one upon
another like horses in litter, nay that they will not allow us neither for our
Money (which they allow to Beasts.) Yea they took away even curtains and valens,
not allowing us a curtain to keep out the wind or cold which are known to be
very bitter in this place; Al which and more to (I trust) I can take thankfully
and joyfully for my dearest Jesus sake! Only I must confess the present
condition, weakness, and ilness of my dear yoakfellow does cut deep; and would
DEEPER had not the most High CUT a COVENANT (in Jesus Christ) with me, which
stands sure and well ordered in all things, Gen: 15.18. 2 Samuel: 23.5. and ah!
it is sweet! to be put to such shi^ts sometimes! ye^ out of all into him who is
all in all! even so! Amen! HALELVJAH!

The ground of this act of tyranny lies (as as the rest dos) in their arbitrary
breasts to weary, tire, provoke, consume, spend us out, break our very
heart strings with such lingering tyranny, and so to kill us if they can that
way; who seem weary with letting us live so long, and sure the SPRING of this
continued fresh-spouting cruelty cannot arise altogether out of WHITE-HELL! Nor
can I conjecture other subordinate cause as to this unhandsome force upon us
from that room, but that then we should see their horrible wickedness every
day drinking, smoking, drabbing, profaning the Sabbath, and name of God at
the Alehouse beating and abusing the Saints, (or such as came to visit us;) and
if friends came to see us that they would not let in (at a back window,) I
could see them, which was an offense; but in this hole we know not when any
come, nor will they let them so much as with soldiers come to see us, but turn
them away weeping, and unknown to us, as two men friends that came from London,
they have done so to already (I hear;) and now one (a Gentlewoman of London) at
this time we (by a providence) hear is at the gate, that they will not let come
to us, so that I think these may be the reasons (beside the threats of Serj:
King who lusted for this cruelty, and threatened it long;) for although as Isai:
3.9. The show of their countenance does witness against them, and they declare
their sin as SODOM; they hide it not. Yet were they vexed to do it always in
our eyes which they confessed, and so removed us into this HOLE; and this is
the most easy and charitable construction that can (I think) be given of their
cruelty! but it could not vent in this, for their wickedness burns as fire, and
here also are they worrying us a fresh too to this moment; I may well say with
sweet Joseph in his prison, Gen: 40.15. And HERE ALSO have I done nothing that
they should put me into this DVNGEON; and that it is a Dungeon, yea not only
beyond Joseph's, but far exceeding some fellons in England. I shall a little
describe it to you! it is some three steps long, and three steps broad; (not so
long as one of the little garrets they put us into, first) when they brought me
into this Castle, with a promise of two rooms, two beds, and better
accommodation! til they have gotten me in, but now they gripe me, and not
perform a title of their promise! but it is no wonder from men of such principles
who make no more bones of breaking an Oath, then a soldier dos of cracking a
louse) nor is it so large as any one of the rooms we had at Windsor. Underneath
it is a deep, low vault, from whence arises (into the room) day and night
unwholsom vapors, winds, and filthy damp mists very dangerous, the boards
being broken and rotten; the chimney is a little low thing, casting smoke so
unreasonably in such a little close room that it is uncomfortable, and better
to be bitten with cold, then smotherd with smoke; all the light that comes in
is a little dark window, which for many hundred years (I suppose) never saw the
sun, unless a little at nights upon the long days of summer; so that it looks
at noone in the room (for the most part) as if it were night. Before the window
is a great Hill which keeps off light and air, so that the air that comes in
to us is either out the Vault, or deep damp hollow cave underneath us
(exceeding unwholesome) as we find by Woeful experience to the flesh! day and
night, or else in at the door, and what that is, let any judge, for at the very
door (within three steps) is the filthy common Sewer, stench, and common house
of Office,, and at the side of the common Dunghill, so that what delight can be
in this air, which the room is so strong and full of, let any (but Beasts) judge
in this it exceeds Sandam fort, as the Soldiers do for cruelty, and I think
when it is best and sweetest, it is when there is less of the house of Office
air, and more of the other; that is when it smells but fusty and foggy like a
Well, Cave, or low Sellar under ground, with raw, cold, and aguish humors. Now
if in these and other respects it be not a Dungeon, (and far exceeding many,
yea in many respects the very Dungeon of this Castle which they threaten me so
much with) I am much mistaken. But now for some few fruits too of their tyranny
that we may tell you how it tastes (as from them;) ever since has my poor Wife
been weak and sick, yea so (by fits and through frights) as I feared her
dissolution before this, and that which made her yet the more dejected, and
down (as at deaths door) was the want of Means, they not suffering help to
come when sent for, but rather, upbraiding and saying pish! We could be sick
and well when we would! the sense whereof made her complain deeply, and look
upon her self as a lost Woman for some days! Besides the lame Maid was now
taken ill also, she feeling their cruel usage, lying, and complaining full of
pain and torment for six or seven days together, but they would not suffer so
much as a Woman sent for to help her, (keeping her bed, which one in pity lent
her to lie on!) but we sought the Lord for help, for compassion, for remedy! we
not being suffered (neither) to send out a Letter to signify a word of our
condition or cruel usage; some seven or eight Letters we have reckoned they
have kept (of late) though not a word in them (for the most of them) that
meddled with these matters or their Government, only of my Wives sickness,
sending for means, as also for a little money which one had of ours, but they
neither let those Letters go the right way, nor told us of their stay, and so
al lost (it is like.) Al I hear they can say is that I dated one of them from
Carisbrook-Castle a Den of Cruelty, which they pretend a high capital Crime, so
afraid are they, the least truth of their tyranny should come to light. But the
Lord our God heard us graciously, and gave us some hope of their recovery,
insomuch as my Wife began to grow a little cheerful, lively, and in hope to
out-grow her frights and fits, but ah! behold their barbarous wickedness! O
thou God of Righteousness! O how envious are they at thy goodness! for this
time they take! BULL and a company of them being feasting, ranting, gaming,
making merry, and bowling in a green they have for that purpose, and from this
sport he orders his cruelty; commands a violent party of soldiers (without so
much bowels as a Man, or mercy as some beasts have, not once regarding my Wives
long weakness, or the Maids lameness,) to set upon us a fresh, and so tear away
this bed also that my Wife now lay upon from under us; but it pleased God to
give a foresight of it by several signs I had of a new trouble coming upon us;
BULL with the soldiers being so exceeding crank, merry, laughing, and like
them in Amos 5. at ease, and trusting in the mountain of Samaria, putting far
away the evil day, that stretch th^mselves upon their Couches, eat the Lambs of
the flock, chant, and drink Wine in bowls, but they are not GRIEVED for the
AFFLICTIONS of Joseph! nay they are so far from a sense of Joseph's sorrows in
the midst of their mirth and jollity, hat indeed as v: 3. They cause the SEAT
OF VIOLENCE to come near! even then! when they are at this voluptuousness;
whereat (besides seeing them cast their eye so at my Dung-hole lodge) I did
resolve they had a new design, so communicated my thoughts to my Wife, wishing
her to be of good cheer, and so going into my co-Exiles chamber (which is the
help we have for air) we lockd up our own chamber door, and a while after came
in these soldiers like greedy Leopards! for the bed we lay on; and perceiving
our door lockd (according to Orders) with hatchet, swords, etc. broke open the
door, lock and all; notwithstanding I pleaded with them my Wives weak
condition, how they had already almost killed her, and for my own part I should
be content to lie in straw if they would allow it; but my Wife being so weak
and ill, had need to have a bed, and this was hard usage, and unchristian;
besides, before they got me in to the Castle, both Bull and they promised I
should have two beds, (and so after I was in) and it was allowed at first; and
I was taken from a prison where I had al these, under pretense of better
accommodation; and would they not allow us now one bed to lie on? we did desire
but one bed, and if nothing else would move them, my Wives present illness and
sickness should importune a litt^e a little compassion of them if they were
men! but they would not hear! in they went! tore all the things off the bed, and
carried away to the very bolster, and pillow, (where they now lie in the
aforesaid Lieutenants chamber.) And I was answered that in no prisons were
Fellons or Murderers allowed a bed to lie on, (ranking us with them!) yea they
had taken away the very sheets! My poor Wife was this while ready to faint,
very il, and falling into her fits again (through frights) which for present
were prevented by means; my fellow prisoner (also) using a I endeavors to
comfort her; but afterward she fell il again as she used to be before, this
last cruelty renewing her sickness, so as al her flesh would fall a trembling,
her whole body be as in an agony, but especially her head, which does swel, and
the humors settle in her face, etc. so that for want of the means here, and
because they seem resolved to give no rest (as we think) until they have
murdered her, or been her death; she must (now) be forced to leave me in their
clutches, and if the Lord make her able to get to London for the preservation
of her life! which the Lord in mercy grant me! Amen!

But I shall abruptly break off here! by reason my poor weak Wife is now leaving
me and creeping out of this (Castle-Goal) yet Rehoboth where is room for me,
and my soul is left at a fresh spring! O blessed be my God! but I must confess
it is grievous to the flesh; to be left in the hands of such as have threatened
and seem to thirst for my blood as greedily as the Dog for the sheeps! but
(yet) by Gods grace they shall leap above ground for it! and not get it by
gaping, that I think: Psalm: 37.32, 33, 34. The wicked WATCHES the Righteeous,
and seeks to slay him, But the Lord will not leave him in his hand; WAITON THE
LORD, and keep his WAY, and he shall exalt thee to inherit the Land! this is a
sure Word, and in season here! where I hope to wait, and wait in hope that will
never make me ashamed! notwithstanding the violence done to my flesh, the
afflictions of my body and relations, and the danger of death in this
Dungeon-like-hole, which I hope in Christ; we dare (sometimes) look ful-face
upon and meet! though many times I must needs say with Bishop Ridley Martyr, I
think I could creep into a mouse-hole, and that is when (through these late
out-ragious exercises) I have fits of sudden fear, and am so subject to
frightings! But O pray! pray! pray for us incessantly with Faith! Al ye that
shall hear these tidings, that he may (always) stand by us who stood by Paul
against the beasts of Ephesus, and before Nero! not knowing which way our most
dear Deliverer will come! whether by life or death to free us from fierce and
unreasonable creatures, though for my own part I rather expect the latter in
this place (ere long!) desiring to be found faithful unto Death in this most
glorious Cause of Christ Jesus my Lord! King! and Master! nor do I think (if I
dye) that you will hear the perioding passages of their Tyranny, or this Tragedy
upon my body! or that I shall write more to get it out (my papers lying hid
underground! where I fear they will rot!) but the Lord will raise up the truth
from the dead, I do know assuredly!

By these things you may learn thus much more, 1 That the persecution is at
principles of truth (let them say what they will) for they sal upon us for
Christ the Words and Spirits, and Saints sake, we see; nor can they so much as
pretend a danger to their Castle, (as they had formerly done) by a few feeble
Women to stand in the Highway, (and not so much as in the outworks of the
Castle;) but mere malice to the word of truth. 2. That they would not end with
out persons or lives if they had them, but what they do unto us, they would
fain be doing to all the Saints, and Churches who wait or call for the Kingdom
of Christ; (and so they have said that they could have our Arms up to the
elboes in their bloud^) as appears by their fowl falling upon the Messengers of
the Churches with blows without any occasion glving them, but standing still and
hearing me, so that (therein) they also fell upon them that sent them, so also
upon their dragging the poor (lame) MAID about the yard. 3. That this hindering
the Word (with sword-violence) is a high robbery to poor Souls, (in a
scripture-sence) yea and to God; whom they openly scoff and mock at to hear him
named, Mal: 3.8. Joh. 10.8. and God will deal with them accordingly; yea were
Dr. Tailor now alive, and going to be burnt for this cause, he would burst out
with his words (in Fox: vol: p: 179.) against these Brtites. and much more in
these days of Apostasy; ah horsen Thieves! whoresen Thieves! rob God of his
honor! rob God of his honor! for as Mat: 23.13. Woe to them! for they neither
go in themselves, nor suffer them that are entering: but blessed be the Lord for
that promise in Isai. 18.7. The PRESENT shall be brought to the Lord, of a
people scattered and PEELED, with ch: 42.22. This is the people robbed and
spoiled, they are all of them suared in holes, and hid in prison-houses. 4.
This swordsilencing of the Ministers of Christ is a far more cruel and cutting
way of silencing then the Bishops High-Commission-Courts, or the Star Chamber!
Amos 5.13. Theresore is it, the prudent shall keep silence in that time, for it
is an evil time, not that the Lord approves the practice, but reproves their
prudence. 5. The Sword-preaching (or such preaching as the Sword only allows)
is the worlds, the Devils, and Antichrists 1 John: 4.5. and such a way of
converting as the Turks use, and the Saracens, and so the Spaniards have it in
the Indies under pain of confiscation of Lands, liberties, life. etc. to
acknowledge God and the Spanish King, of whom the Indians had never heard; So is
the Sword-preaching in these days, in this Isle (as Bull confessed) to keep
them in subjection (that is in slavery) to his Lord Protector whom they never
saw; but to preach up the Lord Protector of Heaven and Earth; or the Lord Jesus
Christ our King) this is crushed by the Sword for sedition and dangerous
Doctrine; so that ELIAH is persecuted, Micaiah mured up in close prison, and
kept with bread and water of affliction, whiles all the States Priests (or Kings
Clergy) who say Go up, and prosper! yea 400 false Prophets feed every day at
Jezabels Table; but yet we are upon Charmel-Mount, and our enemies shall know
that we are not here a fishing for Gudgeons. Much more I have to say of their
tyranny, and cruelty (and in many things I have been sparing) but time will
declare all! I trust.

Now to offer my thoughts a little further, from what I foresee, and may
easily gather, I dare affirm, 1 That either extraordinary sufferings, or
extraordinary actings, (in either of which (for the word of God, and testimony
of Jesus, Rev: 12.11.) we must carry our lives in our hands to offer up) are at
the door in England; but the last I rather look for; when as Anselm ( lib: de
simil c: 52.) says, In futuro seculo sic justus fortus erit, ut etiam si
velit, terram commovere possit; and e converso injustus imbecillis ut nec etiam
vermes amovere queat, etc. a Saint shall be able to shake the whole World at
his Will but a Tyrant, a persecutor, an enemy shall be so weak he shall not be
able to put away or ^urt a poor WORM of us; Zach: 12.7, 8. He shall save the
TENTS (in W^rs) of JVDAH; (amongst us (Japhet) Gentile Christians,) FIRST and
he that is FEEBLE amongst them shall be as David, and DAVID as the Angel of the
Lord before them; yea, as precious Mr: Burrows says (out of Luther) that the
BODIES of the Saints shall have that POWER as to t^ss the greatest MOVNTAINS of
the world like a BALL; but this I am persuaded (by Faith) they shall begin to do
shortly, when the Worm is called to thresh the Mountains, Isai: 41.15. and beat
them small as Jer: 51.20, 21, 22. Dan: 2.35. and this I confess is that I rather
look for. 2. But if it break forth and continue in worse sufferings, (by
persecution, etc.) I expect it in Julian (the Apostates) way of Policy, which
Sozomen mentions, by returning the worst of the old Clergy, and ^jected secular
P. or such like People and Spirits into place again, Vt belio intestino
expugnarent ecclesiam (notwithstanding our persecutors seem at present so
unmerciful to some of the honestest and best of them, that they would not have
them (by School or otherwise) to earn bread for their families honestly, which
is monstr^^s tyranny (even to the worst of men) and makes my heart sometimes
bleed within me!) but somewhat like to this seems their reviving of the old
Orders, degrees, popish customs, forked caps, hoods, and tippets, and such
Antichristian trash! (which so many Martyrs have witnessed against!) besides
the famous burial of the Archbishop of Ire: at O.P. charges in Eng: whiles we
may rot in his prisons. 3. If in actings amongst the Saints; (as I am most
inclind to think) then look for such a Spirit (in proportion) to be doing with,
as the Saints had (in primitive times) to be suffering with the most exquisite
torments men could be put to; Like the Woman of Valeneience, who said she would
rather burn her body then burn her bible, and so was burnt; or rather that
Woman which the Martyr Guy de Brez: mentions in a Letter to his Mother; I
remmeber (says he) I have read how the poor Christians (in primitive times)
were assembled together (a great number) to hear the Word and a great
COMMANDER was sent by the Emperor to put them al to the the sword, which a
christian Woman hearing, hasted with all the speed she could to be at this
meeting, carrying her little one in her arms; as she drew night to the troop of
Horsemen, she rushed in to get through, the Gov: seeing her make such have,
called to her, and examined her whither she posted so fast? she gave him this
short answer, I am going (faith she) to the assembly of the Christians; what to
do (says he?) have thou not heard that I am commanded to put them al to death?
Yes! yes! (says she) I know it well, and therefore make I have that I may not
COME TOO LATE, least I be not worthy to loose my life with them, but what will thou do with the little child (says he?) I will carry it with me (says she)
that it may also have the crown of Martyrdom! At which the Tyrants heart was so
vvounded, that he retired back to the Emperor and told him as the Lieutenant
told Julian that the christians did but deride their tormenters, and laugh at
their tortures, which were more terrible to the Spectators and Executioners
then to the christians that were to tur'd! I could tell you (in primitive times)
of whole Flocks that would run in voluntarily to be tormented, when they heard
christians were to suffer; now I say I do expect as high, forward, and
excellent a spirit to come down for action, that vvil make nothing but sport
(for Christ's sake) to run in among multitudes of enemies in the name of the
Lord, and (though men account them mad, desperate, or such as throw away their
lives) they will on, upon swords and Pikes, and play as prettily, merrily, and
cheerfully with cannon-bullets as at stool-ball; and if the Roman or Trojan, or
Persian spirit was so invincible and resolute in the day of it, do we think the
5th: Kingdom spirit shall not be so much rather? and what a shameful thing is it
as Jerome says, Vt non prestet fides, quod praestitit infidelitas? that Faith
in Christ should not make us as courageous for him as ever Infidels or carnal
men were or are for their masters.

4. For that Resolution goes before action, I find in my prospective that the
Lord had ripened his Saints at a high rate already; especially such hidden ones
of his as hang most in the SLIN of Generation-light! me thinks they begin to be
shod with Gospel-preparations, Ephesians: 6. and hoofes of brass to beat a pieces
many people, Micha: 4.13. (but to them by and by;) who are at present in the
inner court, the Tabernacle of the Testimony! Rev: 15.5. and about the Throne
with the four and twenty, and standing on the crystal seat: Rev: 4.4.10. and
5.8. these LEVITES (of the order of 24) in 1 Chronicles: 24 and 25 and 26 and 27 who
are to execute the Judgment thoroughly (upon all that have run a Whoring from the
Lord!) Exodus: 32.27, 28, 29. with the sword! in the mean time, O Lord, look down
upon thy prisoners! and behold how greedy these BEASTS are! as Mica: 3.2.3. To
pluck off their skin! and flesh from off their BONES! yea to eat the flesh of
thy people, to break their BONES, and chop them in pieces as for the pot, and
as flesh within their CAULDRON yet, v: 4. They will cry unto the Lord!

Now for a conclusion; Let my most dear and homoured brethren in bonds (and out
also) be of good cheer! full of Faith and expectation, unmovable in the Lord,
knowing their labor, their love, and their bonds be accepted, 1 Cor: 15.48.
yea! your infirmities (my Friends) are over-looked! Jer: 50.20. in the covenant
of Grace, Heb. 8.12. and your cause (of Christ) assisted and labored after by
the whole Creation! Therefore as LUTHER said upon Henr: 8 's bitter Letters
against him, Agant quicquid possunt Henirici, Episcopi, atque adeo Turca, and
ipse Satan nos filii sumus Regni, etc. Pish! Let all the Harries, Bishops,
Turks! and Devils do their worst as long as Christ is ours; and so we are the
children of the Kingdom! we care not! we spare not! we fear not! though they
kill us! spit upon us! beat, bruise, imprison or crucify us to death for our
Christ; for that al shall be well with us, yea better then well! when we be the
Stones of his CROWN lifted up Zach: 8.16. Therefore O you the Lords Prisoners!
and royal Persecuted ones in Pathmos-Isle-Exiles! and in Palmon-prisons! (my
most d^ar and honored Brethren indeed! and now more then ever!) M: G:
Harrison, and Mr: Courtney, M: Carew, Col: Rich, M: G: Overton, C: Day, B:
Feak, etc. and all the rest whom I salute in the Lords name! and look toward!
from this top of Amana! (for it is a Nurse as the word signifies in the Truth!)
this top of Shenir, (where is the prosperous teacher as the word signifies) and
this Hill of Hermon, Cant: 4.8. (full of Dews dedicated to God! yea from these
Lions Dens, and mountains of the Leopards, where I am now cast for a prey by
men to be devoured in Carisbrook-Castle, (a close prison, and kennel of nuclean
creatures!) from hence I say do I cry aloud! and call upon you,) who have
accounted the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures and
pleasures of the present court!) having no other way to speak unto you but
this, I am BIDDEN of the Lord to mind you al (with my own Soul) of the
daybreak! we have so long waited and prayed for! that DAY BREAK of the Vision,
which we may easily discern through little streams, the morning is breathing
but of such a day as will be neither dark nor clear! yea the years of Wonders
are entering upon us, and as I take it, it is now the EVE-YEAR of terrible Times
and things of the strange MOUNT PERAZIM-dspensations! Isai: 28.21. which I have
( I hope) evidently demonstrated and proved (even in the eyes of the
adversaries) by scripture arguments both in my Prison-born Treatise ready,
which are both of a MALE-SPIRIT! were there any MIDWIFE so hardly to do their
Office without fearing Pharaohs cruel comm^nd of killing them, (who is
contented to let the female, carnal, and low spirited things to pass the Press
every day;) surely the Lord would deal well with such Midwives but instead of
such we find them Murderers! Traitors and very Monsters to the choicest Truths
of the Day, insomuch as I may say they have ^ript up the WOMEN WITH CHILD of
GILEAD, (or of the Witnesses and choicest Saints, Cant: 4.1.) that they might
enlarge their own BORDERS, Amos 1.13. but the BLOOD and judgment be upon them!
that have stifled and destroyed the Male-truths and discoveries which we have
been so big (or with child) with, in the Holy Ghost, neither suffering us one
way nor other to be delivered of them, neither by printing, preaching, nor
otherwise publishing! O! O! worse then pagan, popish! or Prelactical tyranny
over us! over our very souls and consciences! much more then over our bodies!
and estates! but for all this, that men may know we have the blessing! the Lord
has given us the blessing of the Womb and full breasts, whiles our enemies
have the miscarrying Womb and dry breasts, Hos: 9.14. whose fruit is stil-born,
and so shall every one of them be like the untimely, birth of a Woman that sees
not the SUN, Psalm: 58.8, 9. when the Whirlwind comes and now my brethren, in
bonds and banishment (where you be in the world as men (almost) forgotten by
some; and as dead men out of mind, Psalm. 31.12.) how rest you in your
Arimathean Sepulchers? are you not sweetly embalmed in your sufferings? and do
not the affectionate Mary's find you out with their spices? or is it a
Resurrection-time with you first? before they can do that? will the Whales-belly
vomit you out and up again amongst your brethren at liberty? after you have
layen like dead Carcasses your part of the three days? for surely the Lord will
revive his Work in the midst of the years, and in the midst of the years make
it known says the Song of Seginoth, Hab: 3.2. Hos: 6.^, 2. And in wrath
remember mercy! what say you? O you honorable ones of the Earth? (that is to
come) to al these things? do you not lie easy and sweet in your prisons and
Exiles? are not your beds blessed and green, for your beloved, and you to lie
down in together! O that I were with you, O that I could visit you! that I
could hear what you would tell me! how cheer you? how live you? how feed you?
how lodge you? what find you? what feel you? what see you? what satisfies you?
and what enjoy you of the DAYSPRING from on high at hand? Ah my dearest
hearts! do you not startle sometimes to feel the babe spring up in the Womb? is
he not quick? how say you? does not the comforter abide with you in your bonds,
and dip your feet in oil for you? O how often does the Angel of the Covenant
visit you? and come leaping over the Castles and Walls unto you? and does not
the most high Jehovah Shammah stand by you (as he ever he did by his poor
Worms! his prisoners of Faith and hope of old) saying be of good cheer,
Harrison! Rich! Carew, Courtney, Overton, etc: and to turn you unto your strong
hold! for even to DAY do Ideclare that I will render double unto thee, when I
have bent JVDAH for me, filled the bow with Ephraim, and raised up thy Sons O
Greece! and made thee as the SWORD of a mighty man! I am with you! I have oyled
your bonds, and made them easy and sweet unto you; yea I have muzled of this
misshapen Court-Monster, this ugly creature! this bastard of Ashdod! this seed
of the Dragon! begotten in darkness brought forth in weakness! and nourished
with unreasonabless! growing up in wickedness! to continue with shortness, and
to be confounded with the fierceness of the wrath of GOD, which is at hand,
Rev: 14.10, 20. Wherefore up! up O concaptives! and Co-Exiles! if ever now with
courage Sirs! be ready and look about you, for I tell you truly after our 42
monthed voyage we may see the Land! which so many precious preceding Saints the
Martyrs our predecessors have so longed to see! Let us sing and shout for joy
(Laeto clamore canentes, and caventes) for that our suils are filled, our
tackling is good! our motion is swift! our compass is true, and we are near the
Haven! come then, tack about Sirs! and to our business, to our Work with might
and main, make have, keep ground, prepare the Gable and cast out Anchor, yea
awake, awake al you that be aboard! for the time is come to visit the Coasts,
and set ashore! yea my beloved, the sun of persecution grows (now) low, and will
set soon! O therefore let us stand to it like Heart of Oak without warping in
the least! O consider a little is it comely for us to hang down our heads, and
so near the Haven! or to droop at the end of the 42 months? what now? now? to
yield or parley about it, being this Fort of truth (our strong hold) has held
out so long and valiantly too against the beast and his image by all the Saints
and Martyrs! and for so many hundred years, yea and all the Saints that have
left us their skuls, blood, ashes, and bones behind them for our encouragement!
yea the whole creation, yea God, Christ, Angels, and men do expect our
coustancy and faithfulness to the end! and shall we now faint? or fear the
enemy, seeing we are so well accomodated with all necessaries? yea much beyond
our blessed predecessors for outward things? and upon so poor a slight seige
too of the enemy as this is? who is almost worsted without hand; and now too
that such a great relief is raising for us by the spirit of life? (the 5th
Kingdom Spirit?) which we wait for every day, such as has not been heard of
for above this thousand years, and shall not we stand to it? shall not we hold it
out, and dye like Christ's men? or shall we admit of any composition?
capitulation? or terms with them? or be routed in the rear (in this the
rear-testimony of Jesus) for want of Faith and courage to carry it up! O no,
no! God forbid! but let us rally by Faith! and by the grace of God keep our
ground like men, and make have with the main body (as they begun blessedly, in
that wing of Honorable WALES,) to move for the relief of the engaged Forlorn!
for the Lords sake make have, and march up, yea sally out most fiercely (O ye
men of courage) upon this Apostate and prefidious enemy, with such an
undaunted, invincible, and impregnable resolution as may make them know they
are not ORDINARY PRISONERS whom they would bury alive in these iron graves for
the most blessed cause that ever was on foot in earth, or that ever was betraye
by men, come, come Sirs! prepare your companies for King Jesus, his Mount Zion
Musterday is at hand, his Magazine and Artillery, yea his most excellent
mortar-peices and batteries be ready, we wait only for the Wora from on high to
falon, and faith and Prayer to do the Execution according to Rev: 18.6. (reward
her as she has rewarded you) and then by the grace of God the proudest of them
al shall know we are engaged on life and death, to sink or swin, stand or fall
with the Lord Jesus our Captain General upon his red Horse against the beasts
Government, so as neither to give nor take Quarter but according to his Orders;
Therefore take the alarm my brethren, be up and ready, for we are not our own
but Christ's, nor are we redeemed to men, but to God! therefore (like Champions
refreshed with Wine) let the shout of a King be heard amongst us! are we not
yet awakened and warmed? is it not high time for the two VVitnesses to be
uniting, stirring, and rising? yea standing upon their feet! and I hope we (you
of the majestracy, and we of the Ministry) are of the same spirit with them,
and are blown by one and the same breath, though as pipes we may have different
sounds. Besides, let us consider how eagerly Shearjashub or the little Remnant
is making ready for your rise, yea Maher-shalal-hashbaz is ready to pitch his
great Tent, and to blow his great Trump, yea the man among Myrtle trees, Zach:
1.8. on his red Horse is already mounted (if I mistake not) and ready to march
with his sword to execute and fire to plead with all Nations, for his bow he
used upon his VVhitehorse, Rev: 6.2. hitherto, but the next is his sword on his
red Horse, and the slain of the Lord and shall be many, Isai: 66.16. yea and
after the Harvest (wherein I hope to be a reaper, (a cutter down, or a gatherer
in,) the blood of the Vintage will be up unto the horses bridles, Rev: 14.20.
viz: those Horses that are to carry the 4th Chariot from between the two
Mountains of brass, wherein the Lord Jesus fits to give Laws unto the whole
earth, Zach: 6.1, 7, 8. and this I can easily fore see, for I have almost
obvious, undeniable, prospective of it from this cliff of the rock, where my
present lot lies. But ah Lord (may I say) what means this? that men be so
hush and still then at this, day, yea goodmen so asleep, so secure, Zach: 1.11.
Behold all the earth sits still and is at rest! why it is, that they may be
surprised as in the days of Noah and LOT? and with the coming as a Thief in
the night; therefore O my Brethren, Let us enter the Ark, for no safety will be
found but in the work! believe it, listen! for the noise of his chariot wheels,
(with the spirit of the living creatures) is (in some measure) come upon us!
look about and believe, with boldness and with gladness! yea up and make ready!
to run to run with these horsemen who are at hand! prepare, prepare! put on the
whole armor of God to stand, outsland, and withstand in this evil day, Ephesians. 6.
Awake, awake, yea rouse up (O Saints) with most royal resolutions! and shake
your selves from your prison-dust! O Captive-Daughter of Sion! for it is high
time, yea the set time is now to start up like Lions (too stout for sufferings
as before!) putting off your Sackcloth, or captivity garments, and putting on
your beautiful Zion Robes to follow the Lamb with, Isai: 52.1, 2. and when you
put on these Robes you must put off al those Relations (though ever so dear)
that may make you stagger yea even stamp upon them; as Jerome said, If my
Father were weeping on his knees before me, and my Mother hanging on my neck
behind me, and all my brethren, SISTERS, and Kindred round about me, I Would run
over them all, and in this case we are bid even to hate them! Luke 14.26. if we
follow Christ; Wherefore O my most honorable brethren, Concaptives, and
Coexiles! yea most noble fellow-commoners at the Kings charges! let us up
together (all at once, and fall in all at once, Numb: 13 30.) with one mind, and
as one man, Zeph: 3.9. Appoint the day! appropriate the duty, and to it, yea do
it with such a shout too, ( Jer: 50.14. Amos 2.2.) as may make the ears of the
enemies to ring, yea begin the Earthquake, Rev: 11.13. and rend up by the very
roots the foundations of these persecuting Nimrods, with their prisons, Acts
16.26. So as one stone be not left for a corner of them; yea til there be such
a trembling, shaking, and consternation, yea a (...) translation, overturning
and total amotion of them, that the Beasts Government may never have a being
more in England neither in Civils, Ecclesiastics, nor Militaries: For
Jehovah-Sabboth will confound them, and break them to pieces before us; yea this
house of Saul (rejected) must fall flat before the house of David (the little
stripling!) And all this Apostative interest of Councils, Courts, Triers,
Clergy, Academies, and Armies whom the Lord is departed from; or rather who
have no foundation at all in the Covenant of Grace, or Kingdom which the God of
Heaven has set up over all Nations, must worse then tumble; but our cause
cannot miscarry (my Friends,) it cannot fail us, (who are Heirs of the Promise)
because every jota of it (as we contend for it) is founded in the New and
everlasting Covenant! blessed be the Lord, the Holy one of Israel who has
already given us so many gracious and specifying prison prognostics of the
great day of Jezreel at hand.

1. In that We (and the CAUSE we are in) are found and founded in Covenant of
Grace, whereby the Father stands engaged to his Son, and (by his Son) to us in
an inseparable union and tie, Isai; 53.11. Jer. 33.25, 26. Acts 2.30. Gal:
3.16. So that as Rom: 4.16. It is of Faith that it might be by GRACE, to the
end the PROMISE might be sure to ALL THE SEED, 2 Samuel: 23.5. and our infirmities
(though many) cannot hinder the most excellent glory and Resurrection of this
most blessed Cause of Christ against Antichrist; of the Lamb against the Beast
in England, Psalm: 89.33, 34: Ezekiel: 16.60. nor deprive us of our weight in that
glory which is a coming, by how much the Lord of this cause is the Lord of that
covenant which is established upon so clear, sweet, and sure New Testament
promises, Heb: 86, 12. Isai: 43.25. yea Jer: 50.20. says the Lord, In those
days their iniquity shall be sought for but not found, for I will pardon whom I
RESERVE; the little REMNANT that overcome with the blood of the Lamb, and the
word of the Testimony, Rev: 12.11. O my brethren, do not our heart even burn
with us, by a New Covenant communion with the Lord in this Cause? having the
pardon of sins? the seal of his Love? the assurance of his favor? and
boldness in his sight through the blood of Grace? yea can we not run into the
inner Court with the blood and the Fat of Lords Offerings? and have as free
and frequent an access into the Holy of holies (where our High Priest is) as
we vvil? what should hinder us? or who should let us? and do not the Lords
fats overflow with new Wine and Oil unto our souls, O my most precious Friends
shall we, or can we ever forget our prisons, and Exiles? so exceedingly lined?
warmed? refreshed? renewed? and followed with such full, plentiful, and
ravishing mercies? and let men say what they vvil, it is marvelous sweet to our
souls (and our Consciences do witness it daily) that our sufferings are
New Testament sufferings; our vvitnessings New Testament testimonies, our
comforts and hopes pure New Testament hopes and consolations, so are our
privileges, principles, and Spirits (as odious as our enemies make them by
their false reports) New Testament spirits and principles, (O that they were
tried yet more and more) yea and our actings thereupon are New Testament
actings, upon and in the Covenant of grace which the blood of Christ ha^h
sealed, yea the Decree of God, which (to put an end of all strife, Heb: 6.16,
17, 18. God himself has SWORN to, that WE (poor prisoners of hope might have
a strong consolation who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the HOPE set
before us, and herein lies the whole controversy between us and our
persecutors; blessed be our most Heavenly Father for these prison companions
and comforts of Christ, for these fresh springs which cannot fail us, nor can
we fall the subjects of Gods wrath, let them prison! hang! or head us! banish
or burn us! for the Covenant stands sure, and is well ordered in all things.

2. The EARNEST PRESENCE of Immanuel or GOD WITH Us in our Prisons and Exiles
is a most excellent PREFACE to the matter in hand; yea a sure token for good
unto us, and a certain testimony of the Cause of Christ with us which we suffer
so sweetly and satisfactorily in and for (in the race of those righteous ones
in all Ages that have freely parted with all to follow Christ, for although a
many profess him, talk of him, and pretend to do it very highly, yet they turn
it off to the affections, (not actions) as if it were only to fix the heart
upon him, and not upon the world or sublunary things, and those have thereby
condemned themselves as unworthy of him; nor indeed are they the true Disciples
of Jesus Christ, (but only at larges as the young man who had great
possessions, Mat: 19.22.) and so the Martyrs and primitive Saints (as I could
prove) have all along lookd upon them at a distance, (as we shall see in the
day of Christ;) but now, I say, we see the breadth of the Land of Immanuel much
more then formerly in these prison prospects, and do men or Devils their
vvorst, we may expect a most eminent reviving of the spirit of life upon us,
yea on our heads in an Oecomenical dispensation, as is rested on Christ! 1 Pet:
4.14. the blessing shall be upon the head of Joseph, (whom no man remembers in
the prison) Deuteronomy: 33.16. yea and Joseph shall have the first lot among David's
singers, 1 Chronicles: 25.9. or Christ's Worthies that have victory over the Beast,
Rev: 15.2. who have your chambers in the inner Court, and a clear prospect,
Ezekiel: 40.44. and sing the song of Moses and the Lamb, Rev: 14.2. JOSEPH being
one of the free Woman that stands upon the Mount of blessing, and not on the
Mount of Cursing, Peut: 27.12 Besides as MANOAHS WIFE said, if he would have
killed us he would not have received our Offerings, nor would he have showed us
all these things that are to come at this time, Judge: 13.23. and in the prison
too (and in a strange Land) had we been such evil doers as our enemies (for
their own sakes) would make men believe us to be. But O my happy Brethren in
Christ! does not our God give us most remarkable, full, and frequent visits?
yea reveal his mind unto us? and foreshew us things to come! and accept of us
in his dearest Son? what mean we then to fear what flesh can do unto us?
Psalm: 27.1, 2. Psalm. 1^8. Verily, verily, I say it and see it, (and by the
authority which the Lord has given me I speak it) that not ONE (no not one
soul) in prison upon this pure and single account for the King of Saints but
shall say it (and if they persevere yet, much much more enjoy it) that they have
had such a presence of the Lord with them as is not usual, no! not to Saints!
but I leave the further evidence of this (tasted) truth to TIME to declare at
our next Hallelujatick triumph (altogether) over the beast and his Image! for
our God is gone up with a SHOVT! and we shall sing praises together, sing
praises to the Lord! sing praises, sing praises to our King, Psalm: 47.5, 6.

3. For that our close (yea closest) Prisons are made our free, (yea the
freest) Schools that ever our Father has put us unto to learn the Book of the
Lamb in! where our lessons are most profitable and seasonable, though hard and
difficult to flesh and blood: for as one says Qui tribulantur, sacras literas
melius intelligunt; Alii eas legant, sicut carmen Ovidii, etc. The Saints in
prison have the mind of the Scriptures most; others read them as they read
Ovid. O here! here are the seven eyes of the Stone which lay before Jehoshua,
and Zerubbabel! yea the seven spirits of the seven seals of that blessed Book,
Rev: 5. they are in some measure ministered unto us, and the truths are even
burn and glow in our hearts! so that we are made other manner of Proficients in
the present Truth and Testimony (by him that teaches to profit) then ever we
thought such poor silly worms as we are could ever have been!

4. It is no little comfort and witness with us, that our persecutors (as bad
as they are) have nothing evil to lay to our charge! neither against the Laws
of God, of Nature, of Reason, or Nation! nothing for matter of Fact, or any Act
deviating from a due Rule or End; Only in the most Eligible matters of our
Faith, and for our faithfulness to the Lamb against the Beast is it, that we
suffer so as we do, the Lord our God knows it, and let our enemies say or do
what they dare (as immodest as they are) (besides lying and slandering) and
(with our lives in our hands) we vvil stand a TRIAL with them, or any of them
before any competent Judges by what LAWS they vvil; either of God, reason, or
Nature, that the Traitors both to God and men, and the (indeed) Offenders may
be duly proved and punished, and this their own consciences will tell them! But O
what miserable fowl-play is this so harshly to imprison and banish us; and that
contrary to Law, Conscience, Reason, Religion, common honesty, or the liberties
so long contended (or rather pretended) for? and that without any charge in
their commitments of me (that ever I could see) wherein they exceed the
unrighteousness of their predecessors, both Pope and Prelates, yea without any
Accusers face to face without any Judge? without any crime or judgment, and
that for whole years too together, burying us alive? and not suffering us to
speak a word for our selves, print, or publish the truth! and all for the truth
the Lord knows (so ^ar as we understand!) and then too to insult over us, with
most impudent lies, pamphlets, reports, and Pulpits, persuading the poor
ignorant people (most irrationally and untruly) that it is no persecution upon
us, and here might come in the Plowmans complaint in Edw: the 3ds, d. Lord,
Lord, ^ow much truer doom was there in PILOT (an Heathen Justice,) then in our
Kings, etc. that woulden deemen to death, him the Priests deliveren without ten
Witnesses and Priests, etc. But before I pass over this, I am willing to revive
Mr. Tyndal (that precious Martyr in Hen: 8.) his Apostolical Doctrine on Mat:
5. for says he, RULERS must not IMPRISON or apprehend any out of malice or
hatred, or to avenge themselves, but to maintain the (true) OFFICE of
Magistracy and good Laws (which we never opposed, nor were so much as in
thought against, nay we are imprisoned for standing to them) so says he on on
Mat: 5.13. Ye are the salt of the earth, etc. The nature of SALT is to bite,
fret, and make smart; but the SICK PATIENTS of the WORLD are marvelous
impatient, so that though they can suffer gross sins to be rebuked under a
fashion, as in a parable a far off, yet to have their righteousness and
holiness disallowed and condemned for damnablec and divelish, that they may not
abide. Insomuch that thou must leave thy SALTING, or else prepare (to prison)
to suffer again, even to be called RAYLERS Seditions, a maker of Discord,
TROUBLERS OF THE COMMON PEACE, Scismatick, Heritick and to be LIED UPON, that
thou have said or done what thou never thoughtest of, and then to be called
CORAM NOBIS and there sing a new song, and forswear thy SALTING, or else to be
sent after thy fellows that are gone before thee, and in the way that thy
MASTER went. This, this good man (and Martyr) said very right for our days
also, for indeed it is our SALTING with the sincere truth that mak^s them burn,
rage, and fret so, for when the Word comes home they are cut to the heart,
Acts. 5.33. and 7.24. and cannot endure it, but do with Vae nobis make coram
nobis our portion, calling us Raylers, and disturbers of the common peace
(which indeed they break, and not we) yea lying and slandering us at such a
height as is to be wondered at, none of us escaping their uncivil court-ships,
and most nauceous mouth-fistula's, no, not that good man Mr: Tillingast whom
they called (as the enemies did Luther) a Liar, and as to my self who am (of
any indeed I think the most deserving their censures, I am) lashed aloud
Aculeis serpentum with Scorpion tongues and thongs, but I leave it and them to
the most righteous Judge, (the God of truth,) to whom I have committed my cause
(or rather his own herein) and yet for the Truths sake I have assayed hard (so
far as the truth is concerned) a most clear vindication which cannot pass the
Press, and so I do overpass and transmit it to the most High Judge of Heaven
and Earth (in Jesus Christ) for he is near that JUSTIFIES me who will contend
with me, Isai: 50.8. But this most precious Apostolic spirited Tyndal is much
enlarged upon the foresaid subject in several places, as in p: 124. where he
tells us how the preaching the Truth is so hateful to Kings and present Powers
of the World, because (says he) It is impossible we should PREACH CHRIST
except we preach against ANTICHRIST; that is THEM that with violence are
against the Truth; and as the PHYSICIAN does heal no disease, but dos first
begin at the ROOT of it, so we do preach against no mischief, but we first
begin a^ the ROOT thereon. And as he has said to the shame of our present
preachers of Christ, who can let alone Antichrist in the present G^^ We have
held it our duty to begin at the root of this grand Apostasy in England which
is at VVHITE-HAL, (or VVHITE-HEL rather) in this matter, which has occasioned
so horrible and subtle a persecution from those men of corrupt minds, who would
not endure us to touch the Root o this Epidemical, yea Apodemical Disease in
England, themselves being the BOTTOM of it.

5. Another very excellent prison-prognostick, and a very evident token unto us
for good too, is that the SPIRIT OF THE LORD upon us, is (I trust) so much past
cowardice and fear! that we can do it to the teeth of the proudest Tyrants on
earth, that we are above them and their rage! do their worst! because greater
is he that is in us then* HE that is in the world, 1 John: 4.4. and in our
prison is the (...) Power of the Witnesses a coming upon us (through the
strength of Christ) to do marvelous things; yea as Hag: 2.7, 8. According to
the WORD that I have COVENATTED with you: So my SPIRIT remains among you,
FEAR YE NOT* for thus says JEHOVAH yet a little while and I will shake, etc. I
will make the earth to tremble before you, Joel 2.10. yea this pitiful p^dlie,
filthy, mieryclay-Government that is gotten up in Great Brittany which is the
first that must be struck through by the Stone, Dan: 2. Wherefore O my Friends
we must and will rejoice yet more abundantly in this so blessed, sweet,
temporate, New Testament Zone which we are under in prisons and Exiles, for all
the fierceness of this last Beast who has made the torrid Zone of his tyranny
inhabitable and insupportable! and in truth, if I know my heart in this matter,
I would say (for one) like Jerome of Prague, when the flames were kindling
behind him, (says he) with courage to the Executioner, Come! come! Kindle me
the fire before my face! for if I had been afraid I had never come hither! nor
are we such lively members of Christ's body if we cannot (when called to it)
sweat a bloody sweat ^^fr his sake. Wherefore as the Dutch Martyr said, Christo
submittemus sexcenta si nobis essent Colla, etc. had we six hundred heads for
one, they should all off for Christ in this most blessed cause, for Quas non
oportet mortes praeeligere, etc? What Deaths had we not better choose? yea what
Hels not endure? then to decline one step so blessed, so certain, and so
glorious a Cause as this is? for which we are in bonds? Wherefore O my most
honorably beloved hearts! the spirit of life rest upon you and of the two
Witnesses to make you as stable and as able as Mount Sion! Psalm: 125.1 yea as
those Mountains of Brass from whence the Chariots of King Jesus come! they are
a coming, Zach: 6.1. so that all the Devils of Hell may not be able to remove
you then one inch of ground! but that those who have gone before us from the
days of Abel to this day, and who have led up the VAN with valor, with all
the Elect Angels (our fellow servants in this Cause!) may exceedingly rejoice
to see our Faith, and Faithfulness, vigor, constancy, and courage in carrying
up this finishing Rev: 11, 7. this Rear-testimony Mat: 24.14. Rev: 17.14.
according to the Spirit of the Fifth Kingdom against the BEAST! like the
children of the captivity now to be returned! like the children of the promise,
and of the Freewoman, Gal: 4. yea like the children of the Kingdom! Mat. 13.
that good seed that must sow the whole earth! and the children of the
Resurrection, Luke 20. which are to have their lot in the next world upon the
Earth! and to reign with Christ a thousand years! as I have proved at large (in
prison-born morning beams, Lib: 3. and 4.) For Jehovah only is the Lord Patron
of al our preferments, and whiles we are in the prison as I said we are not
fishing for Gudgeons, for We pre-possess several sweet tenures both free and
copyhold which we cannot part with (no more then Nabaoth could with his
Vineyard) though we loose our lives for it! and to conclude, I woul'd leave t^
is one word with you, that the same Lord of Hosts, and Captain of the Hoasts of
Israel that went before them in the Van, is now with us in the Rear, where the
enemy has fallen on (for that is now the Captains place) so that we may
confidently and undoubtedly expect as much of his prowess, power, wonderful
appearances, and presence with us in this Rear, as ever any of the Saints (or
Martyrs) among Jews or Christians found in the Van (or in former days) when
the enemies fell upon them; for this is clear in Isai: 52.12. For ye shall not go
out with have, nor go by flight: for JEHOVAH will go before you: yea the God of
Israel will be your RERE-WARD, Isai: 58.8. Thy righteousness shall go before
thee, the glory of the Lord shall be thy RERE: WARD, then shall thou call and
the Lord shall answer; thou shall cry, and he shall say HERE I AM: if you take
away from the midst of thee the yoke, etc.

I am prevented in my Word to the little Remnant, I mean the Lambs faithful
followers, of the Woman's seed that keep the Commandments of God, and testimony
of Jesus, (but in my Banish-born-Treatise, lib: last, I write at large to them,
and of their Work if it ever come to light! though I confess my Bucer-like hand
which writes but bad may be some let, or at least delay therein) yet at present
I am to bid them BEWARE and PREPARE; beware of running before Orders come from
Jehovah of Armies! and prepare for them when they come! yea to make all their
Arrows ready against Babylon for the time to visit her is now come! the set
time to thresh her, the Harvest is come, Jer: 50.51. Rev: 4. and to favor
Sion, Psalm: 102.15, 16. yea the set time is come, and it is easy to see the
SIGNS of Times come upon us! yea the signs complete them, this little born!
this last B: this (...) (as the learned read (...)!) this last limb of the
Beasts Government, and the man that makes up his number six thousand, six
hundred six (as we have proved in Prison Morn:) He is now come, O up! and be
ready then like Roaring Lions against the end of the time, times and divident,
with your Ahud Chereb (not Pe Chereb two mouthed swords like Christ's men of
War, Pe Chareb or sword with one mouth only as has been, but Joel 2.2.7, 9,
11. to run and climb the wall like mighty men, and JEHOVAH shall utter his voice
before you; his Dread shall be upon your enemies who have insulted over you, but
shall fall before you, Josh: 2.9. Rev: 11.11. yea they shall tremble! and fear!
and wax feeble as Women! Jer: 51.30. Nahum: 3.13, and become bread for your
swords to eat! (as in Jeremy, Acheleh Cherbechem Ne biechem) because their
defense is departed from them Numb: 14.9. nor are the most godly amongst them
that have Apostatized these times any more to be reckoned amongst the Lambs
number then Dan and Ephraim (because of their Apostasy, Judge: 17, 18.) were
reckoned among the sealed ones, of the 144000 Rev: 7* 5, 6, 7, 8. Wherefore up
O my dear ^arts! who are of that number that stand before the Throne, Rev: 7.9.
or with the Lamb in Mount Sion, Rev: 14.1, up and be ready! with your Ahod
weapon! awake? arise O English Shearjashub! for out of JUDAH (Christ with us
Gentiles (of Lea!) comes forth the CORNER, out of HIM the Nail, out of HIM the
Battle-bow, and they shall be as mighty men which tread down their enemies as
mire in the streets in the battle, and they shall fight because the Kord is with
them, Zach: 10.5.

Wherefore I be sure ye begin-your Muster (or to mount your horses Zach: 1.8.)
upon a Mount Sion ground, or in a New Covenant principle, that is purely for
(or rather with) Christ and his Kingdom; (and for no earthly Persons, things,
or Interests of Men whatsoever;) such a War was never yet in the four
Monarchie^s. And 2. Be sure that you be fully separate from the Beasts dominion
in all things, and in every ministration as well civil and Military as
Ecclesiastic, for the BLESSING shall be upon the head of him that is SEPARATED
from his brethren, Deuteronomy: 33.16, and it is an Ordinance, yea obedience to an
indispensable command, Rev: 18.4. Jer: 50.28. The voice of them that FLEE and
ESCAPE out of the Land of Babylon to DECLAE IN SYON the vengeance of the Lord
our God, the vengeance of his Temple; for such only are to come out of the
Tabernacle of the Testimony, and to pour out the Viols in pure linen, and not
(at all) in defiled Garments, Rev: 15. But furthermore 3. Be sure you loose not
the least opportunity or nick of time put into your hands to do the Work when
the END comes. And 4. Be sure you set not upon it with your own spirits, nor
pour out in it your own wrath or revenge, but Gods only, and upon such subjects
too as the Word reveals. Yea 5 Lastly, Be sure that you in your actings,
executings, and sufferings be upon no other bottom, (being) or foundation but
the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 3.11. whereon if you overcome you are sure to walk with
him in White, Rev: 3.4. Rev: 7.9 14. amongst his WORTHIES; yea and be as
pillars in the Temple! Rev: 3.12. Rulers over the Nations, Rev: 2.26, 27. and
Heirs of the New Jerusalem glory! the tree of Life! the new name! and the
Throne! Rev: 2: 7, 17 and 3.12, 21. Therefore up O ye Saints to take the
Kingdom, Dan. 7.^8* and to possess it for ever! for the GENTILES ( Christiani
qui gentiliter vivunt) have possessed the outward Court this 42 months, but We
singers have the inner Court, Ezekiel: 40.44. and it is now time to arise, yea high
time to deliver thy self O Syon Isai: 52.1, 2. and shake off thy dust! to lay
wast the land of Nimrod with the Sword, Mica: 5.6, 7. And the Remnant of Jacob
(the Worm) shall be in the midst of many people, as a DEW from the Lord, as the
showers upon the grass that TARRIETH not for MAN; yea among the GENTILES as a
Lion! who if he go through both treads down and teareth in pieces, and none
can deliver, Numb: 23.24. the Holy City is the holy Camp in the outward Court
of the Tabernacle that is to arise (with the Two VVitnesses) and root the Beast
that trod it under foot. Therefore for the Lords sake Sirs be valiant! like
David's worthies! yea King Sclomons men! Cant: 3, 7, 8. Who all hold swords
being expert in War. It is said of Sadeel that with Gener a Citizen he fought
so furiously for the (then) cause of God that he himself put a thousand
Spaniards to flight! and shall we fear? (Non de vita sed de scuto solliciti
estoti) regard not your lives for the work of Christ, when called to it! It is
said that Sceva at the siege of Dyrrachium so long alone resisted Pompeys Army
that he had two hundred twenty darts sticking in his shield, and lost one of
his eyes, and yet gave not over til Caesar came into his Rescue! is it possible
(my Brethren) that this could be for the carnal interest of a man in a fourth
Kingdom spirit? and shall not as noble a spirit, and as high a love be found in
a Fifth Kingdom man for the most excellent cause an^ King that ever was on
earth? viz: Jesus Christ and him only! Blessed Lord! when will thou raise us
up with thy spirit of life! or how long shall all lie dead? O what cowards are
we now to run into holes and corners for fear of sufferings! surely Lord Jesus
had al thy Disciples dealt thus with thee in their Generations, there would
have been but few Martyrs or followers of the Lamb! O I blush for shame when I
behold them that are gone before, with these that now follow! IGNATIUS said he
had rather be a Martyr then a Monarch, but now men had rather be Monsters then
Martirs, when the Dragon Emperors gave Orders to put al to death that would
confess themselves christians, they came in of themselves by whole flocks
confessing themselves christians, and defying the Heathens, (as in Arrius
Antoninus's days) they ran in voluntarily to dye and to be tormented, as did
Romanus Gerdius, Menas, and a many others in Dioclesians days; but ah! where
be they that run in flocks to White, Hal, now saying we are Fifth Monarchy men
or for the Kingdom of Christ, and will live and dye with our brethren together;
see 1 John 3.16. Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his
life for us, and we ought to LAY DOWN our lives sor the BRETHREN. But ah, how
iniquity abounds, and the love of many waxes cold, as Gui de Brez: Martyr in
Flanders, so Mr: Buroughs tells us of the Woman we heard of before who ran for
Martirdom with the Saints for fear she should loose it! and do we sit still for
fear of sufferings, which were such Jocularia and ludicra, as Vincentius called
them, to the Saints in primitive times! Rejoice and leap for joy, (as the word
is) to suffer for Christ, or be found doing for him when he comes. Now I
beseech the Lord awaken you, if you be of that race, and rouse you up, and set
you all awork, (as upon life and death) with all speed to overceme the beast
and his followers with as lively a spirit as high a zeal and readiness to dye
in the service of Christ, and this his most comprehensive Cause at this day, as
they were in theirs through the are greatest strife, and so to overcome with
the Word of the Testimony, and blood of the Lamb not loving your lives. Rev:
12.11. Bate me nothing of my sufferings, (says Gordius to the Tormentors) for
it is to my loss then Majora certamina, majora sequuntur praemia. Wherefore
(because I must break off with these few words to you (as to OVERCOMMERS) for
so ( I trust) you are or will be in CHRIST Jesus, and close Followers of he
Lamb) I shall leave you with that blessed man Mr: Hollands Legacy bequeathed to
his Friends at his death against Popery, Commendo vos dilectioni Dei and odio
Papatus, etc. So against this Apostate-Generation, I commend you (my Brethren)
to the dearest lovo of God, and to the deadtiest hatred of these Hipocrites and
Apostates; AMEN, for Heb: 10, 31. If any man DRAW BACK my soul shall have no
pleasure in him

I would have had a word to this Bastard of Ashdod, this illegitimate Monster
(had he ears to hear!) but his most irrational rage has hindered me, and I must
be silent with another loud cry to thee O. P. out of this DEN where thou have
cast me so inconsiderately with such cruelty, and for so long a tiwe too, of
whom I think I might have said as Tacitus of GALBA, Digniffimns imperandi nise
imperasset, How worthy had thou been of Rule, if thou had not ruled! but as
High as thou art, and as lovv as I am under thy foot, me thinks when I am
mounted and vvinged by the Holy Ghost, thou art as much under me and my Christ
whom I serve in these bonds, and in this Cause. Yea as Cirus Theodorus said to
Modestus about Basil when he was under his Tirannie, O MODESTUS, Why BASYL is
above thee, thou art but a poor PISMIRE to him, though thou roarest against him
like a LION, and be not offended at it! for I tell thee (through the cruelty) I
am set upon a Mount so high as I see thee, and all the Kings of the earth to
boot (as proud as they be) but like Hoppimit hmbs, I mean but like buggs about
a block, or Ants about a Molehill, or Worms upon a Dunghill, which I laugh at
when I see them most busy about their nests, which in one crush will be
destroyed, kickd down, and dispersed like the dust on the floor, Dan: 2.35.
Wherefore Sir! that you had but once this sight! and if I speak not to a man
most desperately resolved and hardened up to irrecoverable destruction; yea to
one worse then a stone! yea guilty of the great sin against the Holy G: let me
be heard! and O that I might be heard in thy conscienee (O thou! O thou sinful
Man*) before the decree come forth, or thy sentence be executed; for Dum
peritura pares, per male parta peris: how sore a ruin is running upon thee
though thou see it not? wherefore either deliver us quickly quit of these DENS
(admiring our hitherto preservation from on high, whose Angel has delivered us
out of the mouths of these savage beasts) and give you glory to God, as Darius
did if thou can find in thy heart so to do, for as much as innocence and
truth is found on our side! or else I say unto thee by the AUTHORITY of the
Lord committed to me, that thou shall DYE like a BEAST, yea more miserably then
in a DEN or DVNGEON! and as Romanus said to the Tirant, so I tell ^hee (and them
about thee) as I have done in my Postscript of Prison b: that I appeal from
this thy tyranny which has no pity to the Throne of Christ, and cito vis vos
omnes (as Jerome of Prague said to his persecutors, Vt respondentis coram
alties, and justissimo judice post (45) Ann^s, I summon you all that have a
hand or heart in this persecution to appear before my Christ, (his elect Angels
and Saints) the most SUPREME POWER and righteous JUDGE, after the 1335 days;
where we shall judge you that now Judge us; (though this is your hour, and the
power of darkness, Luke 22.53.) SO BE IT! as says the faithful Witness, ye
AMEN! for a little season! yea a vtry little WHILE and he that shall come, will
come and will not tarry.

Even so! Amen! Come quickly Lord Jesus!

HAec non durabunt Aetatem said Juel of the Ceremonies, and as Athanasius that
(...) (as he was called) said of Julians, so say I of this APOSTASY with great
Faith and assurance, Nubecula est Cito! transitura! wherefore cheer up! my
Brethren! and be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Amen! AMEN!
and ye shall suddenly see the Witnesses ascend up in the CLOUD. So be it!

Amos 1.11. For three Transgressions and for four I will not turn away the
punishment thereof: because he did pursue his BROTHER with the SWORD, and did
cast of all PITY, and his anger did tear PERPFTVALLY, and kept his Wrath for
ever. Finis in Imis! ultimis! and Novissimis! Amen! Hallelujah!
A POSTSCRIPT.
READER:
THou art desired to take notice that in the forced Absence of the Author in
Banishment, the Press lets many mistakes (in printing) pass uncontrolled, and
for want of due help and ability does miscarry of the Latin, Greek, and
Hebrew, which was intermingled in some eminent Passages. Now the Lord bless
thee in these evil Days, and give thee bowels to the suffering Saints and
Truth, and help thee to follow that which is good, and which make for thy peace
and comfort in the World to come! Amen!

A Necessary Word to the Ingenious READER.
My Christian Friend,
IT is about a year since I had a perfunctory glance and perusal of these
papers in this piece called an Introduction, etc. to Prison-born Morning beams,
which I found (as you see) so infinitely mangled and mishaped, that I wa^ (and
yet am) in such a dress, ashamed to own them; which Deformity (put upon them
by others) through want of skill, Care, or Love to the suffering Author, shall
be greedily multiplied by some men to abuse me with; upon whose back the
Errataes of other men (it seems) must lie, till truth and innocence may come
abroad and find justice. But blessed be Jehovah, who has given me (a poor
creature!) the portion of the Anointed ones, viz. the WAVED (or lifted up)
BREAST, and the RIGHT SHOLDER! Exodus 29.26. And it shall be thy Part! Levit.
7.31, 32. to serve Jehovah with one Shoulder! Zeph. 3 9. But yet I must beseech
thee to a little Charity and Candidness toward me, and not to impute the many
pitiful Soloecismes of Books (which usher in my name) to my pen, but their
pates and the press together entrusted. For some I hear, since my long
imprisonment have been glad of the opportunity, traducing me freely about my
Treatise of Church Discipline, but I (for ever) bless my God (though the
unreasonable Sword has given them leave to insult over me, and trample upon
me, yet) the TRUTH is above them and their Malice. She may be blamed, but never
shamed by those monstrous reports which the most make of her in her sufferings
and bond; for chagor charbecha gnal-j^rech (whereon is written King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19.16.) Gibbor! hodecha ve hadarecha; yea, tselach
rechab gnal-deber-emet ve gnanvab tsedeq! is some of my Daily Song to my King.
Nor do I greatly fear the foyling of the hottest enemies I have with the
power of his truth, meekness and Righteousness! Whether they be the ( Rozenim
of (...) razah) now LEAN ONES (as Rulers are called Psalm. 2.2.) or the
(Abbirim) fat BULLS (as Enemies are called Psalm. 22.12.) and fiercest foes that
now triumph over us, for it is their time. Nor had that frothy rabble of Aerie
stuff (gathered up together into a Cloud of Vapors) and exhaled from the
Dunghill of one CRAFTON (a Malignant Priest in London) a little before my
imprisonment, escaped the public Fire, upon its slimy Matter so as to have
burnt it up in the sight of the Sun (whose Tabernacle he fumed and fomed
against) but the long lawless Sword interposed, took away my papers, and
plundered from me (amongst them) the Reply to (what is Sober in) his
Stage-play-Treatise: Nevertheless, I do yet more abundantly bless the Lord
for his light of the seven Lamps of fire which burn before the throne, Rev.
4.5. whereby I see the better end of the staff in my hand, while the Truth is
still with Me! only I must entreat thee my Reader and Friend to wait with
patience and in hope with us, till Deliverance and Liberty to the truth be
restored; and in the interim mend with thy pen the following Errataes before
thou proceedest in this part (called the Introduction) etc.

What the other part (called Jegar-Shabadutha, or a Heart-Appeale etc.) is for
Errataes I am ignorant, nor have I yet seen sheet of it: Only I fear so hard a
travel (through so many extraordinary obstructions of the birth, and so little
help from the Neighborhood, will at the least deform it, if not indarger the
very being of it, (in my absence and exile;) which accordingly you must
consider, because the cruel Decree of Pharaoh has put the Hebrews upon
bringing forth such male-truths without the help or skill of the Egyptian
Midwives. Yea, and (which is worse) I am informed, those few seeming friends
that do assist the birth have agreed to cut off some Members (if not integrals)
of that little Treatise, to facilitate the birth! but how can it then live? or
if it do, so monstrously misshapen as they think (I hear) to make it, I shall
want will and affection to own it for mine, for I differ from their vote who
had rather have it born a Creple, then not at all.

My Dear Reader, a word more: It may be thou will wonder to see the
Introduction to a year or two's prison-travel of spirit, put in this place, and
therein here news of an ensuing Treatise or two (about the two (British)
Witnesses, and of a more obvious supputation of times, according to the
Danielian and Apocalyptick accounts, then has ever yet been extant (a matter
so important to be cleared) and of the two Beasts with all the apurtenances,
Characters, Seals, works, times and signs,, and also all the 42 m speriod upon
us, and of the slaughter of the two Witnesses in this street; for the single
time, duall time, and a devident; with the mystery of that number 666. (giving
my reasons why I differ in the root from learned Mr. Potter, canvasing,
traversing, and trajecting his Arguments with modesty and submission.) Also a
Synopsis of the Lambs Government, showing the difference between the Lambs and
Beasts G. Civil; and so between the Lambs and Beasts martial Laws in all
duties of Officers and of Soldiers (the apparent discrepancy seen at once) the
Beasts in one Collume, and the Lambs in the other, Also a very lucid discovery
of the Kingdom of Christ on Earth, and the present work of Saints in England;
the order, instruments and matter of the viols, the holy war at hand, the 1000
years, and first Resur. with the order thereof; and much other matter which you
hear of) but see nothing. Alas! alas! (as Lam. 4.3.) it is because this
((...) T^nniu) Serpent-Seamonster has sought to devour it, and the truth
betrayers and Murderers have pursued these males in the womb, that they stick
in the birth and cannot come forth, none being so hardy to help them; he that
offers it makes himself a prey. But this poor miscelany of general matter has
(with much a do) remained untaken, to declare aloud their cruelty who have
hindered and stifled the most speciail. Wherefore in pity (I pray) give quarter
to this (maimed) that has so hardly escaped the hands of the Cutthroats, and
allow it a little House-room with the other called a Heart-Appeale, etc.
because it is a kind to that, (which delineates our Winforsuffrings and the
present in this exile,) this beginning an abstract of our first trial at
Lambeth; in both which, you will have a History of above two years bonds and
banishment in several prisons, to this present abiding, me and mine; which
therefore may the more justly claim the company of each other. Much more might
be added (in this Tragedy of our hard trials to the flesh,) both as to the
present condition of my own body so much distempered in this unwholesome hole
(of this Castle) whereinto I am cast (it rising up with blisters, aching with
pains, burning with hot humors, and falling into unusual fits (full of pains
inwardly, and very often at the heart.) So also my Wife, (whose sufferings have
been so great in this Jail, that several Doctors of Physic in London have
affirmed her sickness to have risen from the rude handlings and frights, with
the unwholsomnesse of the pit we are put into together, to the evident hazard
of her life; This is known to him in power.) Yea, and the rest of my family
with me, some or other, or all being (continually) ill, and afflicted with
distempers, pains, sickness, lameness, and other sore trials of the flesh. But
I much rather affect to make my condition known to God, (who has the bowels of
a father!) then to men, (who have not the bowels of men;) whose interest is
neither to hear us nor believe us; for (...) tsammetu babbor they have cut
down into the pit, ditch, and Dungeon those sanctified ones that rejoice in thy
Highness, Isa. 13.3. whom thou, Oh Jehovah wilt raise up: Wherefore karenu
shemcha Jehovah mibbor! We have called upon thee (O God) from this Grievous Pit
of Caines-Brook-Chaines.

To Conclude, forasmuch (loving Reader) as I find no faith, no truth, or
constancy in Men, but (through the persecution of undoubted foes, and
perfidiousnesse of dawbing and doubtful friends, who promise fair, but
perform foully;) all I do for the Public is either betrayed, pilled, spoiled,
or obstructed, in my absence, and a true friend to one in prison being rara
avis in terris, I am forced now in this third year of my imprisonment and
banishment to convert my time more particularly (then I had intended) to my own
use and profit, by perfecting my search of, and studies in the holy Scriptures
(through the Hebrew, Chald. Syriack, Arabic, (and so Persian roets) which is
my present and daily Work; and I do bless my God for this great blessing upon
me, in that little progress, which (through his grace) I have made into the
Pentateuch, Psalms and Prophets; For by the Hebrew, Chald. Samaritan,
(Rabbinic.) Arabic. (Persian) Aethiopick Armenian and Topic Tongues (in all
which, except the two last, I am now perusing the Scriptures of holy
inspiration) I have received a most sweet Light taste, and singular comfort to
my own soul (such as I naver experienced before) in the Unction from the Holy
one, 1 John 2.20, 27. and have yet a lively hope that I shall one day (therein)
serve the Public again, although for days, weeks, months, and years, I
have now lain among the tile-v^^s (...) ben shepha^im, (or between them) in the
fiery furnace and burning kilne; and by the Walls, like a Dead man out of mind.
Yet the Almon-rod blossometh, and God has powered out grace, and my heart (as
Psalm. 45.1) has ((...) rachash) boiled and bubled up a tabar tob a good Word
indeed, yea my tongue is as ((...) guet made of the quil from the Eagle before
the throne, Rev. 47. and 6.7. and 5.7.) the pen of a quick Accountant ((...)
Sopher mahir) in the times and seasons and great Matters of our King.

Now, O all ye friends! Fellow-citizens of Sion, and Fellow-waiters (with us)
for the help of Israel bear us a little in your bowels, and bosom before the
Father; (Me and my dearest concaptives and co-exiles in this glorious cause of
Christ,) when you come before the King into his Presence Chamber of grace and
supplication; be sure you forget not Joseph; Ah! I beseech ye in those open,
bleeding, earning bowels, which hung upon the Cross, to mind a poor Worm, and a
prisoner of hope (and of a little faith) in this Valley of Achor and Eshool
(thorough grace) that whiles Christ is lighting, and you (without) are trimming
the Lamps in the Sanctuary, in the light and life of those seven Lamps of fire
(the seven Spirits of God) before the Throne, we (within) may also draw near
with the holy perfume (for a perpetual incence, Exodus 30.78. poured out on the
Altar of Incense by our High Priest (Jesus Christ) within the veil, till from
thence the Temple be filled with smoke, Rev: 15.8. Levit. 16.12, 31. and the
Angel of the Viol go forth.

Now I commit you all to the Inner-court, comforts, and counsels; that yo may
be measured (these disorderly times) by the Angels Cubit, the Golden Reed, (and
not by men's rotten rules) according to the which I am ( laid out, and measured
in the Lords Tabernacle of Testament; yea bound with those Golden Chains which
fastens the Shoulder-pieces to the Breast Plate, wherein is put the Vrim and
Thummim (by the finger of God) and thereby I have had an Answer of God to my
great encouragement and rejoicing; who yet remain in the faith, hope and
patience of the Kingdom.

THINE (as a Heave Offering to the Lord by the hand of Christ) in this fat
soil, wherein my foot is dipped with Oil, Jo. To.

Errata's in the Introduction, etc.
PAge 2. Line 25. Read (...) p. 4. l. 21. r. were able. p. 6. l. 36. r.
abstract Account. p. 10. l. 12. r. 4 l. 4 s. p. 12. l. 15. r. Commanded. p. 16.
l. 24 r. Lies. p. 19, l. 35. r. door with l. 30. language p. 21. l. 36. r. ne
peccem. p. 24. l. 7. r. (and yielding) from our. p. 27. l. 26. dele of. p. 30.
l. 19. r. for the Lamb. l. 30. r. (...) gnanoim. p. 41 l. 4. r. (...) p. 47. l.
4. r. (...) p. 49 l. 37. r. ex debito. p. 50. l. 26. r. responsable. p. 56: in
marg r. whereof it treats. p. 62. l. 3. r. Jehovah had. p. 64. l. 36. r.
disputes about. l. 37: r. where are their degrees. r. 70. l. 23. r. that Christ
was the Lord of the S. l. 37. r. there Righteousness. p. 71. l. 33. r. Civil
Powers. p. 79. l. 24. r. after the Mode of the World. l. 38. r. That made
Daniel. p. 80. l. 17. r. Satiari. l. 34. r. Duorum Testium. p. 81. l. 2. dele
in l. 23. r. of that party. l. 35. r. of Luther. p. 82. l. 4. r. of lip. l. 5.
r. (when he bids) l. 16. r. fee or favor of the great Turk. l. 35. r. of Lies
and l. 36. r Tyriig bilingues and r. Dorick. l. 37. r. cor auro. l. 38. r.
heart. p. 83. l. 1 r. obstreperous. l. 7. r. Parrots and Parasites (as these l.
10. r. Terrigeni. l. 29. r. leapt from them. p. 84. l. 2. r. and destroy. l. 4.
r. Preachers. l. 19. r. too low, and too little. in the marg. r. (...) l. 30.
r. too; (the Greek (...) l. 35. r. for your selves, your Children. l. 36. r.
that are: p. 85. l. 25. r. pocos y focos. l. 31. r. (say they) in marg. r.
poorest. p. 86. l. 4. r. it seems so, (in Josephus) l. 5. r. him too. l. 6. r.
to come and dwell. l. 16. t. most amarulently, and r. professors. l. 20. r. It
was not, the common. p. 87. l. 12. r. begin. l. 28. r. Seeming impossibilities.
l. 35. r. O Paul! p. 89. l. 6. r. And so it has been. p. 19. l. 7. r. ipso.
l. 16. r. So are the Priestly. in marg. r. pellit. p. 93. l. 4. r. there
Sufferings, there Acts. p. 94. l. 9. r. justils. l. 32. r. tortures jocularia
and ludibria nobis. l. 34. r. they are jucund in the midst of. p. 95. l. 11. r.
(...). l. 20. r. Heb. 10.38. p. 98. l. 23.24. r. superadded and ante
delienated. p. 99. l. 13. r. aequaliter. l. 18. r. differt. l. 30. r. in
speculativa ratione. p. 102. l. 22. r. trepidation. l. 23. r. house fell under.
l. 7. r. have bin to thy. p. 103. l. 1. r. preserve us. l. 24.25. r. Venite in
contemptum Diaboli. There be other lesser faults which thou may correct in
reading: And beyond p. 104. I have never seen; therefore know not how to
correct the other Erratas.

FINIS.

