THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD to MAN, wherein he was created; With a discovery of
the fall, by the strength and subtilty of the Serpent: And of the recovery of
Man, by the seed of the Woman, which bruises the Serpents Head.

ALSO, A Declaration against the Beast and his followers, who act by his power;
And a Warning to the people not to join with the Beast, nor to uphold the
Harlot, least you be taken with the Beast and the false Prophet, and cast into
the Lake together alive, and there be none to deliver you.

A few words to O. C. And to the Officiers and Soldiers of the Army in general.

WITH, A true Declaration how I lived before I knew the truth, and how I came
to know the truth, and overcame deceit.

Given forth for the simples sake, that they may learn Righteousness; and to
know him whom God has given to be a Covenant to the People, and a light to the
Gentiles, and his salvation to Redeem his seed from the ends of the earth, and
all that come unto God by him, shall in no wise perish, but have eternal life;
But he is a stumbling block, and a Rock of offense to the Nations; and blessed
are they who are not offended in him.

By a sufferer for the righteous seed sake, in the common Goal of Edmonds Bury
in Suffolk, who is called GEORGE ROFE.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black-spread-Eagle at the West end of
Paul's, 1656.

The Righteousness of God to Man, wherein he was Created; with a Discovery of
the Fall, by the strength and subtilty of the Serpent, and of the Recovery of
Man, by the Seed of the Woman, which bruises the Serpents Head.
IN the Beginning God Created every Creature, and saw that the work of his
hands was good; God is good, and all Creatures in Heaven and Earth, and the
Seas, and all them, and all that in them was, was made in the beginning by the
Word of God; and all proceeded from God, and was good; and God created man in
his own Image, and made him good; and of him who was good he made the Woman,
and she was one with the Man, and they were good; and God placed them in the
Garden, wherein he lived and walked; and Adam was the Son of God, and lived and
walked with God in the habitation of God, and God made him Lord over all the
works of his hands, and gave him dominion over every Creature, that they might
serve him; and in the wisdom of God, while he walked with God, he ruled over
the Creatures of God; and in the Garden, God gave him every Beast,, and Fowl,
and Fish; and out of the earth, he caused every Herb and every Tree to grow,
and there was no barrenness among them, for their Seed was in themselves; and
the Tree of Knowledge he also made which was good but not for food, and
therefore God forbad Man to eat of it; and made a Law with Man, that in the day
he eat thereof, he should die; and God gave Man of every Tree that was good for
food, to be his food, and Man had power to rule, and ruled over every Creature,
and walked with God in the place of his dwelling, where there was no iniquity
nor evil; and the Serpent was more subtle than any Beast of the field, and fell
from God, and became a liar, Gods enemy, and he knew that God had said to Man
that he should not eat of the Tree in the midst of the Garden, (the Tree of
Knowledge of good and evil) and he talked with the Woman concerning it, and
what God had said unto them of it; and she knew the Command of God that they
were not to eat of it, nor to touch it, and in the day they eat thereof, God
promised they should die; and the Serpent who was a Liar, said they should not
die, and of the fruit which was not good for food gave the Woman to eat, and
was conceaved in the Woman, and got power over the Woman, and she did eat, and
entered into him who was the power of death, and acted by his power and
deceaved the Man, so they both fell from God, first the Woman was deceaved then
the Man, and here the Serpent got power, and slew the Lamb; and the World was
set in Man's heart, and here Man lost his power and purity from being the Son of
God, and was as God, but not of God, but had entered into the knowledge and
taste of evil, and fell from God, and became a likeness as God; and here was
the founder of Images and the ground of Imaginations, and death, and hell, and
the grave had power over Man, and shame came upon Man, and their garment was
taken away, and nakedness appeared, and fear entered, and Man became fearful
to see God, but God fulfilled his promise which was righteous, and death came
upon them, and in the Curse were they driven out from God, to till the earth,
which was accursed for their transgression sake, and labor and pain were they
cursed to be in, and God cursed the Serpent above every Beast of the field, and
drove the cursed out of the Garden, and set a flaming Sword which turned every
way, to keep the way of the Tree of Life, and that the cursed should not enter
the Garden, and promised the seed of the Woman to bruise the Serpents head,
which was known in Abell, whom Cain who was brought forth in the Curse, slew,
him who was not in the Curse, but knew the seed of the Woman which God had
promised to bruise the Serpents head, and knew God and walked righteously with
God, and was accepted above Cain, who was in the Curse, unto whose Sacrifice
God had no respect, through he offered that which was good, but not in the
good, so out of the faith, so to him it was sin, and he did not well, and sin
laid at his door: and God gave another seed in Abells stead, Seth, in whom the
seed of the Woman was known, and the Serpents head bruised, and the World
destroyed, and the Lamb raised to Life, which in him and his seed took away
the sins of the World; and Enoch walked with God, and God took him, and Noah
and his Sons walked in the faith of the seed of the Woman, and they and their
Wives were saved, with the Male and with the Female of the Creatures, which
were not destroyed with the old World, who lived in the delight of beauty, and
pride, and lust, and were builded upon the Serpent, and therein all flesh was
corrupted, and they run a whoring after the thoughts of the immaginations of
their own hearts, which was evil continually, for which the wrath of God was
kindled against them, and in his fury he swept them away in the flood of his
Indignation; but God respected the seed which walked in truth, and saved them
from the destruction which he brought upon the wicked; and made a Covenant with
Noah, not to drown the earth any more, nor to cut off all flesh by the floods
of water, and set his bow in the clouds for a sign unto generations
perpetually; and Noah and his Sons was blessed and had power over all Beasts
and creeping things, and the Fishes in the Sea, and all that moved upon the
earth was given into their hands; but Ham in whom the Serpent had his seat, did
that which was evil, and upon his Son Canaan the Curse entered, and against
his offspring the Curse prevailed, and they were not accepted among the seed,
but were driven out before the seed which was blessed, Exodus 34.11. and Lot who
was of the seed was saved from being destroyed with Sodom; and his Daughters
who were in the faith of the seed, were saved from being destroyed, yet they
did evil, they consulted with the Serpent, and fed upon the Tree of Knowledge,
and brought forth a seed in the Curse which was accursed, whose offspring is
accursed unto this day, Genesis 19.34. Numb. 24 17. Exodus 34.11. And Abraham who
was the Father of the faithful, received the promises of God unto the seed, and
that in Isaac all kindreds of the earth should be blessed, and with Jacob did
God establish his Covenant, that he made with Abraham, and blessed him and gave
his Brethren to be his servants, and sustained him with all that was good in
the earth, and he was of the seed, and was Ruler over all his Brethern, (as of
Ishmael and Esau, and their offsprings) but lives and raigns with God for
ever, and to his seed is the blessing for ever: and God promised that his seed
should multiply and be a great people and reach to the ends of the earth; And
Moses was of the seed, who chose rather to suffer affliction with the People of
God, than to enjoy the pleasure of sin for a season, by whose hand God wrought
wonderfully, and delivered his seed out of the house of Bondage, and out of the
Land of Egypt, and caused the waters to stand on heaps, till the seed went
over and was preserved, and delivered out of the hands of their oppressors, and
overthrew Pharaoh and his Host in their sight; (and them who were delivered out
of Egypt, who were not faithful to the seed, God cut off in the wilderness, and
brought plagues upon them that murmured,) and thus God wrought wonderfully by
the hand of his Servant Moses, whom he spoke unto face to face, and promised
that he would raise up a Prophet of his Brethren, like unto him, and him the
People should hear; and them that will not hearken to the words of this
Prophet, which God commands to speak, God will require it at their hands; and
unto David who was of the seed, a man who walked in righteousness, according to
Gods own heart; God promised that out of his Loins, and of his seed, he would
raise up a Savior of the People, which was fulfilled in the days of Herod the
King; and in Bethalem in Judea the City of David, was the Savior born
according to the promise, and there was the seed born; Jesus a Savior of his
People from their sins: who is set for the fall and rising again of many in
Israel, and for a sign to be gainesaid; who was and is a gin and a snare, and
a stumbling block, and a rock of offense to the Nations, and blessed are them
who are not offended in him, in whom is the promise to Isaac fulfilled; and in
him is all the Nations and kindreds of the earth called and blessed; and before
him went the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the
Lord, and make his paths straight, which was prophesied of by Isaiah, and he
was the voice of the living God, sent to prepare the way of his Son, and John
witnessed that he himself was not the light, but that Christ Jesus was the true
light, which lights every man that comes into the world; and there was the
fulfilling of the promises spoken by Isaiah, 42.6, 7. and 49.6.9. And in those
days God gave his Son to be his salvation, to redeem his seed from the ends of
the earth, and this Son of God is to be heard and submitted to, and every one
that will not submit to his government, which is to eternity, shall be cut off
and perish for ever. And now all people return to the Lord God, and listen to
the light of his only Son in your consciences, which shows you sin and evil,
which God has given to redeem all that believe in it; and all that receive the
light Christ Jesus, the only begotten Son of God, they receive power to become
the sons of God. He came unto his own, and his own received him not; to them he
was a stumbling block, because they believed not in him: but all that believed
in him, or that do believe in him, to them he is the great power of God unto
salvation. The Lord God loved the world, and gave his only begotten Son a
light to open the blind eyes, to bring the prisoners out of the prisonhouse,
and is the gift of God, and leads captivity captive, that as many as believe in
him should not perish, but have eternal life; and this life is in himself, who
is the seed of God; who redeems all them that believe in the light, and walk in
the light, which is of himself into himself, out of the curse, out of the
world, out of the fall into Paradise from whence man fell; and from under his
power who is the strength of the fall, to serve him, to follow him, to walk in
his light, to receive the light of life, and makes them of the seed which has
power to come through the Cherubims and the flaming sword, into the Garden unto
the Tree of Life, and to eat of it and live for ever. But all you that live in
pride and idleness, and lust and uncleanness; the light in your consciences
shows you, that you are not of the seed, for the seed of the woman keeps the
commands of God, Rev. 12 17. and all that is not of the seed, shall not enter
into the Garden, nor cannot come near the tree of life, nor have no right to
it: so you are in the enmity of the wicked one, and shall never enter into the
inheritance of the righteous. And all you hireling teachers, you that preach
for hire, and divine for money, and live in ungodly covetousness, which is
Idolatry, and tell people that they that minister at the Altar, should live of
the Altar, and that they that preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel, the
light in your consciences also lets you see that you are not of the seed, nor
know not the seed, but are in the enmity of the wicked one against the seed,
and are not sent by Christ the seed to minister to the seed, nor do not
minister at the Altar, nor live of the Altar; but your ministry is to them who
are proud and covetous, wicked ones like your selves, who are not the Altar,
and on them you live and know not the Altar, and your preaching is not the
Gospel; if it were, then you would live of the Gspel, and not of the world: But
the ground and effect of your preaching, stands in the love of money, and to
tell that people cannot be freed from sin in this life, and so preach that
which the Apostles preached not, and sow that which is accursed, and the love
of money is the root of all evil, and you live of the world and not of the
Gospel, and you are chargeable to the world, and oppress the people who are not
of the Gospel, and are out of the life of the Ministers that the Gospel sent
forth, who freely received and freely gave: But your preaching is not free, but
for gifts and rewards, the wages of unrighteousness, as the false Prophets ever
was: and herein you are to perish, as they did, who are out of the life of the
seed, as you are who are their offspring, which is accursed for ever. And all
people that desire to know the truth of God, and that your souls should be
redeemed from under the power of the Devil, return to the light of Christ,
which shows the seed of the Serpent, and the works of the Devil, and the
wickedness that is acted by his power in you, that with the light you may be
brought to know a difference between the seed of the Serpent and the seed of
the Woman, which is promised to bruise the Serpents head; and search and
examine with the light of Christ in you, with it to see were you are, and how
fat you are redeemed out of the curse, and out of that nature wherein the evil
doer lodges, over which the curse has power; the fruits that is brought forth
by the seed of the Serpent, are cursed fruits, and proceed from a cursed
ground, and are brought forth in the curse, and the actors of them are to
perish under the curse and wrath of God; the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eye, and pride and covetousness, and swearing, and drunkenness, and all manner
of uncleanness, and sporting, and gaming, and fighting and quarrelling, and
mocking and scoffing, and scorning, and all manner of profaneness, are the
fruits of the Serpent, and are brought forth by his seed, which is in the curse
alienated from God in the kingdom of darkness, over which the seed of the
woman has power it to destroy: And this seed is known by them who are guided
by the light of truth, which leads into all truth, and to deny the Serpent who
is deceit, and the leader of the wicked in deceit; and the children of light
do by the power of Christ the light, follow the seed of the woman, and do
receive the light of life, and know the enmity put between the seed of the
serpent and the seed of the woman, and know the living God, and obey him in his
light, and by his power deny the Devil the Prince of death, and differ from
him and his fruits, and are acquainted with his wiles, and know his motions to
evil, and deny them, and know a difference with God from him who is Gods
enemy, and know the worship of God in spirit and truth, and differ from them
who pretend to worship him in their wills by traditions of men, and
imaginations from the Scriptures, and not in spirit and truth, which worship
God does not accept.

A Declaration against the Beast and his followers who are by his power, and a
warning to the people not to join with the Beast, nor to uphold the Harlot,
lest you be taken with the Beast, and the false Prophet, and cast all into the
lake together alive, and there be none to deliver you.
VVO unto them that are carried upon the Beast, and decree unrighteous Decrees,
and by his power accomplish them: such hasten down to the pit in the way of
perdition, by the strength of the Dragon, the Devil and Satan that old
Serpent, who goes about as a roaring Lion, and deceives the Nations, who by
his strength and subtilty deceives the whole earth, and all that worship him
they receive his mark in their foreheads, or in their right hands, and by his
power make war with the remnant of the seed of the woman, who cannot worship
nor bow down to the Beast nor his image, and seeks their lives to swallow them
up quick, if by their power it might be, and to the uttermost of their power
they proceed against the Lamb and his chosen, who follow him whithersoever he
goes, and by the power of the Beast, who has received his power and seat from
the Dragon; do they who worship the Beast, persecute the Saints the tribe of
the Lamb, and overcome them, and cast them into prisons and dungeons, and holes
till they die; and some they scourge, and stock, and stone, and beat, and
buffet, and spit upon, and hale out of the Synagogues to before Rulers, who
have imprisoned them till their lives have been a ransom to have set them at
liberty with the Lamb; and this Beast reigns over the whole earth, and gives
power to the inhabitants of the earth for to accomplish his will to the utmost,
that he might reign over all, and that the Lamb should not take away their
sins; but that they should take and drink of the cup of abomination and
filthiness of his fornication to the bottom. But the Lamb will arise as a
fierce Lion, and rule over the Nations with a rod of Iron, and dash all the
inhabitants of the earth to pieces who worship the Beast, and give them the cup
of the fierceness of his wrath to drink without mixture, and will reward the
Harlot double according to her abominations and fornications, wherewith she
makes all nations of the earth drunk for her pleasure, and they fared
delitiously with her; but her kingdom shall become a desolation for ever. The
Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world, he is the light of the
world, and lightneth every man that comes into the world, by which light all
nations and tongues and people may see the Beast which makes war against the
Lamb: the light of the Lamb Christ Jesus shows every one that they should not
live in wickedness, and reproves every one that do commit evil; and the Beast
lodges in man, and leads in evil, and wars in man against the light of the
Lamb, and they who join with the Beast, they join with the father of all
mischief, who leads in the way that is broad which leads to destruction,
wherein all the world walks and wonders after the Beast, and worships him, and
know not whither they go; who if they go on in wickedness, are to have their
reward with the Beast and the false Prophet, who are to be cast into the lake
alive, and there to be tormented day and night for ever and ever. And all
people as you tender the good of your souls, return to the light of Christ in
you, that by it you may learn what repentance is, and what the fear of the Lord
is, and come out of Babylon from amongst the wicked, that you may be recived of
the Lord, and join not with the Beast, nor hold not up the Harlot any longer,
lest you perish. If you join with such as call themselves Ministers, who have
learned at Cambridge or Oxford, and call them the well-heads of Divinity, you
uphold the Harlot, for in them places she has her seat, and by her power are
they Priests come forth, and are of her and taught by her, and have learned of
her, the Harlot, Mystery, Babylon, which sits upon the waters, which rides upon
the Beast, who lodges in the waters, you people are the waters, and in you the
Beast lodges, which is one with the Harlot which makes war against the light of
the Lamb in you, and with you do her Merchants trade, and to you do her
Merchants sell their ware, and of you do they take money, and therewith
maintain themselves, and wives and children in pride and idleness, and none
live higher in lust and pride, and fullness of bread than they, and hence you
may see them to be an ill example to all that follow them, and by their lies
and lightness do they make the people light and vain, and all that ever they
do or speak of the name of the Lord, it is in vain, and by it none learns
righteousness, but the image of the Beast is upheld by them, and in them has a
mouth, and speaks great swelling words of vanity, by which the people are
deceived, and none by them is turned from comitting all evil; but have been a
long time learning, and not yet come to the knowledge of the pure truth, which is
but one, wherein wayfaring men may walk and not err. And against you, O ye
priests, is the strong arm of the Almighty stretched forth, which will rout you
out root and branch, and you shall have your portion with your King the Angel
of the bottomless pit, who leads you now in your cursed practices, to preach
for gifts and rewards, for which you have sold your selves to your King, who
has long led you after the reward of unrighteousness, and for it sets you on
work to uphold his kingdom; and you by his power strive to the utmost so to
do, and go to your brethren who have received the same power, and they joined
with you, and persecute and imprison them who freely are sent of the Lord to
declare against such ungodly practices. But the Lord God is bringing forth his
Northern Army against you, who are fierce and terrible, and shall spread over
the whole earth, and their Instruments are new, and have teeth, and shall dash
down you and your King and your kingdom, and the breath of the living God
shall consume you root and branch: this Army is strengthened by the Almighty
God, and he is with them, and they fear not the Nations, for no sword can enter
them, nor no weapon formed against them can prosper, nor the mighty men cannot
hinder them; for the conquest is theirs, and all the Nations of the earth is
but as a Potters vessel before them; for their leader is just, holy and true,
and they are called and Chosen and Faithful, and are resolved to make an utter
desolation of Antichrist and his kingdom, of whom you Priests are and he you
seek to uphold and are against Christ in the ways of Cain and Balaam, and your
way is to perdition. Judas sold the Lamb of God to your Fathers, who slew him
and bought a field with the reward of iniquity; and you sell the words that
proceeded from the Lamb, and therein are swallowed up in iniquity, and have
purchased many fields with the money you have had for his words whom your
fathers slew, and your transgression is exceeding much greater than Judasses,
with the reward of whose iniquity there was one field bought, but you have
bought many fields, besides what you have spent upon your lusts in maintaining
your selves, and wives and children in pride and idleness, and fullness of
bread, the sins of Sodom, by whom the Lord of life is crucified, and the
plagues of God will be heavier upon you than upon Judas, who is gone before you
to his and your home, and God has already cursed your blessings, and your
preaching is noisome in his sight, and your singing is loathsome to be heard
which stands all in unrighteousness, for which the wrath of God for ever is
turned against you and your seed, which will be swept away with the besome of
destruction; yea already the whirlwind of the Lord is gone forth against you;
and you all from the least to the greatest cannot escape it, and the fire which
will devour you for your iniquities sake, and the blood of thousands who have
perished under your Ministry, who were ever learning of you, and knew not the
truth, is upon you, and at your hands God will require it: and all that trust
to your teaching are like to be lost for want of knowledge: and in this I am a
witness for God. And this I am ready to seal with my blood if I be called to it.

A few words to O. C. and to the Officers and Soldiers of the Army in general.
TO thee Oliver Crumwell, thus says the Lord, I had chosen thee amongst the
thousands in the Nations, to execute my wrath upon my enemies, and gave them to
thy sword with which I fought for the zeal of my own name, and gave thee the
enemies of my own seed to be a curse and a reproach for ever, and made thee an
instrument against them, and drove many of them out before thee, and thou have
taken the spoil of them, and many have I cut down by my sword in thy hand, that
my wrath might be executed against them to the utmost; and therein for a time
thou was zealous, and then I was with thee for my seeds sake: but thou art
fallen from thy first integrity, and in the spoil of my enemies art exalted,
and art set up in the glory of the world, which is not pleasant in my sight;
for therefore drove I my enemies out, and ruined them before thee, that my seed
might be set at liberty, and have its freedom in the Nations to worship me: But
now thou rewardest me not with good for the good I have done to thee; but in
thy name and by thy power do my pure seed suffer, and tyrants rule over my
people; and by thy power and in thy name do they persecute them, and imprison
them unto the death, and have spilled the blood of my innocent people to
satisfy their corrupt desires. But surely I will visit for these things, and
much do they lie upon thee; and if thou let tyrants get rule in thy name,
and by thy power, on thee and thy seed will I require the blood of the innocent
that has been shed in these late days under thy government, and will deliver
my people by my own power, and thou shall know that I have spoken to thee when
I visit for those sufferings of my people, then thou shall not be able to plead
ignorance, but shall know that thou have been warned of them, and that I gave
thee a time to repent.

ANd all you Officers of the Army from the highest to the lowest, and all
Soldiers, know, that God drove out his enemies before you; not for your sakes,
but for his own name sake, which long has been polluted by the heathen; and
them that God overthrew in his wrath, it was for his own seeds sake that they
might have their liberty, and not for your sakes who are turned against the
Lord and his seed, and are exalted in the pride of life, and in the same glory
wherein the enemies of God were who are drove out and made a curse and reproach
for ever. Remember how God wrought in the days of old for his seeds sake, and
how he delivered his people Israel out of the land of Egypt, not by the
strength of flesh and blood, but by his own power, wherewith he has overthrown
the multitudes of Horses and their Riders, and delivered his people, and them
who were delivered out of Egypt, who in the wilderness turned from the Lord, he
there cut off: and you are turned into the same Idolatry for which they were
cut off. Your hearts run a whoring after other lovers then God; you eat and
drink and rise up and play, you are exalted in pride, and glory in your own
strength, and do not give God the glory for what he has done for you, but
follow the example of the Kings of Babylon, to whom God gave power that they
should destroy his enemies. And remember what God did to Nebuchadnezzar, who
had greater power than you, for his power reached over the whole earth, and
whom he would he let live, and whom he would he slew. And after that he was
exalted, and gloried in the strength and pride of himself ( Dan. 4) and gave
not God the glory, and God drove him out from amongst men, and changed his
heart from man's, and gave to him a beasts heart, and wetted him with the dew of
heaven, and he was fed with grass till seven times passed over him, and till
he knew that the Lord god reigned. And hence you may see how God resists the
proud; and here you may see that neither the strength of flesh, of men nor
horses, can deliver the proud out of the hand of the Almighty God, who will
reign over all. And remember Belshazzar how he made a feast, and drank wine in
abundance, and how God cut him off, and gave his kingdom to Darius the Midian,
because he was weighed and found too light, Dan. 5. And here you may see your
figure, and know that you are in the same nature, and are too light. And
remember how the Kings of Assyria spoiled the Nations, and beat down their
idols: and to do this, God gave them power that they should execute his wrath
upon the heads of his enemies, though for doing it they had not a reward with
the righteous, Isai. 1.37. But the Assyrians gloried in their own strength; and
in blasphemy did Rabshakeh come up against the Lords anointed, and gloried for
the King of Assyria in the multitude of his Chariots, and they trusted in their
own strength, and in the pride of their hearts came up against the seed of the
living God; and God delivered his own seed, and sent his Angel who smot the
Assyrians, and cut off an hundred fourscore and five thousand: and thus God
delivered his people by his own power, and not by the strength of man. And thus
God slew and cut off his enemies, and avenged his quarrel against his
adversaries, whom he had made instruments in times before to cut down his
enemies, and when they were lifted up in pride, then God abased them; and when
they gloried in their own strength, then God cut them down. And all you while
you have time spend it not in vanity, and glory not in pride, nor trust in your
own strength, for if you do, surely God will abase you and cut you off, for you
are not greater than them whom God has cut off for so doing. And every one
fear the living God and dread his name, and live not in pride and vanity, and
use not violence to any man, but be content with your wages, for God will
reward you according to your works, and will surely punish you if you oppress
his people, and all that you take by fraud God will judge you for, and while
there is yet a day given you to repent in, take heed how you despise it, lest
God cut you off in your iniquities, and your perish; and know this, that God
will deliver his own seed out of the hands of tyrants, though his people for a
time do now suffer in innocence by you and your power, and the powers of the
earth; yet a time of deliverance will come, and woe to them that are their
oppressors or that join with them that do oppress them, for they shall receive
a reward according to their works, and God will deliver his people himself,
and they shall reign over all their enemies for ever and ever. And in the
assurance of this hope and confidence I rest where man cannot make me afraid.

Here follows a true Declaration how I lived before I knew the truth, how I
came to know the truth, and overcame deceit.
FOr many years together in my youth I lived after the manner of the Heathen,
in pride and vanity, and sporting and gaming, and propanesse, and much
wantonness, as the common profane ones in the world now do; whereby the
Just, the light of Christ in me, was slain, and the Covenant of God trod
under foot by the power of the Beast; which guided me in wickedness, and
oftentimes by that time I was twelve years of age, the witness of God the
light of Christ in me did arise, and judge and codemne me for my wickedness.
And oftentimes I was smot by the witness of God, so that terror came upon me,
that I have not known what to do, but have been smot by the hand of the Lord
into many fears of what should become of me hereafter, and have often wept
exceedingly in secret and in my bed, so that I have wetted much clothes with
tears. But when I was among my kindred after the flesh, or among other
heathenish company, the Beast acted so strongly, and led me so much, that I was
ashamed to tell any what I ailed; but rather submitted to the power of the
Beast, to join with the Heathen in wickedness, than to tell them that I had
been in torment for my wickedness.

And thus I went on in rebellion against the light of my conscience from time
to time, though I knew by it I did not that which was right, and was condemned
in my conscience for what I did daily contrary to the light: And one time I was
smot with terror down to the earth, so that I cried out exceedingly for a long
time together, and lay with my face toward the earth, and could not for a time
be comforted, terror was so great upon me. And yet for all this the Beast got
up in me, and strongly acted me in the like wickedness for which the judgments
of God had often been upon me, and I could not see any way how to escape the
wickedness which the Devil daily led me into, but gave my self to reading
much in the Scriptures; and yet the power of the wicked one prevailed against
me, so that I received no strength against him by the knowledge of the
Scriptures, though the Scriptures showed me in part what I should do, yet the
power against sin was not there to be found; but sin got the upper hand and
ruled over me, and therein I was led captive, and made a prey upon by the
Devil who deceived me through subtilty. And when I had read and studied what I
could in my own will for many years together, I could not find out a way to
know God, nor satisfaction to my soul; but judgment followed me, and my
thoughts accused me, and the light witnessed against me, so peace I had not
found in all that ever I did seek out, but fear pursued me, and often in the
night time, tears run from my eyes, and terror laid hold on me; so that I have
been made to pray exceedingly; but I knew not to whom, but according as I had
heard or read, but no answer I saw though I called out often; yet I knew not
that God whom I called to, nor that Christ in whose name I thought I asked; but
into a profession of God, and Christ, and godliness, I was led by the will of
the flesh, though I was a stranger to the life of God and godliness: And in
this profession not knowing the power of God, I walked near three years, and
wandered about therein to professors of the world like my self, and went to
Priests where they preached, and heard them two or three times a week commonly
and long together, and yet fear pursued me, and peace I could not find, though
I sought it with tears often, yet the way of peace I knew not, but dissension
and misery was in my paths, and the fear of God I lived out of, though then I
lived in a profession, and was covered with much subtilty, so that the world
could not see but that I lived orderly, and I was kept from many common
pollutions of the world, though the Beast acted me, and often would have led me
into greater abominations than he did, had not the witness of God often brought
judgment and terror upon me, and judged deceit before it was acted. And in
this profession of words I was at times exalted, and therein lived in pride and
vainglory, and was lifted up in that knowledge by which the witness of God was
slain, and I led in great darkness: and when I was exalted most, then greatest
darkness entered in upon me, in which profession I found no peace, neither could
I, for wickedness was lined in, and the profession was not of God (though it
was like what the Saints had professed and lived the life of) as all the worlds
profession is, who follows the Beast, who leads them in imitations of that
which the Saints and servants of God did by command from God. And when I was
about the age of twenty years old, when I was at the height of my profession,
in which my soul found no rest, it happened that according to the will of God,
there came some of his messengers (who were called Quakers) to the town where I
lived in my empty profession; ( Halsteed in Essex) wherein I was not satisfied,
but went into the Market to hear the people called Quakers speak; who spoke
there some few words which I did not then understand, though I had heard
something of them in writing, and many slanderous reports; yet I was convinced
in my conscience that they were the people of God: and the Scriptures witnessed
that the people of God should be hated and persecuted, and all manner of evil
spoken of them. So yet I was not at rest in my spirit, but desired to know the
truth and the life of it. And soon after that time the Lord sent another of his
Messengers who had a meeting in that town where I lived, and in, the forepart
of the day came to the steeple-house, where I was hearing one of the worlds
Ministers, who is called William Sparrow, who had long deceived me with good
words and fair speeches: and when he had ended his speaking, the Messenger of
God spoke, and reached the witness of God in me, so I was drawn in love toward
him, and the later part of the day went to hear him speak, and his words
reached the witness of God in me, so that I was more exceedingly drawn out in
love toward him, and heard more to my souls satisfaction that day, than ever
before: and that of God in me, which often had judged me, and brought fears
upon me, owned his words, and owned him to be of God, and the seed of God in me
was refreshed and grew, and showed me how I had spent my time, and brought all
the evil that ever I remember I acted, and laid it before me, and condemned me
for it, which condemnation I was made willing to own, and therein did wait for
the mercies of God, and the seed of God in me grew in strength, and showed me
what I should do, and what I should leave undone, and was my guide to guide me
out of the former ignorance and wickedness I had lived in, and was a Judge for
God to condemn the ground of the most secret deceit in me; and showed me the
most secret deceit of the Serpent, and gave me power to withstand all
wickedness; which before I owned the light of Christ, I had not power to
withstand, the strength of the enemy had such power over me. And after that God
had showed me the way of truth, and gave me power to withstand all evil, the
Devil was exceeding wroth against me, and wrought exceeding subtly to have
destroyed that which was begotten of God in me; but the gift of God was
plenteous, and grew, and shaked terribly the earth, and removed mountains', and
rewarded the transgressor with judgment, and cast out the Prince of this
world, and reigns for God going on conquering, and to conquer, and treads
down all Gods enemies under his feet. And this is the free mercy and love of
God that he has revealed himself to me by the light of his own Son, and has
made known his everlasting Covenant of peace to me, and has redeemed my soul
out of hell, and from under the power of the Devil into the glory of his own
Son, to praise him in the beauty of holiness in mount Sion for ever, who has
called me by his own Spirit and power, to bear witness for his own name in
righteousness, and has given me his word to declare to the inhabitants of the
earth; and his power to stop the mouths of truths gainsayers, and to confound
the false Prophets, and make the Deviners mad, and to judge all hirelings and
false teachers out from amongst the Saints.

This is the work which the Lor has done for his seeds sake which dwells in
me; which he has raised to eternal life, to live and reign with him for ever.
And it was his free love that he left a seed in me, else I had been to him as
the Cities of Sodom and as the inhabitants of Gomorrah.

The world calls me George Rofe, but my name is written in heaven, and therein
do I rejoice.
From the common Goal of Emonds Bury in Suffolk, wherein I have suffered more
than 40 weeks for the truth this last day of the 4th month, 1656.
FINIS.

