AN ANSWER UNTO Thirty Quaeries Propounded by those who by the World (as they
say) are scornfully called QUAKERS.

By THOMAS ROSEWELL, A Witness to the Truth, as it is in Jesus.

London, Printed in the Year 1656.

Courteous Reader,
I Thought good to acquaint thee, that I was earnestly desired by a loving
Friend to give an Answer to these Quaeries: Which I have done according to the
measure of the grace of Christ, and the illumination of his blessed Spirit. And
if thou have received an Unction from the Holy One, to wit, the anointing of
the Spirit, then shall thou be able to search out all things, yea the deep
things of God, 1 John 2.20.27. compared with 1 Cor. 2.10. And surely, we have
great need (in this later Age) of Gods eye salve for the anointing of our eyes;
considering, that as there is a Mystery of Godliness, which is great, 1 Timothy
2.16. so is there a Mystery of Iniquity also, which works with all
deceiveableness of unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.10 Satan is a very cunning
Sophister, and knows how to transform himself into an Angel of Light. Therefore
it is no great thing, if his Ministers also be transformed as the Ministers of
righteousness, 2 Cor. 11.15. Consider then what is said, and the Lord give thee
understanding in all things.

AN ANSWER unto Thirty Queries propounded by those called QUAKERS.
IS the Scripture the Light, or a Declaration of it?

Supposing that by Scripture you understand the written Word of God contained
in the Books of Moses, the Prophets, Apostles, and Holy men of God, who were
the Penmen thereof, and gave it forth by inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3.16. and
2 Pet. 1.21. And that by Light you understand, the Lord Jesus Christ who is
said to be the Light that shines in darkness, Joh. 1.5. And the true Lights
which lights every man that comes into the World, John 1.9. And the Light of
the world, Joh. 8.12.12.46.

I Answer first, That the Scripture is a light, Psalm. 119.105, 130. 2 Pet 1.19.

Secondly, It is a declaration of the light (that is) of Christ the true light,
Isa, 9.6. Luke 1.70. Romans 1 3, 4. 2 Cor. 4.6. Gal. 4.4, 5. 1 Timothy 3.16.

2. Is the Scripture the Word, or a declaration of it?

I answer, If you understand by the word (Christ) the Word that was in the
beginning with God, the Word that was with God, and the Word that was God, Joh.
1.1, 2. So the Scripture is only a declaration of that word, that is, a
Declaration of Christ.

3. What is the Gospel?

The Gospel has various, significations or understandings in Scripture, all
pointing and referring unto Christ, who as he is the end of the Law for
righteousness to every one that believes, so may he be said to be the very sum
and substance of the Gospel, in that all the Types, and Shadows, and
Sacrifices, all the Prophecies and Promises, both under the Law and the Gospel
are all, and shall be fulfilled and consummated in him, Rom 10 4. 2 Cor. 1.10.
But more particularly, it is (in my understanding) the glad tidings of
salvation by Christ, Isa. 40.9.52 7.61.1. Luke 2.10, 11. Romans 10.15. called the
Gospel of God, Romans 1.1. The glorious Gospel of the blessed God, 1 Timothy 1.11.
The Gospel of the grace of God, Act. 20.24. The Gospel of Christ, To. 1.16. The
Gospel of the Kingdom, Mat. 4.23. The Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 6.15. The Gospel of
our salvation Ephesians. 1.13. Or the power of God unto salvation, Romans 1 16.

4. What is the first Principle of the pure Religion?

To give a clear and full Answer to this Question, I would know what you
understand by the first Principle of the pure Religion? If you mean the first
Principles of the Oracles of God, spoken of in Heb 5.12. which afterward in
the first verse of the sixth Chapter are called the Principles of the doctrine
of Christ, these first Principles are there particularly mentioned and
expressed, namely, 1. Repentance from dead works; 2. Faith toward God; 3. The
doctrine of Baptisms; 4. The doctrine of Laying on of hands, 5. The doctrine of
the Resurrection of the Dead; and, 6. The doctrine of Eternal Judgment. And if
you would know what the pure Religion is, the Apostle James does tell you, Jam.
1.27. Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to visit
the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep ones self unspoiled
from the world.

5. May not a man have the Scripture, and yet be ignorant of the mystery of
Christ, yea or nay?

I answer, yea; if you mean by having the Scripture, a man's having of it in his
house, or in his pocket, or at best in his brain only, and not having it in the
heart, as to the sanctifying and purifying thereof, Joh. 17.17. So a man may
have the Scripture, and yet be ignorant of the mystery of Christ. The Sadduces
had the Scriptures in the first sense; and yet our blessed Savior said unto
them, Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God, Mat. 22.29.
Mar. 12.24 27. And it is given to you (says he, speaking unto his Disciples)
to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but unto thim (the multitude of
unbelievers) it is not given. And according to this understanding, I shall
answer many of your following Quaeries.

6. May not a man have the Scripture, and not believe in the Light?

Yea.

7. May not a man have the Scripture, and not know the way to the Father?

Yea See Joh. 14 6.

8. May not a man (as the Pharisees had) have the Scripture, and not know the
Word, and not know the Light?

Yea.

9. May not a man have the Scripture, and not know the Truth?

Yea.

10. May not a man have the Scripture, and not know the Life?

Yea.

11 Was not the Scripture given forth from the Spirit of God?

Yea, All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3 16. And holy men
of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet 1.21.

12. And can any know the Scripture without the Spirit?

No, not effectually and savingly without the Spirit: It is the Spirit that
searches all things, yea, the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2 10.

13. And has not every man a manifestation of the Spirit given him to profit
withal?

To this I answer, That every man that has the Spirit of God, has the
manifestation of that Spirit; and the manifestation of the Spirit (that is, of
the Spirit of God) is given to every man to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. But
every man has not the Spirit of God or of Christ, Romans 8 9. And where the
Spirit of Christ is not given, there can be no manifestation of that Spirit.
The fire is manifested by its heat, and the Sun by the light thereof.

14. Are not all in confusion, who are not led by the Spirit the Scriptures
were given forth from?

Yea.

15. May not a man have the Scripture, and not know the Gospel which is the
power of God?

Yea.

16. Does not Christ enlighten every man that comes into the world with a true
light?

Before I give an Answer unto this Question, I might ask you what you mean by a
true light? If you mean the light of Nature, or the light of a natural
Conscience, that may not altogether improperly (I suppose) be said to be a true
Light; and with this every man is lighted by Christ that comes into the world,
either more or less. For Paui speaking concerning the Gentiles, tells us, That
the work of the Law was written in their hearts, their Conscience also hearing
witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing or excusing one another,
Romans 2.15. which must be upon the account of doing well or ill: And surely
every man has naturally in himself an acquitting or condemning conscience, Joh
8.9. For what conscience is there so feared, that has not at one time or other
some convictions for sin? But yet the natural Light comparatively to the
spiritual m^^s Light, is but a dimn Light, and the natural Conscience at the
best is a dark, impure, and defiled Conscience. The natural man receives not
the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can
he know them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2 14. And unto
them that are undefiled and unbelieving is nothing pure, but even their mind
and conscience is defiled, Tit 1 15. So then there is another kind of Light,
wherewith the spiritual man is enlightened by Christ, which is clearly
distinguished from the Light of Nature, or man's natural Light: Ye were
sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord; walk as children of the
light, Ephesians. 5.8. Who has called you out of darkness into his mavelous light,
1 Pet. 2, 9. So, God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has
shined into our hearts to give the Light of the knowledge of the Glory of God
in the face of Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. 4.6. What a clear distinction is here
betwixt the one and the other. John says also, That the darkness is past, and
the true light now shines. 1 John 2.8. And speaking of him that hates his
Brother says, that he is in darkeness and walks in darkeness, and knows
not whither he goes, because that darkeness has blinded his eyes. And very
remarkcable is that of our blessed Savior who says, If the light that is in
thee, be darkeness, how great is that darkeness? Matt. 6.23.

So then, understanding by the true Light, the Light of the new Creature, or
the spiritual man's Light, which gives unto us the knowledge of God in the sace
of Jesus Christ. Then I do affirm, That Christ does not enlighten every man
that comes into the world with this true Light. For such as have not the spirit
of Christ (as all men have not, Rem. 8.9. Jud. 19.) Such have not the spirits
Illumination, I mean as to a through conversion and change of the whole man:
Paul bids the believing Hebrews To call to remembrance the former days, in
which after they were illuminated, they endured a great fight of Affliction.
Heb. 10.32. And to conclude with what David speaks in Psalm. 18.28. Thou (faith
he) meaning the Lord) wilt light my Candle, the Lord my God will lighten my
darkeness. And in 36 Psalm, verse 9. For with thee (says he) is the fountain of
Life; and in thy Light shall we see Light.

17. Shall he that believes in the Light abide in darkeness? yea or nay?

I answer, Nay, supposing that by light, you understand the Lord Jesus Christ,
then he that believes in that Light abides not in Darkeness: For this is the
Lord Christ's own Affirmation. Ioh. 12.46. I am come a light into the world,
that whosoever believes in me shall not abide in darkeness.

18. Is there any unity but in the Light, or any friendship but in the Light?

I answer (if Christ be the Light you mean) there is no true unity or
friendship but in him, if we speak of a unity that is spiritual, divine and
heavenly. For Faith does unite, ingrast and as it were incorporate us into the
Lord Jesus Christ, and brings us into a State of friendship and communion with
him; But out of Christ the (Light) there is nothing but disunion, strife,
disagreement and confusion. The Carnal mind is Enmity against God: For it is
not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. Romans 8.7. What
fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness, and what communion has
Light with Darkeness. 2 Cor. 6.14. Yet there may be a unity and league in sin,
a covenant with Death, and an agreement with Hell, Esa. 28.18. Your covenant
with Death shall be disanulled, and your agreement with Hell shall not stand

19. Is there any true belief, but who do believe in the Light?

I answer, there is no true beleise, but as we believe in Christ who is the
true Light. But it is possible for men to believe a Lie; For this cause God
shall send them strong delusions that they should believe a Lie; 2 These. 2.11.

20. Are not all in the Error, who do not believe in the Light, and not know
the Scriptures nor the power of God.

Yea, the not believing in Christ the Light, and the ignorance of the
Scriptures, and the power of God, is the ground of all Error. Christ has told
us that He is the way, the truth and the Life, and no man comes unto the
Father but by him, Ich. 14.6. And it was he that said unto the Sadduces, Ye
dee-Erre not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God. Math 22. 29. Mark
12.29 To the Law, and to the Testimony (says the wisdom of God) if they
speak not according to this word, it is because there is no Light in them. Esa
8.20.

21. Did God command that Infants should be sprinkled, and if he did, show his
command by plain Scripture.

I answer, I do not find in Scripture that God did ever command that Infants
should be sprinkled, nor do I find, that there is either a command or example
in all the Scriptures for to justify such a practice. How justly then may this
Nation fall under that sharp reprehension of the Lord, Who has required this
at your hands. Esa. 1.12. And in vain they do worship me, teaching for
doctrines the commandments of men Math. 15 9.

22. Shall not all them that be gathered together with the Scripture, though
they be Elders, Members, or gathered people, and not gathered together with the
Spirit of the Lord, be broken by the Spirit of God.

I answer, can any be gathered together with the Scripture (I mean the
Scripture of Truth so called, Dan. 10, 21.) and not be gathered together with
the Spirit of the Lord? is there any such disproportion or disagreement betwixt
the Scripture and the Spirit of the Lord as your Question seems to imply? Or
is there not a Sweet harmony and consent between them both, so that the
gathering together with the one, cannot truly and properly exclude the other?
When our blessed Savior says Where two or three are gathered together in my
name, there am I in the midst of them. Mat. 18.20. Are we to understand by the
name of Christ there, such a gathering together by his Spirit, as that the
Scripture the word of God is not to be understood also? Is it not the word of
God which effectually works in them that believe. 1 These. 2.13. Is not the
Scripture profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof for Correction, for Instruction
in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to
all good works. 2 Timothy 2^ 16.17? Is it not the power of God to salvation to
every one that believes. Romans 1.16? And is it not able to build us up and to
give us an inheritance among all them who are sanctisied, Acts 20.32. And shall
we then imagine that such as are gathered together by the power of this word,
shall be broken in sunder by the Spirit of God? Indeed there is an Association
or a gathering together but not by the Lord, which shall assuredly be broken in
pieces, Esa. 54.15. And as there are the Assemblyes of the Saints, who are of
the true Circumcision which worship God in Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus,
and have no confidence in the flesh. Philip. 3.3. So there are many formal and
false worshipers of God in the world, who gather together upon pretense of
Scripture, and say perhapps they are Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue
of Satan, as those in Rev. 2 9. who cry up themselves for good Christians, and
yet are strangers to the Life of Christ having only a form of Godliness, but
deny the power thereof. 2 Timothy 3.5. These also in time shall be broken in
pieces; For every plant (says Christ) which my Heavenly Father has not
planted, shall be rooted up. Matthew 15.13. But the speech of Gamaliel (me
thinks) is very considerable herein (which I desire you will seriously mind,
as to your own gatherings together.) If this Council or this work (says he)
be of men, it will come to naught. But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow
it. Acts. 5.38, 39 So say I, if such gatherings together be of men, that is, of
mere humane authority, or men's Inven^ious and Imaginations, perverting the
Scriptures (as some do) to their own destruction, assuredly then in a while
they will vanish and come to naught. But if they be of God, I mean of divine
Authority, and according to the mind of God (as al such are who are congregated
and gathered together by the power of the Scripture, the word and spirit of
God, then certainly they will not, they cannot be overthrown. Indeed the
malice, and persecutions of men may break them, or rather scatter them asunder
for a while, but the living and eternal truth of God, which dwells and
abides in them, shall stand firm and inviolable and that for ever and ever;
Even your Wood, Hay and Stubble, and all such Combustible matter, which shall
be found amongst you, (and which you have built or shall build (as you pretend)
upon Christ that sure foundation, being revealed and tried by fire, shall be
burnt unto your loss, although your selves be saved, yet so as by fire. Let
every man then take heed how he builds thereupon. 1 Cor. 3.10.11.12.13.14.15.

23. And whether every man that comes into the world, has not a light which
will condemn him, if he does not believe in it?

I Answer, That every man that comes into the world has a light, that is, a
natural light, or a light that God has placed in nature, being the work of the
Law written in their hearts, by the help whereof men may come to the
understanding of the invisible things of God, even his eternal power and
Godhead, and the not living up to this light may leave men without excuse, Romans
1.20. and thereby also they may come to be condemned in their own consciences,
Romans 2 15. But this light though it may discover much of God, yet it will never
bring us to the true knowledge of God in Christ. And as it is no less then
eternal life to know God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, John 17.3. who is
the true light in which we are commanded to believe, if we will approve our
selves the children of light, Joh. 1 9. Joh. 12.36. In which light also, if we
do believe, we shall never perish but have everlasting life, Joh. 3.19.36. So
the not believing in this light will assuredly be the great condemning sin. He
that believes not is condemned already, Joh. 3.18. And he that believes not
the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him, Joh. 3.36. It
follows then that men's condemnation (unless we understand a being condemned, as
before, in their own consciences) will not be so much for not believing in that
light, which they bring with them into the world, but for their rejection of,
and not believing in Christ who is the true light, Joh. 3.19. This is the
condemnation, etc.

24. May not a man have the Scripture, and not see the door, as the Pharisees
had?

Yea.

25. May not a man have the Scripture, and not see the hope of Glory, which is
Christ the mystery, as the Pharisees did, who had the Scripture that spoke of
him that was to come?

Yea.

26. May not a man have the Scripture, and be a stranger to the life of God?

Yea.

27. May not a man have the Scripture, and not know the blood of Jesus, and
have the Scripture, and not know the sanctification, and the redemption, nor
the justification?

Yea.

28. Are not these who be in the life of the Scripture, different from all the
worlds fashions, worships and gatherings; and is not all worship in the will,
without the Spirit of God?

Yea.

29. Is not all humility fained without the Spirit of God?

Yea.

30. And is not all righteousness selfish, while man lives according to the
course of the world, and believes not in the light that comes from Christ,
Gods righteousness.

To this last Query, I shall give you this Answer, and shall refer you to my
answer unto your Fifth Query as to the rest; I do not find, that any men or
women in Scripture do fall under the denomination or account of righteous
persons in any sense whatsoever, so long as they live according to the course
of the world, for they that live so they live in sin, and in all licentiousness
and unrighteousness, In the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the desires of the
flesh and of the mind, according to the Prince of the power of the air, the
spirit that works in the children of disobedience, as you may see in Ephesians
2.1, 2, 3. And what selfish righteousness can there be in such? The Apostle
John says, That he that does righteousness is righteous, even as Christ is
righteous: But whosoever does not righteousness is not of God, 1 John 3.7, 10.
But yet notwithstanding there may be much selfish righteousness even in such
who live not according to the course of the world. This was the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees, and this was Paul's righteousness, whiles he was a
Pharisee, and when in his zeal he persecuted the Church; for he tells us, that
touching the righteousness which is in the Law he was blameless, Phil. 3.5.6.
And that it was a selfish righteousness, or a righteousness of his own, the
ninth verse of that Chapter makes it very clear, when being convinced of his
own filthy or dunghill righteousness, he desires only to be found in Christ,
not having his own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by says. And
how greatly does he find fault with his Brethren the Israelites (as he calls
them) whose salvation he did so affectionately desire and pray for, for that,
they had a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge; And for that, they
being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to establish their own
righteousness, did not submit themselves unto the righteousness of God, Rem
10.1, 2, 3. And I wish from my foul, that you your selves (whatever your
pretenses are of love unto Christ) being too much ignorant (I fear) of Gods
righteousness, or the righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ (whose name and
whose memorial for ever is, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS, Jerem. 23.6. and in
whose righteousness, both you and I, and all others must be found clothed and
arrayed in, if ever we think to stand before him at the last day, Rev. 19.8.)
That you (I say) do not go about to establish a selfish righteousness, or a
righteousness of your own, in opposition to the righteousness of God. But know
and consider well, That Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every
one that believes, Romans 10 4. And as he was made of God unto us Wisdom and
Righteousness, etc. 1 Cor. 1.30. So also was he made sin for us, who knew no
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Our righteousness
is only in Christ, and in believing in him; But does not your Question imply
clearly that you go about to establish and set up another righteousness then
the righteousness of Christ, even a righteousness of your own, when you say, Is
not all righteousness selfish, while, etc. man believes not in the light that
comes from Christ Gods righteousness? What are we to believe in the light that
comes from Christ? and will such a faith entitle us unto a righteousness that
is not selfish? Surely, if this be not an establishing of our own
righteousness, even that selfish righteousness which you seem to find fault
with, I know not what is; are these wholesome words, even the words of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and the doctrine, which is according to godliness? 1 Timothy 6.3. Is
this the faith of the Gospel which we are exhorted to strive together for? 1
Phil. 2.7. or is it the faith which was once delivered unto the Saints, which
we are to contend earnestly for? Jud. 3. Surely, these are wholesome words, and
the doctrine which is according to godliness, when we persuade men to believe
in God, and to believe also in the Lord Jesus Christ, Joh. 14.1 To believe in
the light (that is) in Christ the light, Joh. 12.35, 36. The light that came
into the world, Verse. 46. The true light, Joh. 1.9. Yea the light of the world,
Joh. 8.12. And in this faith alone are we to expect the imputation of
righteousness, Romans 4.22. And not in the believing in the light which comes
from Christ, which whether it be this, or Christ, which you call Gods
righteousness, I know not. But this know, that that which I am to believe in
must be my righteousness, and my salvation, and this is not in the light that
comes from Christ, but in Christ himself, The bright Morning Star, Rev. 22.16.
The Day spring from on high, Luke 1.78. The Sun of Righteousness, Mal. 4.2. The
Fountain of Light, The foundation of my Reconciliation, Justification,
Sanctification and Salvation, Act. 4.12.

For him has God given not only to be a Light unto the Gentiles, but also to
be his Salvation to the end of the Earth, Isa. 49.6.

FINIS.

