To His Highness Lord General Cromwell, Lord Protector, etc. The humble
Cautionary Proposals of John Rogers, Minister of the Gospel according to the
Dispensation of the Spirit (now) at Thomas Apostles London.
MY LORD;
IT is the great Jehovah Nissi, or Lord Protector of his People, who has
awakened me morning by morning (who would not let me rest day nor night since
you were Proclaimed Lord Protector) until his Spirit had set me upon my Feet
in these following Proposals, with Cautions. Now, although I have no
Encouragement from Man, and little hopes to be heard, who am so contemptible,
and unfit for such a Message; Yet say not (says the Lord) I am a Child, for
thou shall speak what I command thee, and be not afraid of their Faces, for I
will deliver thee. Now because none else is up on this Errand (which is so
eminently for Christ, and his Interest) and so many are up and jocund (already)
for the interest of Antichrist; Therefore I can find no truce, nor peace
within me till I become obedient to the Lord God, which has opened mine ear,
and I will not rebel; Therefore have I set my face like a flint, for I know
that I shall not be ashamed.

I. Proposal, Take heed of Protecting the Plantations of Antichrist, or the
Towers of Babylon, which must fall (and with fury too) upon the Heads of their
Protectors, as Isa. 31. 3. When the Lord shall stretch out his hand, both he
that helps (or is their Protector) and he that is helped shall fall with him;
To which purpose, is Psalm. 146. 3. Trust not in (such) Princes in whom is no
help, (...) or who are not able to Protect themselves or others in the Day of
the Lords Controversy against Babylon; Therefore (My Lord) be set for the
Defense of the Gospel, and encourage all you can the building up of Sion, and
her Bulwarks, for in the midst of her, God will be a Refuge; And upon all her
Glory he will be a Defense.

II. Prop. Take heed of being guided or governed with the Old-State Principles,
of Carnal Policy; for Antichrist works (now) more in a mystery of Iniquity
then ever. And what the Beast could not do with his Horns here in England (by
cruel pushing) which we hope are off, yet he hopes to do it with his Heads (by
cunning plotting) which we fear are on. This Principle of Policy was fatal to
Jehu; Achitophels Counsel came to nothing: And Antiochus could not protect
himself; although says Daniel, 8. 25. (...) He shall make his Design to
prosper by his policy, and magnify himself; and although (by his Policy) he
shall stand up against the Prince of Princes, (viz. Christ, the Head of all
Principalities and Powers, Col. 2. 10.) yet he shall be broken (or destroyed
miserably) without hands* So Isa. 17. 1. In that day Jehovah with his sore, and
great and long sword will punish Leviathan ((...)) the piercing Serpent
(Beriach i. e. in his Power) yea that crooked Serpent (Akal i. e in h^s
Policy, which is most dangerous.) An enemy to Christ (2 Cor. 11. 3,) A friend
in trust for Antichrist, and an evident Forerunner of Ruin to them that are
ruled thereby). Wherefore (My Lord) set up Principles of Piety, with Ezra 7.
25, And thou after the wisdom of thy God set up Magistrates and Judges which
may judge all the people, etc. O Proclaim! Proclaim Christ alone the Head of
your Wisdom, to whom the Lord has given all power in heaven and earth.
Consult with his word, Psalm. 119. 24. lest you should be laid aside as not fit
for his Work (which will make our souls mourn.) Luther was wont to say three
things would be the Ruin of Religion, viz. Unthankfulness (to God) Security,
and Carnal Pol^cie, and the last he feared most.

III. Prop. Take heed of Carnal Counselors (I mean such men as seek themselves
more then Christ) Darius, had such Counselors who flattered him to his face,
Dan 6. 6, 7. etc. but they were enemies to Daniel the true Prophet (who had an
Excellent Spirit) and therefore (in hatred to him) they persuaded Darius to
sign the Decree, who did it Accordingly, and set up Idolatry (by their
Malignant Council) but could not for all that hinder Daniels Spirit of Prayer.
Thus the Rulers complying with the Carnal Council of the Chi^fe Priests
crucified Christ in the Flesh, persecuted his Apostles and Disciples after him.
This will be the fruit of such Counsels and Counselors. Therefore (My Lord)
let them give you Counsel that are conversant with the Secrets of God, and the
Visions of these days. Belshazzar did send for Daniel to open the Vision to
him that concerned him: So when you find (My Lord) all the Wise men (of the
world) to fail you in the Visions of these times and seasons (by their liberal
Arts and Sciences, Phylosophical Notions, or Rules) then send for the Daniels
(of an Excellent Spirit) to confer with upon the Prophesies, such as have their
Wisdom and understanding by the Spirit of God; For if the false Prophets may
prevail with you, no Daniels (by their good wills) shall be left alive, but all
be thrown into the Den (ere long) through their subtilty. Besides (My Lord) it
concerns you (you will find one day) to have a high esteem of those most
Honorable Members of the last Parliament that proved faithful to Christ
against Antichrist, and his cause.

IV. Prop. Take heed of meddling with the Protection of men's Carnal, Cruel,
Heathenish laws, guilty of Tyranny, Oppression, Perjury, Cheating, Injustice,
Persecution, and much innocent blood, and moft of them contrary to the Laws of
God, whose Laws are to be restored, and made Republic Laws in these latter
days, as Isa. 42. 21, 22. For his righteous esse sake he will magnify the
Law, and make it HONORABLE. His are the best in all cases that ever were made,
which must be known to all Deuteronomy. 30. 10, to 16. Job. 7. 49, then Justice will
be easily had, and Judges sit in every City-gate, 2 Chronicles. 19. 5. Deuteronomy. 16. 18.
without respect of persons, and which none dare gainsay, Heb. 10. 28. Romans 2,
2. Deuteronomy. 1. 17. Lev. 14 22. 1. Sam. 12. 3. Lev. 29. 15. Yea, then will Judges
be as at first, and the Lord our Lawgiver, Jam. 4 13. Isa. 1. 26. and this Law
(or Body of Law which is Gods will abide for ever: Therefore (My Lord) about
the Lords Laws, above the Lands Laws, the (...) Mizuoth de ora ita, or rather
the (...) Torah Shebicthab, and not of the Carnal (...) Minhagbim, Customs,
peevish Lusts, or partial laws of men. Away! away! with our Egyptian (Norman)
Laws (now) and with good Josiah, 2 King. 22. 12, 13. having found the Book of
Gods Laws, let that be Read and Restored; And as Ezra 7. 25. to judge such as
know the Laws of our God, and teach thou them that do not. Mal. 4 4* Remember
the LAW of MOSES my Servant, which I commanded (for the Commonwealth) with the
STATUTES and the JUDGMENTS, which if you do not, the Lamentation in Dan. 9.
11. will be ours. O! all (England) have sinned in wanting (the word is, (...)
or being without) thy Laws, O Lord! And therefore the curse is poured upon us!
and the oath written in the Law of Moses the servant of the Lord, Lev. 26. 14,
15, 16. etc. Dent. 28. 15, 16, etc.

V. Prop. Take heed of Protecting the Carnal, National Antichristian Clergy
(though they come in the name of Orthodox or Learned, for so did the Scribes
and Pharisees.) Zedekiah's indulgence to the Priests and false Prophets of the
Nation, imboldned Hananiah in his lies, Iere. 28. 1, etc. Which (Zedekiah
believing) persecuted the true Prophets, and brought dreadful destruction upon
his own head. So Ahab (a notable Politician) did protect his National Clergy,
or Prophets (who were his, not the Lords, 2 Chro. 18. 5.) and by their
suggestion, hated and persecuted the true Prophet Micaiah, which proved his
ruin. Thus the Rulers that were led by the Priests, proved Tyrants to the true
Ministers of the New Testament, Acts 4. 16, 17. And whiles they would defend
them, they destroyed themselves. Thus the worldly Clergy do ever fly to
worldly Powers for Protection (having none from God,) and for this end it is,
they flatter great men, to engage them to their Ruin; so do Antichrists, now
they are near falling, and (without the Lord hear prayers for you, and deliver
you from this fearful danger) they will ensnare you, and cast you a sleep with
their enchantments, and render you unfit to follow Christ any further, but
(under the name of the Ministry) most miserably entangle and subtly seduce
you into Antichrists cause: Which if they do, will be your utter Ruin, as
Revel. 4. 9, 10. If any worship the Beast, or his Image, and receive his mark
in his Forehead, or in his Head, or in his Hand, the same shall drink of the
Wine of the Wrath of God, etc. Revel. 19. 20. And the Beast was taken, and with
him the false Prophets, with whom he deceived them that received the Mark of
the Beast, and them that worshipped the Beast; these were cast alive into a
lake burning with brimstone. Therefore (my Lord) if a word from Jehovah on
high, may (as yet) be received, look about you! and before you! with an ocule
irretorto! Make haste, my Lord, for Christ's Protection! against the Plagues
that are (as sure as God is Righteous) coming upon Babylon, and all that will
cleave to her interest. Luther was not too bold (in the name of the Lord) to
tell his Lord Protector, the Elector of Saxony, Judico celeitud. vest. plus a
me praesidii and tutelae habituram esse quam mihi praestare: Huic causae nullus
gladius consul^re aut opem far potest, etc. That by his Prayers he had gained
him more safety and protection, then he had received from him; and that the
cause of Christ needed not his Protection, but he needed that is Protection. The
power of man (indeed) protects Antichrists cause, but it is the power of God
(set a work by Faith and Prayer) that protects Christ's. And Sive id credat. C.
V. Sive non credat, (says he) Whether you will believe it, or no, yet this Way
I will undertake to secure and protect your Highnesses Soul, Body, Estate, and
all, (viz. By Faith and Prayer) if you engage freely in the cause of Christ
against Antichrist. So say I (my Lord) in that Name which sent me (which fills
me with courage and confidence) that if you will freely oblige for Christ and
his Interest, the Faith and Prayers of the Saints (which were never higher then
now) shall protect you sufficiently in all emergencies; but if you will engage
for Antichrist and his Interest, the loud crying Faith, and incessant
high-spirited Prayers of the Saints, will all engage against you, and never
give Jehovah-Nissi, the Lord our Protector rest, till the excellency of Jacob
have prevailed, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. Take heed what you do!

Thus the Lord has stirred me up by an irresistible and restless power (once
more) to lay his work before you; for that he has used you as a most glorious
Instrument in the Three Nations (by the Faith and Prayers of his people) to
make way for this work; which if you reject, will reject you, and be the
infallible forerunner of your fall: Which that God may prevent, is the fervent
prayers of the faithful people night and day, whose souls mourn in secret for
you, whose hearts ache and bleed abundantly on your behalf; as for a man (most
dear in their souls* but) under most desperate temptations and dangers.

I have freely exposed my self (in this my Masters service) by whose spirit I
am (I hope) full of power to all the sharp censures, reproaches, revilings, and
hard measures that I can meet with, from Men or Devils, choosing rather to have
my peace within me, then without me, and to suffer with his afflicted Saints,
then to sin with the World. Ruere cum Christo quam regnare cum Caesare: It may
be men will judge me proud or self-seeking, as they thought of Luther, if so, I
say also, Inveniar sane superbus, etc. Modo impii silentii non arguar, dum
Christus patitur. Be it so, yet I had rather men think so, then I sit silent,
whilst Christ suffers: Yea, Prorsus Satan est Lutherus dum Christin vivit and
regnat, Amen. Though I be accounted a Devil, or any thing, I care not (be it
so) so Christ may but reign. But, in these Proposals, I am sure, I have kept my
sphere, and followed the strong impulse of Gods own Spirit in me, and many
others; however it be taken. Wherefore the great God awake you to his work!
else the time will come when God will say, Let him alone; he is joined to
Idols, Hos. 4. 17.

Now that the Hand of the Lord may be with you, see what these five fingers
point at, to you; which if you practice, will be able to protect you, as well
as direct you in this dreadful day of the Lords controversy for Sion: They
concern you (my Lord) more then Caesar's Paper did him. Now that they may not
prove a Hand Writing against you (and a Cup of trembling put into your hands)
they are strengthened with a Divine generosity, and shall struggle with you in
the Faith, Tears, and Prayers of many, who pray and mourn for you, and amongst
other,

Your (afflicted) faithful Servant, for the Interest of our Lord Jesus, JOHN
ROGERS.
From my Study, the 21 day of (...) Tebeth, or the Tenth Month.

