THE LORD LOVDOVNS SPEECH TO THE English Commissioners at Edinburgh, WITH The
Treaty between the Grand Committee of Scotland, and the Commissioners from the
Parliament of ENGLAND.

SEVERAL Papers delivered to the Estates, and the answers returned back to the
English Commissioners.

ALSO Orders from the Kirk to all the Ministers in Edinburgh, and parts
adjacent, and Instructions for their Humiliation.

And the Scots Commissioners Papers concerning the KING, the Parliament of
England, and the ARMY.

March 1. 1647.
Imprimatur

Gil. Mabbot.

Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, near the Queens-head
Tavern. 1648.

SEVERAL Papers delivered to the Estates, and the Answers returned back to the
English Commissioners.
Right Honorable,
THE grand Committee of the Estates of Scotland met (and sat down) on Tuesday
Feb. 15. 1647 And the Lord Chancellor Loudonne (with the rest of the
Commissioners) went on in making their reports to them, declaring what they
offered to the King, what answer they had from him at Hampton Court, and what
Papers they had dilivered into the Parliament of England: Something concerning
the City of London; and several passages about all of them, The grand
Committee of the Kirk sat that day also.

Wednesday Feb. 16. The Scots Commissioners went on in their reports of the
English negotiation. And a Committee was appointed to draw up Instructions for
the Lord Chancellor to receive, and report the addresses of the English
Commissioners, which was the less hastened because all the English
Commissioners were not come to Edinburgh. The Lord Chanellor protested to the
Committee of Estates that he had and would (to his uttermost) labor to make
good the interest of the Kingdom of Scotland, in what trust he was reposed by
them. The Grand Committee of the Kirk appointed the next Lords day to be a
public Humiliation in all the Churches in Edinburgh, and parts adjacent, and
appointed a Committee to draw up a Declaration of the causes thereof.

Thursday Feb. 17. The Commissioners of the Kingdom of Scotland gave account
to the Estates concerning the business of the Kings going to the Island of
Weight, as also the addresses to Him there, and some overtures between the
Parliament and them about it. Diverse English Malignants here (for here are good
store of them in this City) were very merry that day; some of them were foxed
before night, and many healths were drunk to King Charles (by them) but they
did not meet (altogether) with their expectation, (Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and
Colonel Layton, and diverse others that were Officers under the King, are here,
but not very flush of money, and not many friends, their meetings are most
among themselves, and though fauned on by a few, yet laughed and jeared at by
most: They would feign stir up the minds of the people to rise against
England for the King, but have no great influence. Here is like to be a great
contest (because of many factions) and when the end will be God knows.

The Grand Committee of Estates were moved that the English Commissioners might
be sent to, and (for that purpose) the Lord Chancellours Instructions brought
in and passed, The Estates being advertised that there were four of the
English Commissioners then come, viz. the Earl of Nottingam, Mr. Ashurst,
Colonel Birch, and Mr. Robert Goodwin, whereupon the Committee were appointed
to bring in the Instructions the next day.

Friday, Feb. 18. The Lord Chancellor Londone was dispatched, and had his
Instructions for going to the English Commissioners to receive their addresses
the next day. The substance of Instructions were, To repair to the Earl of
Nottingam (and the rest) the next day from the Estates and to receive such
addresses as they were authorized unto from both Houses of the Parliament of
England, to communicate to the Committee of Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland.

The Marquis of Arguile made an excellent speech before the Estates moving to
peace and amity, declaring how the Lord has blessed the two Kingdoms, joining
in his cause, and moving that all may labor to strengthen that unity between
both Kingdoms.

Instructions were given from the Commissioners of the Kirk, to the members of
the City of Edinburgh, and parts adjacent, concerning the public humiliation
to be on the Lords day following, That the Lord should be pleased to stay the
Plague lately broken forth in and about the City, that the Lord would direct
the Estats and enable them to maintain the Covenant: That the Lord would purge
out all Sectaries out of the Kingdom of Scotland: And that the Lord will
settle them in peace, etc.

On Saturday Feb. 19. The Lord Chancellor came to the English Commissioners,
The Earl of Nottingham, Mr. Robert Goodwin, Mr. Ashurst, and Colonel Birch
being at their Quarters in an Inn (for no house is yet assigned to them nor I
do not know whether any will at all) And his Lordship made aspeech (after a
short (complement of salute to them).

A Speech made by the Lord Loudone Chancellor of Scotland to the English
Commissioners at Edinburgh, February 19. 1647.
My Lord,
I am commanded by the Convention of the Estates of this Kingdom to wait upon
your Lordships, to know if you have any addresses to make unto them from the
Parliament of England, which if you have, they desire you to communicate them
unto me, that I may give the Committee an account thereof.

The English Commissioners told them that they had addresses to make to them
from the Parliament of England.

The Lord Chancellor demanded by what authority they came.

The English Commissioners showed him what gave satisfaction in that particular
also.

For ought I find, the English Commissioners are not heartily welcome to
Scotland, but they carry themselves fair in outward civilities, only they do
not provide a place suitable to their receptions at Worcester House in the
Strand when they always come to London.

The Lordsday Feb. 20. Was a day of public humiliation at Edinburgh, and the
parts adjacent Mr. Marshall (when he was here before was entreated to preach by
many of the Scots Clergy, but now he) is not desired to come into any of
their Pulpits, he asks not, nor do they offer, only he Preaches before the
English Commissioners, and many come to hear him. The Scots Ministers thundered
in their Pulpits against Sectaries and Covenant-breakers etc. But I do not
hear that any of them speak any thing about the King either one way or other

Malignants interpret them to include the King as being one branch of the
Covenant, but this is sub-intelligitur.

I pray God compose all our differences; that we may be cordial and love
sincerely.

The City is very full (it is said) seldom has been seen the like, But (me
thinks) I could not find the Churches so full, Many honest men were much
displeased, at the carriages of some English travelers that are here, that
might find better employment at home.

Yester day the Committee of Estates chose Committees who are to consider of
the Papers, according to Instructions, so that there cannot be much expected
from hence until the Parliament sit about March the sixth next.

Our Commissioners are not received in that capasity by the Estates) as was
expected.

When the Parliament sits here the great question will be, whether they will
condescend for an Army to pass into the Kingdom of England.

The Scots are yet quiet and there is no appearance of any considerable visible
force acting or levying, only what the imaginations of the Cavaliers does
produce, who are somewhat high in the South part of Scotland, and speak broad
words.

The chiefest matters which have passed between the Committee of Estates of
Scotland, and the Commissioners from the Parliament of England are to this
effect.

The English Commissioners, communicated Papers to the Scots, advertizing that
they were sent from the Parliament of England to clear them of labors and
endeavors for continuance of peace between the Nations, and to take off
misrepresentations, desiring that they may be heard in such things as shall be
objected against their proceedings, that so there may be continued a right
understanding between the Nations.

They received a Paper back from the Scots, of their order for the Chancellor
to receive what they had to present.

The Commissioners showed their letters of credence from the Houses of
Parliament to the Parliament of Scotland, a Paper was sent them back that the
Parliament was (since the date of the said letters of credence) risen,

The Commissioners then sent in another Paper, concerning their Instructions
from both houses of Parliament to treat with the Committee of the Estates of
Scotland, which having passed both Houses is of power equivalent as an
Ordinance:

This Answer is now under debate by the Grand Committee of Estates, where it
was declared (by diverse of the Members,) that it would be a breach both of the
Covenant and Treaty to refuse a Treaty with the English Commissioners, seeing
that they are appointed by authority of both Houses.

You in England may suppose delay, but need to fear no breach from hence, to
engage new wars. God send an happy peace, So prays,

Edinburgh. 22. of Feb. 1647. Your Humble Servant, WILL. ROSSE.

FINIS

