To the chosen and betrusted Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, Assembled in
Parliament at Westminster. The humble Petition of Alice Rolph, wife to Major
Edmond Rolph, close prisoner at the Gate House Westminster, etc.
Presented to the Honorable House of Commons, July 10. 1648.
Shows,
THat you are chosen and betrusted by the people to provide for their Weal, but
not for their Woe; and to maintain their Laws and Liberties, which you have
often promised, sworn and declared to do, and for the preservation of which you
have engaged the Kingdom in a most desperate and bloody War: In which service,
by your Command and Authority, your Petitioners Husband has, for almost six
years together, in judgment and conscience, adventured his life, and has
always, to this day, continued faithful and unspotted, and therefore may
justly, in the largest extent, expect and challenge from you the utmost
benefits and privileges, the Laws and Liberties of England can afford; it
being not only his undoubted inheritance and birthright, but also the purchase
which he has earned with the hazard of his l^fe, and price of his blood.

Yet notwithstanding, your Petitioners said Husband, upon the false and lying
information of one Osbourne, and one Dowcet, who being conscious of their own
guilt and baseness, in perfidiously betraying the trust reposed in them by this
Honorable House, in combining maliciously and wickedly, and plotting of their
own heads, (without, nay contrary to all Authority) to convey away the person
of the King, in these dangerous and tumultuous times, from the place of his
present abode and residence by the Authority of this Honorable House, to the
apparent hazard of the more desperate engaging this poor bleeding Kingdom anew
in a bloody War, and to the hazard of the utter ruin and destruction thereof:
For which perfidious treachery the said Dowcet was imprisoned, and the said
Osbourne, conscious of his own guilt, fled as a Delinquent: And now taking
advantage of the troublesomness of the times, and to increase the fury and rage
of the people, that so in a giddy and distempered Crowd they may the better
escape their deserved punishment for their desperate and dangerous treachery,
have most lyingly and maliciously invented and informed, that your Petitioners
Husband declared to him the said Osbourne that the Governor had received
several Letters from the Army, intimating they desired the King might be
removed out of the way, either by poison or otherwise, etc. which they would
persuade the world to be the ground of their endeavoring his escape; which yet
(notwithstanding all their own averments) they kept secret in their own breasts
almost a month after they had entered into a confederacy for the Kings escape,
without revealing it to any visible Magistrate in the Kingdom; neither did they
ever make use of such an allegation to any of the three Soldiers that they
drew into their Confederacy, though they had been long treating with them: All
which, according to their own principles, does (as your Petitioner is
groundedly informed) by the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, render them
liable, as Traitors, to lose their lives, for their so long concealing a
Treason of such dangerous consequence.

But may it please your Honors, your Petitioners Husband no sooner heard of
the said lying information, but instantly and voluntarily (though he had been
extreme sick for some days before) without so much as a summons, came from the
Isle of Wight to evidence his innocence to this Honorable House, at whose open
Bar he declared the truth in each particular, according to his knowledge,
without either diminution or evasion: And after that, being exceeding ill, with
his distempers, retired to his Lodging in London, leaving Notes with diverse of
his acquaintance at Westminster, of the place of his Lodging, in case any
belonging to this Honorable House, did enquire for him.

And, as a further demonstration of his innocence, although he knew of the
order for his Commitment, made by the Lords June 27. 1648. several days before
it was executed, yet he never removed or left his Lodging, but contrariwise
sent a Letter, bearing date June 30. 1648. unto the House of Lords, to certify
them both of his abode, condition, and ready desire to clear himself of all
those heinous crimes laid to his charge: All which are clear demonstrations,
that the justifying peace of an innocent and good conscience did free him from
any inward guilt in that particular.

Yet so it has been, may it please your Honors, That the said illegal Warrant,
for your Petitioners Husbands Commitment, from the Lords (who by Law have no
power over him, as has lately been sufficiently proved in the case of Sir John
Maynard Knight of the Bath, and an Honorable Member of this House, and the four
Aldermen of London, and Lieutenant Col. John Lilburn, etc.) has been executed
upon your Petitioners sick Husband with more cruelty then ever was used against
any of the Kingdoms greatest declared enemies, having suffered many
incivilities and unchristian-like dealings by the appointment, or at least
countenance of Mr Fane Gentleman Usher of the House of Lords, who would take no
cognizance of your Petitioners Husbands sick estate, notwithstanding his
Chirurgions then declared and since by Affidavit before the Lords affirmed,
that your Petitioners Husband could not be removed without apparent danger:
Yet, almost to the hazard of his life, both in respect of his bodily distempers
and the fury of the multitude, he was violently hurryed to the Gate House
Prison at Westminster, being never so much as examined, or carried before a
legal Magistrate, as by Law he ought; It being an Act abhorred even by Paul's
heathen Judges, viz. To condemn any man before he is heard, and he and his
accuser be brought face to face. And to heighten their cruelty, the Lords have
since passed a sentence of close imprisonment upon your Petitioners Husband,
denying him the benefit and assistance of his friends; which your Petitioner
conceives to be contrary to all Law or Reason, and the very height of tyranny,
That a man shall stand accused (nay without, and contrary to Law, condemned)
for such a heinous crime as Treason: And being sick of body, almost to death,
should be locked up and threatened to be laid in irons, and debarred all ways
either to know what is in particular laid to his charge, or to make his lawful
defense.

The Premises considered:

May it please your Honors, To take your Petitioners Husbands Condition into
timely consideration, (before his blood be added (by your neglect) to that
flood which has and does overflow this Nation, and still cries for vengeance)
and by your timely interposition give a stop unto these unparaleld, tyrannous,
and unjust proceedings of the Lords, who one day after another usurp a
jurisdiction over Commoners in criminal cases, and trample under feet the Laws
and Liberties of England, seeing by Law it is provided and ordained, That
Treasons shall be tryable only at Common Law, in the ordinary Courts of
Justice, and not otherwise. And that your Petitioners Husband may forthwith by
your Justice be freed from his unjust and illegal Imprisonment by virtue of the
Lords illegal Warrant. And forasmuch as if any person or persons shall make a
suggestion to the King or his Council, he or they ought to find sufficient
Surety to prosecute and make good the said suggestion, as appears by the
Statute of the 37, and 38. of Ed. 3. by your selves cited in the case of the
Lord Kimbolton and the five impeachea Members; first part book Declar. page 77.
That therefore if any person or persons have any Crime in Law to lay unto your
Petitioners Husbands charge; That he or they may be enforced to prosecute the
same legally by way of Indictment and due process of Law in an ordinary Court
of Justice, and give sufficient security so to do; That so by a Legal Judge
sworn to proceed according to Law, and a Jury of his Peers or Equals sworn to
judge according to evidence, according to the merit of his Cause he may receive
either justification or condemnation, to which competent Judges he appeals, and
wholly refers himself. And lastly, forasmuch as by the confession of the said
Osbourne, Dowcet, etc. they have acknowledged themselves privy to the Design
and Plot, with which they charge your Petitioners innocent Husband, and yet
have concealed the same for the space of three weeks and upwards, which by the
Law is Treason; That therefore The said Osbourne and Dowcet, etc. may be
forthwith attached and imprisoned in order to a legal Trial, and not suffered
to continue free, and made use of only to accuse and destroy the innocent.

And Your Petitioner shall pray, etc.


