THE RUMP Held forth last first day in a Brotherly Exercise, at the Bull and
Mouth at Aldersgate.

Rump- atur quisquis Rump- itur ex merito. London, Printed, 1660.

The RUMP held-forth in a Brotherly Exercise at the Bull and Mouth at
Aldersgate. Rump-atur quisquis Rump-itur ex merito.
Dearly beloved Brethren and Sisters,
WE are here devoutly met together in this our sanctified and religious
Meeting Place, to exercise our spiritual Gifts, in the holding forth a little
portion of scripture, as you will find it in the 37. Psalm and the first part
of the 17. verse, in these words: The Arms of the wicked shall be broken.

In the further holding forth of which words, give me leave to tell you, that I
shall discover and disclose unto you a notable Mystery of Iniquity before I
have done: And therefore, I shall impart unto you, how the words are rendered in
an old Authentic Translation, albeit, that it be in the language of the Beast
of Rome. The arms (Brachia.) It is not said ( insignia, or the States-arms, as
the Cross and the Fiddle, beloved) but the Arms; that is, by a figurative
speech, the Strength, Policy, Confidence, and all the carnal security, being
as the Arms of the Bodies: (improborum) of the wicked, or (as the word holds
forth more properly, of professed Knaves, or cheating and dishonest men) Rump
entur, shall be broken, confounded dissolved, or brought to naught. The arms of
the wicked shall be broken. Out of which words, we may hold forth one principal
Doctrine, which is this, that although wicked men or cunning crafty, subtle,
deceiptfull, perjured, rebellious, banckrupt, lying and dishonest knaves,
whether they be Parliament men or others, do put their carnal confidence and
assurance in the Arms of flesh, or in the strength and valor of an Army by
land, or Navy by sea, yet Rump-entur, beloved, they shall be broken;
confounded, dissolved, and brought to naught. The very Text it self, is an
affirmative proposition, The arms of the wicked, Rump-entur. Scripture is so
universally plain and positive for proof of our Doctrine, that we shall not
need to vouch any Texts in particular, you know it well enough, beloved. But I
shall hold forth unto you some Reasons, and produce unto you several examples,
as well ancient as modern, that will more easily persuade you of the truth of
our Proposition.

First, It is so, Because wicked men are hated of God, and odious and
abominable to all good men; being perverted and corrupted in their Principles
and Practice of Religion and honesty; and therefore whatsoever their strength,
Policy, or carnal confidences are, or their wicked and devilish machinations,
and hellish inventions can contrive and project against good and godly men,
Rump entur, they shall be broken all in pieces, and dissolved, or Vane ish
away, like a mist before the sun in his power at noontide; as the word holds
forth in a late translation.

But secondly, beloved, it is so, because the Arms of the wicked, are wicked
arms, and therefore destructive to the Saints; and therefore Rump-entur, they
shall be broken. They shall be broken, not only for Gods sake, but for his
Saints sake The text is a Promise, and a very comfortable one too to the
Saints, that although wicked men, and politic knaves shall by strength and
power of Arms tyrannize and domineere, and swagger, and lord it, beloved, over
the Saints for a long season, for almost twenty years together (as I may say)
or longer; yet in the end this shall be certain; and therefore of great
Consolation to us, Rump-entur, they shall be broken and confounded. As it is in
the 15. verse before my text, their Bows Rump entur shall be broken. By Bows,
Sy-noc-doc-chically, all sorts of Arms and Ammunition (whether great or small
Guns, great or small shot, Gunpowder, Swords, Halberds, and so forth) are meant
and intended in that place, beloved: And not only their Arms, but by a
Metonymie, their armed men too (whether they be horse or foot) Rump-entur, they
shall be routed or broken and brought to naught.

There is a great deal of emphasis and significancy in the word Rump-entur,
and it is very well and properly translated from the Original; and all the
weight of my following Discourse must rest upon it. Oh! Rump-entur, they shall
be broken in pieces, like a potters vessel: Their snares, as it is in another
Psalm, Rump-entur, shall be broken. And (oh the Comfort is there) we shall be
delivered, like a bird from the snares of the fouler, from these wicked men,
whether they be Parliament Men, Committee Men, Excise men, Great-men,
Little-men, Horsemen, Footmen, Head-men, Rump men; from all these in time we
shall be delivered.

But then thirdly, beloved, an other reason of our Doctrine is, that it is so,
because the Power and Authority (as well in the foundation, as in the exercise
and use of it) of wicked men, is a wicked and ungodly power: And although they
may be permitted for a time by the Almighty to tyranize, and usurp, and reign,
and be a plague and scourge to his people, the better to try their faith and
other graces; yet at the last, these wicked men Rump-entur shall be broken, I
say, they shall be broken, as a knavish, cheating bankrupt is broken.

Fourthly, It is so, because Divine Promises never are defeated for want of
performances, either in respect of power or good will in the Almighty, in his
own due time. And therefore (as we have lately seen by good and happy
experience, even amongst our selves in this Nation) the Arms of our wicked
Rump-men, and their wicked Army-men, rump-untur they are broken: Their credit
is banckrupt, and their confidence confounded.

Objection, But some perhaps will object, That all our Parliament men were not,
nor are not wicked men? And therefore that our honest secluded members and some
others non Rump untur, are not broken; nor their honest Religious and truly
Conscientious Arms and Forces Rump-untur are broken.

By way of Answer, I say, that it is very true, non Rump untur, they are not
broken, beloved, because they are Religious, Loyal and Honest Gentlemen, and
men of sound principles, and unspotted Reputations, and such as have nobly
asserted the just Rights and Prerogative of our King, and the lawful
privileges of Parliament. But they that are the wicked men in my Text, qui
Rump-untur, who are broken, are such, as, according to the exquisite method
held forth by a learned Author in his Metaphor of Mali, viz. Much Ale Little
Thrift; I shall discover and reveal to you, (I say, in that manner and form)
by dichotomizing, dissecting, dividing and taking in pieces the Letters
contained in the first syllable of the Verb Rump-entur (in my Text, being four
in number) and ranging them (as in several Columns) whereby you shall, beloved,
more plainly and easily understand and distinguish, who those wicked Rump-men,
are, R. U. M. P. Regicides, Usurpers, Murderers, Perjurers, Rebellious,
Unrighteous Malicious Perfidious, Ravenous, Ungracious Monstrous persecutors
Riotous, Violent Malevolent, plunderers Reprobate, Ungodly, Machiavellian
Politicians Refractory, Vulturous Mordacious Pilers and pollers Rancorous,
Villainous, Malignant projectors Rotten, Unholy Mungrel, Professors, Railing,
Unreaso^able most memorable, profaners Revengfull Unruly Mechanic praecisians
Repugnant Untractable Morose Puritans, Rapacious, Usurious Malapert Publicans
Rammish Venereous, Maleficous Panders Renowned, Unparalled Manifest
pick-pockets Regrating, unmesurable miserable purveyors Reptitious,
vainglorious Mountebank Patriots Renegados Violators Multipliers Protectors of
of of of Religion, Uniformity Misery, Popery Ruiners Vilifiers Masters Props of
of of of Reformation Urbanity mis-rule, pravity Ransacking Vehement Merciless
praedators Rifling Unchristian Moss-trooping, pillagers Reprievless
Unpardonable maledict proditors Rope Vane Martin, Pox and and and and Robbery,
Vanity, Mildmay, Priapisme, Religious Veridicous Mercurius, Politicus.

Beloved, as the Letters of this syllable Rump, have denoted and described unto
you, the persons, properties and qualities of our wicked and ungodly Rump-men:
So in the like manner, they will demonstrate unto you the Characters of
Religious, Honorable, and honest men; as for one example instead of many: R U.
M. P. Renowned, Victorious, Monck, Protestant. Reformer of Vindicator of
Moderator of Protector of Religion, Verity, Monstrosity, Purity. Restorer of
Vanquisher of Mitigator of Purger of Royalty, Usurpation, Misery, Profaness.
Repressor of Voucher of Molitor of Patron of Rebellion, Unity, Monarchy,
Parliaments.

I might be voluminous, beloved, if I would, in such Characters and
descriptions; but I shall content my self with what I have held forth unto you,
and confine my self in as much brevity as I can.

But as I have proved my Doctrine, by modern examples, in our own knowledge and
remembrance, as well as by sollid and substantial Reasons and Arguments; give
me leave, I pray, to vouch a few of more ancient Authority; and I shall then
draw my self and you (beloved) to a speedy Conclusion.

R. U. M. P. Richard the third, was an Usurper, Murderer, Poysoner.

And his Arms were broken at Bosworth field (before he had tyranized two years
and three months) by Henry the seventh.

Oliver Cromwell (his wicked successor) was a Rebellious, Usurping, Murderous
Protector.

And what are become of his Arms, I pray you, are they not all broken? Yea, as
well his material arms in the field, as his ficticious arms in his Shield,
Rump-untur, they are all broken: And why? Was he not (I beseech you)

A Renowned Runnagate; Voracious Vultur; Memorable Martyr-Monger, Prodigious
plot-maker.

Reproach to Religion, Vanguard to Violence, Monster to Majesty, Pest to
Parliaments.

I might instance also in some other memorable examples, as,

Ravilliac the Regicide, Vatinius the Vicious, Masianiello the Mortiferous, and
Parson Peter's.

But let the last suffice, if you please, instead of a thousand: Parson Peter's,
I say, beloved, he that is a R. U. M. P. Racovian Virginity Ministerial
Papistical Ranter, Vitiator, Mammonist, Puritan.

And thus have I done with Examples; a president or two more, I might have
cited, but being they were so impious and infamous (as Bradshaw, Lisle, and the
like) and to all the world so publicly notorious, I pray let us acquiesce in
the goodness and providence of the Almighty, who has broken them all in
pieces; Rump-unter, they are broken: Those bloody Regicides and Murderers of
Royallists, Rump-untur.

Having thus (beloved) fully proved unto you and holden forth the truth of my
doctrine, I shall twist up all together like a Rump-us or Trail of Vines, in
the French Rump-otineta, and dismiss you hence after a word or two of Use and
Application.

1. Is it so, the Arms of the wicked Rump-entur, shall be broken. Then this
serves for a use of Conviction and reproof of all the wicked men in the world,
that since it is true that wicked Rump-men, Army-men, Committee Men,
Excise-men, and so forth, Rump-untur are broken, confounded and brought to
naught; The wicked also notwithstanding their great strength and policy,
confidences and confederacies, Rump-entur, shall be broken.

2. As it serves for conviction and reproof of wicked men, it may also serve
for information and instruction of others that are good men, that only the
Arms of the wicked Rump-entur shall be broken, Rebellious Arms, Anabaptists
Arms, Lambert's Arms, Desboroughs Arms, Hewsons Arms, and his neck too,
Rump-entur all shall be broken. Not General Monck his Arms, nor General
Mountague his Arms, beloved, but the Arms of the wicked, Rump entur shall be
broken.

3. It serves for an excellent use of Consolation to the Saints, that since it
is so that the Arms of the wicked Rump-entur, shall be broken.

Then let us triumph and rejoice in the late providence and dispensations
amongst us, that since it has mercifully pleased the divine Justice and
Goodness to break the Arms of our wicked Rump-men, who were such, as I have
before characterised under the Letters of that infamous Syllable; So for our
Comfort, all other wicked Men, and their wicked Arms and forces in due time
Rump-entur, shall be booken, dissolved and confounded, and brought to naught.

4. It may also serve for a Use of Trial and Examination, that we should
examine and scrutinize our selves, whether any of us in this Meeting House be
of that wicked kind of men, that are described in the holding forth of my Text
unto you, for if we be, assuredly then we may conclude, that in the end
Rump-emur, we shall be broken.

5. It may also serve for Caution and Warning to us, that since the Arms of
the wicked Rump-entur, shall be broken, We our selves be warned to take heed,
either of being such wicked men, or joining our selves with any wicked men's
Arms, for in the end Rump-entur, they shall be broken.

6. It may very well hold forth unto us also an Use of Exhortation, that we
should labor and endeavor so to comport and behave our selves in a religious
and conscionable way in the affairs of this world, as that if we should be
necessitated to take up Arms for our just defense against Usurpation and
Oppression, we may not fall under the curse and judgment of the wicked in my
Text, The Arms of the wicked Rump-entur shall be broken.

And for our better encouragement to practice the ways of Religion, let us be
excited and stirred up in our duty by a few Motives.

1. Consider (beloved) that a little that is honestly gotten with Gods
blessing, is better than all the gold in Hispaniola, Jamaica and the West
Indies, which our late Usurper would have gotten in the Devil's name, if he
could, with the loss of twenty thousand Souls and the honor of the Nation to
boot.

2. Consider, That wickedness and wicked men shall surely receive the guerdon
of their Iniquity: as certainly as Lambert was in the Tower, and Sir George
Booth at liberty and acquitted for Treason.

3. Consider, That good men are allways honored of the righteous; and their
Names are lovely, as a sweet smelling savor, as General Monck is to the City
of London, and the good people of these nations; whereas our wicked and
abominable rump-men stink worse in the Organs of all honest men, than the
pollution of the defiled and contaminated Alderman's Posteriors.

4. Consider, That the Arms of good men are very strong Arms, and are
fortified strongly with divine benediction and security; whereas the Arms of
the wicked are always a compact and a company of rotten Members; and how easy a
thing it is to break a rotten Member, or limb of a corrupt and degeneted
person, our daily experience will fully evidence and evince to us.

5. Consider the good Condition of good men (such as fear God and honor the
King) as our Christian duty is (beloved) their Arms non Rump-entur, they shall
not be broken, they are the Arms of the wicked that are and shall be broken.
Such wicked men, as break all the Laws of God without fear, and all the Laws of
the Realm without shame, and all the Laws of Nations without comparison; That
pull down the Church to set up their States, murder their King to reign in his
stead, keep out his Son to keep his Inheritance; These wicked men ex necesse
Rump-entur they must be broken.

A word only to tell you how they must be broken, and I conclude.

Rump-antur, let them be broken, in the very same manner, as they have broken
others, but with a different respect. As they murdered their King, let them
have the execution of rebellious Traitors. As they sold his Lands and revenues
amongst themselves, let them be reinvested in the Crown, as forfeited for
Treason and so forth. This Law of Retaliation is an equitable and most
excellent Law. Is it not better for the good of their souls, that they should
be hanged by the hand of Justice, than be felones de se, and hang up themselves
as Alderman Hoyle did, or to run stark mad and die in despair upon the bare
conviction of a parrat, as young Rowland Wilson did? or be so hard put to it by
the Devil for security, as to give Bond 3 or 4 days before for their
appearance in the Tartarian Court, as old Oliver did?

These are sad Truths (Beloved) I confess,

But now to conclude, let me seriously request you to consider seriously what
has been held forth unto you at this Season: Remember the Text, The Arms of
the wicked Rump-entur: recollect the Doctrine, the Reasons, the Examples, the
Uses with the Motives, the Method that you are to take. Sit not wickedly down
on your Rumps, as the Rump-men did contemning and proudly disdaining all
Christian admonition an reproof. No (beloved) go home and do as you would be
done unto: Deal honestly, justly, religiously, that the cries of the fatherless
and widows ascend not up to heaven against you for vengeance; and what you do,
do it seasonably, seriously, speedily, Give unto Caesar the things that are
Cesars, and unto God the things that are Gods, and then in spite of all
opposition, strength, policy, combination and confederacy, the words of my Text
shall be fully verifyed, The Arms of the wicked RUMP-ENTUR.

Vivat Rex, currat Lex, vigeat Grex, Amen.

