THE CYPRIANICK-BISHOP Examined, and Found not to be a DIOCESAN, Nor to have
Superior Power to A Parish Minister, or PRESBYTERIAN MODERATOR: Being an ANSWER
to J. S. his Principles of the CYPRIANICK-AGE, With Regard to Episcopal Power
and Jurisdiction.

TOGETHER WITH An APPENDIX, In ANSWER to a Railing Preface to a BOOK,
Entitled, The Fundamental Charter of PRESBYTERY.

By GILBERT RVLE, one of the Ministers of the City, and Principal of the
College, of Edinburgh.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1696.

THE PREFACE.
OF this Controversy about Episcopacy, the Learned Vitringa, de Synagog. vet.
lib. 2. C. 2. P. 474. has this Observation; a quo tempore Ecclesia Reformati
nominis, secessionem fecit a Pontificia Romana, and diversam recepit regiminis
formam, tantopere praeferbuit litibus, de vero typo Regiminis Ecclesiae, ut
nulla controversia fere eruditorum calamos tam diu, tam serio, and
pertinaciter, and tanto utrinque studio and contentione, and vincendi tam spe,
quam desiderio, exercuerit, atque haec ipsa. It also has long divided the
Church in these Nations, and seems, in our days, to be further from
Accommodation, than ever: Presbyterians, on the one Hand, growing daily more
and more clear, and confident, that Parity is of Divine Institution, and cannot
lawfully be changed, though mean while, they have Charity to good Men who are
otherwise minded: and some of our Episcopal Brethren, on the other side,
beginning to talk higher for a Jus Divinum to be for Prelacy, than their
Predecessors did: and counting all the Societies of Christians which are
without Bishops, to be no Churches of Christ, but a Company of damnable
Schismatics; among whom there can be no Salvation: if these men be for Peace,
let any judge. But it is unaccountable, that in a Matter that Salvation does so
much depend upon, in their Opinion, they should lay so much stress (as they
commonly do) on the Opinions of Men, and the Testimonies of the ancient Church:
seeing, 1. All, except Papi^^s, agree, that Matters of Faith, and which
Salvation depends on, must be determined only by Scripture: and that God
speaking in his Word, is the only Judge in such Controversies. Secondly, The
Fathers themselves plead for this, and disown both each himself, and one
another as either Judge, or sufficient Witness in such Debates: Optat. Milevit.
contra Parmen. lib. 5. de Coelo quaerendus est judex, sed ut quid pulsamus ad
Coelum cum habeamus hic in Evangelio Testamentum. Jerome in a Debate with
August. had cited seven Fathers for his Opinion, and craved leave to err, (if
he did err) with so many Learned Doctors, to whom Augustine replied, ipse mihi
pro his omnibus, imo supra hos omnes, Apostolus Paulus occurit, ad ipsum
confugio, ad ipsum omnes qui aliud sentiunt provoco, etc. Augustine. Hieron. Ep.
19. the same August. Ep. 3. Fortunatiano. Neque enim ( says he) quorumlibet
disputationes quamvis Catholicorum, and laudatorum hominum velut Scripturas
Canonicas habere debemus, ut nobis non liceat salva honorificentia, quae illis
debetur, aliquid contra etc. and Tom. 2. Ep. 112. Paulinae: nunquid ullo modo
Evangelio nos comparabis, aut scripta nostra ( he speaks of himself and
Ambrose) Scripturis Canonicis coaequabis? Profecto si recte in judicando sapis,
long nos infra vides ab illa authoritate distare. Yea, in particular, this
mark of Insufficiency to prove a Divine Truth, is set on Cyprian' s Authority,
by Augustine, l. 2. contra Crescon. cap. 32. Hujus Epistolae authoritate ego
non teneor; quia literas Cypriani non ut Canonicas habeo. Et ibid. c. 31. Nos
nullam Cypriano facimus injuriam, cum ejus quaslibet literas a Canononica
divinarum literarum authoritate distinguimus. Thirdly, It is observable, that
even the Affrican Fathers, after Cyprian, do not speak so high of Episcopal
Praelation, as Cyprian does; as Augustine, Cited in the Book it self, his
secundum honorum vocabula, and usus obtinuit; are two considerable Diminutives,
and derogate the one from the Degree of Episcopal Authority, the other from the
Perpetuity and Divine Right of it. And Primasius Uticensis calls the
Presbyterate, secundus, and pene unus Gradus cum Episcopatu; sicut multis
Scripturarum Testimoniis comprobatur. In Tim. 1. C. 3. Now these two Affrican
Bishops could not but know Cyprian' s mind, and therefore they either differed
from him in this Matter, or (which I rather think) Cyprian used higher, and
more keen Expressions, for the same things, and that out of a peculiar Zeal,
that he had for the Dignity of the Church; and to magnify his Office.
Fourthly, It is evident that the Ancient Bishops, and other Divines, when they
gave Marks of the True Church, brought them always from the Scripture, not from
Humane Testimony. August. Ep. 50. Bonifacio Comiti: in Sanctis Libris ubi
manifestatur Dominus Christus, ibi and ejus Ecclesia declaratur: Where also he
Charge them with Wonderful Blindness, who seek Christ in the Scripture, and
the Church in Humane Writings. Also Cyprian. Ep. Coecilio; and in that to
Pompeius, proves that we must follow Christ and his written Word only, as our
Rule, and not old Customs and Practices. The same thing Gerson proves, in a
Sermon before the Pope, and asserteth that the Scripture is sufficient for the
Government of the Church: and calls it Blasphemy to say, that it can be
better done by men's Inventions. Fifthly, The Ancient Bishops (even such of them
as were Holy and Humble,) might have too high Thoughts of their own Praelation,
and too much Inclination to greaten it. That Temper appeared among the
Apostles, while Christ was with them. Great Corruptions in the Church have
Insensibly had their Beginning from Good and Zealous Men. Sixthly, Many Famous
and Learned Bishops, much later than these called Fathers, and yet before the
Reformation from Popery, held that Bishops and Presbyters were by Divine
Institution every way one, so Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury on Philip. 1.
and Tit. 1. Rich. Armachan. in quaest. Armenorum: Aeneas Sylvius, ( afterward
Pope Pius secundus) Ep. 130; which is concerning his Conference with the
Ministers of the Taborites. Also in the time of the Reformation, the English
Bishops and Clergy, who still were Popish, in the Book called the Institution
of a Christian Man; Chap. of the Sacrament of Orders. Cassander in his
Consultation Art. 14. says, non convenit inter Theologos, and Canonistas, an
Episcopatus ponendus inter Ordines Ecclesiasticos: convenit autem inter omnes,
Apostolorum Aetate inter Episcopos and Presbyteros nullum Discrimen, etc
Seventhly, Even Mr. Dodwell (as high as he is for Episcopal Authority,) says,
that the first Bishops were made by Presbyters: and that it behoved to be so,
otherwise the Succession could not be secured in the first times of
Persecution. How this consists either with our Author's Book or with his own,
against Separation from the Episcopal Chairs, let the Reader judge. It Is true,
Mr. Dodwell (it is 521, 522.) pretends not to be afraid of the Consequence of
this Assertion, with Respect to the Bishop's absolute Power, because Kings also
are Invested by their Subjects, (this Parallel I might, but shall not Debate
with him,) but how can he, on this Supposition, defend their sole Power of
Ordination to be of Divine Right; I cannot see, but shall be glad to be
instructed. I insist not on the Suspicion, that Cyprian' s Epistles are
corrupted; though Augustine Ep. 48. Vincentio; has these words, neque enim
potuit integritas atque notitia literarum unius quantumlibet illustris
Episcopi, ( Cyprian scil.) custodiri quemadmodum Scriptura Canonica, etc. What
is said, may derogate much from the Testimonies that my Antagonist brings,
and warrant our putting a sense on them, different from the sound they have in
the Ears of this Author, and some others of his Persuasion. The Reader may
know, that our Debate is not about the Jus, but Factum; not how the Church
should be Governed, but how it was done in the Age mentioned. In which, I
affirm that though it is manifest, that the Bishop was above the Presbyter in
Dignity and Order, yet he did not Rule the Church by himself, but the
Presbyters had equal Power with him in managing Church Government.

THE Cyprianick-Bishop Examined, etc.
SOME of the Episcopal Clergy of Scotland, who have lost their places, wherein
they sat silent, without troubling the Presbyterians with their Controversal
Writings (for they then dealt with them by other Weapons) are now at leisure to
maintain the Stickle that way: and some are so irritated by their Losses, that
much more of their passionat Resentment, and personal Reflections against such
as never did them wrong, appears in their Books, than Strength of Arguments
for what they hold in our present Debates; I have with much weariness and
Reluctance considered some of these Pieces: and hoped our Debates had been at
an end, after their silence for some time, and that we should no more be that
way diverted from our more necessary Work: till I lately met with a Treatise
called the Principles of the Cyprianick Age, etc. which I find to be written in
a more Scholar like and less unchristian Strain, than what I have hitherto
seen from these men. He deals fairly by Arguments, tho I am not terrified nor
convinced by the Strength of them, and I am resolved to treat him with the same
Civility, and for the weight of my reasonings, let the Reader judge. It is not
Victory, but the clearing and maintaining of Truth, that I design; and shall
not be ashamed to become his Proselyte, if what I hold be found to be an Error.

. 2. Before I consider his Book in the particular Contents of it, I shall make
a few general Remarks about it. 1. Then, if we should grant all that he
pleads for, it would not ruin the Cause of Presbyterians, nor establish
Prelacy: It would amount to no more but this, that one Presbyterian, and he
among the meanest of them, did mistake in matter of Fact, as it is related in
the Ancient History. He might know, that neither the Presbyterians generally,
nor that Author in particular, did ever lay the Stress of their Cause on the
Practice or Principles of the Church, after the Apostolic Age: Though we will
not yield the Suffrage of later Antiquity to be for our Adversaries: yet that
is the Antiquity that we build upon; for it is Divine, not humane Authority
that we take for the Rule of our Belief and Practice, in the matter of
Church Government, and managing the Affairs of the House of GOD. Timothy was to
be guided by it, 1 Timothy 3 14, 15. and so will we. And even the Defender of the
Vindication against the Apologist, or his Friend, (as our Author calls him,
P. 4.) has fully declared his Opinion to this purpose; Rational Defense of
Nonconformity, P. 158. which Book our Author seems to be no stranger to; for
he is ( P. 69) at pains to cite and try his critical Skill upon a Passage in
it. He could not then, think to silence Presbyterians by this his Attempt: we
have other Grounds, if we were beaten from this, as I hope we shall not. If his
Book was written only to convince the World, that he who wrote the Defense of
the Vindication against the Apologist, is not infallible in all that he
asserteth; he might have spared his pains: that should easily have been yielded
to him. To write a Book of Twelve Sheets on such a Subject, is such Work as we
have no time for. Egregiam vero laudem, and spolia ampla -- He had read
Cyprian's Epistles (which are not very voluminous) and had made a Collection of
Citations; and thus they must have a vent.

. 3. The Passage that he builds his whole Fabric upon, was by the Defender
(which is my second Remark) set down with that Brevity that was suitable to the
purpose in hand; though may be not sufficient to preclude all the critical Notes
that a Man of this Author's Skill and Learning could make, when he is so
disposed to do* The Apologist had, in a rambling and incoherent way, started a
Number of Debates that are between us and the Prelatists, insisting on none of
them: And the Defender thought not fit to make a large Treatise on each of
these Heads, but answered what he proposed, with a suitable succinctness; If he
had then thought it convenient, or had imagined that so large a Book as our
Author's, would have been built on this Passage, he would have made the
Foundation broader, though not more commodious for what this Author builds on
it: He could have told him, that though he might be bold to venture his Credit on
the Cyprianick Age, being more on our side than on that of our Adversaries; And
though our Cause, duly and distinctly stated, should suffer no loss by being
tried at that Bar, yet neither did he venture any bodies Reputation but his
own, nor will he quit the more divine Letters Patents that we have for
Presbytrey, to rest in this, either as our only* or our chief Strength.
Notwithstanding of what I have now remarked concerning this Author snatching at
a fancied Advantage against us, I hope to make it evidently appear that he has
wholly missed his Aim, and that these two or three Lines of my Book will stand
against the shock of his long Treatise.

. 4. I thirdly observe that this Author, who is so profuse in his Refutation of
a few Lines in my Book, has, in his own, given occasion *to any one who were
of as scripturient a Disposition as himself) for vast Volums: as in his
sarcastick denial of Ruling Elders, P. 8. That Presbyters, in the Cyprianick
Age, were seldom called Pastors. P. 9. That there can be no Church without a
Bishop. P. 19. That the Bishops Power is Monarchical. p. 22. That the Bishops
Deed is the Churches Act. p. 24. That Episcopacy is of Divine Institution. p.
26. That he is subordinate to none. p. 27, 28, 35. That the Bishop is a supreme
Ecclesiastical Magistrate. p. 43. And Majesty is ascribed to him, Ibid. he is
called a Sovereign and Peerless Governor. p. 65. Supreme and unaccountable
Power is ascribed to him. p. 67. These, and many more such Assertions, are the
Stars by which his Treatises is bespangled: And each of them might afford
matter for a long Discourse, to one who has nothing else to do. A fourth
Remark is, that through the whole course of his Argumentations he uses such
confidence, and these Pretenses to conclusive and irrefragable evidence, as may
fright an unintelligent or unwarrie Reader; while the Strength of his
Ratiocinations is no way proportionable, but apparent to be built on Words
rather than Matter. Every one knows that the Signification of several Words
used about Ecclesiastical Things in Cyprian's time, was far different from what
is our modern Dialect. The truth of this will, I hope, be more fully manifest
in our considering his particular Arguments.

. 5. My Assertion against which his Book is levelled, he seems to wonder at,
as strangely rash, and a putting our being, or not being. Schismatics, on a
desperate Issue. The Assertion is, a Bishop in Cyprian's time was not a
Diocesan, with sole Power of Jurisdiction and Ordination: If he prove that, we
shall give Cyprian, and him, leave to call us Schismatics. A Bishop, then, was
the Pastor of a Flock, or the Moderator of a Presbytery: If he can prove that
we separate from our Pastors, or from the Presbytery, with their Moderator,
under whose Inspection we ought to be, let him call us what he will: But we
disown the Bishops in Scotland from being our Bishops; we can neither own their
Episcopal Authority, nor any pastoral Relation they have to us. He seems p.
1. to divide his Book into two parts: First, to take to Task what I had said;
to wit, the words above set down. 2. to add, perchance, something concerning
our main Argument. The first part he has largely insisted on: with what
Strength or Success, I am now to examine. Of the 2, I find nothing, but that,
p. 94. he has fairly waved it; But with confidence that he could accomplish
it: and leaving to the person to whom he directs this long Letter, to command
him to prosecute what is left undone. The Import of which is, that it is much
more his Inclination to write ad hominem, against a particular person; than ad
rem, for that which he takes to be the truth of God.

. 6. His first work is to expose the abovementioned Passage in my Book, as
yielding a large Field, if one had a mind to catch at Words, and that it were
easy to insist on such escapes, if one had a mind for it. His first Remark is,
Suppose the word Diocese was not in use in St. Cyprian's time, as applied to a
Bishops District, does it follow that the thing now signified by it was not
then in use. Answ. Pray Sir, who made that Consequence: the Words cited (catch
at them as much as you will) import no such Consequence, and design no more but
that which we call now a Diocesan Bishop, with sole Power of Jurisdiction and
Ordination, was not in that Age. His next Remark is in this Question, What
could move him (the Author of the Passage now under Debate) to insinuate that
we assign the sole power of Jurisdiction and Ordination to our Diocesan Bishop.
Answ. It is a greater wonder, what should move this Author to except against
our thinking that they assign such Power to their Bishop, seeing himself
ascribes all that Power to the Cyprianick-Bishop, and affirms him to be of
Divine Institution; as has been already observed: Has he not said, that the
Bishops Power is Monarchial, page 23, 32. and expressly, page 38. near the end
he says, the Bishop had the sole Power of Ordination: and says, it has been
frequently and fully proved by learned men, that he need not insist on it: and
page 39. tells us of Cyprian's Ordaining without asking the consent of the
Clergy or People: and pleading for this as the Right of all Bishops. If he do
not ascribe this sole Power to his Scots-Bishops, then ( ex tuo ore) they are
not the Bishops that Christ instituted: Nor these of the Cyprianick-Age; nor
these for whom the learned men that he speaks of, has pleaded: neither can I
guess what kind of Animals he will make them: they must be a species of Bishops
that never man pleaded for but himself. I suppose his Lords the Bishops will
give him small thanks thus for pleading their Cause. What I have now observed,
shows his Questions to be impertinent, viz. When did our Bishops claim that
Power, and when was it ascribed to them by this Constitution? When did they
exercise it? When was it thought necessary for raising a Bishop to all the due
Elevations of the Episcopal Authority? I give this general Answer to all these
Questions: our Scots Bishops look on themselves, and are looked on by their
Underlings, and by this Author, as Scripture-Bishops; or at least, as
Primitive-Bishops, and the Bishops that the learned men of this, and the
preceding Ages have pleaded for: but our Author says these had the Power we
now speak of: and therefore he must say, that that Power was given them by the
Institution; that they do claim it, and ought to claim it, that it is necessary
for their due Elevation. If they shun to exercise it, at least openly, by not
laying on of Hands without Presbyters; it is because they know that practice
cannot take, nor be born with in a Nation where Parity has been so much known,
and generally liked: I always understood that the main thing debated between us
and the Prelatists, was about the sole Power of Jurisdiction and Ordination:
and I am not alone in this; the Synod of London, Vindication of Presbyterial
Government; page 24. proposes the Controversy in the same Words. So does also
Smectymnus,. 8, 9. and I think he will not find many (if any one) of either
side, who handles this Controversy without respect to this Power. To his
Question, When was it ascribed to them by the Constitution: I Answer, it was
done, with respect ^o Ordination, anno 1635, in the Canons and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical, chap. 2.. 3. where the Examination of the Candidate (and
consequently the Power of determining who shall be ordained) is laid on the
Bishop: and he is allowed to perform this Examination by himself, or his
Chaplain. And for Jurisdiction, a person ordained to a Charge may not Preach,
unless he be also licensed by the Bishop, ibid. chap. 7.. 5 Nor may he refute
Error preached by another, unless he first ask and obtain leave of the Bishop,
ibid.. 7. Yea, a Presbyter may not go a Journey for some time, without the
Bishops leave: nor stay unduly at Edinburgh, but he must be censured by the
Bishop; chap. 4.. 3, 5. And in general, in all these Canons, all
Church Discipline is laid on the Ordinary; that is the Bishop: not a word of
Censure inflicted by the Presbyters. Without the Bishop no Minister may appoint
a Fast; not in his own Congregation, chap. 14. and chap. 18.. 10. The Sentence
of Deprivation of a Presbyter is pronounced only by the Bishop: no consent of
Presbyters is sought; only the presence of three or four, whom the Bishop
calls, is required.

. 7. The import of the distinctions he uses for illustrating this Matter must
be, that our Scots-Bishops have in Jurisdiction and Ordination, a chief Power,
though not a sole Power: a Power superior to, but not exclusive of other Powers:
a Power without, and against which no Power can act; but not a Power destroying
and disabling all other Powers. We should better have understood him if he had
opened the terms of these Distinctions: I confess, qui been distinguit been
docet, but not qui obscure distinguit. I observe none of these Distinctions
clear to us, whether he thinks our Bishops can Ordain, Depose, etc. without
the concurrence of Presbyters, acting authoritatively with them: as he
alleges the Cyprianick-Bishops might do: and seeing he does not determine
this, I know not what his Distinctions serve for, but to make a noise with
Words. His first distinction between chief and sole Power, if easily made (as
he says) is not so easily applied to the case in hand: for our Question is
about sole Power, and if he deny that to them, whatever other Power he give
them, he makes them no such Bishops as he after pleads for. Beside, the word
chief is ambiguous; it may be taken either for Dignity, that the Bishop's Power
though the same with the Presbyters, yet is more conspicuous because of the
dignity of the Bishops person or office: or that the Bishop can do some acts of
Power which the Presbyter cannot do: or that the Presbyter's Power is derived
from the Bishop, or that he cannot exercise it unless the Bishop pleases: The
first Sense, I suppose will not please our Bishops, for it imports no
Imparity of Power. In all the other Senses, the Bishop's Power is sole; at
least as to these things about which he has that Power. His second Distinction
is the same, in different words: the third differs little; for if Presbyters
cannot act except the Bishop please, and if they must follow his Light,
whatever be their own, I see not what Power they have. What Power is given to
our Bishops by their Constitution, I shall not farther determine; but it may be
made appear, that they have exercised, and consequently claimed a Power over
whole Presbyteries, which makes void all their Power, while they have
commanded them to desist from proceeding to Censure Scandalous Offenders; of
which I can give Instances. His third and last Remark is, that that part of my
Definition of a Bishop is loose and ambiguous, wherein I call him the Pastor
of a Flock: for says he, may not a Bishop and his Diocese be called a Pastor
and his Flock, as well as a Presbyterian Minister and his Parish? Answ. He
might easily have understood my words in our ordinary Dialect, now in use; and
then all Ambiguity had evanished: but I cannot make him understand my words
unless he will: we use not to call a Bishops Diocese the Flock, nor him the
Pastor: nor did Scripture so use these terms; seeing the Pastor is to feed the
Flock, Act. 20. 28. which he must do, not only by Ruling, but also by Teaching;
which I am sure a Bishop cannot to his Diocese. That a Bishop in our modern
sense, was called the Pastor, and such a Diocese as ours, his Flock, in
Cyprian's time, we deny: and shall consider his Proofs of this, when he shall
propose them. I have run over his large field, and find not what fruit he has
reaped from it: nor the escapes that he thinks it so easy to insist on, p. 2.
at the end.

. 8. In the sense he gives of what I had asserted, which he enlarges upon, p.
3. I have little to observe: for I am ready to maintain all that he there
makes to be my Opinion; except, that he says, that in the Presbyterian sense,
a Moderator, as such, is no Church-Governour; which I cannot agree to: but
because he has this over again, and improves against us that Notion, (which is
his own, none of ours,) p. 35, 36. I shall there consider it, viz.. 20. It is
true, the Vindication of Chapter of S. in Answer to the the ten Questions, Q. 1..
5. Says, that a Moderator as such, is no Church-Governour; but it is evident
to any who impartially considers what is there said, that no more is meant,
but that he is not a Church-Governour of another Species from the rest, or who
has another sort of Authority than they, or a Superior Power to them: not, as
our Author would improve it, that it is not needful that he has the same
Church Power with the rest; but may be a Heathen, as he affirms, p. 35, 36.
Also because he infers from what I had said, that my Opinion is, that in
Cyprian's time, the Church was governed by Presbyters Acting in Parity, after
the Presbyterian Model, p. 4. It will be needful, before I examine his
Arguments, to give a more full and distinct Account of my thoughts in this
Matter, than is done in that short hint which his whole Book is employed
against: and this is the rather needful, because my Antagonist does not so
plainly as were to be wished, state the Controversy, when he says; p. 4. If I
shall prove, first, that a Bishop in Cyprian's time, was more than the Pastor
of a Flock or Moderator of a Presbytery, in the Presbyterian sense. 2. That he
had really Genuine Episcopal or Prelatick Power. 3. That he Acted in a real
Superiority over, not in Parity with Pastors; our Author is bound to
acknowledge himself and his Brethren to be Schismatics. I shall state the
Question a little more distinctly; but not disown any of the Terms in which he
has put the Questions, all which three, are indeed but one Question.

. 9. Let it then be considered first, that we never thought, nor said, that
Church Government was in all it is Modes and Circumstances in the third Century,
(in which Cyprian lived) the same with what it is now among Scots
Presbyterians: the Substance of Government may remain, and yet considerable
Alterations be made in the Modes of mannaging it, in the Succession of Years;
much more of Ages: We confess many words relating to Church-Offices, Officers,
and Administrations, signified another thing then, than they do in our Modern
Dialect: these we call Moderators, and my Antagonist calls Bishops, were then
constant; among us they serve in that Station but for some small time, and give
place to others: in the Affrican Church these they called Primates, (whom yet
we deny to have had either Sole, or Superior Jurisdiction) were the eldest
Minister of every Province; which afterward was changed* and they chosen
according to their Personal Qualifications: and Metropolitans were the Bishops
of the chief Cities; which had no Superior Power; but only sometimes praesided
in Synods. Cyprian disowned that any of them was Episcopus Episcoporum. See no
Evidence for Diocesan Churches or Bishops, p. 28. Also L' Arroque adversar.
Sacr. Lib. 2. C. 14. makes this plain. And Leidecker. dissert. de statu
Eccles. Affric.. 7. he shows that Primates were above Metropolitans in
Dignity, and that they first attained that Degree by their Age, reckoning it
from their Ordination: and the other from the City where they had their Charge.
Yea there has been no Age of Old, or in later times, in which there have not
been some lesser differences in Management, even among Churches which used the
same Species of Church Government, for Substance: as at this day, in Scotland,
Low Countries, Geneva, among the Switzers; etc. Some Churches are more and some
less pure, and near to the Pattern: and yet all governed by Presbyters Acting
in Parity: and among the Prelatists, Prelatick Power is higher in one Church
than in another; as in England now, and in Scotland of late? Wherefore our
Author must not think to triumph, if he can show some difference between the
Cyprianick Age, and our Way. Cypr. Ep. 75.. 5. Firmilian writing to Cyprian,
has Instances to show, that in diverse Churches, they had diverse Practices,
and yet kept Peace, one with another. 2. We deny not that in Cyprian's time,
there was some Advances made toward some sort of Prelacy; though the Parity of
Power was not then wholly taken away: as the Mystery of Iniquity, in other
things, so in that, did begin early to Work even in the days of the Apostles,
when Diotrephes did (...), affected to be primus Presbyter, or (...), or
Moderator, in their Meetings: and this (...) becoming fixed, and constant after
the Apostles times, (these good Men not foreseeing the ill Use that others
would make of that Handle given them) it did, by insensible Degrees, degenerate
into an undue Usurpation: (as it is hard to get Power kept within it is due
Bounds, even among the best men) and the Primitive Power of Presbyters, was
gradually wrested out of their hands, by the Ambition of some, and by the
innocent Simplicity of others. Many other Corruptions had crept into the Church
by that time, and this Declension from absolute parity went along with them:
the name (...) began to be appropriat to the (...); and that Custom being
confirmed by a little time, made even humble men imagine, that some different
Power was signified by that name, that they had distinct from others; which the
rest, who were so usurped upon, did too easily yield; minding more the Work of
Feeding, than of Ruling the Flock: and not seeing the fatal Consequents of it,
which afterward appeared, and were not discovered, till it was too late to
retrieve them. 3. It is evident from the History of the first Ages, that as
Episcopacy did not arrive to it is height of a sudden; so it was not at the same
time settled in all the places where it obtained at last: the Ambition of some,
or at least their too big Thoughts of the Power that belonged to them, and the
Easyness of their Com-Presbyters, made it in one place make quicker Advances,
while the Humility, and sound Judgment of others, together with the Vigilance
of these who with them governed the Church, retarded it is Progress in other
Churches. And it is certain, that, for as much as this Contagion of the Church
walked in the dark; yet it was observed, and opposed by some, as Aerius, Jerome,
and others; as will appear in our Progress. Leidecker. Dissert. de Statu
Eccles. Affric.. 7. Namque (inquit) uti ab Origin Episcopatus Ordinis and
Praesidentiae in Presbyterio titulus erat, (quamvis alibi suos terminos
egrederetur) in Africa vetus Libertas Presbyterii est retenta; dum Episcopi
praesidentium honor non dominatu in Ecclesiam, aut Presbyteros gauderent. This
he not only asserteth, but proves by diverse Testimonies.

. 10. Hence we may conclude, that our Author cannot prove what he pretends,
unless he make it appear, that Episcopal Power, (such as he pleads for) was
not only acted by some, but generally, in the Churches of the first, second,
and third Centuries; or approved by general Consent. Wherefore, if we can bring
Testimonies to prove a Parity of Power among Presbyters, and that Domination
over them by one was condemned; his bringing some Testimonies to the contrary,
will not be found concludent. I say not this, as if I were afraid he can prove
what he undertaketh, by the Authentic Suffrage of any one of the Fathers of
the first three Centuries: but that he may see what Weakness and Fallacy is in
his Reasonings on more Accounts than one. I may here add a Conjecture, on which
the Reader shall be desired to lay no more Weight than he pleases: that, seeing
it is confessed by the best Antiquaries, that we have but little Historical
Certainty of the first Ages of the Church, it is probable that more Opposition
might be made to the Tendency toward Church-Domination, than we have account
of: for the Topping Party might carry all before them, and others might be
suppressed, or what they did, buried in silence: especially considering that
meek men are often too apt, rather to suppress their Sentiments, than to make
much noise with them, to the hazarding of the Peace of the Church: and to groan
under Grievances, rather than cast the Church into a Convulsion by struggling;
when they do not foresee the greatness of the hazard that they fear. This, I
conceive, may be one part of that Sleep, that gives the Enemy advantage to sow
his Tares. I ground this Conjecture on the great difference that is between the
Scripture-account of Church Government, and that of after Ages; and that the
further we come down from the Scripture-times, the difference seems to be the
greater; and yet we have but often, small account of any sensible Change made
at any one time.

. 11. The Learned Author, to his main Proofs (as he speaks p. 4.) premitteth
a shrewd Presumption against what I hold: that generally, the great Champions
for Presbytery acknowledge that Episcopacy was in the Church long before
Cyprian's time: and he names Chamier, Blondel, Salmasius, the Synod of London,
Spanhemius, etc. What his etc. may contain in it is vast belly, I know not, but
I am not afraid of any of them he has mentioned; they are all Friends to the
Cause I maintain, and say no more than I have already said; but much against
his Sentiments. It had been easier for me to make this appear, if he had
thought fit to point at the Books, or Places of them, on which he groundeth his
Assertion; for some of these Authors have written much: however I hope to find
out in them what is sufficient to my purpose. I begin with Chamier; who,
Panstrat. Catholic. Tom. 2. Lib. 10. discourses on this Subject copiously: but
I find not one word in him, asserting that in the first three Centuries,
Bishops had the Rule of the Church above Presbyters, further than that they
were above them in Dignity, and by a Priority of Order; not of Jurisdiction:
far less that they had the sole Jurisdiction, which our Author pretends to
prove. On the contrary, that Learned Writer proves, C. 3. that there was no
Domination allowed in the Church, C. 5. that the Government of the several
Churches was Aristocratical: and he shows that all Presbyters at first were
equal; but that afterward, (as he cites Ambrose and Jerome) unus electus est,
qui omnium primus esset, and Episcopus diceretur. And on this he makes two
Observes: First, in Ecclesiae Primordiis, nullos tales Episcopos fuisse, qui
postea instituti fuere, qui suo jure reliquis e Clero praeessent. And he thence
infers the absolute Parity of Presbyters, de Jure. His second Observation
is, ne tunc quidem, cum hic Episcoporum a Presbyteris distinctorum ordo est
constitutus, fuisse Episcopos ut Monarchas, (see how he agrees with our
Author, p. 23, 32.) qui potestatem haberent in Clerum; sed Principes Electos,
qui rebus deliberandis praeessent, ut necesse est in omni Aristocratia. Where
he seems exactly to describe a Moderator, such as is in our Presbyteries, and
other Church Judicatories. After that C. 6. he had proved, that Jure Divino
Episcopus non est major Presbytero, (contrary to our Author, p. 26. C. 7. he
proves that the Government of Provinces was also Aristocratical; and does
evidently make an Archbishop or Metropolitan, no more than we make the
Moderator of a Synod, or of a General Assembly: I mean he allows them no more
Jurisdiction. Now let any judge, with what Brow my Antagonist could bring
Chamier for his Voucher, who so flatly contradicts the whole of his Book.

. 12. His next Author is Blondel; who will be found to do him no more Service:
For the whole Design and strain of his Apologia pro sententia Hieronomi is, to
prove that Episcopus and Presbyter were the same, as both in Name and Power, in
the Apostolic Age of the Church; so in Power in the first, second, third, and
much of the fourth Century; though he confesses that the Name, and some Majority
(not higher Jurisdiction) was sooner given to the Bishop. This is evident, for
S. I. p 4. he says that Jeromes toto orb decretum est ut unus de Presbyteris
caeteris superponeretur, occasioned by the Divisions among Christans, and
saying, Ego sum Pauli, etc. That this, I say, was quarto a Corinthiorum turbis
saeculo: and that Jerome said it, de sui temporis hominibus; and proves it
from Jerome's own words, which are, quando non idipsum omnes loquimur, and
alius dicit, ego sum Pauli, ego Appollo, ego Cephae, dividimus spiritus
unitatem, and eam in parts and in membra discerpimus. And he says, that
Jerome torquebat verba Paulina de Corinthiis, in eos: Nempe, sui temporis
homines, and p. 6, 7. he fully shows, that Jerome believed the Identity of
Bishop and Presbyter, from his blameing them who made Deacons equal to
Presbyters. i. e. to Bishops Also p. 8. that in Alexandria (of which Jerome
says, that a Marci temporibus ad Heracleam, Dionysiumque Presbyteri unum ex se
electum in excelsiori gradu collocatum Episcopum dixerunt) It was but Jusprimae
Cathedrae presbyteri inter collegas fratrem spontanea hac dignatione
honorantes, sedentis. and ibid: he says, ex Hieronomi sententia episcopalia
omnia ex aequo competebant: and that every one of them was equal Vrbico papae.
S. 2. Blondel proves all the Fathers of the three or four first Ages, to have
been of the same Opinion with Jerome. And p. 8. has this Transition, prodeant
jam (...) patrum acies, qui sanctum virum (Hieronymum) seu solitarium in tecto
passerem non relictum, doceant. This he proves from Clemens of Rome, from
Polycarp of Smyrna, from Hermes, from Pius the Pope of Rome, Justin, Papias,
Irenaeus and the Gallican Church in his time, Victor the Pope, Clemens of
Alexandria, Tertullian, Origin. Cyprian also: on whose Opinion in this matter,
my Antagonist stateth the whole Controversy. Wherefore I shall a little further
consider what account Blondel gives of his Opinion. He says, p. 41. (...)
toto administrationis tempore aggressus est, sed partita (quasi ex concepto
voto, cum comministris cura ac potestate, Carthaginensem plebem gubernavit: and
cites Cyprian himself saying to his Clergy; Sed cum per Dei gratiam venero,
tunc De iis quae vel gesta sunt, vel gerenda (sicut mutuus honor exposcit) in
communi tractabimus: And in another Epistle, quae res cum omnium nostrum
Consilium and sententiam spectet, praejudicare ego, and soli mihi rem communem
vindicare non audeo. He shows also; p. 43. that Cyprian does always speak of
the Clergy as divided only in two parts, the Praepositi and the Deacons, and he
calls both the Episcopi and the Praepositi Apostles: If I should cite all
that Blondel brings out of Cyprian to this purpose, I behoved to transcribe
almost four pages of his Book, of which Citations we shall have further
occasion given by our Author to Discourse. It is then more evident than what he
in most of his Reasonings talks highly of, that either this Author has not
read Blondel, but cited him at adventure, or has a confidence to assert what
he will, though absurd and unaccountable.

. 13. He is full as unhapy in his next witness, Salmasius, who both in his Book
de Episcopis and Presbyteris is against this Author, and in Walo Messalinus,
that is commonly ascribed to him, does strongly maintain the Identity of Bishop
and Presbyter, against Petavius the Jesuit, in the first Ages; and is far from
acknowledging any further Difference between them till Jerome's time, (which
was after Cyprian's, about which we now contend) than of greater Dignity; for
Chap 3. he shows that the Primacy among Presbyters was from their Seniority;
and more fully, Chapter 4. p. 273. credibile est (says he) circa medium secundi
saeculi non alias in Ecclesia fuisse cognitos Episcopos quam qui primatum in
presbyterio adepti essent, cum primos faceret non electio, ex merito sed
ordinationis tempus: quem morem diu in Ecclesia durasse, Testis est ille Author
qui Ambrosii nomine, commentarios in Epistolas Pauli scripsit: and a little
below, (...) dabatur ei qui ordinatione antiquior caeteris esset. C. etiam. 6.
ostendit jurisdictionem episcopalem ortam partim ex distinctione nominis
Episcopi a Presbyteri appellatione; partim principum Christianorum indulgentia,
partim pontificum Romanorum aliorumque ambitione and usurpatione. Who then can
imagine that he thought that in Cyprian's time (which was before the Church had
Christian Princes) the Bishops had sole Jurisdiction. The last of his Authors
that he cites is, the Provincial Assembly of London; what Book he means, I
know not: neither does he himself, for what appears: For the Vindication of
Presbyterian Government and Ministry by the Ministers and Elders of the
provincial Synod of London, has not a word on that Head, neither for him nor
against him: wherefore I can guess at none but jus Divinum Regiminis
Ecclesiastici, written (as the Title page bears) by sundry Ministers of
Christ within the City of London: In that Book I find nothing that hinteth the
Concession that he alleges: But on the contrary, p. 140. (interpreting (...)
mentioned, 1 Cor. 12. 28.) they have this passage, not the Prelatical Bishops,
pretending to be an Order above preaching Presbyters, and to have the Reins of
all Church Government in their Hands only: For in Scripture Bishop and
Presbyter are all one Order, -- hereunto also the Judgment of Antiquity
evidently subscribeth, accounting a Bishop and a Presbyter to be one and the
same Office in the Church; as appears particularly in Ambrose, Theodoret
Jerome, and others. I shall not hope to say any that is convincing, if what I
have brought do not persuade the unbyassed Reader that our famous Presbyterians
have the same Sentiments of the Judgment of the first Antiquity, about the
power of Presbyters in the Church, that I expressed in the place that our
Author makes such a pother about: he brings also Spanhem against me, which I
wonder at; seeing the words himself cites amount to no more than manifesta
(...), which none of us ever denied to have crept early into the Church: but he
deals not fairly with that learned Writer, (if this Appellation may be used
without his offense) for he curtaileth his words, leaving out what displeases
him. viz. quanquam de primis (Episcopis) controversum, diversine an superioris
ordinis haberentur. he deals yet less Christianly with the same Author, both
in detracting from his knowledge of Antiquity; and also in mis-representing his
words, out of which he would make good his Charge: in that he says Spanhem
denies Exorcists to have been in the Church in the third Century: whereas he
does not mention Exorcists in that place, but only Ostiarios, Copiatas,
Acolythos: These last our Author will prove to have been in the Church in
Cyprian's time, out of Cyprian, Ep. 7. 34, 45, 59 and 77. And mentions
several Names of Men in that Office. I was at the pains to read over all these
Epistles on this occasion, and find not a word in any of them, either of
Acolyths, or of any of the persons whom he names: it is like the Epistles of
Cyprian are diversely numbered in diverse Editions: my Edition of Cyprian is
1593, cum notis Pamelii. I find the Epistle of Cornelius in Eusebius, Lib. 6.
C. 42. (he calls it 43) how genuine that Epistle of Cornelius is, or the
Account that Ensebius gives of it, I shall not now enquire: what I am now
concerned in is, that the Learned World bears Testimony to Spanhemius, so as
this Author will not be able to derogate from his Credit: And I doubt not but
he can give grounds for what he wrote. I hope I have said enough to show that I
am not so arrogant, nor so rash, as to reced in this matter, from the
Sentiments of these great Patrons of Presbytery that he has brought against me.

. 14. He proceeds ( page 5.) to his other Arguments. His first Argument
(which he manageth to page 11.) is built on three Foundations, or Pillars; the
first is, that every Church was, in Cyprian' s time, ruled by a Bishop,
Presbyters and Deacons. This I deny not: only I observe a few things: one is,
that our Controversy is not about the Name Bishop, being appropriat to one and
not given in common to all the Presbyters, as at first; but about that Bishop,
or first Presbyter's Power;; which this his Discourse does not touch. Another
thing that I observe is, that it cannot be denied that the Deacons, in that
Age, and may be sooner, had more Hand in the Government of the Church than was
allowed by Divine Institution; by which they were only Servants, not Rulers;
and their work was only about the Poor. I thirdly observe our Author's
unwarriness, in here asserting that the Church was ruled by Bishops,
Presbyters, and Deacons; and yet he pleads for the Bishops sole Jurisdiction,
in most of his Book: This I impute to want of a good memory. What he has p. 6.
of Superinducing a Bishop where one already was, and that there could be but
one Bishop in a Church, will after fall in to be considered: where he insisteth
more directly and fully on it. His second ground that his Argument is built on,
is, that the Presbyters in that Age were Preaching-Presbyters, and not
Ruling-Elders, such as we have in the Presbyterian Church. That the Bishop in
that Age was distinct even from Preaching-Elders, or Ministers, we deny not;
and that there were many such where was but one Bishop, we acknowledge: so it
is with us; there are many Ministers where there is but one Moderator, and many
Ruling-Elders, where there is but one Minister or Parochial Bishop. What sort
of Officers in the Church the Presbyters, distinguished from the Bishop were,
in the Primitive times, is controverted among some: Dr. Hammond held that only
Bishops were of Divine Institution, and were in the Apostolick-Church; the
consequent of which is, that Presbyters must be a device of men and brought in
afterward: this is solidly refuted by the learned Mr. Durham on Revelation, chapter
3. p. ( mihi) 230. The Author of the Book Entitled, An Inquiry into the
Constitution, etc. of the Primitive-Church in the first 300 years, who
pretends that this work is done by an impartial Hand, he also has a like
Notion, p. 72. and maintains that Presbyters are not necessary to the
Constitution of a Church; that they are equal to a Bishop in Order; and have
all the Power that he has; but inferior in Degree; that they were ordained
Preachers; but had no particular Charge; but were employed by the Bishop in any
piece of Church-work, as he thought fit, and so were his Curats, or Assistants.
But of this afterward. I deny not that there were Presbyters in the third
Century, such as our Author contendeth for, that is persons authorized to
preach the Gospel and administer the Sacraments, distinct from Bishops. For his
Sarcasm against Ruling-Elders, who have no Authority to Preach, affirming page
8. that there is as profound silence of them in Cyprian' s Writings and time,
as there is of the Solemn League and Covenant, or the Sanquhar Declaration;
this shows more of his Spite against that Church-Office, than of his Skill to
refute it.

. 15. It might have been expected from this peremptory Confidence, that he
should have attempted a Refutation of what many Learned Men have written on
that Subject; if he looked into that Controversy: the London Ministers, (whom
he cites) could have taught him, at least, to speak more soberly: so Blondel
de Jure Plebis, p. 79. etc. Smectym. L'Arroque Conformity of the Discipline of
the Church of France with the Primitive Church. Calvin. P. Martyr. and many
later Writers: at least he might have had some regard to Archbishop Whitgift,
(a Zealous Pleader for Prelacy) as he is cited by Synod Land. Vindication of
Presbyterial Government. I know (says he,) that in the Primitive Church, they
had in every Church Seniors, to whom the Government of the Church was
committed; but that was before there was any Christian Prince, or Magistrate. I
hope then that it was in Cyprian's time will not be denied. May be, on second
thoughts, he will abate a little of this Confidence, when he considers these
few Citations following: which do plainly prove that both before and after
Cyprian's time, there were Ruling Elders, who were not Preachers, acknowledged
in the Church, Origin. Lib. 3. contra Celsum: (...), etc. There are some
appointed, who do enquire into the Life and Manners of them who are Admitted;
that they may debar from the Congregation, such as commit vile things; and
receive such as abstain from these; and make them daily better. Tertul. Apol.
C. 3. Praesident probati quique Seniores, honorem istum non praetio, sed
testimonio adepti. These were before Cyprian. After him were Jerome, on Isaiah
3. 2. Et nos habemus in Ecclesia Senatum nostrum, etc. August. Ep. 137.
Dilectissimis Fratribus, Clero, Senioribus, and Vniversae Plebi Ecclesiae
Hipponensis. Where he makes a plain Distinction between the Clergy, and these
other Elders, and also the Body of the People: these Elders then were not
Teachers, and they were above the People. The like he has, contra Crescentium,
Lib. 3. C. 1. Omnes vos Episcopi, Presbyteri, Diaconi, and Seniores scitis. Et
ibid. C. 56. Peregrinus Presbyter, and Seniores Ecclesiae Musticanae, etc. The
same Augustine, in his account of the Purgation of Caecilianus, and Felix,
accused by the Donatists, mentions several Letters Recorded in the public
Acts, (which must certainly speak the Language of that Age,) wherein Ruling
Elders distinguished from Preaching Presbyters, are plainly, and often
mentioned: as Episcopi, Presbyteri, Diaconi, Seniores: again, Clerici, and
Seniores Cirthensium: also a Letter directed Clero and Senioribus: and another,
Clericis and Senioribus: Likewise the Epistle of Purpurens to Sylvanus has
these words, Adhibe^e Clericos, and Seniores Plebis, Ecclesiasticos Viros, and
inquirant diligenter quae sint istae Dissentiones: where it is clear that the
Ecclesiastical Consistory was then made up of these Elders, as one sort of its
Constituent Members; and that they had Authority to take Course with Disorders
in the Church, in Conjunction with the Teachers of the Church. Even Gregorius
Magnus the Pope, in the end of the sixth Age, shows that such Elders were
still in the Church; Tabellarium (says he) cum consensu Seniorum and Cleri
memineris ordinandum. Also, Lib. 2. Epist. 19. Si quid de quocunque Clerico ad
aures tuas pervenerit, quod te just possit offendere, facile non credas, sed
praesentibus Ecclesiae tuae Senioribus est perscrutanda veritas, and tunc si
qualitas rei poscit, Canonica Districtio culpam feriat delinquentis. Is it
imaginable that there were no Ruling Elders in Cyprian's time, in the third
Century, and yet after three hundred years, they were revived again; when
Episcopal Tyranny, and manifold Corruptions in the Church were come to a
greater height? Isidor. Hispal. Sent. Lib. 3. C. 43* Prius docendi sunt
Seniores Plebis, ut per eos infra positi facilius doceantur.

. 16. It is yet more fully against this Author's bold Assertion, that even in
Cyprian's time it self, this Office was in the Church; as Witness the Writers
of that Age, Basil. in Psalm. 33. Quatuor gradus Ministrorum constituit, quod
sciz. alii sunt in Ecclesia instar Oculorum, ut Seniores; alii instar Linguae,
ut Pastores; alii tanquam Manus, ut Diaconi; etc. And Optat. Milevit. Lib. 1.
adv. Parmen. tells us of certain precious Utensils of the Church, which in a
time of Persecution, could neither safely be transported, nor hid in the Earth;
and therefore they were committed to the Custody of the faithful Elders of the
Church. From all this it is evident, that if express and distinct mention be
not made of this sort of Elders by Cyprian, it is either because he had no
occasion; or that he comprehended them under the general name of Presbyters, as
the Scripture sometimes does under the name of Bishops: for it is not to be
imagined that Cyprian, in this, was of a different Sentiment from the Church,
before, in, and after his time.

. 7. His third Foundation for his Argument is, that the Bishops Power,
Authority, Pastoral Relation, extended to all Christians within his District:
and a little after, the Bishops Prelation, what ever it was, related not solely
to the Clergy, nor solely to the Laity; but to both equally and formally: this
we are no way concerned to oppose; for we think every Minister has a Relation
to the Universal Church, and Authority with Respect to all the Members of it:
and more particularly within the Presbytery whereof he is a Member: and yet
more fully toward these of the Congregation he is set in, whether Elders or
People. Neither is our Question about the Extent of the Bishop's Power, as to
Persons, so much as about the Solitude of this Power; whether Church Power
reside in his Person alone, or be in the Community of Presbyters. I might
dismiss this whole Section; but that his Proofs seem not so much levelled at
this Conclusion; as at some other things which we cannot so easily comply with:
he tells us of Cyprian's defining the Church, to be a People united to the
Priest, and a Flock adhering to their Pastor: he brings Citations to prove,
that where a Bishop is wanting, the People has no Ruler, the Flock no Pastor,
the Church no Governor, Christ no Prelate, and God no Priest: and he will have
Presbyters to be but Vice-Pastours. Now how far is all this from his
Conclusion; viz. that the Bishop's Power extends to all the People? All this
tends to prove the Bishop's sole Jurisdiction, which is afterward to be
considered, where he insisteth on that point on purpose: but here here he does
nothing but make a Parade with a parcel of impertinent Citations: I shall only
now tell him; that this may be well understood of a Parish Bishop or Minister.
For Presbyters being Vice-Pastours, that is afterward answered. Wherefore I now
consider his Application of his three Conclusions to what he would prove; viz.
that a Bishop in Cyprian's time, was neither the Pastor of a Flock, nor the
Moderator of a Presbytery; in my sense of the terms: not the first for Cyprian
at Carthage, Cornelius at Rome, etc. had many such Pastors under them: yea, it
was so over all the World. Not the second; because a Presbyterian Moderator as
such, is no Church Governor at all: has no direct, immediate, formal relation
to the People, but only to the Presbytry. This is the goodly Argument in which
our Author early triumphs, as sufficient, if there were no more, to ruin our
Cause.

. 18. This Triumph will be found to be before the Victory: That I may give a
full and direct Answer to his Argument, I must distinguish what our Author
confounds, viz. the signification of the word Bishop in the Apostles time, it
signified any ruling, ordinary Officer in the Church: hence Phil. 1. 1. all
Church Officers are so called, except the Deacons. And 1. Tim. 3. 1, 2, etc.
The Apostle gives Directions to all the Ruling-Officers in the Church, and
then verse. 8, etc. tells what manner of Men the Deacons should be. If the
Apostle had known any other ordinary Church Officers, these Canons had been
very lame: and indeed it is no wonder that the Bishops (not being here
comprehended) do what they will; for we know no Scripture, rules neither for
their Qualifications, nor Work: and Tit. 1. 5, and 6. the Elders that were to
be set up in every City are called Bishops, v. 7. the same Word in after Ages,
as it was sometimes given to Pastors of particular Congregations, so it was
ordinarily given to the (...) the primus Presbyter or Moderator in the College
of Presbyters: and the same that sustained the later of these Relations had
also the former, and labored in the Word and Doctrine, and managed
Congregational-Discipline in a particular Parish, taking the Word Parish in our
modern sense. Wherefore if the Citations he brings for Episcopal Power can
rationally be applied to either of these Notions of a Bishop, our Cause is safe
from his Assaults. That the Moderator of the College of Presbyters is called
Bishop, not only is evident from Jerome, Vnus e Presbyteris electus est qui
caeteris superponeretur -- Episcopi noverint se magis consuetudine quam
dispositionis dominicae veritate, Presbyteris esse majores, and in communi
debere Ecclesiam regere: but this Author cannot deny it; though he pleads for
an extravagant Power to that his Moderator; about which Power I now debate with
him.

. 19. That the Pastor of a particular Flock was also (in the Primitive Times)
called a Bishop, is certain from this, that the Scriptures dividing the
Church Officers in Bishops and Deacons, are by the Fathers so applied: as I
have showed elsewhere. Likewise we find Bishops in small Villages, where were
no number of Pastors, over whom the Bishop might praeside: as is fully proved
by the learned Mr. Clarkson, Primitive Episcopacy stated, etc. c. 2. p. 19,
etc. and that by multitudes of Instances, as also Testimonies of Fathers,
asserting it to be then usual, Sozomen Hist. l. 7. c. 19. tells us that in
Arabia (...): he says the same of Cyprus, and extends his Assertion to other
Countries, (...). Mr. Fuller (though Episcopal, yet a person of more Ingenuity
than many others) History of the Holy War, lib. 2. cap. 2. p. 45, and 46.
speaking of Palestine, at this time (says he) Bishops were set too thick for
all to grow, and Palestine fed too many Cathedral-Churches to have them
generally fat: Lydda, Jamnia, and Joppa, three Episcopal Towns, were within
four Miles one of another: -- neither let it stagger the Reader, if in that
Catalogue of Tyrius, he light on many Bishops Seats which are not to be found
in Mercator, Ortelius, or any other Geographer; for some were such poor Places
as they were ashamed to appear in a Map. -- For in that Age, Bishops had their
Sees at poor and contemptible Villages. Council. Antioch. in their Epistle
concerning Paulus Samosatenus they mentioned Bishops (...). I know Dr. Maurice
pretends to refute Mr Clarkson's Book: neither shall I judge who has the
better in most parts of that Debate; but I see no sufficient Answer to what I
have here quotted. Yet do I not join with Mr. Clarkson in the whole design of
his Book. These two Notions of a Bishop being familiar in the Primitive Times,
it is no wonder if we find the Fathers, sometimes speaking of a Bishop in the
one Sense, and sometimes in the other.

. 20. I now Answer his Argument: a Bishop in Cyprian's time was always the
Pastor of a particular Flock, and Moderator in the Consistory of Ruling-Elders;
but sometimes he was also the Moderator of a College of Presbyters; and so
might have many Presbyters under him; that is, he was above them in Dignity;
and we deny not but that by reason of his fixation in that Office, he by custom
had crept into some more Power over them than was due: but that in Cyprian's
time, he had the sole Power of Jurisdiction, and Ordination, or such Authority
as our Diocesans pretend to; I utterly deny. For the other part of his
Argument, that he could not be a Moderator, because a Moderator as such, has
no Church Power, nor is a Church Governor. I Answer first; the Assertion he
here reflecteth on, cited by him page 3. that a Moderator, as such, has no
Church Power, was not meant, that there might be a Moderator who has no Church
Power, and so taking As specificative: as he absurdly improveth it, p. 36.
affirming that a Heathen may be the Moderator of a Presbytery without
repugnancy to any Principle of Christianity, though not without indecency and
inconvenience. I say this is a most absurd Assertion, both because a Heathen
Moderator could not understand the Affairs of the Church; And because he would
embarasse them: and because it is against common sense, and the Sentiments of
Mankind, that an Enemy of the true Religion should have the Conduct, and main
hand in mannaging the Affairs that do so nearly concern it: Yea, this his
Assertion contradicts it self: for he acknowledges that this were Indecent
and Inconvenient, and I hope he will not deny, that it is a Principle of the
Christian Religion, that all things be done Decently, and in Order: and that
both Nature and Religion require, that we should shun what is inconvenient,
especially to so high Concernments as are these of Religion. That Assertion
then, that he aims at, is to be understood reduplicative; that is, that a
Moderator acquireth no Church Power by his being Moderator, above what he had
as a Pastor of the Church: and here a Sub-distinction is to be used, he
acquireth indeed an Ordinative Power, in that he orders the Meeting to avoid
Confusion, and many call it pre re nata; but he acquireth no Decisive Power: he
gets a Power to be their Mouth, not their Will, or Commanding Faculty: to
keep Order in the Management of what comes before them, not to Determine what
is Debated among them, as it is expressed in the place he cites; and which
might have prevented this Cavil, if he had heeded what was said. To conclude
what I have to Reply to this his Argument, it is no Proof of such a Prelacy in
Cyprian's time as he pleads for, that it related to the Laity, as well as the
Clergy: for so does that of our Moderator: that is, he orders the Affairs
which concern them, which are managed in the Presbytery: and that Cyprian did
more, or, that he managed the Affairs concerning the Laity, without the same
Authoritative Concurrence of the Presbyters, is the Question, and is not
concluded by this Argument.

. 21. He undertaketh, p. 11. easily to collect another Demonstration against my
Notion of a Bishop, from the way, how in Cyprian's time, he was promoted to his
Chair; to that Sublime Top of the Priesthood, as he calls it. This is to
fright us with big, bur empty Words: if he bring a concludent probable
Argument, though short of a Demonstration, we must stoop. To Cyprian's Words, the
Sublime Top of Priesthood, I should not doubt to give a satisfying Answer, if I
could find the place, and consider the purpose he is speaking of; but my
Antagonist has made my Work very difficult; not by the strength of his
Arguments, but by leaving me at uncertainty where to find any one of his
Citations, unless I either stumble on them casually, or read all Cyprian's
Epistles for every place that is cited: for he knows there are several
Editions of Cyprian; and he has neither told what Edition he uses, (I have no
other at present, but that Printed by Le Preux, 1593.) nor names he to whom
the Epistle is Directed: whether this be done de industria, or not, I shall not
judge: but I am sure it is a great neglect: especially considering that
Cyprian's Epistles are quite otherways numbered by Scultetus, than in the
Edition mentioned, but I find neither of these can help me to find his
Citations. All that I shall say about this Sublimity he talks of, is, that
the Fathers used to speak big words concerning the Gospel Ministry; which both
Papists and Prelatists have abused: also the Bishops Power was elevated to a
higher Dignity, though not greater Authority, than the Presbyters, and that was
their Sublime Fastigium Sacerdotii. This his Argument also, he builds on
several Propositions. The first is, There could be no lawful Promotion to a
Bishopric, where a Bishop had been settled, unless there were a clear,
Canonical, and unquestionable Vacancy: it was a received Maxim then, that there
could be but one Bishop at once in a Church. Our present Debate is no way
concerned in this Principle, whether it be true or false. For taking a Bishop
for Moderator; we think there should be but one at one time: and that another
ought not to be chosen till the place be void, by Death, Deposition from that
Office, or Cession. If by Bishop you understand the Pastor of a Flock, whether
there be one or more over a Congregation, is nothing to our purpose; seeing the
Question is about the Power of the Bishop, whether it be in one, or more
Persons.

. 22. Yet I shall observe a few things on his Discourse of this his Principle.
1. If I were willing to be very critical, I would ask him, what did they in
those days, when there was a real, and lawful Vacancy; but not clear, nor
unquestionable; as in the Contest between Cornelius and Novatianus at Rome: and
many other Instances that might be given, of most Unchristian, and sometimes
Bloody Contentions, between Bishops pretending to the same See: I hope the
sound Party might, and did place a Bishop; though the Vacancy was questioned.
Next I oppose to his Principle, Dr. Hammond, on Rev. 11. p. 662. who tells
us, there were two Bishops at once in Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, and Rome, he
names them: and gives Reasons why distinct Congregations under their
respective Bishops in each City were necessary: he says also it was so in
other Cities: and his Reasons do prove that it must be so in all Cities: where
there are many People. I insist not on the Bishops at Philippi, Phil. 1. 1. At
Ephesus, whom the Holy Ghost had made Bishops, Act. 20. 20. Thirdly, I observe
that all the Citations he here brings, has this Tendency, to show that
Novatus in intruding himself in the Bishop's See at Rome, was to be blamed,
seeing Cornelius was already duly settled in that Place. This was a plain Case,
the Presbyters and People of Rome had chosen Cornelius to be Pastor of a Flock,
and their constant Moderator, as was the Practice of that Time: Novatianus was
not only unsound in other things, but he got a Faction to choose him for Pastor
and their Moderator, and he with them, set up another Presbytery, in Opposition
to that wherein Cornelius was fixed: I know no Presbyterian who would not
condemn this Practice as much as Cyprian did: and it is observable that the
Citations here brought by our Author, do not so much concern the Unity of a
Bishop; as the Unity of a Church, which indeed Novatianus had broken: I confess
Cyprian here used Expressions a little too vehement, in that he not only
denies them who make such Rents to be Pastors, being unduly Chosen, and
Ordained; but denies them to be Christians: it was a great Sin,, and deserved
the highest Censure; but it is hard to Unchristian all who make a Schism: but I
impute this Fervor to the Temper of that Age, rather than of the Holy and Meek
Cyprian: and it is like, these Wise Men saw a peculiar Reason at that time, for
thus Opposing the Seeds of Ruin to the Church, which often lurk unobserved in
Schism.

. 23. His second pillar of this Argument is this Assertion; there was no
canonical vacancy but where the Bishop whose the Chair had been was dead, had
ceded, or was canonically deposed. Let this pass. The third is, when a See was
thus canonically vacant, the Bishops of that province met, choosed and ordained
one in presence of the people whom he was to govern. I object nothing against
this, save that the Bishops choosed the Man to be ordained: we say the People
had the choice, with the Eldership: but this Controversy he waveth, as not
belonging to this Argument; and so do I. His fourth Proposition is, that the
person elected received new Imposition of Hands, and new Ordination; though he
had been ordained a Presbyter before: this he prosecuteth p, 14. and cites
many Testimonies to prove what he alleges: he says, no doubt that each of
these was raised to the Episcopacy by a new Ordination: and of Sabinus, that he
was ordained by Imposition of Hands: I deny not that even an ordained Presbyter
behoved to be chosen to the Office of Bishop, before he could exercise it: so
it is with our Moderator. That there was more Solemnity in installing a Bishop
then, than we use in making a Moderator, cannot be denied: that was
consequential to the Bishops being constantly and for Life in that Office, and
to that Prelation, or Dignity above other Presbyters that he then had. Neither
shall I contend with him about Imposition of Hands to have been in that case
used; (though after search, I cannot find the place he cites) for it is well
known, that in the Apostolic Church (and it is like it continued in after
Ages) Imposition of Hands was used when Men were sent into a special piece of
Work, though no new Office, or new Power was given; as Act 13. 3. I hope he will
not say, that Saul, by that Imposition of Hands, was promoted unto a higher; or
new Office, being already an Apostle. But our Question is, whether the Bishop
had a superior Power over Presbyters, which resided in his person alone: this
we deny, and affirm that it is not proved by the Citations he has brought. The
Zeal that even false Bishops used to have all the Formalities in their
promotion that were used by any other (which is one of his Topics) is as
little probative; Nor should I wonder if they exceeded: they had need of all
the Pomp that could be, to make up the want of Real Right, to strenthen their
weak Title. He concludes, p. 15. that now my Definition of a Bishop is routed
a second time. Let the Reader judge.

. 24. He comes to apply his former propositions, and to conclude his Argument
from them. How (says he) can the Maxim of but one Bishop at once consist with
the Bishops being a single Presbyter; seeing in Rome and Carthage were many
Presbyters, and yet each of these was but one Church. Ans. 1. It consists
well with the Notion of a Moderator. 2. It consists well with the Notion of a
Bishop in lesser places, where was no such plurality of Presbyters; of which
before. 3. I have said enough above to discredit this Maxim, in the sense our
Author uses it 4. There might be a plurality of Presbyters in a particular
Congregation; not only Presbyters that were only ruleing, but-Preachers also:
For it is observed by some, that in the primitive Times, they ordained many
more preaching Presbyters in Churhes than they had present Work for: So Mr
Clerkson, primitive Episcopacy, Chapter 5. p. 93. and he builds on Nazianzens
Authority, who Orat. 1. Shows that the Officers in Churches were some times
as many as these whom they had the Charge of. (...) (says he) (...). It is
probable, that then the Christians having no Universities, the Churches,
especially in great Cities, or where were learned Bishops, were Colleges for
Breeding men to the Ministry, and that when they were ripe, they ordained them
and employed them; that so they might be Seminaries out of which vacant
Parishes might he provided: and if any will say, that the Bishop had such
Authority over these Presbyters as our Professors of Divinity have over the
Students, It may pass for a probable Conjecture: Only these were ordained, ours
we do not ordain till we fix them in Churches: and in that time I find no such
unordained Licentiats as we have.

. 25. He again asks, If a Bishop were but a single Presbyter, why such a do,
and so many Bishops conveened to elect and ordain him. This is in part answered
above. I add, we also have a Meeting of many Ministers to ordain a Presbyter to
a single Flock: and also when a Moderator is chosen. As for calling Bishops of
a whole province to Elect and instal a Bishop at Rome, and at Carthage, that
was needful, because these were the fixed Moderators in these Provinces; So our
Moderator of a provincial Synod is chosen by no fewer than the Ministers of a
whole Province: and the Moderator of the General Assembly by Ministers from the
whole National Church. What he says about their New Ordination is already
Answered. That which he calls ridiculous is pretty ridiculously by him
proposed: Viz. that so much ado was made about making two men Presbyters of
Rome, who were already Presbyters of Rome. He means Cornelius and Novatianus.
It was about making them Moderators of the College of Presbyters, not in Rome,
but in the whole Province: and indeed it was lamentable, rather than
ridiculous: Both that that Promotion began then to be more esteemed than was
meet; and was looked on as a Prelation above the other Brethren (though it was far
short of what our Author contendeth for) and also that there should be such
unchristian Contests made about it Alas some such things have fallen out where
a Diocesan Episcopacy was not pretended to. Our Sentiments about a constant
Moderator he entertaineth in ridicule, p. 16. rather than refuteth them by
Arguments: this I do little regard. Had the excellent men of the Cyprianick Age
seen, or known the fatal Consequents of it, as we have; I judge they would not
have allowed it as they did. I. refer the Reader for satisfaction in this
Point, to Mr. Baillie, Unlawfulness and danger of limited Episcopacy: and
another piece bearing the same Title, which he defends against a Reply made
to it. That the Presbyters of Rome did often meet during the Vacancy of the Sea; and that they had a Moderator in their Meetings, none will deny: but what
he infers is in consequential; that they might as easily have chosen a
Bishop, if he had been but Moderator. For not only the Custom of having the
Moderator fixed, made it more hard than to choose one to be their Mouth for one
Meeting, or two; but also, (as I have said) the whole Province was to be
concerned in him. He argues p. 17. in many words, if he were Moderator, why
the people was to choose him, or why was it needful that he should be chosen in
their presence. A. Because also he was to be Pastor of that Flock. That he was
no Church-Governour as Moderator, is answered above: But it cannot be said he
was no Church-Governour under another Relation; viz. as Pastor of the
Congregation of Rome, or a Congregation in it. That he was chosen by 16
Bishops. i. e. says our Author, sixteen Moderators was not then needless,
seeing he was to be Moderator over them to; that is over that Province. If
sixteen parochial Bishops met to choose a Moderaror of a Presbytery, or sixteen
Moderators from sixteen Presbytries met to Elect him who was to praeside
continually in the Synod; This cannot infer either sole or superior
Jurisdiction. Further if we should grant that in these days, a Presbytery used
to take the help of other Presbyteries, or their Moderators, or that help was
by Custom imposed on them, this will indeed prove that some of the Privileges
of Presbyters began then to be abridged; but not that their ruling Power in the
Church was transferred on a single person, the Bishop. What he further argues
p. 18. from the Bishops new Ordination, is already answered.

. 26. His next Argument (and some that follow) is taken from the Bishops
relation to his particular Church; viz. That he is the principle of Unity to
her: who ever adhered to him was in the Church, a Catholic Christian; who
separated from him, was out of the Church, and a Schismatic. Under this Head,
he has no less than six Considerations, which either are intended as
Arguments, or signify nothing. Before I come to examine these, I shall take
some notice of his Argument, as it is here generally proposed. And 1. I
observe, that this very Argument is fully with as much strength managed by the
Papists, for the Pop's universal headship over the Christian Church: they plead
that we are not of the Church Catholic, are not to be reputed Christians, are
Dividers of Christ's Body, etc. because we do not adhere to the Pope, whom they
hold to be the Principle of Unity to the Christian Church: and the Papists
reckon the Protestants as Heretics, because they do not believe this; and
Schismatics, because they live not in Communion with the Pope, and that Church
whereof he is Head. 2. This Doctrine, as it is by our Author crudely, and
indistinctly proposed, will Un-Church some of the best and soundest Christians:
for have there not been Bishops, who had as good Title to their Sees (to speak
in his own Dialect,) as any could have; who afterward turned Heretics? How
many Arian Bishops were there, whose Right to their Places was not contested?
Will he say that all the Orthodox who separated from them, were guilty of
Schism, and all the Aggravations that his Citations, p. 19, 20. load it with?
Are we not commanded to withdraw from them who teach unsound Doctrine, 1 Timothy
6. 3, 4, 5. And our Lord warnes his People against Wolves; and the Apostle gave
Warning to the Elders of Ephesus, that of themselves, (and our Author will say
they were Diocesan Bishops,) should men arise speaking perverse things, and
drawing Disciples after them. This Argument will prove, (if it has any force)
that these their Followers were the sound Christians, and the rest
Schismatics; because the one sort adhered to their Bishop, the Principle of
Unity; and the rest departed from him. I am far from charging my Antagonist
with owning these Consequents; but I see not how he can shun the Consequence,
unless he retract this his inconsiderat Opinion. Thirdly, I wish he had
explained this Term, the Principle of Unity: which he ought the rather to have
done, because he says, p. 18. near the end, this is a Point of great
Consequence. What he says for clearing it, is very insufficient: his Metaphors
out of Cyprian, de Vnitate Ecclesiae; prove nothing: viz. that of the Sun and
Beams, the Root and Branches, the Fountain and Streams: if they prove any
thing, they prove more than, I suppose, our Author will allow: for Cyprian, in
the very page where he uses these Similitudes, ( p. mihi 297.) speaks of
Peter's Primacy, and places the Unity of the Christian Church in him: tamen ut
Vnitatem manifestaret, unam Cathedram constituit, and Vnitatis ejusdem Originem
ab uno incipientem sua authoritate constituit: hoc erant utique and caeteri
Apostoli quod Petrus, pari consortio praediti and honoris and potestatis, sed
exordium ab Vnitate proficiscitur. And a little below, quam Vnitatem firmiter
tenere and vindicare debemus, maxim Episcopi, qui in Ecclesia praesidemus ut
Episcopatum quoque ipsum unum atque indivisum probemus. Where it may be
observed, 1. That either Cyprian was absolutely for the Pope's Supremacy, or he
had no such meaning as our Author designeth. 2. That Cyprian does not so much
speak of the Peoples adhering to their Bishop, (which in a sound Sense I am
for,) as Bishops cleaving together, and not breaking the Churches Peace, by
Divisions among themselves. 3. That he is to be understood of a Principle of
Origination, rather than of a Principle of Dependence: that Peter first was in
Commission by Christ, (the truth of which I shall not now enquire into,) and
that all were obliged to adhere to that one Doctrine that he taught: not that
he had Authority over the rest; and they must not Dissent from him in any Case:
Cyprian plainly teaches the contrary, in that very place: that the rest had
equal Authority with him. And if we should apply all this to a Bishop, or
Minister in a Parish, it amounts to no more but this; he receives the Word
from the Lord, and delivers it to the People; and if they depart from this,
they are Schismatics, and break the Unity of the Church: which we all
acknowledge. I observe, 4. That this his Principle is indeed of so great
Moment, that if it be true, there are neither Churches nor Christians in the
World, but such as own a Diocesan Bishop: few in our days are Christians, but
these of the Romish, and Church of England Communion: all the Reformed Churches
must be Rebaptized, and their Ministers Re-ordained: (as Cyprian, and some
other thought of the Schismatics of that time,) I hope all his Brethren are
not of this Opinion. Yea it has been condemned by the most famous of his
Party. When, Anno 1610. some Scots Bishops were to be Consecrated at London,
some moved that they might be first Ordained Presbyters; their Ordination
without a Bishop being null: Bancroft Archbishop of Canterbur^y withstood that
Motion, and told them, that thereof there was no necessity: seeing where Bishops
could not be had, the Ordination given by Presbyters must be esteemed lawful:
otherwise that it might be doubted, if there were any lawful Vocation in most
of the Reformed Churches. This was Applauded by all the other Bishops.
Spotswood. Hist. Lib. 7. ad An. 1610. p. 514. Whence I infer that either
Cyprian was not of this Author's Opinion, nor can his Words be so understood;
or that the English Bishops were opposite to him and Cyprian too.

. 27. What he says further for clearing this his Notion about the Principle of
Unity, is both absurd and groundless: viz. that he (the Bishop) was the Head of
all the Christians living within his District, and they were one Body, one
Society, one Church, by depending on him, by being subject to him, by keeping
to his Communion. I say this is absurd: because then Separating from the most
Heretical Superstitious, yea, Idolatrous Bishop, were unlawful, as above noted.
It is also groundless; for neither Cyprian, nor any other, uses such
indistinct, and universal Assertions in this Matter. I come to examine his
several Propositions, by which he pretends to make out this his Argument. The
first is, that the Ancients highly Valued Church Unity, and laid no more Stress
on any thing than it; and no Sin they Represented as more Heinous, or more
Criminal than the Sin of Schism: And here he is at the Pains to fill almost two
Pages, with the Commendations of Unity, and hard Names given to Schism, out of
Cyprian, Firmilian, and Council. Carthag. I do not find that he is so Copious,
and mustereth up so numerous Forces against any Disputable Point, as in this
where he has no Adversary: for who ever spoke against Unity in the Church, and
took the Defense of Schism. Wherefore all this I pass with a few short
Observes. First, Though we have Account of seven several Councils at Carthage in
the Ancient Records, yet this Author always cites Council. Carthag. without any
discrimination: if he miscite Places, how shall this Error be discovered: for I
think few will be at Pains to read over all the Acts of these Councils, for
every one of his Citations; which are not a few. 2. We may from this Discourse
gather what Sentiments this Author has of Presbyterians; seeing the Design of
his Book is to prove them Schismatics; that is (according to his Citations)
Renegadoes, Apostats, Antichrists, Malignants, Paricides, false Christ's,
Christ's Enemies, Blasphemers, the Devils Priests, Retainers to Korah, to
Judas, Villains; and much more of this Stuff. Either he Applaudeth all this, or
not: if not, his Citations are impertinent; if so, he charge us with all this
Guilt: and I ask him, if he thinks it just, that we should throw back all
this Dirt on himself and his Party, whom we reckon to be the Authors of this
Schism that is now in this Church: for my part, I am far from dealing so by
them: I think they are in an Error, and that that Error misleadeth them into
some Practices that are sinful, and that have bad Consequecens to the Church;
but I hope there are good men among them for all that. 3. The Schisms that
occasioned these vehement Discourses among the Fathers, were chiefly these of
the Donatists and Novatians; which were like to ruin Christianity, and to make
the World cast at it, while it was not well settled, nor universally received. I
hope our Differences though they have sadder Effects, than I am willing to
mention; yet go not that far. 4. It is well known that the Holy Zeal of the
Fathers, and the excellent Rhetoric they were endowed with, made them overlash
sometimes in their Expressions: and it is evident that not a few of the Popish
Errors had their Original, and some seeming Patrociny, from their flights of
Rhetoric; their Figurative Expressions, and some Logical Niceties that they
used. This is not my Apprehension alone; the Learned Daille, Right Use of the
Fathers, has the same Observation, Chap. 5. The Fathers themselves were aware
of this, with respect to the Writings of one another: Hieron. Ep. 139. ad
Cyprian. Plerumque nimium disertis accidere solet, ut major sit intelligentiae
difficultas in eorum explanationibus, quam in iis quae explanare conantur. And
in Matters of greater Moment, they spoke sometimes unwarily, not foreseeing
what ill Use might be made of their Expressions; as Jerome also gives us ground
to think; Apolog. contra Ruffin. vel certe (says he) antequam in Alexandria
quasi Daemonium meridianum Arius nasceretur, innocenter quaedam and minus caute
locuti, -- and quae non possunt perversorum hominum calumniam declinare.
Petavius makes also the same Observation, though a Jesuit, in Panar. Epiphan. ad
Haer. 6, 9. Yea, the same Author has this Passage; Not. in Epiphan, multa sunt
a Sanctissimis Patribus presertim a Chrysostomo in Homiliis aspersa, quae si ad
exactae veritatis regulam accommodare volueris, boni sensus manca videbuntur.

. 28. I observe, 5. That though our Author would fright us also with what the
Scripture says of Unity, and against Schism, (which I confess is enough to
make us love the one, and hate the other,) yet I do not find this strain used
against all Divisions, in Scripture without Discrimination; but that another
Spirit appears in these Inspired Writings, and that more of Christian
Forbearance is Recommended, 1 Cor. 1. 11. and 3. Chapter 1. Divisions are reproved,
and with strong Reason condemned: so 1 Cor. 11. 18. but that Weight is not laid
on them that our Author speaks of: and Philip. 15. 16. Forbearance, and
Joining in Uncontested Truths and Duties is enjoined. And I am sure the
Differences of these Times, were Things of more Moment, than our Bishops
Mitres, or Lordly Domination are: The Church might be in Peace, if they either
would show us Divine Warrant for their Prelation, or not trouble us with their
Usurpations.

. 29. His second Proposition is, for the Preservation of Unity, and preventing
of Schism, in every particular Church all were bound, in Cyprian's time, to
live in the Bishop's Communion, and to own and look upon him, as the Principle
of Union to that Church of which he was Head and Ruler. I see not wherein this
differs from the former Proposition: I am sure it contains no new Matter:
and therefore I should have taken no notice of it; but that p. 21. he brings
some Citations that need a little to be examined. Although I can by no Diligence
find some of the Places that he cites, yet by chance I have light on these:
and the Words he uses afford a plain Answer to his Argument brought from them.
For his first Citation out of Ep. 33. (I find it in Ep. 27.) it makes nothing
at all for the Bishop's sole Power, nor for his being further the Principle of
Unity, than what I have above granted. The Case was this, some of the Lapsed
who had been received to the Peace of the Church, (as they pretended) by the
means of some Martyrs; wrote to Cyprian that they were now received by the
Church, and desired that they might be more fully restored by Cyprian and the
Church with him: Cyprian took it ill that they should write to him as from a
Church, whereas they that had received them, nor they themselves, were no
Church; but in this had neglected the Authority of them who were truly the
Church. In all this Cyprian says nothing but what is according to the
Principles of Presbyterians: if any should pretend to receive Penitents, even
though they were Elders in a Congregation, or Ministers in a Presbytery, without
the Moderator, without the Elders, or the Presbytery, respective; we should
blame them, for Usurpation, and disorderly Walking. And it is very observable,
that Cyprian in this very Passage says, that Ecclesia in Episcopo and Clero,
and omnibus stantibus est constituta: then it is not the Bishop who is the
Church: what he says of the Church as being built on the Bishop, is already
cleared: he says indeed, omnis actus Ecclesiae per eosdem praepositos
gubernatur: in which our Author shows but little Skill, when he translateth
these words, all her (the Churches) Affairs are ordered by them as the Chief
Rulers: where it should be turned, by the same who are set over her (the
Church:) and I think that it will not be denied that Presbyters are Praepositi,
and are set over the Church: he says no more then, but the Church is founded
on the Bishop, that is, his sound Doctrine, as was before explained, and her
Affairs are ruled by the same Praepositi; that is, the Bishops, and others
having Ecclesiastical Authority with them: For Presbyters are the same with
Bishops in this; and that Cyprian means so, may be gathered from his varying
the word Episcopus into Praepositus. Again granting, that all the Acts of the
Church are ruled by the Bishop, this will not prove that they are ruled by him
alone. His other Testimony out of what he calls Epistle 43, is far less to
his purpose; Felicismus, with his Faction (who formerly had opposed Cyprian's
Election to be Bishop) in his retirement, not only without him, but without the
Concurrence of the Presbytery, or Congregational Eldership, (I shall not
determine which of these the Church of Carthage was then governed by) received
some of the lapsed: which I, as well as my Antagonist do reckon a very
disorderly Action; this Cyprian does justly blame: And that on this Ground,
that they set up another Altar in that Church, that is, they threw off the
Church Authority that was regularly placed in Carthage; and set up another
beside: we also would blame them who would cast off the Authority of the
Presbytery, or Kirk-Session, and set up another. What is Cyprian's meaning is
yet clearer from what our Author unwarily cites out of his Book de unittae
Ecclesiae. An esse sibi cum Christo videtur qui adversus Christi Sacerdotes
facit? Qui se a cleri ejus and Plebis societate secernit? Where he describes
Schism to be when some depart from the Rulers and Members of the Church (not
from the Bishop alone) and that is to be understood, while they keep God's way.

. 30. His third Preposition is, that Cyprian makes the contempt of one Bishop,
or undutifulness to him, the original of Schism. I am so far from opposing him
in this, that I think when people begin to quarrel with the meanest of Christ's
Ministers, (unless his Life, or Doctrine, or Government, give just cause) that
they sin against God, contemn his Ordinance, and are on the brink of Schism;
if not Haeresie also: And I am sure all that he cites out out of Cyprian on
this head, amounts to no more except a word or two, which I shall a little
consider. When he speaks of one Bishop, I understand him of one Praeses,
whether in a Congregational, or Classical Presbytrey, and that in conjunction
with them: who opposes such Authority opposes Christ's Institution. He
mentions p. 23. as also p. 32. The Bishops Monarchical power in the Church;
and makes Cyprian prove it by the Bees who have a King, the Beasts who have a
Captain, and Robbers who have a Chiftain. It is evident to any who consider
Cyprian's other Writings, that he never arrogated to himself a Monarchical
Power over the Church; for he plainly disowneth it as we shall after have
occasion to show: But he is here dealing with one Pupianus, who had reproached
Cyprian as proud and arrogant, here Cyprian defends himself, and retorteth
the same Charge of Arrogance on Pupianus in that he took on him to arraign the
Bishops and Rulers of the Church; and had denied his power in the Church: and
he shows what Inconveniency it were to the Church, if all this time the
Church of Carthage had been governed by a Man who had no Authority: and in this
he brings the similitude of the Bees, etc. Will any think that Cyprian was so
weak as to take this for a sufficient Argument to prove Monarchical Power in
the Church: he only brings it as a similitude to illustrate this Truth, that
there must be a Government in the Church, and it had been ill with the Church
of Carthage, if so long a time they had One over them who was no lawful Ruler:
which is no Determination of the Extent of Cyprian's power; Neither was that
the Question between him and Pupianus.

. 31. I proceed to his fourth Proposition, p. 24. The Bishop was so much the
principle of Unity; the people had such Dependence on him, and was so virtually
in him, that what he did as Bishop, was reputed the Deed of the whole Church;
which he ruled. And to confirm this, he brings Instances, that Churches were
blamed for communicating with criminal Bishops, and that they did not separat
from them; and are commended for the Bishops owning the Truth. Had our Author
thought fit to peruse and consider his Papers before he printed them, it is
like we should not have been troubled with such crude Notions. For 1. How can
this be reconciled to what he had a little before-pleaded, concerning the
horrid sinfulness of separating from their Bishop; and this without any
distinction or Limitation. 2. He is so unwise as to add one word that spoileth
all his Design, viz. As Bishop, for what a Bishop acts as Bishop, he acts
in the Consistory, or the Presbytery; and by the plurality of their Votes: and
that is indeed the Fact of the Church Representative, and of the Church
diffusive too, if they show no dislike of it; But this is no Semblance of Proof
of the Power of Bishops that he pleads for. Cyprian's Rhetorical flourish in
saying, that when Cornelius confessed the Faith before the Persecutors, the
whole Roman Church confessed; Is no more but that Cornelius gave a faithful
Testimony to that Doctrine, that he had preached among that People, and that
they received, and did still own; is this an Argument that Cornelius had the
sole Power of Church Government in Rome. Yea, all this might have been said of
any Member of that Church who had so confessed, and the Church did not reclaim,
but professed the same Truth; It is far less probative, that Cyprian desired to
suffer at Carthage, rather than else where, that he might in Confession be the
Mouth of them all. And least of all is it an Argument, that he calls them his
Bowels, his Body, their Grief was his Grief, etc. We must abandon all Sense and
Reason, if these pass for concludent Arguments. Of the same weight is what he
brings out of Pontius, of the Blessedness of the people of Carthage, who
suffered together with such a Bishop. I beg the Readers pardon for troubling
him with such silly Arguments, which need no Answer.

. 32. His fifth Proposition, that the Bishops being the principle of Union to
his Church, was held before the Cyprianick Age: This, I say needs no further
Animadversion: for it brings no new thing; Neither is it to be imagined that
Ignatius, whom he cites, meant that the sole Authority of the Bishop, rather
than the Doctrine that he taught from the infallible Word of God, was the
Principle of Unity to the Church: Or, that they who belong to Christ are with
the Bishop, whether he teaches Truth or Error: It is a vast mistake that he
says, that Cyprian, Ep. 33. pleads for the divine Right of Episcopacy in
that Ep. (which is ( mihi) 27) he pleads for the Divine Authority of the
Church, and her Bishops; that is, Pastors: not for a Divine Warrant for the
Praelation of some of them above others: nothing can be more evident than the
concurrent Testimonies of Antiquity against this Fancy: Scripture, and the most
Ancient of the Fathers speak of Bishops and Presbyters indistinctly; when the
Distinction began to be taken notice of, Jerome says that it was brought in by
the Presbyters themselves: Ep. ad Evagr. as also on Tit. and Aug. Ep. 10.
refers to Ecclesiae usus. Yea, Council. Nic. 1. Can. 6. makes the
Distinction of Bishops, as Metropolitans, etc. To be mos antiquus: All that
follows,. 37, 37, 36. does also confute this Opinion. But this I insist not
on, because our Author has put off the proof of that Divine Institution of
Episcopacy, to his next Essay, p. 94. His sixth and last Proposition is, that
the Principle of the Bishops being the Center of Unity is most reasonable and
accountable in it self. We may now expect some Herculean Argument, and the
highest Effort of his Skill: And I am willing that the whole Controversy be
hanged on this Pin. All that he brings for Argument is, every particular
Church is an Organical, political Body; and there can be no Organical Body
without a Principle of Unity, on which all the Members must hang, and from
which being separated, they must cease to be Members; and who so fit for being
Principle of Unity to a Church as he who is Pastor, Ruler, Governor, Captain,
Head, Judge, Christ's Vicar, etc. Not his Conclusion only, but an Assumption is
understood, viz. the Bishop is all this, ergo he is the Center of Unity; and
his quod erat demonstrandum follows a little after, it is scarce possible to
prove any thing of this nature more demonstratively. One might make sport with
this Argument, which is introduced, and backed with such Parade: But I am in
earnest in this Debate. There are here no less than three Premises expressed,
and a fourth necessarily understood, before we can reach the Conclusion; which
every Logician will condemn; and when we are at last, through all these Stages,
arived at the Conclusion, it is above distinguished, and his Argument can reach
no more than is by us confessed: Besides this, it is hard to show how these his
Premises hang together, or what Connection they have. Further, that the
principle of Unity in a political Body is one person and cannot be a Society,
the Consistory, or the Presbytery in the Church, will hardly be proved: by this
Argument there can be no Unity in a Commonwealth, but only in Monarchy,
Aristocracy, and Democracy in a Nation are here not only made unlawful, but
impossible. that the Bishop is fittest to be the Principle of Unity in the
Church is gratis dictum: Yea, it is (...): Notwithstanding of the metaphorical
Appellations that our Author gives him, from some of the Ancients. Yea, if a
Society cannot be the Center of Unity in a particular Church, who shall be the
Center of Unity among Bishops; we must surely have the Pope for this use, which
is indeed the native conclusion of our Author's Argument that he braggeth so
much of. But this will afterward occur.

. 33. He comes now ( p. 27.) to another Argument: a Bishop in Cyprian's age,
was supreme in his Church, immediately subject to Christ, had no Ecclesiastical
Superior on Earth: the Church was one, but divided into many Precincts, each
had its Bishop who was their Supreme. I am no further concerned in what he
says on this head; but what he brings for the Bishops Supremacy. Wherefore I
insist not on his first Proposition, concerning the Equality of Bishops; I only
observe that he is for Parity in the Church; and if it be found among Bishops,
I know no Scripture nor Reason that condemns it among Presbyters. To the same
purpose is his second Preposition, and his Third, all which are levelled
against the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome; whose cause I do not intend to
plead. Wherefore I come to examine his 4th Proposition, p. 31. by the
Principles of these times, every Bishop was Christ's Vicar, within his own
District: So, say I, is every Minister of the Gospel; understanding by Vicar,
one who deriveth his Power from Christ, and to him must give account of it. He
says further, that a Bishop had a Primacy in his own Church. If he mean that
he was primus Presbyter; I denied it not, if that he had the sole Power in his
own person, or that the Presbyters had not a coordinate power with him in the
Government of the Church, I deny it. Neither is it proved by Cyprian's words,
which he cites; Cathedram sibi constituere, and primatum assumere: which I
cannot find by what Directions he gives, and therefore cannot tell what might
be further said for vindicating them. The next Expression admiteth of the same
Answer, viz. that he managed the Balance of Government; it is not said that he
did this by himself; Our Moderator manageth the Balance of Government, but
with the Presbytery. The sublime Sacerdotii fastigum, signifies no more than
primus Presbyter: The Ancients use as big words for as low things: neither do I
know any higher Degree in those days: If my Antagonist will prove it, he must
use other Topics, than words that may admit various significations. the same I
say of the Expressions that follow, the vigor Episcopatus, the sublimis and
divina potestas gubernandae Ecclesiae; This last may agree to the meanest
Member of a Presbytery; Are not Presbyters called by Cyprian such as are divino
sacerdotio honorati: and gloriosi sacerdotes as himself cites. p. 7. To what
purpose he cites Jerome for the Parity of Bishops, and says that I will not
reject his Testimony, I understand not. I shall neither oppose him nor Jerome
in that Principle.

. 34. He brings another Argument, (p. 32.) from the High Priest among the
Jews, and says, that a Bishop was the same to Christians, that he was to the
Jews. I see the learned Author is very unhappy in stumbling upon popish
Arguments, and he can say little for his Bishop, but what they say for their
Pope: And it is evident, that the Papists from this Medium, argue with much
more show of Reason: For the High Priest had universal supreme Authority over
the universal Church, that then was; The Papists infer the Pope's universal
Head-ship: though I am far from thinking this Argument concludent for them; yet
what show of Confequence can it have for a Bishops Power in his Diocese? Or
with what Face can this Author say, that a Bishop is the same to Presbyters and
Deacons, that he was to the Levites, unless he say that a Bishop was the same
to all the Presbyters and Deacons in the World that the High Priest was to all
the Levites in the world. Cyprian's Reasons, brought from the High Priest, have
much more Sense in them than these of our Author: For he pleads no more from
that Topic, but that as the High Priest was to be obyed, and not resisted, so
is the Bishop. As the High Priest was reverenced, even by Christ, so is the
Bishop; we say the same: that a Bishop acting in his Sphere, with his
Consistory, or Presbytery, should be obeyed and respected: and we count it the
same sort of Sin in Schismatics, who rebel against this Church Authority, with
Kora's Rebellion against Aaron: but it is utterly inconsequential to infer
Church Monarchy from Aaron's Power. I wish he had brought any thing that might
look like proof of this consequence. He says, p. 34. that the Christian
Hierarchy was copied from that of the Jews; and he brings Arguments for it,
such as they are, one is from the Names, Priest, Priesthood, Altar, Sacrafice,
etc. which he calls a pregnant Argument; I cannot but still observe how much
the Papists owe him; not only for their Pope, but for their unbloody Sacrifice,
what? must we have all that of the Old Testament whereof we retain the Names?
If so, we must have a new Gospel. This Argument is easily delivered of its
Pregnancy, by denying the Consequence. His other Argument is from an Ep. of
Clement of Rome, who lived in the Apostles times: wherein he exhorts to
Order, and every ones keeping his Station, and then reckons up several
Subordinations under the Old Testament. A. Clement uses the Old Testament
hierarchy as a simile, to illustrate New Testament Subordination of Officers in
the Church; ergo we must have the same Officers, and they must have the same
Power that these had, non sequitur: Neither was such a Consequence intended by
Clement: For a second Answer, our Author may know that that, and others of the
Epistles that go under Clement's name are rejected, as none of his, by Learned
Men, and on solid Grounds.

. 35. He has a long Discourse, beginning p. 34. at the end, to show that my
Definition of a Bishop, is consistent with none of the three Principles last
mentioned, which were current in the Cyprianick Age; much less with all three
together. I have already showed, how far these Principles were held in that
Age; and how our Notion of a Bishop agrees with them all. What seems to be
further Argumentative in this Harangue, I shall consider. He says the Bishops
being the Principle of Unity, does not consist with his being a single
Presbyter; where there were forty six Presbyters; as at Rome: there would
rather be forty six Principles of Divisions, and make the Church a Monster
with forty six Heads. Answ. 1. I retort this Argument: In the first Council of
Nice, (for Example) where were three hundred Bishops, what was the Principle of
Unity? or, were they three hundred Principles of Division? And a Church
Meeting, or a Church Representative, that was so Monstrous as to have three
hundred Heads? What he will answer in the one case, I will answer in the other.
And indeed this Argument destroys the Parity of Bishops, which he pleads
for, as well as of Presbyters; and its Native Conclusion is, we must either
have the Papacy over the Church, or Anarchy in it. A. 2. Where there are many
such Presbyters as our Author pleads for, we say the Bishop was the (...),
and not a single Presbyter. A. 3. In a particular Flock, where are many Ruling,
but not Teaching Presbyters, the Bishop or Minister, is such a Principle of
Unity, as I have above owned: and where there are more Bishops in one Church,
the Principle of Unity, is their Teaching the same Doctrine: as is above
explained. He next alleges, that a Moderator cannot be the Principle of Unity
in a Presbytery; seeing as such, he is neither Pastor, Governor, nor Christian;
but may be a Heathen. A. This wild Notion, that a Heathen may be Moderator in a
Presbytery, I have fully refuted,. 8. To the first part of his Argument, I say,
that not the Moderator alone, but with the Presbytery, is the Principle of
Unity, while they all Teach the same Truths, and adhere to the one Rule of our
Faith, and Practice, the Word of God: any other Bond, or Cement, by which Men
can be United, which lies in the Authority of a Man, rather than in the true
Doctrine, is an Antichristian Fancy; and tends to enslave the Conscience to
the Will of Man. We know no such Uniting Head as he tells of, but Christ,
Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. Neither did ever Cyprian dream of such a Head of the Church
Next he will make our Notion of a Bishop inconsistent with his other Principls,
the Bishop's Supremacy, and Independency. I have already showed, that the
Church in Cyprian's Time, knew no such Supremacy, nor Independency: but held,
and Practiced a Subordination, not of many to one, but of every one to the
Collective Body, and of every lesser Body to the greater, of which it was a
part. I see no Reason nor Scripture Ground for Independency, whether of single
Pastors and Congregations, or of Presbyteries, or of Bishops; and their
Provincial Synods. His third Principle, the Hierarchy under the Gospel, being
the same with that under the Old Testament, I have refuted, as a groundless
Fancy; and therefore am under no Obligation to show the Consistency of our
Parity with it.

. 36. From p. 37. he lays down Principles that would afford stronger, and
more pertinent Arguments, than any we have yet met with, if he can but
sufficiently establish these Principles. He mentions three, viz. 1. The
Bishop's sole Power in many Acts of Government and Discipline. 2. His Negative
in all. 3. That all Presbyters were subject to his Authority and Jurisdiction.
If all this be true, our Cause is lost: but we are not afraid to try it with
him, through his help whose Cause we plead. Before I engage in this Debate with
him, I desire the Reader will reflect on what I observed,. 10. that if we can
bring Testimonies to prove a Parity of Power among Presbyters: and that
Domination over them by one, was condemned, or disowned in Cyprian's Time; his
bringing Testimonies to the contrary, will not be found Concludent: for
Contradictory Assertions derogate from the Authority of the Asserter: or
seeming Contradictions must be reconciled by a fair Exposition: or, such
Testimonies will prove, that the Practice and Principles of the Churches of
that Age, were not Uniform; any of which would weaken his Cause. I shall not
here repeat the Citations that are full to this purpose, which I have on
diverse Occasions mentioned. Nor need I confine my self to Cyprian's Age alone:
seeing our Author pretends to no less Antiquity for his Way, than from the
Apostles down ward; yea, all the Ages of the Church; and all the Churches of
every Age: and we acknowledge that after the third Century, Church Government
was much altered to the worse. I shall begin with Ignatius, both because his
Testimony is Argumentum ad Hominem, at least, seeing my Antagonist, and his
Party, lay so much Stress on his Epistles: also, because if he speak for
Parity, it may abate the force of all that they bring out of his Writings to
the contrary. What I shall allege from him, I find cited by the famous
Archbishop Usher, in his Original of Bishops and Metropolitans, Ignat. Ep. ad
Trallianos. (...), etc. be subject to the Bishop as to the Lord; and after* be
subject to the Presbytery as to the Apostles of Jesus Christ our Hope. Also
(...), etc. he that does any thing without the Bishop, and the Presbyters, and
the Deacons, such an one is defiled in Conscience. And again (...), etc.
farewell in Christ Jesus, being subject to the Bishop, and also to the
Presbyters. Here it is plain that Church Authority, to which the People must be
subject, is not given to the Bishop alone, but to the Presbytery also; and
indeed to them both acting conjunctly. I need not transcribe what is, with much
plainness, cited to our purpose, by Blondel; out of both the Clements,
Polycarpus, Justin; and others of the first of the Fathers. I only mention
Clem. Alexand. Strom. Lib. 7. Penes Presbyteros est Disciplina quae facit
homines meliores. Tertullian Apolog. c. 39. Praesident probati quique Seniores.
Viz. In their Meetings for Discipline: where were Admonitiones, Castigationes,
and Censurae Divinae. He is speaking of the Discipline of a Congregation; and
ascribes the Government of it to a Community, not to a single person. The
Clergy of Rome in their Epistles to Cyprian, (which is Ep. 31.) do plainly
declare their Opinion about the receiving the Lapsed; that it should be done
collatione Consiliorum cum Episcopis, Presbyteris, Diaconis, Confessoribus, and
stantibus Laicis: this they mean of the general Method that should be laid down
for it; it should be Advised about by as many as can give Counsel: but when
they speak of the Authoritative Sentence; they say, it should not be done ab
uno: then not by a Bishop acting by sole Authority. Cypr. Ep. 10.. 3. Writing
to the Clergy of Carthage, and showing the evil of overturning Church
Discipline, as had been done by some of their number; he tells them, Erunt
rei qui praesunt, and haec fratribus non suggerunt, ut instructi a praepositis
faciant omnia cum Dei timore. Where it is evident that they owned them as
praepositi; and charge on them the Duty of giving faithful Warning, according
to that their Character: whence it follows that he did not look on himself as
being the only praepositus, or Ruler of that Church. And Ep. 28. he commends
the Clergy of Carthage, (while himself was absent from them) that they had
debarred from Communicating with them Gaius Presbyter Diddensis, and his
Deacon, who had Communicated with the Lapsed: and he tells them that they had
Acted like Men of Integrity, and according to the Discipline of the Church:
integre and cum Disciplina fecistis. If he had the sole Power, this Fact of
theirs had been quite contrary to Church Discipline. If any say, that they did
this with the Advice of some of Cyprian's Colleagues, that is, Bishops. A.
Whether these were Bishops or not, we know not: but they only gave Advice, the
Authoritative Act was by the Clergy of Carthage. Ep. 55.. 17. Cyprian compares
the number of Presbyters and Deacons who had concurred in condemning (
affuerunt judicio and cognitioni) some Schismatics; with the number of them
that stood for them: which is a clear Argument that the Clergy, with the
Bishop, not only consulted, but judicially determined, in Church Affairs. And
in the same Epist.. 21. speaking to Cornelius Bishop of Rome, he expressly
mentions the Clergy as ruling the Church with Cornelius: his Words are,
Florentissimo clero illic tecum praesidenti. Also Epist. 58. he has Words of
the like importance,. 2. Qui cum Episcopo Presbyteri sacerdotali honor
conjuncti. It is also evident in many of Cyprian's Epistles, that he divides
the Clergy in Praepositos (which Word does manifestly signify Rulers) and
Deacons. So Epist. 62, 65. and elsewhere. I only add out of Cyprian Epist. 6..
4. Doleo enim quando audio -- nec a Diaconis aut Presbyteris regi posse.
Pamelius's Note on this Passage makes it yet more plain for us; though he was a
Papist, and no Presbyterian. Hinc (says he) non obscure colligitur, viguisse
adhuc Carthagini, aetate auctoris, praerogativam Presbyterorum and Diaconorum
primitivae Ecclesiae; qua communi totius Presbyterii, i. e. Presbyterorum and
Diaconorum collegii, consilio, administrabantur omnia ab Episcopis: And he
cites to confirm this, Ignatius, as I have before cited him. If any say
Pamelius attributes to the Presbytery but Consilium; it is plain that Cyprian
speaks of their Ruling Power.

. 37. Contemporary with Cyprian was Firmilianus Bishop of Caesarea in
Cappadocia; who does fully declare for Presbyterial Government, in his Epist.
to Cyprian, which is the 75. of Ep. Cypr. for. 3. he has these Words, Qua ex
re necessario apud nos fit; ut per singulos annos seniores and praepositi in
unum conveniamus; ad disponenda ea quae curae nostrae commissa sunt; ut si quae
graviora sunt, communi consilio dirigantur. And. 6. Omnis potestas and gratia
in Ecclesia est constituta, ubi praesident majores natu ((...)) qui and
baptizandi, and manum imponendi and ordinandi possident potestatem. It is to be
observed, that frequent mention is made in this Epistle of Episcopi, Bishops,
and Pamelius thinks that this Ep. being turned out of Greek into Latin by
Cyprian, to whom it was written, by Praepositus is meant Bishop, and by Senior
Presbyter, whence it is evident, that here all Church Power is ascribed to the
Presbyter that is given to the Praepositus or Bishop. At the same time was
Pontius one of Cyprian's Deacons* and his constant Attendant, and who well knew
his Principles; he wrote Cyprian's Life, and in that History he has these
Words, Nulla mora, nulla dilatio Presbyterium and sacerdotum statum (that is
presently after his Conversion to Christianity) accepit: quis enim non omnes
honorum gradus crederet tali menti: where it is plain that Pontius thought that
all Church Degrees were included in Sacerdotium and Presbyterium; which he
takes for one. And a little below he joineth Sacerdotium and Episcopatus as
the same Office that Cyprian was chosen to, while he was Neophytus, and as was
thought Novellus. From all this it appears that Cyprian was made Priest,
Presbyter and Bishop all at once, as being the same thing. Gregor. Nazianz.
(who flourished in the fourth Century) in his Apology, tells us of the
Apostles making Canons for Bishops and Presbyters, 1 Timothy 3. and Tit. 1.
Whether their Office may be called a Ministry, or Rule of Government; his Words
are (...). He says likewise of them, that they (by their promotion to be
Presbyters) ascend from being ruled to be Rulers: that they have Authority, not
over a Flock; but over men's Souls: and other very sublime Powers he ascribes
to them. And in his Orations, he is as profuse in extolling the Dignity and
Authority of Presbyters, as any other in exalting Bishops. He says, as many as
are ordained, are chosen to the high Thrones of Presbytery (...). That he
speaks not of Bishops as distinct from Presbyters, is plain, for the design
of his Discourse, especially in his Apology, is to show how the Apostle
directed Bishops and Presbyters by the same Canons, without distinguishing
them, or their work; and that only custom had raised the Bishop above them as
their Praeses.

. 38. I next bring Ambrose as a Witness for us; in his Epistle to Syagrius, he
shows, that when he and Syagrius had severally passed Sentence on a
Delinquent, the Church was unsatisfied with the Sentence of Syagrius, and gave
the reason, because he had done it by himself, sine alicujus fratris consensu;
but acquiesced in the Sentence passed by Ambrose, because (says he) hoc
Judicium nostrum cum Fratribus and Con-Sacerdotibus participatum processit.
Whence it is plain to have been the Principle of those days, that the Bishop
had not sole Jurisdiction: however some were then Grasping at it. Chrysostom.
Homil. 11. in 1. Tim. (...), etc. omitting the Order of Presbyters, he (the
Apostle) passes to the Deacons. Why so? Because there is no great Difference:
for they are Ordained for Teaching and Governing ((...)) the Church; and what
he had said of Bishops, he applies to the Presbyters. If then Chrysostom was
for the Bishop's sole Jurisdiction, let any judge. August. Ep. 19. quanquam
secundum honorum vocabula quae jam Ecclesiae usus obtinuit, Episcopatus
Presbyterio major sit, tamen in multis rebus Augustinus Hieronymo minor est.
Where it may be observed, to our purpose, 1. That Augustine places the
Praelation of a Bishop above a Presbyter, in the Title of Dignity, but speaks
not a word of Superior Power. 2. He not only insinuates, that that Difference
(such as it was) had its Original, not from Divine Institution, but Humane
Custom; but he speaks of it as lately settled, jam obtinuit: this was after
420 years: it was neither constant, nor universal, till then. Salvianus makes
the Levitae and Sacerdotes to be the Apostles Successors; not mentioning
Bishops as distinct. So Gildas frequently speaks of Bishops and Presbyters
promiscuously. I hope I may also adduce Jerome, a Presbyter, as a Witness, as
well as they do other Fathers who were Bishops. He gives all manner of Church
Power to Presbyters, and not to Bishops only. Ep. ad Heliodorum. Presbytero
(says he) si peccavero, licet me tradere Satanae in interitum carnis. Et Ep.
ad Demetrium; sunt quos Ecclesia reprehendit, quos interdum abjicit, in quos
nonnunquam Episcoporum and Presbyterorum Censura desaevit. Ambrose gives
Account, Ep. 80. of the Excommunication of Jovinianus, and others with him, by
Syricius Bishop of Rome; whose words to Ambrose were, omnium nostrum tam
Presbyterorum, quam Diaconorum, quam totius Cleri scissitata fuit Sententia. It
is showed,. 37. that Penitents were to be received by the Bishop and Clergy; as
Cypr. Ep. 12. it were then strange, if they were cast out by the Bishop alone.
I desire the Reader (who can) for further satisfaction, would read Paul Baynes
Diocesan's Trial: and Mr. Peregrin Letters Patents of Presbytery: they having
somewhat that is singular on this Subject.

. 39. Let us now examine what he is pleased to bring for the Bishop's sole
Power in the Church; and against the Parity that we have Asserted. And first, I
shall examine his three Principles abovementioned. The first of which is,
there were several considerable Acts of Power, belonging to the Government and
Discipline of the Church, which belonged solely to the Bishop; several Powers
Lodged in his Person, which he could manage by himself, and without the
Concurrence of any other Church-Governour. Of this sort he reckons eight,
viz. Confirmation, Ordination, Settling Presbyters, Disposal of Church
Revenues, Imposing Charitable Contributions, Convocating the Presbyters and
Deacons, Indicting Public Fasts, Delegating two of his Presbyters. These I
shall consider distinctly, with his Proofs for what he Asserteth about them.
For the first of these, Confirmation of the Adult, who had in their Infancy
been Baptized; at first it was no more, but after diligent Instructing them in
the Grounds of Religion, bringing them to the Pastor of the Church, (and
probably before the Eldership) that they might be tried in their Proficiency,
and so declared fit to receive the Lord's Supper: in which nothing can be
blamed. Afterward it came to be more Theatrically managed, and Imposition of
Hands was the Ceremony by which it was set off: till at last it came to be
esteemed a Sacrament. Now when it was thus turned from the Simplicity of God's
Ordinance, to be a Pompous Device of Man, (not a few of which were crept into
the Church in, yea before Cyprian's Age) it is not strange, if they committed
not the managing of it to all, to whom Christ had committed his Ordinances; but
to one of their own choosing. Our Debate is, whether the Bishop had sole Power
of managing any of Christ's Ordinances; of which number this is not. Yet I find
little strength in our Author's Arguments for this Power in the Bishop. His
first Proof is, Cypr. Ep. ad Jubajanum, it was the Custom to offer such as were
Baptized to the Bishops, that by their Prayers, and the Laying on of their
Hands, they might receive the Holy Ghost, and be Consummated by the Sign of our
Lord: which our Author takes to be the Sign of the Cross. Here Cyprian uses
the word Praepositis, which our Author is pleased to translate Bishops; whereas
Presbyters also were called by that Name. For Cyprian, Ep. 3.. 1. the Roman
Clergy, (when they had no Bishop,) said of themselves, that it appeared that
they were Praepositi; and thence inferred, that it was incumbent on them to
take Care of the Flock: and they speak of idle Shepherds as neglegentes
Praepositi, whose Reproof was to be a Warning to them. And Cypr. Ep. and
Jubajan. which is 69.. 4. plainly calls the Successors of the seventy
Disciples, as well as these of the Apostles, Praepositos: for of them that
place Luc. 10. 16. which he cites, is to be understood. And Ep. 62.. 1. he
shows how Church Discipline is to be regarded, a Praepositis and Plebe. And
Ep. 65.. 4. he mentions Episcopos and Praepositos, as distinct. And Ep. 21.
which is Celerini ad Lucium,. 3. quorum jam causa audita, praeceperunt eos
Praepositi sic esse donec Episcopus constituatur. And de Lapsis,. 4.
Praepositos superbo tumore contemnere: it is spoken of all the Rulers of the
Church. For a further Refutation of this his Principle, it may be observed,
that this Confirmation, of which Cyprian here speaks, is not that which in
our days goes under that Name; but that used in the Apostolic Church, the
Effect of which, was the giving of the Holy Ghost; as is clear from his citing
Act. 8. 14, etc* for the Pattern of what they did, and their Warrant for it.
Now that Imposition of Hands was not given to all the Baptized; but only to
such as were ad ministerium ordinandi, says Lightfoot: it was not ad
sanctificationem, sed ad dona extraordinaria; says the same Author. Piscator,
Beza, Grotius, do also so expound this place: wherefore it proves nothing,
except our Author can tell us what Cyprian meant by it: which I can not; seeing
the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost were then ceased, for any thing that
we know. His next Citation, out of Firmilian, destroys what it is brought
for; for he ascribes to Bishops the Power of Baptism, Confirmation,
Ordination: his Word is, they possess this Power: I hope he will not say that
Presbyters had no Power in Baptism: wherefore by Bishops here Firmilian must
mean the Pastors of the Church; all of whom were frequently called Bishops at
that time: yea, himself confesses, that these spoken of, were the majores
natu, whom he most absurdly pleads to be Bishops, as distinct from preaching
Presbyters. Of as little weight is what Cornelius says of Novatianus (Eusebius
makes Cornelius say this of Novatus, chap. 42.) that he was not confirmed by
the Bishop; for in that place Cornelius questioned not only the Confirmation of
Novatus, but his Baptism: and that he speaks not of the ordinary
Confirmation, but of that which belonged to Priests, is clear; for he says,
how then came he by the Holy Ghost? and he is there pleading his incapacity to
be a Bishop, on that account. But of this too much: for it does not hurt our
Cause if it be granted that Bishops then were so far distinguished from other
Presbyters, that they usurped a Power which our Lord had not given to them, nor
any man else, at that time; what ever he had before done to them whom he
immediately sent, and extraordinarly endowed.

. 40. The second Act of Power that he ascribes to the Cyprianick Bishop alone
is, He had the sole Power of Ordination; and that of whatsoever Clergymen
within his District. Ordinations could not be performed without him: but he
could perform them regularly without the concurrence of any other
Church Officer: And he says, this has so frequently and fully been proved by
learned men, that he need insist little on it. All which we deny: neither do I
find any Argument here brought by him, nor have I found in the Writings of his
learned men (and I may, without vanity, say, I have seen the strongest of them)
which might be a rational ground of Conviction. Before I examine his Proofs for
this Assertion, I shall prove the Antithesis: That Presbyters did, in that age,
and before, join in the Ordination of Presbyters. And first, it is evident from
Jerome's words, so much insisted upon by our Episcopal Brethren, Alexandriae, a
Marco evangelista usque ad Heracleam and Dionysium Espiscopos, Presbyteri
semperunum ex se electum, in excelsiori gradu collocatum, Episcopum nominabant.
Whence it may fairly be deduced, that till An. Christi 246, all the Power or
Authority that the Bishop had, was given him by the Presbyters; they elected
him, nor had he any other Ordination, or Communication of Power, but what he
had from them; in the Opinion of Jerome. If then the Presbyters made a Bishop;
it could not be he alone, but the Bishop with them, and as one of them who made
Presbyters. 2. Hilarious, who lived in the middle of the fourth Century, in Ephesians.
4. has these words, apud Aegyptum Presbyteri consignaverunt, si praesens non
fuit Episcopus. Whether ye interpret Consignaverunt of Confirmation, as some,
or Consecration of Church Officers, as others, it comes to the same
Conclusion: seeing our Author and his Accomplices, reserve both these Powers to
the Bishop; and it is probable they were not divided. That they did it absente
Episcopo, does imply that they had that Authority* for without it they could
not have done it at all. 3. Novatus a Presbyter in Carthage, while Cyprian was
Bishop: Ordained Felicissimus: This Ordination (though no doubt it was irregular,
being done without the Moderator and the Presbytery) yet it was not looked on as
null, but Novatus was, after that, owned by Cyprian: and Felicissimus continued
to be a Deacon. To this our Author answers p. 42. that not Novatus, but
neighboring Bishops by the procurement of Novatus, did it. But Cyprian's words
are plain; Felicissimum diaconum sua factione constituit. That this Deacon was
ordained by Bishops is gratis dictum. I have also elsewhere proved, that in
Scotland there were Presbyters ruling the Church, long before they had Bishops:
which could not be if none but Bishops could Ordain them.

. 41. Cyprian Ep. (mihi) 33. in ordinationibus clericis, solemus vos ante
consulere, ut mores and merita singulorum communi consilio ponderarem, etc. In
that Ep. he tells the Church what was his usual practice; and we have cause
to think that he looked on it as his Duty not to Ordain without the Presbyters:
Commune consilium here can import no less than Deliberation and Authoritative
Decision, for it was common to him and them. In the following part of the
Epistle, he excuses his Ordaining Anrelius a Lector, without them, from the
evidence of a Divine Call: and the present Distress and Scattering of the
Church might excuse this necessary diverting from the common Road: yet he
tells them, he did not this by himself, but hunc igitur fratres dilectissimi,
a me and a collegis qui praesentes aderant ordinatum sciatis; quod vos scio and
libenter amplecti, and optare tales in Ecclesia nostra quem plurimos ordinari.
He makes the like Excuse, Ep. 24. for his Ordaining Saturus a Lector and
Optatus a Subdeacon: only here he had before hand the common consent; but his
Circumstances (being in his Retirement) did not suffer this to be done in and
with the Presbytery; but that he did it not alone, we may gather from the
former instance. This does sufficiently show that Ordinations were not
performed without the Determination of the Presbytery. But it is also manifest,
that in the solemnizing of them, by imposition of Hands, the Presbyters had
their Share with the Bishop. Cypr- Ep. 10.. 2. There is mention of impositio
manum Episcopi and cleri, and that two several times. If it be said, that this
Imposition of Hands was for absolving Penitents; the consequence is good from
the one to the other, seeing our Author joyneth Confirmation in order to
Communion (of which this is a sort) with Ordination, as two Powers reserved to
the Bishop alone. Ep. 67.. 4. he says of Cornelius Bishop of Rome, that he was
ordained Suffragi^, Cleri and Plebis, Council. Carthag. 3. Canon. 22. Nullus
ordinetur clericus non probatus, vel Episcoporum (not Episcopi) examine, vel
populi testimonio. Council. Carthag. 4. Can. 3. Presbyter cum ordinatur;
Episcopo eum benedicente, and manum super caput ejus tenente, etiam omnes
presbyteri qui adsunt manus suas juxta manum Episcopi super caput ejus teneant.
This is exactly our practice, if ye allow the Moderator to be the Cyprianick
Episcopus. Our Author himself seems to insinuat, that the Presbyters with
Cyprian, used to concur in Ordination; while he premiseth to his proofs for
sole Ordination, that passage out of Ep. 14. (as he quoteth it) a primordio
Episcopatus mei statueram nihil sine consilio vestro and sine consensu plebis,
mea privatim sententia gerere. I say, if this be not meant of Ordination, it is
here very impertinently brought in. Nor can his Comment on Cyprian's words help
him, viz. That this was his voluntary Condescendence, that he was not bound to:
To prove which he puts Statueram in majusculis as if it were not usual with
good men when they enter on an Office, to resolve to keep within the bounds of
their power; to manage it lawfully; as well as to cede in what is their Right.
But that Cyprian's words cannot bear that sense, I prove by the Reason he
gives; sic mutuus honor exposcit: the mutuus honor must be that due regard
that he had to their Authority in the Church, and they ought to have to his: it
had been a dishonouring of them, and setting them lower than Christ had set
them in his Church, for him to manage her Affairs without them. And Ep. 18. he
makes this Matter yet clearer; Quae res, cum omnium nostrum consilium and
sententiam spectet, praejudicare ego, and soli mihi rem communem vindicare non
audeo. Where it is manifest, that it was conscience of Duty, and not good
Nature only, that induced him to this Conduct. Also that he attributes to
Presbyters not consilium only, but sententiam; not only a consultative Power,
but also definitive, or decisive. The Apostle who had indeed a sole
Jurisdiction, spoke in another Dialect, 1 Cor. 5. I have judged already.
Cyprian durst not do so, because he knew he had not that sole Power.

. 42. Let us now hear his Proofs for the Bishop's sole Power of Ordination. The
first is, What is said of the Ordination of Aurelius, which I have already
showed to be against him. Wherefore I shall only take notice of his Observes
on this Passage, by which he would force it to speak for him. 1. That his Power
was the same in all Ordinations. I shall not much contend about this: only, if
they put the Power of Ordaining Officers of their own devising into the hands
of whom they would; it does not thence follow that they might, or did so
dispose of Ordaining Power with respect to these whom God had appointed, and
about whose Ordination he had given Rules in the Word. 2. He used only to ask
their Counsel about the manners and Merits of the person to be Ordained; not
their concurrence in the Act of Ordination. This is a Mistake, he asked not
their Counsel only, but their joint Suffrage, as is above showed. That their
Concurrence in the Act of Ordination is not here mentioned, is not to his
purpose; seeing it is consequential to their Office, and Church Power. That it
is fairly imported in the instance of Aurelius that they used not to concur, is
a groundless Imagination; For this is a single Instance in an extraordinary
case, and he spends a whole Epistle in making Apology for it: Yea, he more
than insinuates the contrary, when he tells what he used to do, and gives a
singular Reason for what he now did. I wonder that common Sense does not teach
him that such an Act does not import a Custom. 3. That it was entirely of his
own easiness and condescendency that he consulted them in the matter: This I
have above refuted; and it is inconsistent with what himself elsewhere says,
that the Bishop was the Monarch, and the Presbyters his Senate: I hope he will
not say that it is ex beneplacito that Kings consult their Parliaments: Unless
he be for the Turkish Government both in Church and State.

. 43. Another Testimony (which he calls Remarkable p. 40.) is Cyprian Ep. 41.
had given a Deputation to Caldonius and some others, to examine the Ages,
Qualifications, and Merits of some in Carthage, that he, whose Province it was
to promote Men to Ecclesiastical Offices, might be well informed about them,
and promote none but such as were meek, and humble, and worthy. His Remark is,
he speaks of himself in the singular Number, as having the power of promoting;
and he founds that Power, and appropriats it to himself, upon his having the
care of the Church, and the Government of Her committed to him, For A. I
observe a few things on this discourse. 1. This Delegation of Caldonius and the
rest, was not to Carthage, as our Author dreameth; which appears by the end
of the Epistle, in which he bids Caldonius, etc. read this Ep. to the Brethren,
and transmit it to Carthage to the Clergy: which had been incongruous if their
Errand and Work had been at Carthage. Next, this is in consistent with what
Cyprian, and our Author says was his Practice; viz. to consult the presbyters
about who were fit to be ordained: It is strange that he should send Strangers
to Carthage for such Enquiry, and to inform him, with the neglect of the
Presbytery. 2. It is also clear from the Epistle,. 1. That this Negotiation was
about some Sufferers who belonged to the Church of Carthage (may be, banished,
or imprisoned, or confined some where) where they were in necessity; for he
says he sent them, ut expungeretis necessitates fratrum nostrorum sumptibus,
etc. That they might pay their Debts (as Pamelius expounds it) and that they
might furnish them for following their Trades, if they so inclined: And the
enquiry about their fitness for Church-Work seems to be intended on the by;
for he brings it in with simul etiam. 3. That he speaks of himself in the
singular Number, does no way infer that he alone was to promote any who were
qualified among these Sufferers: Neither his having the care of Church
Government committed to him: For ego cui cura incumbit promoverem, says
nothing at all of sole care, nor of sole Power. Not only a Moderator, but any
Member of a Presbytery, to whom the Ordination of Ministers belongs, might
say as much; might desire to know worthy persons, and give the Reason, that it
is not Curiosity, but it belongs to my Office to Ordain such as are fit, and
therefore I desire to know their qualities. His next Citation has no more
strength: For it says no more than that some in a State of Schism have been
ordained by false Bishops; whence he infers, that all Ordinations in the
true, and in the false Church were performed by Bishops. This is not the
Question; but whether they were ordained by Bishops acting each of them alone.

. 44. He next brings Ep. 39. where Cyprian writes to his Clergy, that he had
Ordained Celerinus; and Ep. 29. Saturus, and Optatus; and that though some of
them were but young, and he Ordained them to Inferior Offices; yet he designed
they should sit with him in their Riper Years: that is, (says our Author) he
designed them for the Presbyterate. And he very Learnedly observes, that
Cyprian tells his Presbyters this in a very Authoritative Style, even in a
Style by which Superiors used to signify their Will and Pleasure to their
Subjects; with a be it known unto you. Here a little Reflection will serve. 1.
Here is still the old Fallacy; Cyprian Ordained these Persons, ergo, he did it
alone. 2. It is so far from that, that of Celerinus he says expressly, it was
done by him and his Colleagues, Ep. 34.. 1. As in the former, Ep. 33. he had
said of Aurelius. 3. The present Dissipation of the Church, made some things
necessary, which were neither usual, nor commendable out of that Case: as that
Cyprian, with such as he could then get to concur with him, Ordained some
Persons without the Concurrence of the Presbytery; who then, it seems, through
the Persecution that was at Carthage, could not get that Work managed. 4. For
Cyprian's Style in his Epistle to the Presbytery, I think many more will smile
at his Fancy, than will be convinced by the strength of his Reason drawn from
it: Cyprian's word is, Sciatis, which our Author puts in majusculis, to give
his Argument some more pith: but who knows not that this Expression
signifies barely a notifying of a thing to another; and is commonly used
(especially in the Latin Tongue) to Superiors, Inferiors, or Equals. It is a
token of a mind deeply impressed with the Majesty of a Bishop, (as he elsewhere
expresses himself,) when this word does so sound in his ears. The Ordination
of Novatianus, which he next brings as an Argument for him, rather is against
him: it was an Act condemned by the Clergy and People, by Cyprian's constant
Practice; and that which he looked on as Duty, (as has been showed before,) and
was the Practice of an Aspiring Pope: yea which himself promised should not be
made a Praecedent. Can any body think this is a good Argument to prove the
Custom of that Age? Neither can it be made appear, that this Ordination was
performed by the Bishop alone: especially seeing our Author says, the Bishop
prevailed and Ordained him. It is like he prevailed with some, at least, of the
Clergy, though they did at first much resist it. He says, p. 42. that any
concurrence of Presbyters with the Bishop in Ordination, is not to be found in
Cyprian' s Works, nor in his Age. I hope the Reader is by this time convinced
of the contrary. He next, p. 43. brings for Proof, the second Canon of the
Apostles, commonly so called, which is, let a Presbyter be Ordained by one
Bishop, as likewise a Deacon, and the rest of the Clergy. But our Author might
know, that the Authority of these Canons, is controverted even among Papists:
as Sixtus Senensis, Lib. 2. ad vocem Clemens, p. (mihi) 62, 63. And Caranza.
Summa. Concilior: and others show. The Contentions that are about the number of
them, make them to be all suspected. Rivet. Critic. Sacr. Lib. 1. C. 1. p. 93.
and P. Martyr. Loc. Com. Class. 4. C. 4. p. (mihi) 779. bring sufficient
Grounds for rejecting them, as neither done by the Apostles, nor collected by
Clement, as is alleged. Again if this Canon were admitted, it proves not the
Conclusion: for one Bishop Ordains, when the Moderator with the Presbytery
does it: and that Canon is observed, when no more are called together to the
Ordination of a Presbyter. His Comparison of the Bishop's Power in this, with
the Rights of Majesty in giving Commissions, is vain Talk: unless he can prove
a Monarchy, and that absolute in the Church, which can never be done: for the
Canon mentioned, being universally received in Cyprian's time, it is not
without Doubt, as he alleges, for all Beveregius's Arguments which he
boasts of; but produces none of them. One thing I cannot pass, p. 44. he
tells, that after Cyprian's time, it was appointed by the Canons, that
Presbyters should concur with the Bishop in Ordinations: which overthrows all
his Discourse of the Bishop's Majesty, Sovereignty, Incontrollable and
Unaccountable Power, etc. And it is evident to any who is Conversant in the
History of the Church, that Episcopal Power did rather continually increase,
than suffer Diminution, till it arrived at the height of the Papacy, (which in
the best sense, is his Sublime Fastigium Sacerdotii.) And then indeed the Pope
began to clip the Wings of other Bishops, that he might crow over them.

. 45. His third Prerogative of the Bishop in Cyprian's time, is his full Power,
without asking the consent or concurrence of either Clergy or People, to setle
Presbyters within his District. And on this occasion he ridiculeth our
Principle of the peoples Power of choosing their own Ministers. All the Prooff
of this confident Assertion, and insolent Contempt of them who are otherwise
minded, is, Cyprian Ep. 40. wrote to Carthage, that they should receive
Numidicus as a Presbyter among them: and our Author adds, probably he was
ordained before. 1. If our Author had pleased to state and argue the Question
about the Power of Election, I should have been willing to join Issue with him.
Or if he had thought fit to answer what I have elsewhere written on that Head,
in a Book that he has seen, and cited, when he thought he could say something
against it, I should have considered the strength of what he would say: but he
does wisely shun that Controversy: neither shall I dip in it, further than is
necessary for answering his Book. 2. If Numidicus was ordained before, then was
he also placed in Carthage before; and we have cause to think that he was
ordained by the consent and concurrence of the Presbyters of Carthage: at least
our Author cannot prove the contrary, which is necessary for establishing his
Conclusion. 3. He who animadverteth on Pamelius's Notes on Cyprian, has these
Words, on the beginning of the Epistle, Etsi vocatio Numidici magis erat
extraordinaria quam ordinaria, tamen non sine plebe Carthaginense Presbyterio
ascribitur: whence he infers, that Ordinations without their consent, are
profanae and irritae. 4. His work is to prove that it was the Practice and
Principle of the Cyprianick-Age, that a Bishop by himself placed Ministers:
this cannot be inferred from one single instance; and that in a time of
Persecution and Dissipation; and where there was so signal appearance of Divine
determination, that Cyprian's words are, admonitos nos, and instructor
dignatione divina, sciatis, ut Numidicus Presbyter adscribatur Presbyterorum
Carthaginiensium numero. Any who desires to be fully satisfied in this Point
of Election of Pastors, let him read Blondel. Apolog. Pro sententia Hieron.
from p. 379. to the end, even to p. 548. where it is traced through all the
Ages of the Church.

. 46. The Bishop's fourth Privilege is, he had the Disposal of all the
Revenues of the Church. This our Author maintains p. 44, etc. he had the full
Power of this, says he, ibid. I here observe, that if we should yield all that
he asserteth, it makes nothing for the sole Power of the Bishop in
Jurisdiction, or Government of the Church: for these distributions were always
reckoned a Service, not any Act of Government in the Church: the Object of
Church Power are not (...). Further, I observe, that the Authoritative
Direction in managing these Matters, did belong to all Church Rulers: The
Apostles had the Power; but they were not at leisure to attend the managing of
these things, as our Author's Bishop is; but committed it to Deacons, who were
Officers appointed for that very end, Act. 6. I observe thirdly, that however
to be thus employed, might suit well with the way and temper of the the Bishops
of our time; who generally are more employed about Secular Affairs, than in
Preaching: it was not consistent with the Labor of the Primitive Bishops about
the Gaining of Souls. Fourthly, it is evident, that in the Ages after the
Apostles, the Deacons had the Charge of the bona Ecclesiastica; ergo, not the
Bishop only. Origin in Matthew. 16. Mensis Ecclesiasticarum pecuniarum Diaconi
praesunt. Item, Diaconi qui non been traetant pecuniarum Ecclesiasticarum
mensas, and semper de eis fraudant, and ipsas quas dispensant non secundum
justitiam dispensant and divites fiunt de rebus pauperum, ipsi sunt numularii
pecuniarum, mensas habentes quas evertet Dominus. It is fifthly to be observed,
how absurd it is, and what a snare, for any one man to have the sole Disposal
of all the Goods of the Church, who may take what he will of them, for his
propria portio, (to use our Author's words) and give what he will to the other
Church Officers, and to the Poor. This is a Trust might make bad Bishops (and
such there were even in Cyprian's time) a Scandal, and might expose the best to
Obloquie: and lay a Foundation for perpetual Grumblings and Discontents in the
Church: to prevent which, the Lord by his Apostles, appointed Deacons to
superintend that Affair, Act. 6. Let us now hear what our Author pleads for
his Opinion: he tells us that the Bishop not only had his propria portio,
which he will have to be the third of all; and he observes, that this made
Fortunatianus and Basilides so earnest for Restitution to their Sees, after
Deposition, (and in our days makes many Sell, or Ruin the Church for these
Lucrative Promotions) but he affirms the Bishop had also the Disposal of the
rest. For which his Proof, first as to the Clergies part; Felicissimus is
blamed for contending about his share, contrary to his Duty to his Bishop: and
others are praised who took their shares as the Bishop should please to
dispense them. A. 1. That the Bishop here is meant in his sole, or single
Capacity; and not rather in Conjunction with the Presbytery wherein he
praesided, is denied, and can never be proved. Yea, the contrary is evident,
Ep. 41. (which he cites) where speaking of them who were so tractable, he
uses these words, and vobis acquiescere maluisse; that is, submitted to their
(the Presbyteries) Determination about their shares. 2. If a School Boy should
make such a Version of Latin into English, as our Author here does, he would
be lasht for it. He turns, Episcopo Dispensante, as the Bishop should please
to Dispense them: whereas the Bishop's Dispensing, was nothing but his giving
out Sentence as the Presbytery had Determined; not as he, by himself, pleased.
Likewise, he takes no notice of these words, and vobis acquiescere maluisse:
which is a great Error in Translation. 3. It is evident from Cyprian's own
words, that he did not act solely in this Matter, but with the Authoritative
Concurrence of the Presbytery; for a little before the words cited, he says,
cumque post haec omnia, nec loci mei honor motus, nec vestra authoritate and
praesentia fractus, etc. where he blames Felicissimus for despising the
Bishops honor, and the Presbyters Authority: clearly insinuating the
Difference of the Bishop and Presbyters of his time, that he had more Honor
than they; but not more Authority. The same way are we to understand Cyprian's
promoting Aurelius and Celerinus only to the Degree of Lectors; but entitleing
them to the Maintenance of Presbyters: viz. that Cyprian might propose this to
the Presbytery, though he could not effect it without them: his words are,
Presbyterii honorem designasse me illis, and ut sportulis iisdem -- he designed
it, because they were choice Young Men, but it was the Presbytery concurring
with him, that must make this effectual. He says for the Poors part, the
Bishop's Power in Distributing it, is so evident from Ep. 5. and 41. that I
need not insist on it. A. In Ep. 41. (which is that we were just now Debating
about) there is not one word to that purpose; but that he had sent some to
relieve the Necessities of some Sufferers: but out of what Fond, whether his
propria portio, or any other, is not said. And if it were out of the Churches
Stock, it is not said he did this without the Presbytery: he might very well
say he did it, when the Presbytery appointed it, and he put it in Execution.
What he says in the 5. Ep. is as fully against our Author's Design, as any
thing can be. He bids them, both in Discipline and Diligence, act both their
own parts and his. And he has these words quantum autem ad sumptus
suggerendos, sive illis qui gloriosa voce Deum confessi, in carcere sunt
constituti, sive iis qui pauperes and indigentes laborant, and tamen in Domino
perseverant, peto ut nihil desit: cum summa omnis quae redacta est, illic sit
apud Clericos distributa propter ejusmodi casus, etc. Is it not here evident,
that the Clergy are entrusted with the Poors Money, and are to distribute it as
need requires: and that this Distribution in Cyprian's Absence, was a doing of
their own Work and his; so that they Acted not as his Delegats. Further, they
Acted their own part and his, when one of them did praeside in their Meetings
in his Absence: which was, in these days, his peculiar Work; neither do we find
that he Deputed one to praeside; but left it to the Presbytery, to choose whom
they thought fit. He next brings the 38. and 41. Canons of the Apostles, to
prove what he designed. I have above showed what Weight is to be laid on their
Authority. Nor do they give this Power to the Bishop alone; but the Bishop is
to be looked on, with respect to what is there said, as praesiding in the
Presbytery. What he cites out of Justine Martyr, says no more, but the Bishop
has (...), the Care of the Ecclesiastical Goods: which we willingly yield to
him, and to every one of the Presbytery: but it is not said, he alone has this
Care. He would have us believe, that this sole Power of the Bishop, is fairly
founded on Scripture: but cites no place. I know no more where to find these
places of Scripture, than I know where to find some places of Cyprian that he
cites. I am sure Act. 6. makes nothing for him; but on the contrary. Neither
2 Corinthians 8. and 9. Chapters. For Paul was a Delegate in carrying that
Contribution to Judea: and if he had claimed more Power; it will be hard to
prove the Bishop's Power to extend as far as that of an Apostle.

. 47. The Bishop's fifth Power that he alone possessed is, of imposing
charitable Contributions on all the Christians within his District, for the
Relief of Strangers, etc. For which he refers to Ep. 62. and 78. but cites
no words. I can find nothing to that purpose in either of them, as in my Book.
For his alleging Soter Bishop of Rome, whom Dionysius of Corinth commends
for this Practice, cited by Eusebius, Lib. 4. Cap. 23. ( mihi 22.) there is no
more in it, but that Dionysius commends that Church for their wonted
charitable Distributions to other Churches; and that Soter had observed, and
improved this Custom: this may be fairly expounded of exhorting to Charity
without Authoritative Imposing of Contributions; which any Minister may do. And
if he did impose, it is not said he did it by himself, though he is only
mentioned; as, perhaps, being singularly active in stirring up both the
Presbytery and the People: and he was to publish in the Church, the
Presbyteries Determination in this. What is there in all this for a sole Power
in this Matter? His next full Power is, Indicting of Fasts: for which he cites
Tertullian de Jejun. But it is observable that Tertullian speaks of Bishops
in the plural number; now it is not to be thought that no Fasts were Indicted
but by a Meeting of Diocesans: wherefore Episcopi must be the Presbytery. Or if
he mean the several Bishops in their several Churches: it may be rationally
understood of the Bishop's intimating to the People, what is by common Consent
Determined; not what he enjoyneth by his sole Authority. The seventh Branch of
the Bishop's Prerogative is, to Convocate the Presbytery and Deacons. And let
him enjoy it, for it is what we grant to our Moderator: and there is a natural
necessity, that it be in the Power of some person to call them together, when
any emergent does require it. And seeing in Cyprian's time, the Bishop was the
constant Moderator, it was consequential that he should be the constant
Conveener. But what Prerogative, or sole Power this does infer, or what
Ecclesiastic Authority above the Brethren it imports, I cannot understand.
Let any who has clear use of reason judge, how this proves the Bishop's
managing the Affairs of the Church like a chief Governor, as our Author
dreameth, p. 48. Neither does it appear, that the Bishop might convocate the
Presbyters at pleasure, (as he fancieth) but when there was cause: as in the
Instance he brings there was. He brings in, on this Occasion, an
Observation, that Cornelius received these persons about whom he called the
Presbytery, without asking the Peoples consent; but acquainted them after it
was done. But our Author has forgot what he had a few Lines before said, that
after they were received in the Presbytery, the People were made acquainted
with it; not one word of the Bishop's receiving them by himself. This is
nothing contrary to Presbyterian Principles and Practices. Yea (as if he had
designed to refute himself) he cites a Letter of these Persons, showing that
they were reconciled to the Bishop, and to the whole Clergy: where is then the
Bishop's sole Power of receiving Penitents? He propounds to himself an
Objection; that the Presbyters at Rome met in a Vacancy, after the Bishop's
Death: and at Carthage, in the time of Cyprian' s Retirement. To the second
Instance he Answers, that Cyprian left a Delegation for their Meeting: which
he proves strangely: he wrote, (Ep. 5.) that they should faithfully perform
his Office and their own: where, says he, we have distinct Offices, and an
express settling of a Delegation. A. For distinct Offices, his Mistake of the
Latin Word has misled him; it is fungamini illic and vestris partibus and
meis: I see not but one Presbyter may say this to another. For his Delegation,
I think few others can perceive it in these words; may not any Member of a
Presbytery, but especially the Moderator, say the same, by a Letter to the
Presbytery? It imports no more but a Warning to be vigilant in their Work.
See. 46. His next Citations is out of Ep. 14. (It is Ep. 6.) Where Cyprian
commands them to perform the Office of Vicars to him. Cyprian's words are,
hortor and mando ut vice mea fungamini circa gerenda ea quae administratio
religiosa deposcit. Here is no more but what any of Christ's Ambassadors may
say; he charge them to do their Duty; and he had Authority from Christ, not
as Bishop, but as a Pastor of the Church, and Christ's Ambassador, to enjoin
this. If Cyprian had our Author's meaning, then all Religious Administration
must cease, without the Bishop's presence, or Delegation: which is absurd. For
his mea vice, it signifies no more, but that his Absence might be supplied by
their Diligence. Cyprian's warm recenting what some of them did without his
allowance; shall be elsewhere considered: it was, that some Presbyters without
both their Moderator, and the Presbytery, received some of the Lapsed: which
was wholly irregular, and blame worthy. He next, to the Presbyters Meeting,
sede vacant, Answers; that they might meet; but they might only determine in
ruled cases. That is gratis dictum: but if they might act in any case, it is an
Argument that they had Church Power in their Persons; and that it was not
solely in the Bishop. The last of the Bishop's Prerogatives that he pleads
for, (though he tells us, p. 50. that he could collect more,) is, his
Delegating, not his Presbyters in common, but two of them, Rogatianus and
Numidicus, with two Bishops, Caldonius and Herculanus, to consider the state of
the Poor at Carthage, and to pronounce the Sentence of Excommunication against
Felicissimus and Augendus: which they executed against them, and some others.
If this Discourse prove such a Power of Delegation, it will also prove such a
Power in one Bishop over another; which our Author will not allow; seeing he
asserteth, p. 27, 28, 35. that every Bishop is supreme, and has no
Ecclesiastical Superior on Earth. 2. Sending a Messenger to do for us, what we
are restrained from doing, is not always an Act of Authority: one Friend may
send another, if he yield to it, as well as a Master may send his Servant. 3.
That which has most Weight in our main Cause, (though it be impertinent to the
present purpose,) is, that these Persons were to Excommunicat Felicissimus,
etc. To which I Answer, that this Excommunication might be Determined by the
Presbytery, and it was Cyprian's part, as Moderator, to intimate it; for which
he substituteth the Persons named. Here is no sole Power of Excommunication.
This is Countenanced by Cyprian's own words, in that Ep.. 2. that Felicissimus
had despised both him and the Presbytery. Nec meo honor motus, nec vestra
authoritate fractus: It seems he had been tried before them, and Sentenced for
Contumacy. Further, he was also suspected of Adultery; which Cyprian would not
judge by himself; but referred it to their Meeting, ibid.

. 48. Having now examined our Author's first Principle, I proceed to the
second, which he advances, p. 50, etc. It is, that in every thing relating to
the Government of the Church, and her Discipline, the Bishop had a Negative
over all the other Church Governors, within his District: he had the supreme
Power of the Keys. He sets about the proving of this Point with a high
Degree of Confidence: but let not him that puts on his Armor boast as he
that puts it off. He pretends to show, that Presbyters could not Baptize,
nor Administer the Lord's Supper, nor Excommunicate, nor Absolve, nor Make, nor
Rescind Ecclesiastical Laws, without the Bishop's Allowance. For a foundation
to our Answer to all his Discourse on this Head, I shall re-mind the Reader of
a Distinction of Presbyters abovementioned. They were in Cyprian's time, of
three sorts. 1. The Ruling Elders, who were no Preachers, and who with the
Bishop, (or Parish Minister,) and other Preaching Presbyters, (if there were
any,) made up the Consistory, by which the Affairs of the Congregation were
managed. These, I confess could Administer no Sacrament, neither without, nor
with the Bishop's License. And for Acts of Ruling in the Church, it is probable
enough, that they could do nothing without him who was Praeses in their
Meetings, except, may be, in some extraordinary Cases. 2. There were in some
Churches, (especially in great Cities) some Presbyters who were Ordained to the
Work of the Ministry, but had no particular Charge, and were as our
Probationers, or Students in Divinity Schools, (only with this Difference, that
ours are not Ordained,) these might not Baptize, nor Administer the Eucharist,
yea, nor Preach without the Allowance of the Bishop, or Parish Minister. And it
is so also among us: if some Ordained Ministers happen to live in a Parish,
whereof they are not Pastors, (as sometimes falls out in great Cities,) it is
disorderly for them to exercise their Ministry within another man's Charge,
without his Call or Allowance. These Presbyters, in Cyprian's time, were in
somethings, like Evangelists, whom the Bishops employed, when themselves could
not overtake all their Work: and if these be called the Bishop's Curats, (as
our Author does all Presbyters,) I shall not much reclaim. These were, as the
Sons of the Prophets, bred by the Bishop for the Ministry: of this sort of
Presbyters, see P. Baynes Diocesan's Trial, p. 63. A third sort of Presbyters,
were the Ministers of the several Parishes, among whom the Moderator of the
Presbytery, or other Church Judicatory, was in a peculiar manner, called the
Bishop: and they also often were called Bishops, with respect to their own
Parochial Charge. Now, if our Author mean, that a Bishop in a City had such
Power over the Presbyters, or Ministers in the Villages, or Places about, that
they might not Baptize, etc. without his Allowance, I utterly deny it; and
maintain that every such Presbyter, Minister, or Parochial Bishop, (by what
ever name ye design him,) had in Cyprian's time, as full Power in his Parish,
as the great Bishop had in his, though the one was more in esteem than the other.

. 49. I shall now consider his Proofs for what he affirms. He begins with
Baptism, and pretends to prove, that Presbyters could not Baptize without the
Bishop's Leave. His first Citation is, Cyprian says, Bishops give the first
Baptism to Believers. Which we deny not, if ye understand it of Parish
Ministers. But if he mean Bishops in Cities, who were the Praesidents in
Presbyteries, we deny that Cyprian asserteth that. His next Testimony is out of
Cyprian, Ep. 73. and Firmil. and Fortunatus Bishop of Thurobaris: But it is
evident, and he confesses it, that the Question by them treated, is, whether
Presbyters, who by Heresy, or Schism, had departed from the Communion of the
Church, might Baptize, and if they they did, whether that Baptism was valid, or
the Person was to be again Baptized, and that Baptism esteemed null: And in
this we do so far agree with these Fathers, as to think that all the
Administrations of such Heretics, or Schismatics are irregular, and to be
condemned: and that none ought so to separate from the Church, while she
keeps the Way of Truth, and requires no unlawful Terms of Communion of her
Ministers, or other Members. But none of these Fathers, did ever Assert, that
in the Church, a sound Presbyter could not Baptize without the Bishop's Leave,
within the Limits of his own Charge. That they mean no more than I say, is
evident, for they plead, that none can Baptize out of the Church, nor Bind or
Loose out of the Church, and they say expressly, that none can Baptize, but they
who are Founded in the Evangelical Law: and I hope it will not be denied, that
Ministers of Congregations are Founded on that Law, as well as these of great
Cities, who were then called Bishops, because of their Praecedency in Church
Meetings. That Bishops are named* in these Reasonings, as having the Power of
Baptizing, makes nothing against us, because all Parish Ministers were so
called; and none without their Allowance ought to intrude on their Charge, in
this, or any other Administration: and because the Authority for Baptizing, and
other Church Work was Communicated from the Presbytery, by their Praesident,
the Bishop: he indeed gave the Power; but not by his own sole Authority, but by
that of the Presbytery. The testimony of Tertullian comes next: who says, de
Baptismo, cap. 17. the High Priest, who is the Bishop, has the Power of
Baptizing, and after him, (or in Subordination to him, says our Author,)
Presbyters and Deacons. A. 1. Tertullian does not speak of Bishops, as distinct
from the Pastors of particular Flocks; but from Presbyters who had no Charge:
if this Author put another meaning on his words, let him prove it. 2.
Tertullian a little above, puto autem licuit and tingere, cui licuit
praedicare: I hope he will not say, that Tertullian thought, that no Minister
might Preach without the Bishop's Leave; though he might think that the unsettled
Presbyters, ought to Preach in no man's Charge without his Leave. 3. Tertullian
a little below, allows Laics, yea, Women, to Baptize, in case of necessity,
without the Bishop's Leave: as he does in the place cited, the Deacons to do it
with the Bishop's Leave, all which I look on as spoken without Warrant. 4.
Tertullian groundeth his Discourse on this; that the honor of the Church
requires, that the Bishop's Allowance should be had; and on this occasion,
condemns Emulation, as the Mother of Schism: and cites that place, all
things are lawful, but all things are not expedient. From all which it is easy
to gather, that he only condemned them who Baptized without Church Authority,
which the Bishop, as Mouth of the Presbytery, did Communicate. 5. It is wholly
without Warrant that this Learned Author adds to Tertullian's Words, and in
Subordination to him: dehinc (which is that Father's Word) does neither
signify, nor can import so much: all that can be built on it, is a prior
Dignity to the Bishop; in this, and other parts of the Ministerial Work. His
last Citation is Ignatius, it is not lawful to Baptize without the Bishop. A.
That is, without the Authority of the Presbytery, which the Bishop as their
Praeses, conveyeth.

. 50. He Asserteth next, ( p. 52.) that no Presbyter could Administer the
Eucharist within the the Bishop's District, without his Leave, or against his
Interdict. To this, what has already been said, is a full Answer. No Presbyter
might do this within the Charge of a Parish Bishop, without his Leave: nor yet
in a Presbyterial District, without the Allowance of the Presbytery, given out
by their Episcopus Praeses. His Proofs are exactly like the former; Cyprian
(severely and justly) lasheth some Schismatical Presbyters, who by themselves,
without Cyprian, and without the Presbytery, did Administer the Lord's Supper
to some of the Lapsed, who were not duly Reconciled to the Church: I know no
Presbytery that would not condemn this, if it were done within their Bounds;
yea, they would think their Authority contemned; and their Moderator slighted,
who should have been Applied to, to call the Presbytery for Consulting about
this: who, with them, should have Authoritatively Determined in this Matter:
and this Neglect of the Bishop was in that time, the more conspicuous, that his
Praecedency was constant, and known to all; which was the cause the Bishop is
so often named, in these things that concerned not him alone, but the whole
Community. It is to the same purpose, which he next alleges of Dionysius
Bishop of Alexandria, giving a Command that any Lapsed, in danger of Death, if
Supplicating for it, should have the Eucharist. For that may be understood of
Dionysius enjoining this to the unfixed Presbyters of Alexandria, that it
should be done within that Parish, whereof Dionysius was Pastor: or of the
Presbytery, by Dionysius their Praeses, to be observed within their District.
What Ignatius says, that that is only to be esteemed a firm, and valid
Eucharist, which is Celebrated by the Bishop, or by his Authority: this, I say,
admits of the same Answer; that none ought to Celebrate that Holy Ordinance
in any Congregation, but the Pastor of it, or whom he does call to do it for
him: I might call in Question the Authority of these Epistles of Ignatius which
he cites; but I will not digress into that Controversy; sub judice lis est,
Theologi certant. There is nothing of any more Weight in his next Citation;
where Cyprian, against the Novatians, declares that there could be no true
Sacrament among them, because they are out of the Church; and had assumed to
themselves an Episcopal Chair, and a Power of Baptizing* and Offering. It is
plain that this is meant of them, who had cast off the Churches Authority, that
was exercised by her Pastors, (who are here called Bishops,) but it no way
proves, that some Pastors of the Church, must depend on one of them, for this
Authority. It is tedious to repeat the same thing so often; in Answer to so
many Arguments, which are materially the same. After all these numerous
Testimonies, he comes p. 55. to an Artificial Argument, in which kind of
Arguings, he seems not to be very formidable; he supposes he has fully
proved the Bishop to be the Principle of Unity; the Chief Governor, that by
Consequence the supreme Power of the Keys belongs to him: that he was the
visible Head of the Church; it is highly reasonable on that account, that he
should have the chief Power of Dispensing the Sacraments: and that they might
not be Dispensed without him. I have already showed the Weakness of all these
Grounds he builds upon: and therefore the Consequence built on them, must
fall to the ground: we are no less sensible than he is, of the evil of
Receiving, and continuing unworthy Persons in the Church; and that the
Governors of the Church must be Judges in this matter; but we are not yet
convinced, that the Bishop by himself, rather than the Community of Church
Rulers, are that Judge: and I must take leave to tell him, that (however it was
in the Primitive Times,) in our Days, the excluding of unworthy Persons,
Ministers and others, has been much more to be observed, where the Church is
ruled by a Parity of Presbyters; than where it is governed by one Prelate.

. 51. This Learned Author, supposing that he had proved the Bishop's Negative
in Administration of the Sacraments, hence infers his Sovereign Interest in
Excommunication, Absolution, Enjoining Penance, etc. Which Consequence I shall
not contest with him: but I hope the Reader is now satisfied, that he has not
sufficiently established the Antecedent: nor will we yield that Cyprian, or his
Contemporaries had, or laid Claim to such a Prerogative. But our Author, though
he thinks he might supersede the Proof of his Negative in these other things,
yet, because he will give all possible Satisfaction, he undertaketh a Deduction
of further Powers in the Person of Cyprian: of which we have a long History,
beginning at p. 56. I have nothing to observe on the account he gives of
Cyprian's Conversion, Promotion, (save what I have observed out of Pontius, of
his Promotion to be Presbyter and Bishop simul and semel: but what ever be in
that, it has no great Influence on our Cause,) the Opposition he met with, his
Eminency for Grace and Gifts, the wicked Courses his Enemies took, while, under
the Persecution by Decius, he retired from Carthage; how they got some of the
Confessors and Martyrs to Countenance them; and they upon this, were emboldened
by themselves, to Absolve some of the Lapsed. Nothing of this I contradict,
except what I now said. He has run thus far without a Check; and therefore
ariveth at the Confidence to say, p. 58. now consider what follows, and speak
your Conscience, and tell me, if St. Cyprian was not more than either single
Presbyter, or Presbyterian Moderator, I shall yield him yet a little more, in
what he says of Cyprian's Meekness and Humility; of his being alarmed with
this Practice, that this was an unparalelled Practice, and that Cyprian did
zealously and vigorously oppose it. And for all this I shall speak my
Conscience, and shall give Reason for my Light, that Cyprian was no Diocesan
Bishop, in our modern sense; and that he neither had, nor claimed sole Power,
nor a Negative, in the Government of the Church; and that, bating what I
yielded in stating the Question,. 9, 10. He was no more but a single Presbyter,
that is a Parish Minister, or Presbyterian Moderator. And indeed all that he
here brings, and looks on as so strongly Argumentative, is already
Answered, he having cited all, or most of the places before, which he here
quoteth. He brings three Epistles of Cyprian to prove his Assertion.

. 52. The first is that to the Confessors and Martyrs: where I find nothing but
a sharp Reproof of them for going without their Line: and he blames those
Presbyters who had absolved the Lapsed so disorderly: only what seems here to
contain an Argument is, that they should have Petitioned the Bishop for
restoring of these Lapsed, and not done it without him. The Answer here is
easy; and often before given, that the fault of these turbulent Presbyters
was, that they took this Act of Church Power on themselves, without the
Presbytery; whereas the regular way had been to Petition the Bishop, that he
might call the Presbytery, and that he with them might cognosce of that Affair.
I have laid down sufficient warrant for thus understanding his words, from his
declared purpose, founded on Conscience of Duty, to do nothing without the
Concurrence of the Presbytery, see. 12. And it is like, I may after bring yet
further Evidence, that his Principles led him to this Conduct: At present, I
take notice of that plain Passage, Ep. 15. ad Clerum, speaking of receiving the
Lapsed, quaeres (says he) cum omnium nostrum Concilium, and Sententiam
spectet, praejudicare ego, and soli mihi rem communem vindicare non audeo. And
he desires that that Affair might be put off; donec pace nobis a Domino
reddita, in unum convenire, and singulorum causas examinare possumus: if
Cyprian seem to my Adversary to speak in pure Prelatical Style, as he says, p.
6. He seems to me here, to speak in the Style of a Presbyterian Moderator. Of
the same Importance is the next Epistle cited, which was to the Clergy of
Carthage, (he does not call them his Clergy, as our Author wordeth it; and if
he had, there had been no Argument in it,) he sharply reproves (not the
Presbyters in common, as our Author foully represents the matter; for he
writes in a loving Style to them: but) some of the Presbyters who had received
some of the Lapsed most irregularly; and that because they had not taken the
due course for receiving these Lapsed, which should have been done per
impositionem manuum Episcopi and Cleri, not by the Bishops sole Authority. He
does indeed here speak like a Bishop; that is a faithful Pastor; but not as a
Bishop pretending to sole Jurisdiction; or a Negative in the Government of the
Church. His third Epistle is to the People; where we have the same Complaint of
the Irregularity of the Schismatical Presbyters; and complains that the
honor of his Priesthood, and of his Chair, was not reserved to him. This can
never evince that Cyprian pretended to a Power to manage that Affair by
himself: I see nothing here inconsistent with the Power, or the Style of the
Moderator of a Presbytery, or Pastor of a Congregation: save that the Moderator
then, being constant, his part in the management of public Affairs was more
obvious, and therefore more taken notice of. He has yet a further Citation,
wherein Cyprian tells the Clergy, that they ought to inform him of every
thing that happens; that so I may (says he) Advisedly and Deliberatly, give
Orders concerning the Affairs of the Church; let any one compare this
Translation with Cyprian's own words, which are faithfully enough set down by
our Author in the Margin: Is limare Consilium to give Order? It is to polish,
and amend his Advice* and make it more exact: he then, in his Retirement, wills
them to write often and distinctly to him of all Occurrences, that he, as
making such a figure in their Society, might give the more accurate Advice
about what was to be done: this is no Prelatical, but a plain Presbyterian
Style.

. 53. On this occasion he is pleased p. 61, 62.) to take notice of, and
tragically aggravate a Passage in rational Defense of Nonconformity, p. 179.
where he thinks Cyprian is reflected on as showing too much Zeal in that
Cause (viz. of his Episcopal Authority being neglected) and that possibly he
stretched his Power a little too far, as afterward many did: he was a holy, and
meek man; but such may be a little too high: This he stretches his Invention
to expose, as contradictory to it self; injurious to Cyprian, and an
uncharitable, or ignorant Sugestion: his more sedate Thoughts after all this
Huffiness, may inform him better: That Author as he was not so straightened with
his learned Adversaries Arguments, as he imagines (they being the very same
which now I have examined) so he was far from speaking Contradictions, nor did
he seek to reconcile Pride and Patience, Superciliousness and Selfdenyal,
Huffiness and Humility, carnal hight and Christian Holiness: He was far from
thinking on such ill Qualities with respect to that excellent person: Further
than that the best of men have sinful Infirmity mixed with their Graces, and
best Gifts. He might know and I shall not charge him with Ignorance in this)
that Sin and Grace are consistent in gradu saltem remissiore: And that though it
were ridiculous to say, that Moses was the meekest Man on Earth, and yet he was
Huffie, and Proud, and Passionate: or that Job was most patient, and yet he was
impatient- Notwithstanding it may be said, with our Author's leave; that
neither of these holy Men was so perfect in the grace for which he is
commended, as to have nothing of the contrary evil: Further I am of Opinion,
that what might be imputed to the excellent Cyprian, was rather the Fault of
the Age he lived in, than his personal Fault, there was then a Tendency toward
Church-Domination, which did show it self much more afterward: Though I still
maintain it was not arrived at that Pitch that this Author imputes to that
time. He spends a great many words to prove that Cyprian did not stretch his
Power too far in this matter: all which is lost labor; for that was no
otherways imputed to him, than with a possibility; and on Account of his
mentioning his own Episcopal Power more than he did the power of the Presbytery
(which power of the Presbytery he does yet clearly own, as I have proved) This
had a show of Usurpation; and did in time introduce it: It was the Genius of
that age, to have too big thoughts of that Praelation of being primus
Presbyter: And the best of men in that time were tinctured with this mistake.
Wherefore he might have superceded his proving what Figure the Martyrs then
made, I know their Interest went far, as to receiving the lapsed; yet I still
think that they neither pretended to, nor was then ascribed to them, formal
Church Authority. What he largely discourses, p, 64. of Cyprian's dealing with
the disorderly Presbyters, not by Huffing, but by reason and Argument, is as
little to our purpose; in that, he did rationally, and Christianly: Yet in
these Reasonings, as he in words, takes more notice of his Episcopal
Authority, than of the Presbytries Power, so upon the matter does not derogate
from the one, nor unduely highten the other: as has been already showed. I
wonder at the Insinuation that my learned Antagonist makes, p. 65. as if any
had imagined it questionable, whether Cyprian, or the Presbyters that he
blames, were guilty of Usurpation: They did usurp most intollerably in doing
that by themselves, which should have been done by Cyprian and the Presbytery:
And it was no Usurpation to reprove, and threaten them with Censure for so
doing. The power of the Presbytery was not here questioned; but the power of
particular Presbyters who took the Power of the Presbytry upon them: And
therefore the Presbytery who were not guilty, had no Right of their own to
defend against Cyprian; but had just cause to join with him against these
Usurpers. It is as insignificant, that the seditious Presbyters repented,
excused themselves, and desired a Form from Cyprian: For it is ordinary for
some to go from one Extreme to another. Besides that seeking a Form from him
was to ask it from him, and the Presbytery, not from him alone. That these
Presbyters were generally condemned for their factious Practices, I think none
doubts, and it is to little purpose to prove it so laboriously as our Author
does.

. 54. Yet because in his Proofs of it some things are interspersed which may
look like Arguments against what I plead for, I shall make some Observes on
this Discourse. He gives us account of Cyprian's writing to the Presbytery at
Rome, they having then no Bishop. This I hope is a Token that Cyprian thought
not that all Church Power at Rome dyed with the Bishop; but that Presbyters are
Church Rulers, and not the Bishop only: In the return that the Presbytery at
Rome, made to Cyprian, he fancieth that he finds some Arguments for Episcopal
sole Power: which I shall a little consider: He says they ascribe to him a
supreme and unaccountable Power: I find no words that can be so constructed in
either of the two Epistles that they write to him on that Subject; but on the
contrary, they seem to insinuate a Parity with him, while they frequently call
him Frater. It would be thought great sauciness, in our days, for Presbyters to
write in that Style to so great a Bishop as Cyprian was esteemed to have been,
by our Prelates. Next, they compare him to the Master of a Ship; who does not
act in parity with the other Seamen; A. omne simile claudicat. a Moderator of
a Presbytery may be so compared, as having a main hand in the Conduct of
Affairs. Again the words of that Epistle import no more than making Cyprian the
Steersman: who though he be at the Helm, and the Safety of the Ship depends
much on his Skill and Management, yet he is not always the Commander of the
Ship; and the Safety of the Ship should yet more depend on the Steersman, if he
were fixed, and always so employed; as Cyprian was in the Ecclesiastical Ship
at Carthage. He says, that the Roman Clergy tell Cyprian ( and pray take
notice of it, says he) that they could determine nothing in that matter,
wanting a Bishop. This is a Misrepresentation: for they tell their Mind plainly
in the first of their two Epistles to Cyprian; that he did well in repressing
that Insolency of some Presbyters; that the lapsed should not be suddenly
received, and give the Reason, recens est hoc lapsorum vulnus, and adhuc in
tumorem plaga consurgens; and idcirco certi sumus, quod spatio productioris
temporis, impetu isto consenescente, amabunt hoc ipsum ad fidelem se delatos
medicinam. And in the second Epistle they add another Reason why it was fit to
delay that Affair of of censuring the lapsed, because they wanted a Bishop, not
because the Bishop was to be the sole Judge in that matter; but because the
Bishop was he, qui omnia ista moderetur (these are their own words) he was to
preside in that Affair. Seeing then there was another reason for delaying, even
where there was a Bishop, as in Carthage, it was a superadded reason why at
Rome it should be delayed, the Presbytery being incomplete, by the want of a
significant Member. If it be said, could they not choose a Moderator? Answ.
That Office through custom being then fixed, and the Honor and Revenue that
belonged to it being so considerable, it was not easy to get it done of a
sudden; and the iniquity of that time of Persecution did add to the difficulty,
as themselves express it; Nondum enim Episcopus, propter rerum and temporum
difficultates constitutus. Our Author vitiareth their words, when he makes
them say, who only could define, etc. There is no such words in this Epistle:
it is said indeed of the Bishop, eorum qui lapsi sunt possit cum authoritate
and consilio habere rationem. But that says nothing of sole Authority, but
such as was to be acted in the Presbytery, and with their concurrence.

. 55. He observes likewise, that they commend Cyprian, that he did not
determine in that matter by himself alone; but took the advice of many: and
this they impute not to the incompetency of his Authority for it; but to his
condescendence. Ans. He does wholly mistake this Matter, for the Roman Clergy,
in their Letter to Cyprian, do not at all take notice of what he did, or might
do, with respect to his own District, nor his advising with his own Presbytery;
but that he had taken the advice, in such a weighty case, of general
concernment, of other Bishops, and of the Clergy at Rome, And it is certain,
that he, with the Presbytery at Carthage, might have determined in this Matter
with respect to themselves; and it was Prudence, and not want of Power, that
made him advise with others. He brings another Testimony to the plenitude of
Episcopal Power, from an Epistle from the Clergy of Rome, while they wanted a
Bishop, to the Clergy of Carthage, when their Bishop was in his retirement: in
which case, says he, they had the best occasion of speaking their mind freely,
of the power of Presbyters, and the usurpation of Bishops: in this Epistle he
fancieth that he finds Arguments for Episcopal sole Power: as first, they
say, of themselves, and these at Carthage, that they were only seemingly the
Governors of these respective Churches; and only keep the Flock instead of the
respective Pastors, the Bishops. I had occasion to consider this Passage
before, I blame his want of Wisdom, that seeing he is pleased to give us this
Translation of this Passage, he has yet set down the Latin in the Margin:
out of which one may easily discover his Error, without turning to the Epistle
it self: It is a strange Translation, Videmur Praepositi, that is, we only seem
to be Governors. I am sure, the Marginal Notes on this Epistle says, they
were Pastores constituti. And Pamelius from this Passage argues for the
Authority of the Church of Rome over other Churches; and he that animadverteth
on Pamelius says, Clerus Romanus Carthaginensem agnoscit, quemadmodum and
alios aliarum Ecclesiarum pastores, esse Christiani gregi praepositos:
wherefore videmur must rather signify certainty than doubting, in this place;
it appears not only to our selves, but to all, we are acknowledged for such.
And that they did not mean by vice Pastoris, a vicarious Power delegated from
the Bishop, is manifest, for the Bishop was dead, and we find no Power he left
them* neither could he do it. Yea it is evident that they looked on a Power
residing in themselves, of which they were to give an account: si negligentes
inveniamur -- quoniam perditum non requisivimus, etc. What is said of the
lapsed continuing in their Penitency, that they might obtain Indulgence from
them who can give it: the Word being ab eo qui potest praestare. It might be
understood of Pardon from Christ, on their sincere Repentance, seeing he alone
can make Indulgence effectual: but if that seem strained, the Bishop with the
Presbytery, not by himself, may fitly here be understood. He does again, page
69. misrepresent the Question, in these Words, Let any man judge whether St.
Cyprian or his presuming Presbyters had taken too much on them at Carthage: But
this mistake I noted before. Another Argument he brings, is from some Martyrs
and Confessors, in an Epistle to Cyprian, commending him for his conduct in
opposing and censuring these Presbyters. I also commend him for it: Ergo I
think he had sole Power to manage that Affair: the consequence is naught. He
haleth in another Argument into this Discourse: these Martyrs and Confessors
desire, that Cyprian being so glorious a Bishop, would pray for them: which
they would not have done had they thought him a proud aspiring Prelat, that is
a Limb of Antichrist, as this Author would fain give him out to have been: It
is an injurious Calumny: I never said, nor thought so: and no man can Wire-draw
my words (with any sense or reason) to that meaning. I esteem Cyprian's Grace,
Virtues, and Learning as much as he does: and do judge that his Prayers, while
he was on Earth, were worth asking: and that he was a glorious Bishop; but all
this will not infer his sole Power, nor his negative. -- Cyprian' s
excommunicating these Presbyters, and that fact being approven by others, is
not argumentative, unless he can prove that this Cyprian did by himself,
without the Presbytery. He next brings the Canons of the Apostles (the
insufficiency of which Authority I have above-shewed.) And Ignatius, that
nothing should be done without the Bishop, nor in opposition to him: And that
the Bishop should be honored. All this is sufficiently Answered above. When a
Bishop that is any Minister of the Gospel, acts in his Sphere, and keeps to
the Rule the Word of God, to oppose him, to depart from him, not to honor him,
is highly sinful. But I am sure Cyprian nor Ignatius never meant to enjoin
absolute and illimited obedience to a Bishop, nor any man else. As for doing
nothing without the Bishop, we grant that they who are under a Ministers
charge, Prebyters or others, should act nothing in the Consistory without him;
but this also must suffer a limitation; if he should prove so perverse as to
oppose, and hinder every thing that is good, or what is necessary to be done; I
do not think that Ignatius would blame the Presbyters for acting without him:
otherwise there were no remedy but the Church must be ruined. If it be said, in
that case they should complain. To whom must this Complaint be made: for a
Bishop has no Superior on Earth; if we believe this Author.

. 56. The last of his three Principles, which he advances p. 72. is, that. all
the Church Governors within his District, Presbyters as well as others, were
in St. Cyprian' s time, subject to the Bishops Authority, and obnoxious to his
Discipline. This Principle and all that he says for establishing of it, we
might safely yield, without any hazard to our Cause: for we always maintained,
that a Bishop, considered as a Paroch Minister, has Authority over the
Ruling-Elders, and the unfixed Preaching-Presbyters, if any be within his
Parish; also considered as Moderator of the Presbytry, he is still a Minister,
and has Rule over all the Ministers, and People and Elders within the
District, over which that Presbytery has the oversight: but our Question is,
whether he, by himself, has the sole Authority; or he, as a Member of the
Consistory, or Presbytery, has a share in that Authority which resideth in
that Body, or Community. This last we grant: the former we deny. His Proofs can
never reach the conclusion that we deny: the first of which is, that Cyprian
says, that our Lord chose Apostles, that is Bishops and Governors (where by
the way Note, that Cyprian owneth other Church Governors, beside Bishops, and
therefore they have not the sole Authority) and the Apostles chose Deacons to
be the Bishops and Churches Ministers. Any body may see that this does concern
all Church-Rulers, not sole Power in the Bishop. Next he tells us that
Cyprian called Fabianus Superior, with respect to the Roman-Clergy: which is a
mistake: He calls him simply Praepositus (which as I have above-shewed, was a
Title given to Bishops and Presbyters) and if he had not called him their
Praepositus, that does not import sole Power. In an Epistle to Rogatianus,
Cyprian insinuates that he was Ruler of the Church, ergo he had sole Power: it
is a ^^lish consequence: this may be said of every Elder of the Church. He is
scarce of Arguments when he is forced to falsify Cyprian's words: qui in
Ecclesia Praesidemus: he translateth, who have the chief Power in the Church;
beside that it is easy to distinguish between chief Power, and sole Power; to
which all are subject. Also Praesumus he turns govern the Church. That the
Bishop is said to be one, and set over the Church, may well agree either to a
Parish-Minister, or the Moderator of a Presbytery, who was called (...). His
next Essay is from the Bishop's calling the Clergy his Clergy; for which he is
at pains to cite many places. If this were constantly done (which was not) what
does it signify: that manner of speaking is as common among Presbyterians, as
it was in Cyprian's time: and it signifies no more but Elders of the Church,
whereof Cyprian was Pastor; as the Elders of any Parish are called the Elders
of such a Minister: and Elders usually call their Minister our Minister. It is
a frivolous Question, by what Rule of Grammar, Rhetoric, Logic or Politic
could he be so called if he had no Power or Jurisdiction over them. A. There is
no Rule in any of these Faculties against it: though he have no sole Power; If he
have a share of the Power that the whole has over every one, and have the
Conduct in managing that Power, by being their Moderator.

. 57. He will let all this pass for a mere Praelusion, not being scant of
Arguments. Wherefore we must now expect what is more pungent: that is, the
three Principles he had before proved so fully, viz. The Bishop being the
principle of Unity; having supreme power: being the same with the High Priest
under the Old Testament, do prove this Point. To this formidable Argument I
oppone what has been discoursed on these Heads: I leave the Reader to judge
whether he has fully proved these, or I have fully overturned them: Next he
argues from Cyprian's saying he could by his Episcopal power, Depose or
Excommunicate a Deacon who had rebelled against him, and praising another
Bishop for so acting, yea I shall allow him what he after faith, that this power
extended also to censuring of Elders: Do not our Moderators usually so practice
when there is cause: but not by theit sole Power, but with the Consistory, or
Presbytery. We Presbyterians may tremble at his next Blow: For he says, he
will leave his Reader no imaginable scruple. But these big words dwindle away
into this feeble Argument; that Cyprian might have censured Felicissimus and
some with him, who first opposed his Promotion, and after he had taken them
into favor, apted disorderly in receiving some of the lapsed, without the
Praeses, and the Presbytery: of this case before: it is wholly insignificant
here, unless he can prove, that Cyprian might do this by himself, without the
Presbytery: which himself disowneth, as I showed above: All that follows
(which is a Repetition of what he has often alleged having little to say,
when he braggeth of Superabundance) is already plainly answered. He is run a
little weak; but he reinforceth his Arguments with Confidence and Repetitions.

. 58. Hitherto he has set forth his Cyprianick Bishop in his Majesty, Absolute
and sole Power, etc. In his own particular Church; p. 78. he gives us account
of him, as he stood related to the Catholic Church: and here he expects
matter enough for another Demonstration: which is a big Word in Disputation. We
shall here also, by Divine Assistance, try his Strength; and though we will not
brag of Demonstrations; yet shall endeavor to bring what Light and Strength
the subject does afford. His long Discourse about the College of Bishops, I
have read with Attention; and considered with what Application I am capable of,
but cannot find his Demonstrations in it: yea cannot see wherein it is
conducive to prove his point: only some Hints he has interspersed that seem to
have somewhat of Argument, which I shall consider, after I have taken a general
View of the whole. He observes that all Bishops were Colleagues, and made up
one College. Next that this College was the principle of Unity to the
Catholic Church. Thirdly, that the grand Concern of the Episcopal College was
to preserve and maintain the one Communion; which together with one Faith, made
them capable to be the principle of Unity to the Catholic Church: and that
this was their work he proves first, they thought themselves bound to maintain
Peace. 2. Every Bishop was a Member of this College; and therefore great care
was taken about their promotion. 3. He being promoted sent communicatory*
Letters to other Bishops, giving account of his Promotion. 4. If there was any
Debate whether his Promotion was Canonical, the rest of the Bishops enquired
into it. 5. If he turned Heretic, or Schismatic, he was turned out. 6. While
he kept the Faith and Unity of the Church, he was encouraged, Consulted,
Corresponded with, etc. 7. While he continued a sound Member of the College,
all Letters concerning the Peace and Unity of the Church, were directed to him.
Lastly, p. 87. he observes (cum nota) resist this Evidence says he, if ye
can) that every Heretical, or Schismatical Bishop, with all that retained to
him, was ipso facto out of the Church: At last, p. 88. He thinks he has
another Demonstration against my Notion of a Bishop in Cyprian's time: For how
could a single Presbyter, or Presbyterian Moderator, have born such a part in
relation to the Catholic Church, and her Unity and Communion.

. 59. I must Examine the Strength of this long Demonstration; and what he
adds to fortify it: and then shall return to take notice of what he
intermixeth in the several parts of it, in which our Debate may be concerned:
For Answer then to this Argument, as it stands. I deny the Assumption, viz.
That what he has here asserted cannot agree to a single Presbyter, or
presbyterian Moderator. His three Assertions do well agree to every Presbyter;
that is, Pastor of a Congregation: He is a Colleague to all Bishops, that is
such Pastors. The meeting of such (either by their Delegats; or if they could
all come together) is as capable to be the principle of Unity to a Provincial,
or National Church, yea, to the Universal Church, as if so many Diocesans
should meet. It is as much the concern of these Presbyters, or Parish Bishops
(and I hope they do as much mind it) to maintain one Faith and one Communion.
Does he think that our Ministers do not think themselves bound to maintain
Peace: Or 2. That there is little care taken about their promotion or giving
them charge of the people, and admitting them to a share of the Government. 3.
Though it be not our custom to send communicatory Letters of our settlement in a
Charge; yet every Presbytery notifieth to the neighboring Presbyteries the
Name of him who is to be fixed in a Charge: that they may have opportunity to
object: and the Names of all who are ordained, are recorded. 4. If a Presbytery
ordain any person unduely, or if there be Competition, the superior
Judicatories enquire into it. 5. We also turn out, not only Heretical and
Schismatical Ministers; but them also who are scandalous in their Conversation,
or supinely negligent in their Ministerial Work. 6. We also encourage and admit
to the Government, them that do well. 7. Letters that concern a particular
Congregation; are, with us, directed to the Minister: these concerning the
Presbytery, to the Moderator: we also cast out bad Ministers, and such as
adhere to them; if the Cause be weighty: but we use moderation to the people
who are led away by Schismatical Ministers, when their Separation is founded on
lesser mistake: and if in this we differ from the Cyprianick Age, his Party
should not blame us; having tasted so much of our lenity. Let it then be
considered how impertinent this whole Discourse is, and how insufficient to
prove the Episcopacy of the Cyprianick-Age that he pleads for.

. 60. He uses several enforcements of this Argument, p. 88, and 89. which I
shall briefly consider. 1. The College of Bishops are still considered as
Church Governors notoriously distinguished from Presbyters. Answ. This
distinction lay in the dignity that the declensions of that time from
Apostolic simplicity gave them: not in any Power that they had which
Presbyters had not. 2. A Presbyter was never called a Bishops Colleague. Answ.
If this were granted, such a negative Argument, and that drawn from words, and
ways of speaking (which does often vary) is not very concludent. I have showed
that the same Power is ascribed to them, see*. 62. where the contrary of what
he asserteth is showed. 3. We have no Vestige of a Presbyterian Moderator in
these times. Answ. There was then a Moderator, who was called the Bishop; who
presided in their Meetings: though there was no such changing of the Moderator as
is among us: that I have yielded: but the fixedness of the Moderator, and the
parity of the Power are consistent: though I deny not that the one made way for
destroying the other; as After-ages did show. 4. Our Author repeateth all the
Acts of, and concerning Bishops, that he had insisted on, and affirms that
they could not consist with a single Presbyter, or Moderator, which I have
above-denyed, and made the contrary evident. That he calls all the Acts of
Government and Discipline his (the Bishops) and his alone; is to beg the
Question, for we deny it, and he should prove it.

. 61. I must now return to p. 78, and glean some Passages, which I was obliged
to overlook, that I might have this long Argument (stretching from thence to p.
90.) entirely in view, and give a general Answer to it. He makes the Bishop
the Principle of Unity to a particular Church, and the College of Bishops the
Principle of Unity to the Catholic Church; and Christ the Principle of Unity
to that College. And adds, I hope not being a Romanist, you will not require
that I should prove the highest Step of this Gradation. Here I observe first,
the Discourse is about a visible Head, or Principle of Unity to the Church;
which cannot be ascribed to Christ. Wherefore this is wholly impertinent; or,
if it have any sense, it tends to make his Reader a Romanist, whom he
supposes not to be one already. For if the particular and Catholic Church,
have a visible Principle of Unity; and that which he makes to be the Uniting
Principle, have nothing that is visible to make them one among themselves, they
who can receive his Doctrine about a Principle of Unity, will see a necessity
of a Pope to unite the Bishops, as much as of a Bishop to unite the Presbyters.
2. If Christ be the Uniting Principle of the College of Bishops, why does he
not serve for the same use to Presbyters, yea, to all Christians. And indeed he
is the real Uniting Principle to all; they only are in the Union of the Church,
who cleave to his Doctrine, and observe his Laws; even though they separate from
the Bishop who departs out of that Way. 3. I desire to know of him, why he
thinks the Romanists will put him to prove the highest Step of this
Gradation, more than Protestants will? Does any of them deny Christ to be the
Principle of Unity to the Church? They only make the Pope his Vicar in this,
because they think such an one is needful in the Church, who is visibly
Conversant among men: and does not our Author suppose the same necessity of
such a visible Uniter till he come to the College of Bishops, and he leaves
them Headless, that is, without a visible Head. Where it may be rationally
concluded that this Doctrine is either Popish or palpably absurd. The next
thing I notice is, p. 79. he says all Christians hold one Faith to be
necessary to the Unity of the Church; but in Cyprian's time one Communion was
thought as indispensible: they held there is but one Church, and that this
could not be without one Communion. If by one Communion, he mean (for he
walks in a Cloud in this Matter, whether of Design or not, I know not,) that
Communion of Saints which is an Article of the Creed; which consists in Union
of them all with Christ, and Unity in Faith and Love, etc. I acknowledge the
necessity of it, but I know not what respect it has to Episcopacy, more than
Presbytery. If he mean Local Communion, it is impossible either in the
Catholic Church, or in the Diocese of a modern Bishop. If he mean Communion by
having the same Ceremonies and Government in the Church. Though I confess that is
desirable, and by all good means should be endeavored: (for we should have no
Ceremonies, but these which are of Divine Institution, and the one Church
Government that he has appointed, should be every where exercised,) yet there
may be one Church, where this Communion is not: and if the Cyprianick Age was
somewhat too strick in this Matter, it was their Mistake, (of which above,) but
it is no Proof of Episcopacy, (in the sense of our Debate,) to have been in
that Age. And indeed, if our Author maintain this Principle, he will
(consequentially to it) Unchurch most of the Reformed Churches, as the Papists
do them all on the same score: if by this one Communion he mean, that all
Christians must be United to some one Bishop or other, which Bishops agree
among themselves, and have Communion in the Episcopal College; he will find
hard to prove that Cyprian taught so. Yea, then there is no Communion in the
Church, without an oecumenick Council of Bishops, which we have little hope to
see: and many doubt that the World did ever see it: though there have been
Councils so called; because in them were represented all the Churches of the
Empire. Further, if this was the Opinion of Cyprian's time, how will he prove
that these Bishops in whom Churches were to be United, were any more than
Parish Ministers, and that the one Communion of that time, was more than that
every Christian must be the Member of one Church, where Christ's Ordinances are
dispensed by a Bishop, that is, a Minister of the Gospel.

. 62. Though I am not concerned to question the Practice of Bishops sending their
Communicatory Letters, to signify that they were promoted. Yet I see no
sufficient Proof of it from the two or three Instances that he brings. It
must be either a Law, or a great Train of Instances, in many several Nations,
in greater and lesser Churches, and under diverse Circumstances and Cases of
these Churches` that will bear the weight of so universal a Conclusion. But I
pass this: for it does not much concern our main Question. He will find it also
hard to prove, that these Letters were sent to all other Bishops, (as he
affirms, p. 80.) that had been a Work of no small Labor: I suppose they did
thus correspond with some next adjacent Bishops, or who were of special note;
which we also do, as I showed before. That there were Metropolitans in
Cyprian's time, he asserteth; and I deny it not. But they were but Moderators
of the greater Meetings, (as the Bishops were of lesser ones,) of the Parochial
Ministers and Elders: as also were the Primats, and in Afric especially, the
eldest Bishop or Minister, had this Dignity: but it was Praecedency, and
Dignity, wherein they were above their Brethren, not Power and Authority, but
this our Author touches but transiently; and so I shall not insist on it: only
I ask him; how do Metropolitans, in our modern sense, agree with his Opinion
that every Bishop was supreme, and had no Ecclesiastical Superior on Earth:
See. 9. p. 82. where he is Discoursing of purging out a Heretical Bishop; his
thoughts seem to run somewhat muddy. He says the College of Bishops might do
(to him) the equivalent of a formal Deposition; they could refuse him their
Communion, and thereby exclude him from their Episcopal College: and they
could oblige all the Christians within his District to abandon him. And because
he saw that his former Assertion of the supreme Power of a Bishop, and his
having no Ecclesiastical Superior, would be objected; he says no Bishop was
superior to another in point of Power and Jurisdiction. How to make all this
hang together, is not easy to know. 1. To wreath the yoke of the Bishop's
Domination on the Church, he establishes Independency among Bishops: whereas
no Reason can be given, why Parishes should not be Independent on one another,
as well as Provinces. I look on both these sorts of Independency, as contrary
to the Unity of the Church; and on Subordination, as of Natural and Divine
Right. 2. If the College of Bishops had not formal Power to depose a Heretical
Bishop: by what Authority could they oblige the Christians to abandon him, and
to choose another: if he say, the Fundamental Law of sound Faith and Unity; or
as he speaks, of one Faith, and one Communion, obliged the Christians to
this. A. That is antecedent to the interposing of the Authority of the
Episcopal College, and they were obliged to it, though there were no such
College. 3. That no Bishop has Power over another Bishop, is no more than we
say of Presbyters. But it is strange that the Community of Bishops, has not
formal and direct Power over every one of their own number; both with respect
to his Communion with them; and with respect to his particular Charge; that
makes a wider door both for Heresy and Schism, and for Peoples Being,
without remedy, under the Plague of bad Ministers, than any thing that Parity
can be charged with. 4. The People are here left Judges of the Bishop's
Haeresie, and other Incapacitating ill Qualities; and so to determine whether
they will leave him or not: the College of Bishops can do no more but inform
them, and tell them what they are obliged by the Laws of one Faith, and one
Communion to do. 5. What if the Bishop will not leave his Charge, nor the
People abandon him, has Christ left no Ordinance in his Church, as a Remedy of
this Case? The College of Bishops cannot excommunicat him, nor them: that were
to exercise formal Authority over him or them: if they then, will not yield to
the Colleges Information or Advice, they may go on in their way without
further Controlement. Thus we see that men will venture to ruin the Soundness,
Peace, and Purity of the Church, that they may establish a Lordly Prelacy over
the People of God. What he insisteth so much on, p. 86, 87. about directing
public Letters to the Bishops, and their being signed by them: is not worth
our notice. We also count it regular for our Moderators to be so treated: but
there was some peculiar Reason, why it was so punctually observed in that Age,
because the Praeses of their Meeting was fixed, and it was Interpretatively a
Degrading of him, or questioning his Title, to do otherwise: but this imports
no superior Jurisdiction. He tells, p. 87. that every Haeretical, or
Schismatical Bishop, and all who adhered to him, were ipso facto, out of the
Church. This I do not believe, for how shall a man be known to be Haeretical,
till he were tried and judged? His Proofs amount to no more, but that such were
dealt with as out of the Church; and may be the manner of Process against them,
is not mentioned: but such a negative Argument, will not prove that no more was
done to cast them out: if that be the Episcopal course of Censure, we intend
not to follow it: and if that were the way in the Cyprianick Age, it makes its
Example less Venerable and Argumentative, but it says nothing for the Bishop's
sole Power: he says p. 89. that a Bishop never called a Presbyter his
Colleague. A. If it be understood of Presbyters without a Charge, there is
Reason for it: he had no joint Charge of the Congregation, we use the same way
of Appellation. But if it be meant of a Moderator, with respect to the other
Brethren; I answer we find Presbyters calling the Bishop Brother; as was noted
before: Yea, Council. Carthag. 4. Canon. 35. it is Decreed, that though a Bishop
in consessu Presbyterorum sublimior sedeat, intra domum Collegam se
Presbyterorum cognoscat. This, its true, was a little after Cyprian's time: but
it was when Church-Domination was rather growing than decreasing.

. 63. His strength is now far spent, when in the end of his Book, he wastes so
many words to set off an Argument, which is fitter to be smiled at, than
laboriously answered. It is that the Christian Bishops in Cypria' s time, made
such a Figure in the Church, that they were the Chief Butt of the Malice of
Persecutors: others might live in Peace at Home, when they were forced to Flee.
And he is at pains to prove this, which I think was never questioned in any Age
of the Church. Their Station made them conspicuous, (for I deny not they were
above Presbyters in Dignity,) their Parts (some of them) made them to be
jealoused: their Zeal for God, made them hateful to the Promoters of Satan's
Kingdom. But all this can never prove that they had the sole Government of the
Church; nor that they had Jurisdiction over Presbyters, who were fixed in the
Church, to oversee any part of it. Many Presbyters, Deacons, yea private
Christians, who were eminent for Ability to confound the Adversary: for Zeal
and Holiness; or for their Station in the World, were persecuted as well as
their Bishops. That this is neither strange, nor concludent of Episcopal Power,
is evident (not to fetch an Instance from far,) in the late Episcopal
Persecution among our selves: the Ministers were mainly Hunted, Intercommuned,
Imprisoned, forced to Hide or Flee: and the more eminent or zealous they were,
the harder it went with them: yea, some who were freer than many others, of
what was thought Sedition, Disorder, or Rebellion, yet were hardly used, for
the Hurt that it was thought they might do to that which was the great Diana of
the Ascendent Party. And yet all this will not prove that they had, or
pretended to, or were thought to have Jurisdiction over their Brethren. I do
therefore deny the Consequence, the Bishops (some of them for I will not say it
was the Lot of them all) were mainly persecuted; Ergo, they and not the
Presbyters had the Authority in Governing the Church. If Decius had such a
dread of a Bishop being settled in Rome, that he would more patiently have
endured a Prince to rival it with him for the Empire: I am sure he had not so
much Cause as his Successors had; from the Successors of that Bishop: Of no
more Force is his Argument drawn from Galienus directing his Edict to the
Bishops, when he stopped the Persecution: For we deny not that they had an
eminent Station in the Church, and had a chief Hand in the Direction of her
Affairs, whether ye consider them as Parish-Pastors, as they all were; or
Moderators in greater Church-meetings, as some of them were. I have (as he
wills his Reader to do) considered and weighed his Arguments without
partiality, and in the Balance of Justice: But am not yet convinced, that the
Schism that is in the Church is chargeable on us; but on his Party. Let the
Reader judge whether of us have best grounds for our Opinion.

. 64. He concludes with making excuse, from the bulk of his Book, that he does
not (as he first intended) prove Episcopal Praeemenencie to be of divine Right,
as being Christ's Ordinance, and handed down to us from the Apostles in the
constant Practice of the Universal Church. This is the constant Cant of that
Party; but I have met with none who was able to evince this though the learnedest
among them; and not a few of them, have essayed it. If this Author shall think
fit to make another Effort, as he declares himself ready to do, if commanded
by him to whom he writs this long Epistle) and if he bring any thing new; and
not fully answered already: I doubt not but his Arguments will be examined to
better purpose, than what is, or can be done, by such a mean hand as mine is.

APPENDIX.
AFter the former Sheets were almost Printed, I met with two Books at the same
time, which I had not before seen: the one called the Fundamental Charter of
Presbytry, etc. with a Preface of 167 Pages, by a nameless Author: the other an
Inquiry into the new Opinions (chiefly) propagated by the Presbyterians in
Scotland; with some Animadversions on the Defense of the Vindications of the
Kirk: by A. M. D. D. This latter Book seems to have more of Argument than
some others which I have seen from some Scots Episcopalians, if not from the
same Hand: I have much desired that our Debates might run in that more pure
Channel; and rejoice to see any hopes of it. I am sorry that now I have no time
from necessary, urgent, and daily work, to consider this Book so as to Answer
it, if I shall not be Proselyted by it. I intend to try it is strength as soon
as I shall have leisure, if the LORD give Life and Health; and if it shall not
be sooner Answered by some other Hand; which I do much wish.

. 2. The former of these two Books is expressly levelled against an Act of the
Parliament of this Nation; and is a direct Refutation of it: and therefore the
Examination of it is out of my Road; and is most fit for such as are conversant
in the Affairs of State, and know the Politic which moved the Parliament so to
contrive their Act. I do judge that he who shall undertake it will find no hard
task. Beside, the Presbyterian Ministers did never look on the Inclinations of
the People (which that Act mentions in it is narrative) as the fundamental
Charter of Presbytry; however the Parliament might wisely consider it in their
Consultation and Determining, and mention it rather than what did more sway
some of them. We always did, and do, found the Government of the Church by
Parity, on Divine Institution; and look on Prelacy as contrary to Christ's
appointment.

. 3. What I now undertake is, a transient view (such as the Press hastening to
an end of the former Discourse, will allow) of his Preface: which I hope may be
looked on as a due Refutation of it: nor can I imagine that any judicious and
unbyassed man will judge, that such a parcel of Stuff, deserves a laborious*
Examination: he has need of a hardened Nose who can insist long in an exact
Anatomatical Scrutiny into such a rotten Carrion. The Author has outdone his
Brethren (yea, and himself too) in Billingsgate-Rhetorick: he seems to be
eminently gifted that way; to the silencing of who ever will oppose him; as
some learned acute men have quickly had their Mouths stopped when the Tongues of
some of these good Women have been let loose against them. I had rather own in
my self all the dullness that he is pleased to impute to the man whom he
designeth to expose, than enter the Lists with him at that Weapon: and I do
freely confess I am not qualified for it; and if I were, I should think it
unsuitable to my Character (however mean) and inconsistent with a good
Conscience. Such impotency of Mind, and such injurious Defamation, is not well
consistent with Christianity; nor is suitable to that Learning that is required
in them who write Polemick Divinity: for, Scolding is no Scholarship. If his
Adversary was weak, he should have knocked him down with strong Arguments; not
bespattered him with dirty Revileings: the one would have ruined his Cause, the
other but bedawb'd his Person; and it may be easily wiped off. If the Cause
which my Adversary owneth, need this Conduct, it is weak, and not worth
contending for: if not; they who do so manage it are no credit to it.

. 4. I refer the Reader who would have a view of this Author's Qualities more
truly than he Characterizeth other men, to the Bishop of Sarum' s Vindication:
where, if he be not aimed at, he is very plainly chastised in Effigy: for G.
B. and G. R. seem to have been stung with the same kind of Serpent; if not the
same individual. He had dealt more wisely, if he had not convinced the Reader,
by this management, of the very same ill Qualities in himself, that he so
frankly attributes to another. I am sure he has showed little Wisdom in
bringing Instances to prove his confident Assertions: had he contented himself
with bold Saying, and quibling Insinuations, of what he thinks fit to load
one with; some who know neither him, nor the person who is the Butt of his
Malice, might have believed some part of what he alleges (they who know that
person, however they cannot but see many Infirmities in him, have other
thoughts of him; and indeed better than ever he could deserve: and they who
know this Author will judge that his Tongue, nor Pen, is no Slander.) But now
his Proofs are so exceedingly unsuted to what they are brought for, that a
little attention may serve to improve them as Weapons against himself, and as
Evidences of these things in himself which he designeth by them to fasten on
another. I perceive he has been at pains to read all that has been written by
G. R. on several occasions; and what he thinks fit to ascribe to him; to see
what he could pick up in these Papers wherewith he might reproach the Author:
in which also he has (innocently and without design) done him a Kindness: for
if so critical an Eye could find no more to try his Skill upon in all these
Writings, it is like there are many things in them which he could not Blame:
for, exceptio firmat Regulam in non exceptis. It is a wonder if such a person
as he exposes could say so much to any purpose.

. 4. I shall not insist on his civility to the Parliament, and their Act; nor
his modest Reflection on himself; nor his great care expressed to suit his
Discourse to the English-Nation, even in the Words and Phrases: nor on the
account he gives of the helps he used. Only I take notice how much pains he is
at to prove (through 14 Pages) that the Book commonly called Knox's History was
not written by John Knox: I know none, who is much conversant in our Scots
Affairs, who is contrary to him in this: and if G. R. was so absurd as to cite
that Book under the Name by which it is commonly called; if it hence follow
that he thought John Knox was the Author, let him pass for as ignorant as our
Author will have him to be: if this be no good consequence, I hope it is no
great evidence of this Author's Learning so to infer. That John Knox did not
compose that Book, (though much of the Materials of it was taken from his
Manuscripts) has been held by Presbyterian Brethren, before this Author went
to School: neither do I know any of them who are earnest to have it believed
that he wrote it: yea, this Author himself cites it always under the Name of
John Knox; as he confesses: and why might not another do so too, without
debating about the true Author of it; which had been a needless digression from
his Purpose.

. 6. After he has disgorged a great deal of Gall against G. R. and declined him
for an Antagonist (who has the same aversion from entering the Lists with him,
unless he deal more like a Christian, and a Disputant) we might (but it is in
vain) expect he should be more composed: his Bile overfloweth through all his
Sheets. He mentions some Passages in my Writings that he will not insist on;
only notes them with a Nigrum Theta, as proofs of my unquestionable ignorance:
they are, that I hold Ruling-Elders, who are no Preachers, to be of Divine
Institution; that the Fathers, and Scripture also, own them under the Name of
Bishops. That Patronages came not in till the seventh or eight Century, or
later: (where his own ignorance, or somewhat else, appears; the word is, they
were not settled till then: it is well-known, that many Usages crept into the
Church long before they were settled, either by Law, or universal Practice.)
That, most, and the most eminent of the Prelatists acknowledge, that by
Christ's appointment, and according to the Practices of the first Ages of the
Church, she ought to be, and was governed in common by Ministers acting in
Parity, (which is a gross Misrepresentation; for that is said of Christ's
equally intrusting all his Ministers with Power of Preaching and Governing:
which is asserted and fully proved by the learned Stillingfleet in his
Irenicum: and what follows is that Author's own Words, not attributed to
Christ's appointment as unalterable, nor to the practice of the Church. Yet I
shall not decline debating of both these with him (though I say not they are the
Opinion of Prelatists) That Diocesan Episcopacy was not settled in Cyprian' s
time, etc. (What Ignorance is in this, is to be judged by the foregoing Book,
That the Decretal Epistles of Anacletus are genuine, is neither asserted nor
supposed, nor is any opinion given about them: only they are used as an ancient
Writing; and argumentum ad hominem. If this one Witness be cast, we have enough
beside. That it is asserted, Rational Def. of Nonconf. p. 10. that Episcopacy
is not in any Protestant Church but in England: is neither truly, nor with
Candor said; the Expression is, as in England: and it is easily demonstrable,
that in no Protestant Church, it is in that height, or does so entirely swallow
up the Ruling Power of Presbyters, as it does in England: If my Exposition of
Jerome's toto orb decretum est, be Ignorant, or Erroneous; I must so abide,
till this Profound Doctor Enlighten mine Eyes; which he has not vouchsafed to
do. Another of Jerome's Sayings, Quid facit Episcopus, etc. excepta Ordinatione:
he says my Gloss on it, has been sufficiently exposed, Hist. of the General
Assembly 1690: and I say, it has been sufficiently Vindicated, in Answer to
that, and other four Pamphlets; and Def. of Vindic. in Answer to the Apology,
p. 24, 25. I shall now add, that very Exposition of that Passage, was given by
Marsilius Patavinus, cited in the end of the Preface to Paul Bayn's Diocesan's
Trial: that Author lived about Anno 1324. In his Book called Defensor Pacis,
against the Pope; he has these Words, (speaking of that Passage of Jerome,)
Ordinatio non significat ibi Potestatem conferendi, seu Collationem Sacrorum
Ordinum; sed OEconomicam Potestatem Regulandi, vel Dirigendi Ecclesiae Ritus
atque Personas, quantum ad Exercitium Divini Cultus in Templo: unde ab Antiquis
Legum* latoribus, vocantur OEconomici Reverendi. This we maintain to be
competent to every Parish Minister; though not to the Elders of the Congregation,
to manage these in the Public Assembly. I hope no man of sense, will reckon
that Author an ignorant Person, of whom Papir. Masson. says, cujus Libri
extant, non cuidem Verborum, sed Rerum aepparatu, prorsus Admirandi. His
Instance of my Ignorance, in Citing some Greek Authors, out of the Latin
Translations of them, is so ridiculous, as it needs no Answer.

. 7. He next comes to some Instances, that he seems to lay more Weight on.
The first amounts to no more but this, that I Cited Chrysostom. out of Bellarm.
and I had not Chrysostom then by me, (as our Author says, he had not
Bellarmine, when he wrote this Preface,) and answered Bellarmine and
Chrysostom's Words, as he brought them: if he doubt, (as he seems to do,)
whether I did faithfully Transcribe Bellarmin's Words, let him consult the
Place: And now, when I have seen and considered Chrysostom's own Words, I am
sure that (...), is not the same way ascribed to the Bishop alone, as (...) and
(...) are to him, with the Presbyters: for he deriveth these from Christ's
Institution, which he does not pretend concerning that: nor indeed could he,
seeing he had said (...): he must then mean, that in his time, the Bishop had an
Election, and may be, also Ordination to a superior Degree of Dignity, (which
was without a superior Power,) or that to him, was committed the Performance of
the Ceremony in Clerical Ordinations, viz. Laying on of Hands: though I am sure,
and have showed, this was not the constant Practice. What our Author blames in
my sense of (...) is fully Vindicated, Gillesp. Eng. Pop. Cer. P. 3. C. 8.
Diggress. 1. P. 164. His next Instance, is out of Ration. Def. etc. p. 199.
where I prove the Peoples Power in Electing their Pastors, from Act. 14. 23.
and that from the word (...), (not barely from the force of the word, as he, by
Oversight, or Ignorance, mistaketh; but) by the force of the word, and it is
Circumstances in that Place. If Scapula be not a good Voucher for the
Signification of a Greek Word, both in Profane, and Ecclesiastical Writings,
his Lexicon is little worth: if he be, our Author has little Judgment in
declining his Authority; seeing not one of the Instances he gives of the word,
is for Ordination; but generally, for giving Suffrage. If we Consult Scripture,
it is used Act. 10. 41. and 2 Corinthians. 8. 19. in both which Places, it is used
for Election. And its importing also Ordination, which I alleged, he is
pleased to mock at: but thinks not fit to take notice of the Grounds brought
for that Interpretation, from the best Critics: which I impute to his
Unacquaintedness with that sort of Learning; if we may be so bold, as to
Question the Skill of one, who so looks down on other poor Mortals, as
Ignoramus's.

. 8. The next Proof of Ignorance is, I was bold to reprove one of my
Adversaries for commending Ministers from their understanding Christian
Philosophy: Hence our Auther spends about 10 Pages to prove, that that Phrase
was used by the Fathers: all which is easily granted, and was never questioned
by any that I know. Only I still think (and if that be to be ignorant, I cannot
shun that blame) that however the Fathers did pertinently use it, and even at
this time it may to very good purpose be used in some cases, yet that in a time
when Socinianism abounds, and when revealed Religion is so much decryed, by
not a few, and all Religion is by some resolved into Nature, and Humane Reason,
the improvement of which is Philosophy: I say in that case, it is not so very
proper a Commendation of a Minister, that is taken from Christian Philosophy,
as that which is taken from that knowledge of Divine Things, which is built on
Revelation, as superadded to what we have by Nature, and is attained by
Ratiocination from scientifick Principles.

. 9. He next thinks fit to charge his Antagonist with Nonsense, the Instances
are first, ( Animadvers. on Stillingf. Jrenic. p. 30.) I had said that all
Ceremonies of God's Worship, are Worship themselves. He should have minded that
it is there said that the learned Stillingfleet says the same, Irenic. p. 65.
which I still aver: and if he will not ascribe Nonsense to that unquestionably
learned Author, why may not such an one as I take shelter under his shadow. But
if this Author had understood the Distinction, that I (and many more learned
than I) have elsewhere cleared between Circumstances, Rites and Ceremonies, and
that this last Sort, is peculiar to Religious Actions, and has place in no
other kinds of Actions, he might have understood, that such Actions are
Religious, and Acts of Worship, and that they are true Worship, if instituted
by Christ, and false, if divised by men. This cannot be judged Nonsense, by any
who has, with Judgment, looked into the Controversy about Ceremonies; but it
must be Nonsense to judge so of it. The Fetch, (as he calls it) of Ceremonies
that are in the place of Competentes, or Catechumeni; called in the same place
Candidate Ceremonies, is no more Nonsense than other Metaphors are, if the
Author be so ignorant, as to understand that Phrase literaly, it is his own
Nonsense, and none of mine. The next piece of Nonsense is, that the Affirmative
of the second Commandment is, that we should worship God in the way that he has
prescribed in his word: Rational Def. p. 125. If this be Nonsense, I have for
my Compurgators, the whole Assembly of Divines at Westminster, who in the
Shorter Catechism, gave this Answer to the Question, What is required in the
second Commandment? The second Commandment requires, the Receiving, Observing,
keeping pure and entire, all such Religious Worship, and Ordinances as God has
appointed in his Word. It is like this Author will not stick to charge that
venerable Assembly with Error, but if he dare charge them with Nonsense, it is
no great matter if poor I take a share with them. I am so dull as to understand
as little what Nonsense is in owning the Lutherian Churches, as Sister Churches,
and so having Communion with them, and yet refusing to join with them on their
Instituted Ceremonies. If any thing here look like Nonsense, it is from a
Typographical Error, (which I confese that Book abounds with, the Correcting
of the Press being committed by that Author to a negligent person, while himself
was at the distance of some hundrdes of Miles) it is in the Manuscript
uninstituted Worship: and is meant of parts of Worship not appointed by Christ,
but devised by men: We can have Communion with them in owning the same Truths,
(seeing they own the same Fundamental Truths with us) and in these parts of
Worship that Christ has appointed; but we cannot join with them in worshipping
God, by their Devices, and if they intermix these with instituted Worship, we
must forbear Communion with them in both, rather than pollute our selves with
uncommanded Worship: If this be Nonsense, I must bear that Imputation. Another
Instance of Nonsense is, Second Vindication, p. 14. That the two Governments
(Presbytery and Monarchy) of Church and State, have suited one another many
Ages, since the Nation was Protestant: The Authors Antagonist had expressed his
Wonder, how Presbytery could suit Monarchy in the State. I confess I was not
so critical, as to impute to him, that he meant Presbytery in the State, and
Monarchy in the State; (For I cannot discover Nonsense where it is not, even
in an Adversary, as this sensible Man can;) And I plainly answered, that these
two Governments; (viz. Presbytery in the Church, and Monarchy in the State) did
suit one another. Whether the Nonsense is in my Expression, or in my
Adversaries apprehension, let the Reader judge: Also whether a Handle is here
given for a Cavil; or Malice, or Ignorance, has supplied it.

. 10. Another thing wherein he has a mind to find Nonsense, is Animadvers. on
Stillingfleets Irenicum, p. 5. where the learned Dr. having asserted, that
where there are different Opinions* and probable Arguments on both sides; if it
be not a matter necessary to Salvation, it gives ground to think that that
matter in Controversy was never intended for a necessary mean for Peace and
Unity in the Church: On this occasion, G. R. was bold to say, that if things
not necessary to Salvation, must needs be thus clearly revealed, much more this
clearness is needful in things necessary to Salvation. The Nonsense of this I
cannot yet perceive: and I think this Author (not by his piercing Judgment,
but by this tinctured Fancy) was the first that discovered it. And I cannot
shun still to think, that the Fundamental Truths should be, and are revealed
with more evidence, than the inferior Truths; and that the Lord would not have
us to venture our Salvation, on that obscurity of Revelation, that we may not
venture the Peace of the Church on; if that were at Stake. But the best is,
that the peace of the Church depends not so much on Oneness of Opinion, about
some inferior Truths, as in honest endeavors after that, and in mutual
forbearance where it cannot be attained. I am little concerned in his not
believing a Typographical Error, in a passage about the Decrees of God; which a
Friend of his, (if not himself) had observed, and I had solemnly disowned, and
do still disowne, as what I never thought, spoke, nor wrote: It seems he
measures the veracity of others by his own. But he will prove what he
affirms; That Book was Reprinted in England, without Alteration, or
Correction; Ergo it was the Authors, not the Printers Error. A wise Consequence
indeed: if it went abroad with that Error, (as I deny not it did) it is no
wonder it was Reprinted with it: but that it was ever Reprinted, is more than
I know, or ever heard before: if he will not believe me in this, I hope some
others will. He next sets the black Mark of Nonsense, on the Arguments I
bring against a stinted Liturgy of man's Composure: Rational Def. p. 226. I can
see nothing but tolerable Sense, and some strength of Reason, in these
Arguments; when I review them after many years: And our Author thought not fit
to discover it to us, and therefore they must even stand as they were. Only
this great Judge of Nonsense, shows us that the Lords Prayer is a set Form
and disowned by Presbyterians, and therefore that must be here included:
Answer, that Prayer (if a set Form; that is, if it be enjoined to be rehearsed
in public Worship) is not a set Form of man's devising, and therefore falls
not under the Arguments that he opposes. Neither do Presbyterians disown that
Prayer, but use it as a Directory for Prayer, and if any will repeat the words
in solemn Worship, they do not censure them. He hinteth, (though so confusedly,
that I cannot make Sense of his Refutation of Nonsense) that we are Quakers,
because against Liturgies. We find no Liturgies in the Apostolic Church; and
yet they were no Quakers: if all praying without Book were Enthusiasm, (as he
ignorantly insinuates) many Episcopal men must be such, for they do not always
use the Book. His retorting the Argument on extemporary Prayer, is strangely
wide, and has been often answered: But this Author's business is not to clear
Truth, but to run down a certain person whom he has in chase: Extemporary
Prayer imposes neither Matter, nor Frame, or Composure, on the Hearers, and
Joyner, further than Nature it self makes necessary, where people pray
together: but set Forms do.

. 11. Yet more Nonsense: his Antagonist speaks of the Popish Church of
Scotland, and of the Protestant Church, also often of the Episcopal and
Presbyterian Church there, whereas the Church is but one: Which this Author is
at much pains to expose: but by mishape, exposes himself in so doing: I list
not to contend about words, whether you call a divided Church (as Scotland was
while partly popish, and partly Protestant: and now is whole partly
Presbyterian and partly Episcopal) two Churches, or one Church rent in two
pieces; I think is not material, I see no Nonsense in either way of speaking:
Both Parties or Churches if permitted must have their Government, and
Governors, neither is it fit that they should rule that Church, or part of the
Church to which they are opposite, and which they would destroy. It is wholly
beside this purpose that he brings in, of my blaming Dr. Stillingfleet for
making the Unity of the Church of England, consist, in two Convocations (which
our Author does so grossly mistake for the Upper and Lower Houses of one
Convocation, whereas that Author does make two Convocations in two distinct
Provinces, p. 300) for that is one Church united in it is parts, not divided
into Parties as the Church we speak of. And it is less intelligible, how that
should have two Heads, than in this case: Why two Parties may not be called two
governing Bodies, in a divided Church, I cannot yet understand, for all his
Story of the Platonic Monster: That no Head is mentioned, why should he
wonder; unless he think a visible Head of the Church in a single person is
necessary; in such Metaphorick Speeches, there is no matter of moment; whether
ye call the governing Part of a Church a Body, or a Head: but enough of this
quibling on this Head.

. 12. Our Author's next Essay, is to set forth his Antagonist's ill Nature: in
which Discourse, every one may see, how manifestly and fully he sets forth
that Temper of Mind in himself, which he blames in another: most of the
Passages he insisteth on, were written against some Pamphlets, which contain
the most false and injurious Imputations, and that not against a Person only,
but against all the Presbyterians without Discrimination: yea, against the
whole Nation, in it is Representative, the Parliament; and many of these
Assertions are proved to be false, and if a certain Author, by a Book which
gave less occasion, was by every Line, provoked to the Indecency of Passion,
what wonder, if just Indignation was warmly expressed against such Abusive
Treatment. If I have called any thing Lies, Railing, Sauciness, Impudence,
which was not so, I am content to underly the just Sentence of unbyassed men,
but this Author and his Accomplices, take a Boundless Liberty to Reproach, and if
they be told of it, they are Clamorous beyond Measure. It is not inconsistent
with all that Civility that is due to men, to give things their true Names,
especially where the Rank and Behavior of the Persons we deal with, plead no
extraordinary Respect. He mistaketh, when he says, that I knew, that the
Author of the Memorial was dead, before I answered his Book: I do not to this
day, know who was the Author of it. What was said about giving up King Charles
the first to England, should have been refuted by Reason, not by Quibling: I
have no Answer for such Arguments: neither have I time to examine how fairly
all the words are cited, which he adduceth, nor to show on what occasion, or on
what necessity they were written: what he represents as spoken of the
Prelatists, is injuriously blamed, it was spoken of a Party of them, (who are
but few,) who reproached the Presbyterians in general, and in the most
universal Terms; which never was my way against them.

. 13. If any thing has dropped from my Pen, which may be judged Uncivil, or
short of due Respect toward the Learned, and Reverend Dr. Stillingfleet, I am
ready to crave him pardon, for I designed the contrary: what this Author
charge me with that way, is partly false, as what he cites out of the
Preface to Animadv. on Irenic. for both the Prefaces, (I have seen one at some
Copies, and another at other Copies,) were written by another hand, without the
knowledge of the Author: partly they are foully misrepresented; to give an
Instance: this Author faith, that I said of Dr. Stillingfleet, p. 18. that for
the most part he does nothing, but magno conatu nihil agere. This is
misrepresented: I said that he insisteth most on things not controverted, and
thence inferred the blame mentioned. It is one thing to charge one directly
with an Opinion or Practice: and another, to make an Inference from it: seeing
many do or say that, the ill Consequence of which they do not observe, but will
disowne. His other Citations are but a just Censure one some Passages of that
Learned Author's Writings, which I was examining, which cannot be shunned in
Polemick Writings: to call that a Contradiction that I make appear to be such,
is no Injury nor Breach of that Civility, that is due to a Stated Adversary:
many things are fair enough in open War, which were not so in a State of Peace.
This Author is yet more injurious, in expounding all that I have said of a few
men of imbittered Spirits; among the Prelatists, who have in their Writings
reproacht the Presbyterians, and imputed to them, things that they are innocent
of, or abhor, applying all this, (I say) to all them who are of the Episcopal
Persuasion; or to the Party in general, as that they are Esaus, Serpents,
Spiteful, etc. I challenge him to prove what he says: I deny it: if I have
said any thing of Immorality among the Clergy, it is too evident, though I know
some of them are innocent, and lament it. What he cites as spoken against the
Church of England, and her Clergy, is either what is in Controversy between
us, and them: I have been so bold, as to call their Liturgy and Ceremonies
Superstition, and to mention what is the Native Concomitant of Superstition,
that men will be wiser than Christ or his Apostles. This is no more a Crime,
than it is a Fault to be opposite to their way. What is said of Immoralities,
and Insufficiency for the Ministry, and other Corruptions that are among them,
is not chargeable on me, yea nor on Presbyterians alone, but it is the
Complaint, of the best among themselves, see the five Groans of the Church, and
Mr. Bold' s Sermon. These Authors were truly Sons of the Church of England;
thousands among them, complain of these things, who yet adhere to that
Communion. I might well disowne that Principle of Sentencing, and Executing
Kings by their Subjects, about which some of the Church of England had informed
foreign Divines, as the Principle and Doctrine of Presbyterians: because the
Generality of Presbyterians in Scotland, (very few excepted, and these turned
Independents after,) showed their Abhorrence of that Fact committed on King
Charles the first, so they did in England, and some of them suffered Death, for
owning his Son. Is it Incivility to the Church of England, that I thought, at
the time of the late Revolution, it was fit for Parties to put in their Claim,
for what they thought the way of GOD, that it might be judged of by them who
had Authority? if the Church of England think, we ought not to mutter against
the Corruptions of their way, nor seek a Remedy in an orderly and legal way,
they may know that we pretend to no such Civility, as is inconsistent with
Faithfulness to the Truth, and Ordinances of Christ. We are for the Purity of
the Church of England, and for her Peace too, so as not to meddle with her
without our Sphere: but if speaking, or writing for the good way that we own,
do disquiet her, with respect to her Corruptions, we must be excused. It is a
wise Assertion, he exhorts his Readers to purge the Church of England, etc. I
exhorted none to this Attempt, but in their Station, such as many have not: his
Expression sounds, as if I had stirred all up, that should read this Book, to
fall on the Church of England, and pull her down.

. 14. Impudence is the next Epithet, that he labors to fix on the man of his
Wrath. Instances are; It is abscribed to Cunning, that their Books reproaching
the Presbyterians were spread in England, but hard to be found in Scotland:
which he imputes to want of Liberty for Printing such Pieces in Scotland, and
hazard in importing them: but it is sufficiently known, that many Books of that
strain have been imported, and none seized (that I hear of) but one Parcel,
which was of another strain. Next it is Impudence to assert the Loyalty of
Presbyterians. Answ. It is more Impudence to ascribe to Presbyterians, what was
the Practices of some few, with which the far greatest part, neither did, nor
would concur. What was said on this Head, was also proved; and it is Impudence
to put such a Mark on any Assertion, and yet not attempt to answer the
Arguments brought for it. Another Impudence is to speak of the Harmlesness of
Presbyterians, and that they are no Persecutors. And that any one of many of
them suffered more Hardships, and Barbarous Cruelty, than all the
Espiscopalians have endured: the Impudence of this, he proves very learnedly:
how could one man suffer the deprivation of five or six hundred Livelyhoods.
That there were so many Episcopal Ministers turned out, (I suppose these he
means) I know not; but it is not a wise comparison, of one man to have so
many Families to maintain on nothing, and each to have his own: I affirm that
one man who suffered Torture, Intercommunning, was forced to lodge in Dens and
Woods, and in daily hazard of his Life, who was sold for a Slave in the remote
places of the Earth, suffered more (though his loss of Money did not amount to so
great a Sum) than all they did. I find nothing in what follows to disprove
what I had said, and therefore pass to another piece of Impudence, (which yet
is a repetition of what he had said before) that Presbyterians are no Rebels.
To prove this he (very pertinently) alleges a Contradiction between first
Vindic. ad Q. 2.. 3. where it is said that Episcopacy raised a Tumult, and. 5.
they (the Episcopal men) raised no Tumults. (This last is ad Q. 3.. 5.) Answ.
The former is spoken (as plainly appears to them who will see) of the War
between the King and Parliament. The other of such Tumults as our Author
charge the Rabble with, and it is expressly said that they did what they could
to raise a War. Here then is that horrible Contradiction that he finds, or
fancieth: a War managed by potent Armies and for a long time, is in one place
called a Tumult; and yet Scuffles among a confused Rout, which are soon over,
are distinguished from such a War. Here is neither Contradiction nor Impudence:
The Impudence that follows is injuriously imputed to me (it is vindicating
the Presbyterians from being Rebels) for what himself seems to applaud in
other more modest persons, he might find frequently said by me. But if it be
Impudence to deny Presbyterians to be Rebels, what kind of quality must he be
of who charge them with it, while his own Party is guilty of Actions of the
same nature, and were as universally engaged in them. What has lately fallen
out, might teach him either to justify what he so freely calls Rebellion, or
to lay the blame of it on Protestants, and not Presbyterians only: and then if
no share of it fall on himself, let us know what Party he is of.

. 15. He next challenges some Insinuations, as if the Presbyterians in
Scotland were the only Protestants; which cannot be inferred from any Words he
cites. Neither can it be inferred that I thought, or said that the Gospel was
not preached but by the Presterians. One word he lays weight on, that if the
Presbyterians had not used the Indulgence given to them and Papists; these
would have occasion to mislead People, without any to oppose them. None who had
a mind to understand Words as they are plainly meant, would so construct this
Passage; such universal Expressions most frequently suffer a Limitation: also
in that case they had done what in them was, that none should oppose Popery: as
if a Batallion in an Army flee, they act such a part as tends to hinder any
opposition to be made to the Enemy. Beside all this, though there were some
private Episcopal Ministers appeared faithful in this Case: it is well known how
little most of the Bishops, and the generality of the Clergy appeared, and how
they that did speak any thing that way, were discouraged by some Bishops. I
wish he had better cleared to us, how absurd it is to say, that the true
Protestants in the Nation were for the late Revolution, than by telling us,
that being against it was no Popery: most men think it was too much to favor
it, and was a defect in that Zeal that should have, in such a Juncture, been
showed against it. The secret Instructions from Holland that he gives as the
Cause of Presbyterians complying with the Dispensing Power: I never heard of
them, but from that Epistler whom he mentions: and I could answer nothing to
it but by denying it: and now when he calls for an Answer to it, I say,
First, Presbyterians did never comply with the Dispensing Power, but groaned
under it as a Grievance: their using the Indulgence could not be so
constructed, as I have elsewhere showed. Secondly, I solemnly declare that I
know nothing to this day of these secret Instructions. Thirdly, What moved such
Presbyterians as I was acquainted with to scruple using the Indulgence at
first, and to accept it at last, was, that some Conditions and Limitations,
that they could not submit to, were left out in the last Edition of it. The
Villainy that he charge the Presbyterians with, in Addressing King James for
his Indulgence, while they were on Intrigues to supplant him, must be charged
on them who were so guilty: I knew of no such Intrigues, nor any such design
then on foot, though now I perceive that such Designs were then hatching: neither
can I name one person among all that accepted of the Indulgence who knew of
such Designs.

. 16. He next brings instances of Impudent Shifts used by G. R. when he, or
his Cause is put to it. The rabbled Ministers were not deprived of their
Possessions (I mean Stipends) by an Act of Parliament (as he alleges,) but
thrust from their Places by the Rabble; and the State judged that they could
not relieve them without palpable Inconvenience; and because of the notoriety
of the Scandals of not a few of them which had been so outed; (as appears
from the then Prince of Orange's Declaration,) on which followed the loss of
their Benefices. What the State did, they can best give Reasons for. I never
defended what the Rabble did that way. For what is said of Parliaments calling
King James's Retirement from England, his Abdicating the Government: that is
plain to be meant of the Parliament of England: for though it was written by a
Scots-man, it was said of English* Affairs: of Retirement from England, not
from Scotland: wherefore here is no Impudence, (unless on his own side,) though
the Scots Parliament speak nothing of Abdication. This, and what follows, is
picking a Quarrel without cause given. The long Story he has of the Viscount
of Dundee's Plot, and the Forces that came from the West to defend the
Convention, contains such Matters of Fact, as he contradicts what is
confidently affirmed by them who were on the Place, and had occasion to know
these things, as well as he; and are fully as credible persons as he is. Let
the Reader judge who deserves most Credit. I was Witness to none of these
things: but shall give my Vouchers, if duly called to it: if he can do the
like, let unbyassed Men judge of the whole History. If I had said the whole
Nation knows the whole of this Passage to be true, as he affirms that the
whole Nation knows it to be a Figment; I might have been branded with
Impudence, on better ground than any thing that he has brought to prove his
Charge against me.

. 17. What was said against Dr. Strachan's Defense, he spends many Words upon
it: on which I observe a few things. First, I expressly referred that Objection
to be Answered by some seen in State Affairs; it being Political rather than
Theological. 2ly That I pleaded an Inter-regnum in the time of the Rabbling,
and would not allow it in the Dr's Case, is no inconsistency: for in the first
case the Exercise of Government was impossible; in the other there was actual
Exercise of it. 3ly When it was said the Representative of the Nation had owned
William as their King: it was not meant (as he has a mind to understand it) as
complexly such; but as Exercising the Supreme Regal Power, and designed to be
completely King. I could give Scripture-Instances of such manner of speaking of
Kings: if it were fit to enlarge as much on this Head as he does. 4ly If it was
not a Contempt of the Authority of the Nation, to disobey the Command of it is
highest Power for the time, even though one should attempt to give Reasons
(unless these Reasons were also sufficient, of which none of us are Judge) let
any give Sentence. 5ly He subtilizeth the Distinction too much between being
King, and exercising the Regal Power: but to help out his fine Notion, he
behoved to alter the Phrase, putting Right to Exercise for Exercising it self:
I hope these two may be distinguished; and that there may be not only a
Physical, but a Moral impediment, for a time, of a Moral Right. His Notion of
Exercising the Regal Power before taking the Oath, and that there is no
Obligation to take the Oath before the Coronation; I cannot yield to; but leave
to Statesmen, and Lawers to Debate it with him. I say the same of his Discourse
of Hereditary and Elective Kings.

. 18. That I called K. J. our lawful Sovereign, he says, was a striking at the
Root of the present Settlement. Answer, if I had so called him, with respect to
the time of the present Government, what he says were true. But to say that he
was so before this Government had it is being, and before the Nation in its
Representative had found and declared the contrary, is far from that blame.
Next, he unfairly represents what I had said, that Episcopacy cannot be
restored: I hope it never shall, and I am sure it never can, without crossing
the Institution of Christ. But whether the restoring of it be consistent with
the Civil Rights and Privileges of the Nation, as things are now stated, I
leave it to Statesmen and Lawers to discuss. His Commendation of the
Cameronians, and blaming me for speaking to their Disadvantage, is not out of
kindness to them, but in odium tertii; that he might make the sober
Presbyterians (for I cannot be bantered out of that Distinction) more hateful,
as being worse than they. I should think it lost time, to examine his quibbles
about the Presbyterian Ministers not preaching so much as he and his Accomplices
thought was meet against the Rabling: these things were sufficiently declared
against by some, and that where such Disorders were most rampant and regnant:
but Preaching could not Stem that Tide, many of these men would hear non of us,
nor will they to this day (though, through mercy, not a few of them are
reclaimed) and some who listened to other Doctrine, would not hear that. He has
a wise inference, I had said, these courses were preached against both before
they were acted, for preventing them: and after for reproving them; Ergo, says
he, it was a consulted and deliberat Politic; and the Ministers were privy to
it; and yet did not warn the poor men, that they might have escaped being
rabled: I shall not give this its due Name; as he frequently gives ill and
undue Names to my Words. Ministers knew an inclination to Disorders in some,
that they went beyond their Stations, by an ill guided Zeal: and this they
warned against, yea, and some Presbyterian Ministers did protest against all
these exasperated men, when they beheld it: But that they knew Designs for
these Disorders in particular, is false, and does not follow from what was
said; He says, he can name more than one or two of the first Rank of sober
Presbyterian Ministers, (such a Blunder and Repugnancy in me would have been
called Ignorance, Nonsense, Impudence, and what not) who advised to these
Courses. I solemnly declare I know not any of them, and if I did, I should
blame them.

. 19. He comes next to Contradictions: some of which are fancied; others are
real; but of his own making, by mis-citing words; One is I have said, where
there are Bishops the Presbyters have no Power, in another Book, we do not say
that Bishops take all Power from Presbyters. Any who will be at the pains to
consult the places that he cites, will find that the first speaks of
Governing Power; the other speaks of Power in General, which comprehends
preaching Power, but it is there expressly said, that they take away all
Governing Power: Where is then the Contradiction: Next it is said, (he knows
not where it seems; nor do I) that King James's Indulgence was against Law. And
yet 2d Vendic. p. 43. the Parliament had given the King such Power. The first
Assertion I find not; another Assertion that to him will infer it, is, the Law
was for public Meetings, Ergo, private Meetings were against Law; It is a
pitiful Consequence, Where Liberty is allowed, (as now in England) the Law is
for both ways. Wherefore the second Assertion makes no Contradiction. But if
both had been said, there are just Laws, and unjust: which may without a
Contradiction in the Assertion, be said to contradict one another. This
Distinction removes also the next pretended Contradiction, between a
Forefeiture being unjust, that the Authority of the Nation laid on, and
Ministers having no legal Right to their Stipends, when the Authority of the
Nation have determined otherwise; Parliaments may both do right, and do wrong.
Another Contradiction he fancieth: Animadv. on Stillingf. Jrenic. It is
asserted that all Ministers having got equal Power from Christ, they cannot so
devolve their Power on one of themselves, as to deprive themselves of it: their
Power being not a License only, but a Trust. This he thinks is contradicted
indirectly, by delegating Members to the General Assembly. To this I answer,
Delegation to the General Assembly, is a Temporary, transient thing, for the
exercise of one or a few Acts: and necessity does warrant it, seeing the
Ministers of a whole Nation, cannot meet, without leaving almost the whole
Nation destitute of Preaching, and other Ordinances, for a considerable time.
This is not to be compared with devolving of the Power of the Ministers of a
whole Province on one Bishop, who is perpetually ( ad vitam aut culpam) to
exercise the whole power of the Church, in all the Acts of it; so as all the
rest are deprived of it, and cannot exercise it, nor give account to God for
the Management of it. The one is very consistent with that Parity that Christ
made in communicating Church Power to his Servants, the other is not. He says
also, that I contradict the former Position directly, in true Representation:
and 2d Vindic. by allowing the taking ruling Power from the prelatical Clergy.
Beside the Necessity, and unsettled State of the Church in these Places,
brought for justifying this Conduct, which he rather mocketh at than solidly
answers, I there at length insisted, to show that there is no inconsistancy
between this, and our principle concerning Parity: I need say no more, till he
answer what is already said.

. 20. Another Contradiction he will needs make, between my disowning some
Grounds of Separation in England, and owning the same in Scotland. The one in
my Rational Defense against Dr. Stillingfleet, the other in my second Vindic.
of the Church of Scotland, this he prosecuteth with a great deal of Clamor:
what strength is in his Discourse, let us now try. I hope I shall be found
semper idem, for all this noise. Three Grounds of Separation he mentions,
wherein this Contradiction lies, first Episcopacy. Answer, I said the setting
up Episcopacy in England, was not a sufficient Ground for People to forbear
hearing of the Word in their Parish Churches, I say the same with respect to
Scotland. I said Episcopacy was a good Ground for Ministers to withdraw from
Church Judicatories, where they must (at least interpretatively) own that
Authority: I say the same of England. If he can find any thing in my words,
that does import any more than this, I shall own a Contradiction, and the
shame that it may infer. The second is Episcopal Ministers were Usurpers, or
Intruders. The third is they had not the Peoples Call. I am sure, I never made
these to be two distinct things: but this Author's subtle Wit, has divided
them. Here I cannot own either Contradiction or Contrariety. I approved the
Conduct of many People in England, who by a tacit, and after Consent, owned
these men, as their Pastors, and heard them, though they did not join with their
unwarranted Ceremonies: I never condemned the same Practice in Scotland; but
approved it by my Practice, and Doctrine. Only I pleaded, that what ever might
be said of their not giving Consent, (which was also the Case of many in
England,) they could not be Charged with Separation, while these men were
obtruded on them, against the Laws of the Gospel, especially when they might
hear their own lawfully called Ministers, though in a Corner. I find no
Contradiction here, neither in what he says about the Covenant, which I still
think never made any new Duties, or sins for the matter; but was a superadded
Tie to former Moral Obligations. I said indeed that the Covenant National, and
the Solemn League, made setting up of Episcopacy more sinful than before: but I
never said, that either it made Episcopacy sinful, where it was not so before:
nor that it made owning of it such: though I am sure it aggravated the sin of
both.

. 21. His next Effort is to expose my Rejecting the Testimony of some, who were
brought to Attest the Rabbling: but in his way, (I know not what Freak took
him,) he Digresseth to consider the Preface to Animadv. on Stillingf. Irenic.
which he will needs have to be written by the Author himself, on which he
discanteth after his own manner, that is, not very Learnedly, nor Convincingly;
I assure him, and (if he will not be assured, he having no great Esteem of my
Veracity,) I can assure the Reader, that the Author neither wrote that Preface,
nor what is in the Title Page, nor knew that the Book was Printed, till after
it was done; but was at 300 Miles distance from where it was done. The
Metaphorical Death, spoken of in it, taken from the English Phrase, of being
Dead in Law, as the Nonconformist Ministers then were, was but a sorry Subject
for a Learned Divine to practice upon, but he had a mind to write much, and had
little to say, though he often pretends to have great Plenty of Matter. It is
true I did, and do Question the Truths of many Circumstances, whereby the
Rabblings were aggravated: and though he is pleased to say, that the whole Nation
knows them, I affirm the Generality of the People, where these things were
said to be Acted, know the contrary: let the Reader, who has not occasion to
enquire into the Matters of Fact, believe as he sees Cause, or suspend his
Belief. I did never defend, nor deny the Hardships that some of the Episcopal
Clergy met with from the Rabble: only I said, and I insist in it, that they
were Represented most Disingenuously in several Parts, and Circumstances of
them: his Vouchers I reject, (I mean some of them,) ours he rejects; which is
ordinary in such Contendings, wherefore unless the thing could come to a Legal
Trial, every one must believe as he sees Cause. That I rejected by the Bulk
all the Matters of Fact, is false, and injurious. I did acknowledge several of
them, and condemned them as unaccountable Disorders. It is a foolish Inference,
no man can be a fit Witness before a Court, because we are not to believe all
the Stories that men tell of themselves, or their Friends. That I had my
Informations in these things mostly from Rabblers themselves, is falsely
asserted, as may be seen by any who Impartially consider the second
Vindication. His exposing that second Vindication, because I had the Accounts
of Matters of Fact from other hands, and was not Eye, nor Ear-Witness to them,
is odd; for what Historian is there, who may not be, on the same Account,
blamed. The Book he speaks of, Account of the late Establishment of the
Presbyterian Government, by the Parliament, I have not seen, nor heard of it
before. I thanked the Parliament, in the Preface to my Sermon before them, for
their Act, Establishing Presbyterian Government, can any wise man thence Infer,
that I commended whatever was beside Incorporated into that Act? Therefore all
his long Discourse on that head, is impertinent. Another terrible Contradiction
is, I say Field Meetings were sometimes necessary: and yet they were Condemned
by the Wisest and Soberest Presbyterians. If I had said they were in all Cases
so Condemned, he might have Insulted: but may not I always, that is at all
times, be of Opinion, that a thing should not be done, as I see it often done,
and without Necessity, and yet think that there may be a Case of Necessity,
where it may be done; this is to Cavil, not to Reason.

. 22. The Envenomed Words, in some Pages that follow, wherewith he Concludes
his Preface, and these of the same Sort, wherewith it Interspersed, I
disregard: he does himself more Hurt by them, than me: I resolve not to be
Hectored, nor Banter'd out of my Principles, nor Scarred by Malice, or Reproach
from casting in my Mite, for the Defense of Truth, though he, and such as he
Conspire to Overwhelm me, partly with their Books, and partly with their
Calumnious Imputations. It is not usual for Satan so to Rage against a bad
Cause. These few Pages I have written raptim* the Press waiting for them: if
he, or any other will Examine them fairly, with that Candor that becomes a
Christian, and a Disputant; I shall be willing to be Corrected, if any thing
have escaped my Pen; if he or they write in the same Strain of this Preface, I
will Despise them, as also will all Sober and Intelligent Readers.

FINIS.

