THE Anabaptist Preacher UNMASKED, In a further DISCOVERY of his LYING WONDER
out of LINCOLNSHIRE: As also The NEWS from Richard Hobbs, an Anabaptist
Preacher in Dover, Examined.

Their Juggles, Lies and Deceits detected, BY T. R.

A Hypocrite with his Mouth destroys his Neighbor: But through Knowledge shall
the Just be delivered,

Prove. 11.9. He that seeks mischief, it shall come upon him,

Verse. 27. Printed in the Year, 1673.

The Anabaptist Unmaskt, etc.
SHame might long ere this have covered the Face of the old Enemies of Truth
and Righteousness, had not their Contention driven them to that audatio^s
pitch, as to glory in their shame; to take the least pains to satisfy the
juditious unbyassed Understandings were but lost Labor; for their Eyes already
behold their Envy and Deceit: but its the Innocent and Simple-hearted (whom
these Sim. Magus's of our Age, by their Sorceries delude and enslave) to whom
this is more immediately directed. Scarce a County throughout this Nation but
has been Eye or Ear Witnesses, not only of the dispersing of a Lying Pamphlet
(importing, A Narrative of a pretended Quaker, and his Family in Lincolnshire,
become Leprous and Diseased, etc.) forged by an Anabaptist Preacher; but also
of the Unheard of Insolence, bold Vproars, and Turbulent Routs they have used,
acted and committed to enforce a good Opinion of their great Diana, upon an
Innocent, Simple or Ignorant People. Reader, mistake me not, for I assure thee,
its not my purpose to charge every particular Member or Assembly, who this day
walk under the Name of Presbyter, Independent, Anabaptist or Baptist, as being
Actors and Abettors of this late piece of Shame and Immorrallity, although
Envy, Malice and Falsehood have manifested themselves in some particular under
each of these Courts: but on the contrary (to do them Justice) I acknowledge,
that many have freely in frequent Discourse condemned its Forging, Printing and
Dispersing; much more the Reprinting the same, with a Tail as Leprous as the
former.

The Anabaptist Author or Reprinter of their pretended True Relation, the
better to Countenance the Lying Wonder, amuse the credulous Reader with two
other fresh Passages of Reproach against the People called Quakers; the one, of
Mary Brown; the other, of C. Bailey: the first of those acted without date, like
their former; the second of later stamp, not above Twelve Years standing.

As to the first, of M. Brown, The Relator alleges, She had been a Hearer of
the People called Quakers -- and coming to hear the Baptized People (as he
terms them) at Panton in Lincolnshire, after some time would be baptized
(that is dipped) with them; but upon her passage through the Ceremony of that
Watery Element, had some Conflicts of mind, and Disorder of Body; and after
Recovery was admitted into their select Assembly, and so continued whilst in
that Country; and upon her departure thence, recomended to their Brethren in
London; and whether she is yet among them or not, the Reporter knows not: this
is subscribed by an Eye and Ear Witness (as says the Pamphlet) named, Tho.
Grantham -- from Asbby juxta Partney, the 17th day of the 3d Month, 1672.

I cannot do the Truth and my self more Right, then to recommend the Reader to
the Anabaptist's Pamphlet, to his Tale at length, and if he can find a Bottom
therein, I Will count him Juditious, for my part I find none: But to show himself
a Preacher, has made five Observations upon this Relation, the latter as
ridiculous as the former impertinent, the Closure whereof is (to tell us) That
the Relation, at the request of God's People, was thought fit to be made
public, although the matter came to pass some time since -- This being the sum
of the Relation of our Doasting Adversaries, I shall, Remark in short.

1. That Mary Brown was no Quaker, neither is it so pretended. But 2. That upon
the Anabaptists Inquisitors examining, whether her Conscience would stretch to
the Length and Breadth of their Cistim of Faith and Doctrine, her Hesitation
was so considerable, that it discomposed both her Mind and Body: how little
this tends to the credit of their Inquisitor, or imports their Order meek,
gentle, and Christian-like, let the Juditious consider. 3. And thirdly, How
Uncharitably this Preacher reflects upon his old Member; nay, for ought he
knows yet amongst the Baptists here, to lay open her Weaknesses that time might
long since have buried in oblivion. But 4. Fourthly, Its most considerable to
observe, to what horrid Shifts these decaying Assemblies are put unto, in this
our present Age, that not only in their frequent Sermons and Discourses, but in
Print also, must bring forth such pitiful weak Covers as these, to mask and
blind the Simple and Honest-hearted from the embracing of that Truth which is
Everlasting, unto which God, in Despite of all their Opposition, from amongst
them daily calls many to bear witness against all their Beggarly Elements and
Rudiments, which have perished with the using.
The Author's second Story comes up fresh and new from Dover, June 10. 1672.
and that is of Charles Bailey, once a Quaker, his Actings there from the 13th to
the 22th of October. 1661. -- Its not my purpose to take the Burden of Charles
Bayly's Miscarriages upon me, or to enter a Controversy either in the behalf
of him, or his pretended Actions, wherewith he is charged; his Person, and
Actions (what ere they were when he apostatized and fell away from his
Obedience of that Eternal Truth he once professed, and for ought I know, in
measure lived in Obedience unto) being altogether to me unknown.

And if he has justly caused the Enemies of God and his Truth to Blaspheme, by
reason of his Unfaithfulness, and starting aside like a broken Bow, he shall
certainly bear his Burden, and Answer for his own Iniquity; but his
Miscarriages, Apestacy, and leaving the People of God called Quakers (which
from that time he did) shall be no more charged upon the Quakers, then the
Actions of Judas, Demas, A^nanias, etc. upon the Apostles and Followers of
Christ, or the Doctrine they lived in and professed. And this their Envious
Cavil is fully answered by -- Luke Howard of Dover, a Person well known there,
to those Contentious Anabaptists, that now so zealously rake up this Old Story
against us.

However, It may not here be unseasonable in this small Tract to inspect the
Letter from Dover, of June 10. 1672. with, or in which the Relation of C. B. is
sent, in order to publication in Print, see page 17, and 18. of their Libel;
and by this the Reader may know what spirit they are of, who thus Unreasonably
and Maliciously opppose us, in these following Considerations.

1. To have a Letter Printed, filled with Calumny and Slander, not only against
a single Person, but an entire Body, or Society of men, and not a Name
subscribed for the Writer seems very unreasonable, but denotes the Author's
shame.

2. Well then, since he denies us that common Civility, Let Us Query what his
Lines bespeak him, or rather what by them he would bespeak himself, and that
may appear in what he writes of the Narrative it self, page 18.

1. Says he, The Narrative is an exact Copy taken out of the Original, and was
written and signed by the several Persons, when these things were done in the
Prison.

And in the same page, says he, And when the Narrative was drawn, I showed it
to all the Witnesses that are now alive. Now to know by whether of these two
Paragraves of his he would be understood, were difficult to resolve; for he
pretends to draw one Narrative long after the other written and subscribed; and
certainly, had his former been fit for the Press, he might have printed it
without a new Draught, with the subscribed Names of the deceased Witnesses: and
omitting his own to his Letter, how like a Dark-Lanthorn Merchant he appears,
let his Brethren judge.

2. But further, Query his Reason for publishing his old Tale at this season,
and not before: his first Reason or Answer is, That he sent a Copy of to London
some time ago: What then? Was it Printed? No: But says he, Lately hearing of
that eminent Finger of God, about the Leprosy, it was desired that it might be
Printed with it: So he would make a subsequent accident Obstruction to a prior
Cause. O stupid Folly!

3. Our Libeller although he had so far made the Story public, as to send a
Copy thereof to London; yet would he again insinuate, that the reason why it
was not published sooner, was because he should seem to some as if he had
boasted, and fear of applause prevailed with him to forbear. O horrid
hypocrisy! O deceit in the abstract! shall Persons in their understanding
Account of this days publication, more then the fruit of Envy and Malice; and
thy reason for its being covered so long in Ashes, but a mere Lie? as thy
precedent words fally evidence against thee, and thy seeming voluntary
debacement: palpable hypocrisy! I must tell thee, thy Lines denote whose Child
thou art, if for ever shame cover thy name; and so I leave thee to return to
the Lincolnshire Progedy.

Its observable, That notwithstanding that pretended true Relation from
Lincolnshire etc. (backed with those senceless and contradictory Testimonies)
was fully answered, and returned upon the Forgers thereof, yet their Friends
and Abetters have insinuated to many their dis-satisfaction, for want of a
Testimony from the Inhabitants of those Parts, to prove the truth or falsity of
the Anabaptists words: Therefore its not unseasonablie now to publish also some
Certificates from the Inhabitants of Panton in Lincolnshire, and from others in
those Parts which may clear the Truth to the Enquiror, and stop the Mouth of
the Gainsayer; which take as follow.

1. From the Inhabitants of the Town of Panton in Lincolnshire.
THese are to certify all Persons that desire to know the Truth, That upon the
26th day of the Month called June 1672. Richard Anderson of the Town of Panton
in Lincolnshire, in the presence of above twenty of his Neighbors, Doctor
Lincoln Parson of the Parish being also present, did declare, That he never
was at a Quakers Meeting but once in his life time, and that was at an Assize
time, at the Castle of Lincoln, he did hear them declare about aquarter of an
hour; And says, That Ralph James was then with him; And further says, That he
never was a Quaker, nor owned by any of that People; for he says, they never
knew him; And further, did affirm, that he had no Child leprous; And that Child
the Baptists did say was leprous, and since dead, he showed us alive, and in
health; And the said Richard Anderson, and his Neighbors, did unanimously
affirm, That the Child had not any Leprosy, nor other distemper save only some
running sore, which was cured by direction from one called Mrs Bonner, so far
as they understand: The said Richard Anderson further affirming, That neither:
himself nor any of his family was troubled with any such painful distemper, as
the Baptists say they had: These things were not only affirmed by the man
himself, but also confirmed by the Inhabitors of the Town, whose names are
hereunto subscribed, Doctor Lincoln being also present with the said
Inhabitants, in the open street in Panton in Lincolnshire.

Inhabitants, William Dorrins, Robert Mynto, Henry Walch, John Emming, Robert
Drink, Richard Walesby, Richard Horton, Katharine Hall, Samuel Mathers, George
Anderson, James Hall, John Chapman.

Other Witnesses, then and there present: William Garland, Joseph Pope.
Augustine Smith, William Baldwin, Nathaniel Ball.

2. From a General Meeting of the People of God called Quakers, in the County
of Lincoln, the 26 day of the 4th Month, 1672.
WHereas a Report is gone out of this County from Ralph James, and other
Persons, which have always had a Prejudice against the Truth, and People of
God called Quakers; by which Report the Nation is abused, and those which are
over-credilous made to believe a Lie (viz.) That Richard Anderson of Panton was
a Quaker: These are therefore to certify, that the said Richard Anderson did
never frequent any of our Meetings, nor did he ever join with us in Worship,
nor was he ever owned by us, nor any of us; so that they have not any just
ground to call him a Quaker. And this Testimony we give forth to preserve the
Simple-hearted from being prejudiced against the Truth, for believing a Lie.
From our Quarterly Meeting, held at Lincoln, where some Friends from each
Meeting in that County were present, William Garland, Abraham Morris, William
Eberatt, Joseph Richardson, Augustine Smith, John Winklep, Samuel Hobman, John
Richardson, Thomas Summers, Richard Baxter, John Walcott, Thomas Lowter, John
Mills, Joseph Pope, Thomas Wrestle, William Ashby, William Hargate, James
Brown, William Boman, Robert Brown, Thomas Everitt, Richard Parnel, Joseph
Wilson.


And to take off that too frequent Objection, That we seem to condemn all for
the Miscarriage of some, it may not be unmeet to evince to the Reacer how far
John Green of Southwark was concerned in the publishing that late Narrative
from Lincolnshire, by such measure as may be taken from his own discourse with
several Persons about it; and far be it from us to wrong any, who in any
measure manifest their Clearness, whose desires are, That the Slanderer only
may bear the Weight of his own Just Reproof, which may appear by the
Attestation following.

Southwark, the 15th of the 5th Month, 1672.
John Green's Allegations concerning the Baptists late Narrative.
1. HE said, That he never did consent to the Publishing that Book. 2. That he
was no Witness in the Case; but that they have abused him. 3. He denies the
Book and Certificate, as being of their own making, and with what words they
pleased (that made it.) 4. And that he was questioned about it by the Church
(which he belongs unto) who also disowned the Narrative. 5. That he intends to
speak to his Friends, or Church he belongs unto, to publish a Testimony against
it. 6. And that the said Smith did publish the said Narrative for his own
Interest, although F. Smith considently denies this.
These Things John Green did signify at Thomas Padley's. House in Southwark;
in the presence of us, whose Names are hereunto subscribed.

Thomas Roberson, Thomas Briggs, Elliner Padley.
But a most grand Objection of out peevish Adversaries, against a late Answer
to their Narrative is, That in the Title Page thereof its said, THEIR JUGGLE
AND DECEIT, IN CLOTHING THEIR OWN MEMBER WITH THE NAME OF QVAKER; and that the
Insinuating, that Richard Anderson was a Member of theirs, is a Crimination to
Purpose, and a falling into the same excess of Mistake or Error, that we charge
them withal -- And if so, I must confess deserves double Condemnation.

This Objection was sufficiently cleared before, but inasmuch as they appear
yet dissatisfied.

I Answer and Argue no further then from their own Narrative, see page 8. of
their Pamplet: says the Author there.

1. R. A. came to our Meeting, to hear the Gospel preached, at Northwillingham.
And what was this, but an Hour, or a Day? Yea, of longer continuance. See
further in the same Page. 2. Says the Author, When he had been a Hearer for
some time, -- how long he says not. 3. So long it was, that the Relator
affirms, there he was Convinced. And was his bare Hearing, Continuance and
Convincement all the Tokens of his being one of their Members? Nay, further to
put all out of Question. 4. The Pastor of that Flock gives us this accouut in
his Narrative, That R. A. said, He did believe, that Baptism in Water was an
Ordinance of God; and that both Men and Women ought to be Baptized in Water.
The Cardinal Point of their Confession of Faith, and the Grand Distinction of
their Church Membership from the People of other Professions and Persuasions;
without which, there is no scaling the Walls, or entering the Bounds of their
Sanctuary.
If it be Objected, That after his Union in Faith and Doctrine with those
Anabaptists, his Belief was shaken by converse with the Quakers. Its owned that
he heard one in company with his Pastor Ralph James at Lincoln, but never
before, nor after, as appears, plentifully attested: and what Ground that is to
call him a Quaker, let any thing but Falsehood judge.

But that he was their Member afterward appears thus.

1. Upon his pretended Miscarriage these his Brethren neither deny him, nor
cast him out. 2. Upon his Trouble in Mind the Congregation seek their God for
him. 3. The Anabaptist Preacher is still his Confessor, and the Mediator to the
Brethren in his behalf. 4. Nay further, This Ralph James, and his Brethren, as
they vainly and falsely Boast, were the Healers of R. A. and his Family -- Now
where were the Quakers with him, that he should be called a Quaker, and not an
Anabaptist. 5. But to put this out of question, see the Letter dated April 27.
1672. sent to I know not whom, but subscribed, Your Unworthy Brother in the
Lord, Ralph James, pa. 7. says he, As for the man (that is R. A.) he never
went to the Quakers more, but came to our Meetings. Now whether the Author has
wronged them (in showing their Juggle and Deceit, in clothing their own Member
with the Name of Quaker) let the Juditious and Unprejudiced judge betwixt us.
The next thing that falls under Consideration, is a Postscript, and that so
full of Frivulous Fictions, and False Averments, and Allegations, that it may
aptly challenge for its Author, that creeping piece of Hypocrisy, for whom
that bundle of Falsehood and Deceit was Printed -- who tells his Courteous
Reader, That its scarce Credible, how several of the People called Quakers have
behaved themselves since the Printing of the Narrative. Well then, What Is their
Behavior, or Mis-behaviour, as this Postscriber would argue? He proceeds in
counting all (that is, the Narrative) false, both Root and Branch: What? a
Wonder and not to be credited; such stuff that Eight or Nine Years has run over
to bring out, and not to be questioned; to come from such an approved Author,
and not to be believed, its scarce credible to this Hypocritical Scribe, as he
would Pretend, although he well knows with what continued Solicitation he
procured it for the Press.

His next piece of Admiration is, That the Quakers should object against the
untimely Production of this strange Prodogy. As for their End, it is easily
calculated by such who have but only perused the History of their spirits, much
easier by those who have beheld the Meridian of their Cruelty: And though their
Sun be now so near set, they can insence others to that Cruelty which
Providence has incapacitated them to be direct Actors.

But for the timeing of their Prodogy in Print, our Antagonist he will Appologize,
averring, It was not the Intention of our Adversaries, to render us obnoctious
to the Government, or occasion new Bonds. And how does he this Work? He
imprecates God the Searcher of all Hearts, that he knows, that it was far from
being the End of Publication (thus nonsencically proceeding) that, Were not the
Truth of God prejudiced by silence, while their dangerous Principles seem as
from Heaven discountenanced, by the precedeing Narrative, which is judged by
many, A Sufficient Call for Publication. I shall wave to reflect upon the
Nonsense of his Paragrave, but collect his Reason, or what he intends by his
words, and shall answer briefly thus; Certainly were never men more palpably
given up to direct Falsehood; shall any man believe, that the Anabaptists Zeal
at this day out-strips what it was Seven, Eight or Nine Years ago? that a Story
for so many years together, not worthy a Press or a Sheet of Paper, should now
be trumped abroad, and with an Epethite no less then for the Truth of Christ.
Nay the Author adds, as a further Cause for present publication, That those in
Danger, or misled, may by God's Blessing be prevented or reclaimed. Now I Will
appeal to the Juditious Reader, Whether the raking up of an old Malicious
Story, full of Deceit and Falsehood, and the Printing of the same after Nine
Years expiration, although under the covert of so many spetious pretenses, as
for the sake of Christ's Truth, or reclaiming the Mis-guided, or as a Dicision
of Controversy, Strength to the weak Hands and feeble Knees, and many such
like strained Expressions, be not rather the product of that old spirit of
Hatred, Envy and Hypocrisy, then the Fruits of that Meek, Quiet and Charitable
Spirit of Jesus, which they would insinuate to the World they are led by. But
to close all, he would stop our Mouths with Railing, and falsely affirming, Our
Carriage in Words and Actions in Newgate and New-Prison in London, when
imprisoned with the Baptists, upon the late Act, etc. did equal this incentive
of theirs to Persecution: And in the same sentence (as if it were at the same
instance of Time and Place) alleges, That one Thomas Lawson in Discourse and
Print uttered many harsh words against Matthew Caffin (one of their Preachers.)
As to our first Charge, of our Carriage to our Fellow Prisoners; I question not
but that many of his own Brethren, or such who are called Baptists, will give
the Lie to the Libeller; for, certain I am, that at Newgate there was no such
Occasion given; and this Libeller might be ashamed to aver so notorious an
Untruth: As for any Difference with our Friends at New-Prison, I never heard of
any, and believe it a false Imposition. -- But to his Charge upon The. Lawson,
upon enquiry I heard, about Sixteen Years ago there was Disputes and Points of
Faith or Doctrine controverted, in Print, and otherwise, betwixt him and Matthew
Cassin -- But that there was any such Discourse or Writing of late years, or
about the time of the making the late Act against Conventicles, as this
creeping Imposer would insinuate, I absolutely deny as untrue; and had this
Detractor been so candid, as to have quoted the Book out of which he had pict
out so many black Epethites, or the time of its Imprinting, his own Reader, as
well as mine, might have made Applications of the first, according to due
demerit, and have given Judgment how suitable or unsuitable the latter was to
insert in this present Case of Controversy.

But to argue that it was of later date, and of but yesterday, and as if he had
said but little, he concludes, This is but a Tithe of what might be said of
their Books, Words and Carriages, even in the height of Persecution, etc.

I Answer, That if he can meet with a Reader so void of Reason, that can
neither distinguish 'twixt Day and Night, Light and Darkness, Right Hand from
the Left, he may probably find one so credulous as to believe him; but men of
the meanest capacity of Understanding may comprehend his frothy Discourse and
Rabble. But a Tithe of our Books, Words, Carriages in height of Persecution,
says he -- Whereas that Dirt thou have already cast, is it not upon thee? we
are clear of thy false Aspertions: What can those otherwise persuaded in
Matters of Religion, charge us withal, in our bearing the Spoiling of our
Goods, Beating and Imprisoning of our Persons, to bear a Faithful Testimony to
the Everlasting GOD and his Truth, who hitherto has preserved us? We appeal to
the Faithful Witness in the Consciences of all who have beheld our
Conversation. By what Words, Books, Writings or Actions did we ever, in time of
Persecution, or Liberty, insence the Magistrate against any, as you endeavor
to do now the Rod is off your Back? Be particular in this Point, and you shall
have an Answer.

And forbear thus to belch out your own Shame, and to be in time of Quietness
(as to outward opposition to you-wards) and in some measure to us also)
Incendiaries, and Publishers of those old silly Fables, and Idle Tales, that
grieve the Innocent amongst you, gratify the Profane abroad, and are an ill
savor in the Nostrils of all moderate Enquirers after Religion, who Doubtless
do expect at such a Time and Day as this, better Arguments for your, or against
our Persuasions in Faith and Doctrine, before they will either embrace yours,
or reject ours.

Its worthy Observation, That since the late Detection of their Lying Wonder,
and the Inhabitants of Panton their giving a Certificate of Richard Anderson
(the Anabaptists late Member) his denying his former Confessions to Ralph
James, and his Confederate Fraternity; that the Anabaptists in diverse Parts
have made no small Tumult, and Stir, to cover themselves from that Just Rebuke,
which their Malicious and impertinent piece of Folly and Madness has
consequently brought upon them.

But the most Remarkable Passage of their Stupidity is, That the Anabaptists in
Lincolnshire have pretended to Cross Examine and Confess their late Member
Richard Anderson; upon the stress of whose former Confessions they first
grounded their Prodigious Miracle, Of Curing a Leprous Family: And those his
later Confessions have they subscribed, and dispersed the several Copies, one
whereof bareth date, June 10. 1670. a second, June 15. 1673. a third, July 7.
1672. and the last, July 21. 1672. came to my hand; Its probable the wiser sort
of their Brethren here may prevent it from troubling the Press; if not, it will
serve for a plenary Testimony of our Charge against Ralph James, and the Forger
of that Pamphlet. And whether their late Copies be Printed or not, I think it
meet (for the sake of some) a little to examine how corresponding it is to
their Design and Enterpize.

To that end observe our Charge against them was in these Particulars.
First, Their falsely Insinuating, that Richard Anderson was a Quaker. Secondly,
That his Child was Leprous, or he, and the rest of his Family afflicted with
sore Pains, or bodily Distempers. Thirdly, Then we averred Richard Anderson to
be a Member of theirs before and after, yea, all the time of the pretended
acting of their piece of Pageantry. Fourthly, Their Deceit, in not giving the
World an Account of the Month or Year, wherein happened their piece of strange
Providence. Fifthly, Their Malice and Envy in publishing their Narrative at
this day, after eight or nine years past in silence. Sixthly, That
notwithstanding their bold Averment in the Front of their Libellous Pamphlet,
not one Eye or Ear Witness has been produced, but barely the Weak or Knavish
Confession of their own Member.
The Pains of this summary Repetition is, for the better satisfaction of such
to whose hands Ralph James, and his Fellows, have conveyed the late Confessions
of that poor Wretch, which they stretch as on Tenters, to screen their
Serpentine Designs and Lying Insinuations, of which I neither desire nor need a
greater Proof, then the Lines they have given forth, and subscribed: Therefore
examine, and see whether by all their late Pain, they have extorted more from
the weak man, then was affirmed by us, or granted and returned upon the first
Relators and Forgers of the Story.

The Substance of what these Inquisitors Confessed the poor man into, is,
First, June 10. 1670. That he had Discoursed twenty times with R. James about
Religion, and that he pronounced James a Leper; that he had one Child broke out
in Sores. All this was granted and proved by us to their hands.

Secondly, The second Confession June 15. 1671. 1. generally, then 2.
particularly; 1. generally say the Confessors, He owned the Narrative to be
true, as to the substance -- But what is it in Circumstance? this observe, was
to their Mr. Ralph James himself.

1. His Confessors say, R. A. owned, that he confessed the Truth of the
Narrative at Rasin Fair, September 14, 1669. -- But not a word whether he
confessed the Narrative to be true. 2. He confessed, He heard the Quakers at
Lincoln within the Prison -- an Hour -- which was Three Quarters more then the
poor man gave under his hand; at which the Confessors are ready to quarrel. 3.
His Confessors say, That contrary to what he had given under his hand, he said,
He had discourse with the People called Quakers Forty Times about their
Principles; but whom they were, or where they were, not a word: its too
suspicious the Confessors have here abused the Man -- for doubless, had he
acknowledged but half so many times, they would have extorted the Persons Names
he calls Quakers, and that with no small applause. 4. His Confessors say, He
knew not (that is remembered) what was in the Paper he set his hand to; truly
very probable -- but not a word that the Answer to the Narrative had any wise
abused or wronged him, in mis-citing the Letter. 5. His Confessors say, That he
owned he pronounced R. James a Leper, and after desired his Prayers; and that
he owned, that he had confessed himself well again -- but that he was really
so, not one word.
Thirdly. The third Matter is of July 7. 1672. and this is, That Edward Parish
his wife desired Christopher Foster, one of the Confessors, to meddle no more
with the Matter: He might have done well to have interpreted his meaning.

Fourthly, The Confession of July 21. 1672. (after the impertinent circumstance
of the Journey to Panton, and their Hosts acquainting them of the People called
Quakers having been there) the Confessors say, That R. A. confessed to the
substance of the Narrative; but what they call the Substance, say nothing --
and conclude, That he confessed, that he looked upon the People called Quakers,
as eminently owned of God as Moses was: This is the substance of his
Confession; and truly had the Devil confessed, that he Quakers were God's
People, it had no more invalidated them, then it did Christ, when the Devil
said, Thou art the Son of the Living God.

Where is now these Imposters Proof, that the poor man was a Quaker? What, not
such a Confession, notwithstanding their indefatigable pains with him.

Where is the Leprous Child, the Bodily Diseased Family, and the Proof of the
Child dead, as was falsely affirmed in their Narrative?

Why have we not in, the Year of this prodigious Miracle? And the Eye and Ear
Witnesses of this eminent Finger of God, as they termed it, and the dicision of
the great Controversy, as ye Foolishly and Vain-gloriously boasted?

Remember ye Anabaptists the Wise-mans words, viz. Who so boasts himself of a
false Gift, is like Clouds and Wind without Rain -- Had it not been far better,
and more for the Reputation of R. James of Lincolnshire, and Richard Hobbs of
Dover, to have kept their pieces of Forgery at Home, then thus to have been
Heralds of their own Ignominy and Reproach: I appeal to the Sober-minded, of
what Persuasion soever -- What could any Moderate Man have judged of their
Labors, to bring out such untimely Births? if they had been really true, and
Reflective on the People called Quakers; but that it was the Fruit of that old
spirit of Envy, Hatred and Malice, cloak'd over their Mask of Profession, --
How much more then shall they undergo a Just Reproof from the Sober amongst
themselves, that without Cause have been such zealous Incendiaries to Strife,
and smitten with the Fist of Wickedness without Cause. So to the Wise-mans
words I leave them, who says, He that bideth Hatred with Lying Lips, and he
that utters a Slander, is a Fool.

THE END.

