Rules and Qualifications, to be observed in the Admission of CHILDREN into
CHRIST-HOSPITAL this Year, 1683/4.
I. THAT no Child be taken in, but such as are the Children of Freemen of this
City.

II. That no Child be taken in, under the Age of Seven Years.

III. That no Children be taken in, but such as are Orphans, wanting either
Father, or Mother, or both.

IV. That none be taken in that are Foundlings, or that are maintained at the
Parish Charge.

V. That none be taken in that are Lame, Crooked, or Deformed, nor that have
any Infectious Disease, as the Leprosy, Scald-head, Itch, Scab, or that have
the Evil or Rupture.

VI. That none be admitted, but such as are without any probable means of being
provided for other ways, nor without a due Certificate from the Minister,
Churchwardens, and three or four of the principal Inhabitants of the Parish
from whence such Children came, certifying of the Poverty and Inability of the
Parent living, (if any be living) to maintain and provide for such Children,
and the true Age of the said Child: And engaging to discharge the Hospital of
them before or after the Age of Fifteen Years, if a Boy; and before and after
the Age of Fourteen Years, if a Girl; which shall be left to the Governors
pleasure to do, both by the Parent if any, and Minister and Churchwardens
aforesaid; so that it shall be wholly in the Power of the Hospital, to dispose
of such Children, or to return them to the Parent or Parish, as aforesaid, as
to the Hospital shall seem good.

VII. That no Children be taken in that has a Brother or Sister admitted into
the Charge of the Hospital.

Lastly, To the end, no Children may be admitted contrary to the rules
abovesaid, when the General Court shall direct the taking in of any Children;
before such Children be admitted, they shall be presented to a Committee,
consisting of the President, Treasurer, the Almoners, Renters, Scruitenors, and
Auditors, and all other Governors to be Summoned at the first time, and so to
Adjourn from time to time; and that they or any Thirteen or more of them,
whereof the President or Treasurer, for the time being, to be one, who shall
strictly examine, touching the Age, Birth, and Quality of such Children, and of
the Truth of such Certificate; and when the Committee shall find cause, they
shall forbid or suspend the taking in of any Child or Children presented, until
they receive full satisfaction, that such Child or Children is duly qualified,
according to the Rules abovementioned.

That such Child or Children as shall be presented to be admitted, in pursuance
of the Will of any Benefactor, shall be examined by the said Committee, who are
to take care, that such Child or Children be qualified according to the Wills
of the Donors or Benefactors, (as near as may consist with such Wills) agreeing
to the Qualifications above.


