A REPLY TO THE ANSWER of ANONYMVS TO Doctor Gauden's ANALYSIS of the Sense of
the Covenant: And under that, to a later TRACT OF ONE Mr Zach. Crofton Of the
same Fraternity with him.

By John Rowland Oxoniensis, CCC. Rector of Footscray in Kent.

Ficta in natura suam redeunt. LONDON: Printed for T. J. and are to be sold at
Westminster Hall, and the Royal Exchange. 1660.

A REPLY to Anonymus his ANSWER to Dr. Gaudens Analysis, Of the Sense of the
Covenant.
I Met by accident with a Pamphlet against Doctor Gauden's Analysis of the true
sense of the Covenant, and I know there are enough abler than my self to reply
to it, if the Learned Doctor wanted any help here, as he does not, and I am
unwilling the Truth should suffer any prejudice by my defects; yet I think my
self something concerned in it as a Clergyman, and Lover of the Truth;
wherefore craving leave of the Reverend Doctor, and the candid interpretation
of the Reader, I begin with the Title, which runs thus:

The Anatomy of Doctor Gauden's idolized Nonsense and Blasphemy in his
pretended Analysis, etc. of that sacred Covenant, etc.

I have examined the Doctors words, as I find them upon this man's credit, as
he lays them down (for I have no other Books before me than his I undertook to
Answer) and I can find nothing of the Doctors but solid Reason, good
Authority, and sound Divinity, neither Nonsense nor Blasphemy, unless he will
falsely charge that upon the Doctor, which may more truly be imputed to himself;
idolizing a Covenant (which many wise and godly men call a cursed Covenant, and
the word will beat it) with a sacred Epithet. The Libeller must pass for
Anonymus, because he has not vouchsafed to subscribe his Name. I wish he were
ashamed of his Cause: but I think rather it is the old Presbyterian trick, to
make men believe he is afraid of persecution. But mark his words.

The Reader must know that the late Long-Parliament, (I mean both the Honorable
Houses) drew up, took and Ordered others to take two several Covenants in one
year.

A fruitful Year of Covenants! when you name the Long-Parliament, you do well
to say you mean the two Honorable Houses; for all the world knows the two
Honorable Houses will not own all things done by a prevailing Faction in the
late long Parliament. How many of the two Houses took both those Covenants, I
cannot tell; I am persuaded a great part of them never took them both, but to
free themselves, left their places in Parliament; and of those that did take
them, hundreds its likely have repented for it since, and were it to be done
again, they would never take them, because something contained in them was
unlawful; and besides that, they wanted the Kings confirmation.

Two several Covenants.

I have not opportunity to compare them together how several or differing they
were, it may be they were contrary, or rather contradictory one to the other;
for such Contrivers seldom continue long in the same mind, knowing not well
what they would have. Two in one year, the first June 1643. the second
September 11 the same year. Count the months, and it is not much above a
quarter of a year: they grew apace, and things that are good, seldom grow so
fast, which made men shrewdly to suspect the goodness of them. Now you must
take notice, that it is only the last (the far better of the two) which this
Master of words has opposed, etc. His idle Jests against the learned Doctor
are not worth taking notice of, and therefore I let them pass: But for his
Covenants, I believe the first was not very good, being like the point of the
weapon that makes the entrance, or the sting of a serpent by which the poison
is first conveyed; yet if there were any barrel better herring, I think that
was the best, because it was the first; for mischief still increases from bad
to worse, and nemo repent fit turpissimus. The first Covenant was pressed upon
the people with as much violence as might be, that who ever would not take it,
should bear no Office in Church or Commonweal, by reason of the second tail
that was to follow it: Or rather the two Covenants may be compared to the
Serpent Amphisbaenae with two heads. What was the meaning of that, they can
best interpret that gave it forth, by menacing those that refused it. For when
King Charles the I desired the Earl of Straffords life to be spared, and he
should bear no Office in Church nor State, they replied, He that was not fit
for some Office, was not fit to live: and for this, and some other reasons, I
thank God I had the grace to refuse them all.

Next he quibbles about the Doctors calling his Analysis, The loosing of St.
Peter's bonds. Because he does not find St. Peter's name in the Text quoted,
Acts 16.25. but Acts the 12. A most ridiculous Cavil, as if a man might not
lawfully quote two places of Scripture to the same purpose, the one to fortify
and expound the other, but it must be presently Nonsense and Blasphemy, as
this Libeller will have it to be: he keeps a fearful clutter about it, because
he cannot find out the reason of this Inscription, The loosing of St. Peter's
bonds: but to put him out of his passion, and to serve him with my best
conjecture. The learned Doctor has qualified the harshness of the Covenant, by
giving to it the softest and most sober sense that it is capable of, and it is
possible that the Doctor himself, through humane frailty, in that sober sense
he expounds it, took it so; but finding it for all this smoothing of it over,
to be too hard of digestion, he does in my judgment very well to follow the
Command of our blessed Savior to Saint Peter, Luke 22.23, And thou being
converted, strengthen thy brethren; and therefore he calls his Analysis, The
loosing of St. Peter's bonds. He is very angry because the Doctor will not be
one of the rigid Presbyters, that will hold communion with none but such as are
of their own opinion; and therefore accuses him falsely for upholding communion
with Popery, by reason of these words he alleges, that the Doctor says, He
desires to hold not only all inward, but all actual communion in all
Doctrines and Duties of Faith and Worship to the Word of God, with the Church
of Rome. If this be not well spoken, I wonder what one can say to please him!
He had little cause to fear the Doctor would turn Roman Catholic, who was so
much offended with some enormities he had formerly taken notice of in Episcopal
Government; and being as it appears by his Analysis, a charitable man, and of a
tender conscience, was willing to comply with all Christians in Worship
agreeable to the Word of God; And this Anonymus deserves for his uncharitable
censure, and so frequently scoffing at the Doctors sighs and tears, to be
severely censured himself, who loves to maintain divisions in the Church of
God, and will not, as it seems by him, hold communion with any but such as are
of their Covenant.

Whose bonds were then loosed? The bonds of Goal-birds, thieves, and perhaps
murderers, and other rogues and malefactors, for they are the usual guests in
such places, if any such have taken the Solemn League and Covenant, etc.

I know none that were more fit to take it than such, and doubtless not a few
of them did take it, to bolster them up in their villainy; they found favor,
when others that had not taken it, suffered for smaller matters. But who does
he call Goal-birds? etc. He cannot be ignorant that in the times that St.
Peter, and St. Paul and Silas were cast in prison, nay our blessed Savior
himself, that thieves and murderers were often let go free, the best
Christians were the ordinary Goal-birds: And was it not so, when your Covenant
was in force? were not the best of the Nobility and Gentry, the gravest and
most pious Fathers of the Church, and the most learned and Orthodox Divines
plundered, sequestered, and cast into prison by your Covenanters? deny it if you
can. It Is true, when Godly Kings ruled over us, the case was far otherwise; and
we doubt not when the Land is once well rid of your Covenant, but that those
who do well, shall live peaceably under His Sacred Majesty that now is, (whom
God prosper and preserve) and that none but such as ought to be put into
prisons, and such as are oriminal, shall be the common guests in such places,
as they were formerly.

He promises to use all brevity in his Reply, and for my part I shall do so
too, being not willing to bestow much time, or to spend ink and paper upon such
a Scribler as he is.

I. Proposition.
The Doctor himself does admit the Covenant to be in some sense lawful and good.

2. Here is evidence enough against the Doctor, that the Covenant is lawful and
good, or how else could he give a sober sense of it?

Men that are ready to sink, will lay hold of any thing to save themselves: You
may see an example of it, 1 Reg. 20.33. Now the man did diligently observe
whether any thing would come from him, and did hastily catch at it: And they
said, Thy Brother Benhadad: This is mere sophistry to conclude a dicto secundum
quid ad dictum simpliciter. The Doctor does admit the Covenant in some sense to
be lawful and good; it seems it has many senses, and I think so too, that it
was an equivocal Compact; but in what it may be admitted to be lawful and good,
I consess I could never yet understand, for the best you can make of it, it is
no better but an invention of factious Novelists, contrary to the rule of all
Antiquity, to subvert and cast down an ancient, primitive Apostolical
Government by Bishops, and to set up a new fangled upstart Presbytery in the
room thereof, which has strangely bewitched ignorant and illiterate men taken
with novelties: and I have heard how that Philip Earl of Pembroke fell in love
with it, yet being asked what Classical was? He said, Presbyterial: and what
was Presbyterial but Synodical? a man doubtless of a strong faith to believe as
the Church believes.

3. He quotes the Doctors words, That he believes few took it in any sense
against primitive, reformed, regular Episcopacy, etc. as the reverend Primate
of Armagh proposed in his Reduction of Episcopacy, and hence he infers, If this
Reduction be necessary, the Government cannot be unlawful, but good.

England God be praised, has yet store of able Divines to defend Episcopacy,
as it was first regulated by the Apostles, by Scripture, Fathers, Councels, and
Reason, against all the Adversaries of it; who pretending some Errors in it,
and inveighing against personal faults of some Bishops, would fain extirpate
the frame of primitive Ecclesiastical Government, as it was here established by
Edw. 6. Qu. Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles, of blessed memories, and
they that do it, we have reason to believe would do it, to accomplish some
sinister end of their own, to revenge private injuries they suppose they
underwent, or for some expectations which it may be they deserved not, which
they think they lost by the Bisliops: for it can be nothing else but malice in
the more learned Presbyters, and delusion in those that are of weaker
judgments, to oppose a received Truth for sixteen hundred years and upward, in
continuance whereof the Church of England has been so happy, to the amazement
and envy of all other National Churches, under the most pious Kings and Queens
this Land ever bred; and they that labor to dissolve this form, must condemn
all our best Princes of ignorance and superstition, and our greatest and
learned Bishops and Ministers (whom the world admired for learning and piety)
of all the faults they would fain charge this Government with, and must extol
their own Wisdom and Zeal before theirs, under a notion of new Lights and
further Revelation. I have not seen the Reverend Primate of Armaghs Reduction,
yet I have reason to believe that the learned Primate did not attempt to divest
himself of his honors and preferments in the Church (you did that for him, and
for the rest of the Bishops and eminent Divines) but held it fit that Bishops
should keep a nearer conjunction with Presbytery, than they have done of late
years; and in that respect I know none of the Clergy that are against it, but
hold it very fit, and necessary that it should be so observed.

The Doctor had reckoned up some evils, defects, and dangers incident to
Episcopacy; as Pride, Ambition, etc. Is not (says he) all this enough, to
prove from his own pen, that such a Covenant pre-extirpating such Episcopacy,
is lawful and good?

The learned Doctor Gauden, unwilling to break the bonds of peace and unity, if
it were possible to keep them, explained their Covenant in the calmest sense,
to the supporting of moderate Episcopacy: But this Anonymus will not away with
any qualisication, it must sound of nothing but extirpation of Episcopal
Government; and to speak plainly, I dare say that was the true inrent of it,
and the Doctor is mistaken, to think it will admit of any sober construction;
for it was doubtless another Trojan horse, devised by the Politic Sinons of
the latter Age, full of armed men, and when the walls of Episcopacy were broken
down, to let it in, it had doubtless proved, if God had not been more merciful
to us, the utter ruin of Monarchy and Episcopacy, and overthrown at once both
King, Church, and State; for though there were many necessary and pious things
couched in it, yet I know not any one of them that they have kept sincerely,
but the rooting out of Episcopacy; nay, they rather choose to break all the
rest, that they might fully reak their spleen to abollish that.

II. Proposition.
Herein all sober Christians who understand themselves, agree with him.

1. He after his scurrilous manner falls upon a discreet Gentleman Sir L. B.
(as appears by that prudent saying of his to the Doctor) That many sober and
honest men are by their once taking the Covenant, so scared from all complyings
with any Church Government under any name of Bishops, or notion of Episcopacy,
never so reformed and regulated, that they fear by looking back to the
primitive, catholic, and universal Government of this and all other ancient
Churches, to be turned into pillars of Apostasy, as Lots wife was into a pillar
of salt.

And can you deny this to be true? Many honest men who had been sworn to the
King, could at first hardly be charmed by you to accept of your enchanted
Covenant, and they strained as much to swallow it down, as I have seen some do
at a Pill, who never took any before. Was it not so with many tender
conscienc'd men, you had much ado to bring them to it, but you dealt with them
as Farriers do with their horses, to put it down their throats with a horn, but
when they had been caught by you, as if they had sworn by the Stygian-lake, or
drank of the Lethean Cup, they forgot all Allegiance to the King, and fell down
fast bound hand and foot with the fetters of your Covenant: nay, you still go
on to persuade them, as you seem to believe your self, that it is Apostasy to
depart from it, and that there is no remission for those that shall break it,
but they must perish everlastingly; yet there were multitudes that cast off the
Covenant as a thing of no value, after they had been accustomed by you to
several Covenants, New Engagements, Negative Oaths, and what not? and could
easily take as many of them as you will, without any remorse of conscience at
all.

2. He enlarges his second point against the Doctor, who said that the
admitting of some Church Government under the name of Bishops reformed and
regulated, according to the primitive, Catholic, and Apostolic Institution,
etc. is not against, but very consistent, etc. with the Solemn League and
Covenant, and the true intention of it, etc. allowable by God, and all good men
that rightly understand themselves, who thus far concur with the Doctor.

To this he opposes the second Article of the Covenant, which he says runs
thus: You shall sincerely, really, and constantly (through the grace of God)
endeavor the extirpation of Popery and Prelacy, that is, Church Government by
Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellers and Commissaries, their Deans, Deans
and Chapters, Archdeacons, and other depending on that Hierarchy; superstition,
heresy, schism, profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found contrary to sound
Doctrine, etc. this expressly relates to the Prelacy or Episcopacy then in
being, or in use in England, which was far from apostolic and primitive, etc.
as the Dr. has confessed, etc. if there be any other Episcopacy truly
apostolic and primitive, free from all these evils, and agreeable to sound
doctrine, etc. it is far from the sense of this Covenant to extirpate it, that
it plainly includes a binding of all Covenanters to promote it. The Episcopacy
you would promote, is Presbytery: is that truly Apostolic, and free from all
those evils? may not a Presbyter lord it as much in his Parish, as a Bishop in
his Diocese? may not as much pride be coucht under a Presbyterian Cloak, as
under a Bishops Rocket? examine your selves.

The Doctor, and all others that would bring these men to their right
understanding, do but labor in vain, and may as well wash the Blackmoor white.
I always thought they stood more in need of Hellebore to purge their brains,
than of reason to convince them. Where the Be gathers honey, they Spider-like
suck venom: they are incorrigble, and it is not convenient for sober
honest-minded men to go about to convert them; every man may do well to spare
his pains to undertake to persuade them to come home to their due obedience.
Solomon said right, Proverbs 27.22. Though thou should bray a fool in a
mortar among wheat with a pestel, yet will not his foolishness depart from him.
But as the Romans gave them over with a conclamatum est, who did not revive in
seven days, we may rather despair of these men's return, who have had almost
thrice seven years to understand themselves better, and yet continue their
former obstinacy; and become more obdurate and hardened in their opinions by any
yieldings or concessions that are made to them by the Episcopal party. Henry
the Fourth of France, whom most knew to be a Protestant in his heart, (and I
wish the Presbyters were but so well opinionated of Episcopacy, as he was of
the Reformed Churches) called an Assembly of Protestants and Papists, to see if
he could make some reconcilement between them. He propounded a question to the
Protestants, whether a Papist might be saved? They in their judgment of
charity said, that he might. Then he demanded of the Papists, whether a
Protestant might be saved? They in their rigid and uncharitable opinion
replied, A Papist might but a Protestant might not. His determination was, Let
me have no more Religions within my Dominions than that wherein all Christians
may be saved. The Popish Priests and Jesuits went away triumphing, as if they
had got the day; and so do the Presbyters, by reason of the Doctors sober sense
of the Covenant, as if they had wan the Goal, whereas all discreet men must
confess it is more his Christian charity, than their desert.

He repeats what the Doctor said of Mr. Marshal and others, (who had a great
hand in pennning and promoting the Covenant, (and they owned it to some foreign
Divines, that the Covenant was levelled at the (despoticum Tyranicum Regimen)
mis-government, not the Government by Episcopacy: I am of opinion that Mr.
Marshal that penned and promoted the Covenant, Badgerlike kept one hole open
for himself to pass forth at; this exposition of it was but a reserve for him;
and its probable he would never have said so much against Bishops, if he might
have been one, or rather the chief amongst them: But how moderate and meek a
Bishop he would have been, and free from tyranny over his brethren, let those
that have seen his proceedings all these turbulent times, judge.

In the next place, he undertakes to disprove what Dr. Gauden says in these
words, That it was the sense of those, who with himself, had as much right to
sit among them (that is, in the Assembly) I know not whether this gloss be true
or not, as any others; but were not permitted either by popular Faction or
cumults, or by other shufflings and reasons of State, who took care to exclude
all the excellent Bishops of the Church, and the most able Episcopal Divines,
etc.

He that can have a face of brass to deny this, and to call it a very great
slander, which almost every man can justify, should be confuted as he that
denies a God, or snow to be white. Argumento baculino non Aristotelico. It
would be too tedious for me to traverse the whole matter from the beginning, I
shall therefore give you but one example for all, the proceedings being all
alike. I pray what was the reason that the reverend Prelare John Williams Lord
Bishop of Lincoln, with as many Bishops as durst join with him, at least twelve
in number, drew up a Solemn Protestation against the Violence that was offered
to those eminent Clergymen that were called by His Majesty's Writ to serve in
the Upper-House, who durst not come thither for fear of being murdered by
popular tumults raised against them?

He says, The Doctor was not chosen.

What right Doctor Gauden had to sit there by Election, I am not able to say,
but this I may say, that he and such well-affected persons to the Government of
the Church of England, had more right to sit there than many that did, who sat
only to stir up Contentions in Church and State, to uphold Factions, and
overthrow the best Governments formerly settled by the Laws of the Land, such as
no other part of the world is able to parallel: had he not reason then (taking
the Denomination synechdochically, from the greater and not the better part,
who were but few in number in respect of the other) to call it a Sequatious
Assembly, A grand Inquest, etc. as you say. And had he not cause enough to
desire to sit there, that he might by his judicious advice, help those that
were too few to stop the fury of the Presbyterians against the Bishops?

He quarrels with him, about being Parson of the Deanery of Bocking in Essex,
worth 4, or 500 pound per Annum, who to his shame, and little honor to those
employed him, is non resident from it, and preaches at the Temple.

If his Parsonage had been better worth (though I can hardly believe you that
it is worth so much) it is like he well deserved it, for those who preach at
the Temple, must be men of more then ordinary gifts: it is not fit for such who
have but mean parts, to attempt to teach the learned Judges and Lawyers of the
Land, who know as much as most men can instruct them: But for Essex was chosen
Mr. Stephen Marshal of Finchingfield. I have heard that Finchingfield is a
great Benefice, and I cannot tell whether it be not as good as Bocking. But why
might not Doctor Gauden as well be non-resident as Mr. Stephen Marshal, and
preach in London, and was so long absent from his Parish, that they petitioned
the Parliament against him, that he might either live there with them, or leave
them to choose another; But they could get no other answer from the Parliament,
but they had left him to his choice; and had the times continued, he would have
stayed upon that choice, for ought I know, until the day of his death.

What you say of D. B. his second Edition of the Tract of Sacrilege, which you
think cannot be answered; I say, it is not my business now to reply to it, but
I believe that if Doctor Gauden has promised to confute it, he will be no
worse than his word.

2. Others having right to sit, were not admitted by Popular Faction, etc.

Is a most gross and malicious untruth: For amongst those were chosen, and
summoned to fit in that Assembly, what say you to Dr. Richard Love? nay what
say you to Mr. Christopher Love, I think he sat in the Assembly too, who
suffered him to be beheaded at Tower Hill, for endeavoring to return to his
Loyalty? Dr. Ralph Browning Bishop of Exeter, Dr. Samuel Ward, Dr. John Harris,
Dr. Robert Saunderson, Mr. Robert Cross, James Archbishop of Armagh, Dr.
Matthias Styles, Dr. Featley, Dr. Christopher Pashly, Dr. John Hacket, Dr.
Thomas Westfield, Bishop of Bristol, Dr. Henry Hammon, Dr. Richard Oldsworth,
and many more. I suppose you named almost all that were worth naming, to give a
handsome luster to the Assembly, and indeed there is scarce one of those
recorded here, but was worth your whole Assembly besides. I would you had set
down a Catalogue of the rest, I think you are ashamed of it; but you had enough
to outvote them, and they were meetly brought thither to serve your turns, or
else they should have been laid aside, as they were soon after. Yet he makes a
confusion in setting down their names, as if there were no priority and order
to be taken notice of; then he demands, Where can you pick out three Bishops
more excellent for learning and piety, or other Episcopal Divines more able? He
is such a Sophister in this way of Questions, that no man can give any certain
Answer: he says those fourteen were chosen and summoned, but whether they all
sat there, he says not: and for their learning, piety and abilities, his
words seem to employ something compared amongst themselves, but yet relating to
the Presbyterial Divines, they were not to be compared with them.

Now he has another frolic to save himself that he be not taken in a lie; For
of 121 Divines chosen to sit, twenty four never appeared. And were none of
those you speak of before, to be reckoned amongst those twenty four? it is
certain if some of them did appear, they durst not appear often; there were
enough of them in the first Catalogue to have defended Episcopacy, if they
might have had liberty, against all the Presbyterians in the world. It should
seem their Arguments wrought so estectually with Mr. Herbert Palmer, that he
protested against Extirpation of primitive Episcopacy: and Doctor Burges was
suspended from sitting there by the House of Commons, for declaring and
protesting against the first Draught of the Covenant brought into the Assembly;
for that, amongst other things, there was required an Extirpation of Prelacy
without limitation.

I would fain know, to what end men late there in the Assembly? was it to do
drudgery for the House of Commons, that they must not vote freely according to
their conscience, but they must be suspended for sitting there. According to
this rule, so many carved images might have made up an Assembly of able
Divines, if Albertus Magnus might have sitted them to be in a possibility to
Vote as the Parliament would have them: but I doubt you have injured the House
of Commons, to charge them with such an absurdity; and if it be true as you
say, you might have done well to conceal it now for both your reputations.

As for these that came not, who excluded or detered them? they were all
summoned as appears by the Books of the Assembly; who hindered them? was it not
either because they liked not the Election, or the persons chosen to sit with
them? or that being for the late King, durst not sit, either for fear of
molestation by the Parlinment, or displeasure of the King.

Who can desire more than this man grants? magna est veritas and pravalebit:
he confesses that they were hindered and scared by the Parliament, and he
knows what popular Tumults waited upon them then, being ready at their beck to
ruin, if need were, all that did not run the same risque with them.

For the manner of Election, it was no other for his end (although more solemn
and warrantable) then antecedanious choice, etc.

If you count canvassing and making of parties, and all sinister ways used to
bring things about, be more solemn and warrantable, then when every man is left
to his liberty, to act according to his conscience, then you are right.

For the persons chosen to sit with them, they were all of them reputed to be
able and pious, so far beyond many that sat in the usual Convocations: were
they all reputed to be so? by whom? wherein sometimes Laymen (as Chancellors
and Registers) were admitted.

I suppose Chancellors and Registers were admitted, that if need were, they
might resolve such questions as should arise belonging to the Canon Law, and
other things depending upon their places, that Divines were not bound not
indeed could without diverting of their studies of Divinity, take so full
cognizance of: whether that were the cause that some Members of both Hereses
sat in the last Assembly, or not rather to carry on what the design in hand
was with a stronger hand, I will not undertake to resolve.

As for any fear or trouble from the Parliament, or of the displeasure of his
then Majesty, it was but a Pannick fear without ground; for being called by the
Parliament, the Parliament was bound to pretect them: you said enough before,
and durst not sit for fear of molestation by the Parliament, and is it now come
to be but a pannick fear without ground, and the reason why it is so, is,
because being called by the Parliament, the Parliament was bound to protect
them.

In right reason it should be so, nor will I be so hard to accuse the
Parliament, or to censure what they do, whether it be just, or no, some were so
confident to affirm at the beginning of the Long-Parliament, that a Parliament
can do no injustice. The Lawyers say indeed the King cannot, but whether they
will say the same of the Parliament, I am not assured; but we will let that
pass, and speak of Councels that have been held as free from error as a
Parliament can be, yet you know that John Hu^^, and Jerome of Prague were
summoned to the Council, and had their protections from that Council which
summoned them, yet were they burnt for Heretics when came there.

Yea, had they not been so chosen, but continued quiet, sober, and peaceable,
they needed not to fear the Parliament, witness that quiet, sober, prudent
Doctor Juxon Bishop of London, who lived quietly, and without all danger of
violence or imprisonment in the Parliaments Quarters, yet was he a man known to
be firm to the King in the greatest divisions, etc.

We all grant that Doctor Juxon Lord Bishop of London is very quiet, sober,
prudent man, and of singular parts; he was so prudent to preserve his own
quiet, that he was content (as Naturalists write of the Bever, who knows
wherefore, he is hunted) to leave all he had for a prey to you; and it is
probable many others might have done, and did so too, yet not all; for there
was a more vigilant eye upon some men, whom you found to be likely not long to
endure your tyranny, unless you had them fast locked within your prison Walls.
Were that reverend Prelate to answer you now, I think he would give you but
small thanks for the liberty he enjoyed in the Parliaments Quarters.

He adds, That the King was not displeased with the Bishop of London's abode
here, and therefore there could be as ltttle fear of the Kings displeasure,
etc. It is true, the Bishop of London never sat in the Assembly, because not
chosen a Member of it; yet the Prince Elector Palatine sat there without
offense to His Majesty; and albeit His Ma esty first disliked the Calling and
Sitting of that Assembly, yet afterward he liked it, and approved of what they
had done, etc.

It is evident enough that you cared not much for the Kings displeasure, and
therefore he was as good to let you do what you pleased, for he could not help
himself; what you were resolved to do, you would do without him, yet for
fashion sake, and to delude the people, you would ask his consent in the most
humble way of petitioning that might be, We your Majesty's most humble and
obedient subjects. As for the Lord Bishop of London's not being chosen, and
therefore not sitting there, it had been more trouble for him, if he had, for
should he have offered to cross your faction, I scarce believe he should have
escaped imprisonment, or lived so quietly in the Parliaments Quarters, as you
say he did; but the Prince Elector Palatine sat there: he did your Assembly a
great deal of honor, but what honor he got by it himself, I know not: If Prince
Robert and Prince Maurice might have been admitted to sit there too, they would
doubtless have given you great thanks for it; and they were ever ready and
willing to have waired upon you, to have guarded you from all popular tumults;
but you thought you were safer without them.

III. Proposit on.
That notwithstanding all that he had spoken touching the sense of the
Covenant, and so great a Concurence in it, he endeavoreth to vilify, make
odious, and destroy the Covenant it self, as his main design.

You say he calls his answers oblique, and that they are so indeed. As oblique
as they are they fall directly upon you; yet sometimes a slanting blow may do
as much effect, as if it were downright. He boasts, that he can shrewdly
batter the Covenant by urging the defectiveness and invalidity of it to bind
either in Conscience, or in any Judicatory, because without the Kings consent,
for it binds no more then the vow of a servant, son, daughter, or wife could
bind them without, yea against the declared consent of their master, father,
husband under whose protection they were.

And is not his Battering-ram as you call it, able to break your Covenant in
pieces? is not this good Scripture that he quoted for it, Numb. 30.2. how does
that make against him? you say you shall demonstrate that after, but I know not
when that after will be; mean while take notice that his instances of sons and
servants, is a Tale of a Tubbe, there is no such thing.

Not in express words you will say: are not consequences drawn immediately from
Scripture of any force with you? but presently it is a Tale of a Tub, and he
that does use it is a false man, and not to be trusted; as if he did dare to
salsifie an express text of Scripture. The Chapter you say, mentions daughrers
in their fathers houses, and wives under husbands, when the Vow is made, what
would you have plainer? Does not his Argument hold water, if there were not
such Scripture for it? Reason it self will evince what he contends for, either
in Monarchical, Aristocratical, or Aeconomical Policy: Do but judge whether it
be fit for such servants or wives to vow a Covenant without, nay against the
consent of those under whose charge they are, would you be content your
Relations should deal so with you? when they are to be guided by you, to
resolve to do what they please? are you not ready to shake hands with the
Church of Rome now, which you would have us to believe you are such a great
enemy to? you run away from them you think, and yet for want of discretion you
run almost always in their mouths. Let your wife, son, or daughter vow to
leave you, and go into a Monastery, and ask a Roman Priest or Jesuit whether
they may do it without your consent, and he shall tell you it is not in your
power to hinder them, though it be against your express prohibition. And do you
not see now that your Covenant made without the Kings consent, was first forged
in the Popes Consistory? The way you go is to make divisions in all Countries
and Families, to cause all that should obey, to rebel against their Governors.
But how does that Text make against Doctor Gauden? you say the Text speaks
only of a vow made by a man, and that all such vows are binding, If a man vow
a vow unto the Lord, etc. Here is not the least exception, no not of a son
under his father, but all men that vow, are by God holden unto it, whether the
chief Governor consent or not; it is only the vow of a woman in her minority
or matrimony which may be made void.

But what if they vow things unlawful, and contrary to the will of him who has
the rule over them, as the Covenant is said to be? I understand not your
Divinity. What if a woman being a Pagan, vow to serve God, who can make her Vow
void? surely no man: so then the more ado you keep to justify your
un-warrantable Covenant, to destroy the Church Government amongst us, of which
the King is, and ought to be the chief Overseer and Ruler, you do but hamper
and entangle your self the faster: You would fain justify your Covenant,
though it were taken and pressed upon your fellow subjects, over whom I know no
authority you have without the Kings consent, is not this to wrest the Scepter
out of the Kings hand? will you make Kings like the Log you speak of, which
fell from Jupiter, that such croaking frogs may leap upon at pleasure? Are
Kings placed by God, to let those that should obey, rule over them? Kings are
called (...), The Shepherds of the People: Now what if the sheep should
covenant to run away to the wolves, as you did, do you think it is fit for the
shepherd to let them do it, if he can stop them? But you will needs make your
selves supreme Governors, and the King and the rest of his subjects must be
under you. But why I pray, must not the kings consent be first asked and
obtained by lawful means before you obtruded your Covenant upon his subjects,
which was to maintain the true Protestant Religion and his Majesty? was the
King so bad a Christian as not to suffer his subjects to join together to
maintain the true Protestant Religion? or was he so careless of his own safety,
that he would deny them leave to covenant for his defense? no such matter. But
the King saw the Hook, though your Bait was cunningly laid: he discerned the
sad and tragic Effects were like to follow it, if Episcopal Government should
be ruined by you, and would not consent; whereupon you had no way to effect
your purpose but by the echo and noise of the times, and the midwifery of
tumults and Armies. You call this notorious untruths, nothing but impudence,
and therefore you will pass through this mire without answering. Answer him
indeed you cannot, and if you think to pass through, let me tell you plainly
you will stick fast, and are in danger to be drowned in it; and therefore my
advice is that you make haste back again before you pass any further.

The Covenant interpreted against all Episcopacy, must needs grieve some, and
pierce to the quick those former lawful Oaths (where he takes it for granted,
that the Covenant is not lawful: and think you that others do not take it so as
well as he?) not only of Allegiance and Supremacy, and Canonical obedience,
but that of the King a his Corona ion, and there can be no superfetation of
such a cont any Vow and Covenant without apparent perjury. And what have you to
say against this? You say suppose the Covenant were against all Episcopacy. All
Episcopacy? what against primitive Episcopacy which you allow of, and think it
to be Presbytery? But what need that supposition now, if you take Episcopacy
as it was here established, which you vowed to extirpate? But you will never
leave your equivocations. What is that to the Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance
to his Majesty? can no man be true to Kings; but he that is for Bishops?
Surely it is something to the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, for subjects
to rule, and to make the King stand for a cipher. But why to Kings? it seems
you were stumbled, and would shift it off upon the ubjects of other Kings that
have no Bishops; but you have left it inde inite, which answers to a universal,
and therefore it includes the King of Great Britain, as well as the rest; so
then he that takes your Covenant, cannot in that be true to Kings, that is to
say, all Kings, unless he be for Bishops; because it is a Church Government
confirmed by the Kings Laws here. In other kingdoms where Bishops are not, the
case is not the same; yet I wish all Protestant Kings and Princes were so happy
as to erect Episcopacy within their Dominions. The valiant King of Denmark's
resolution was when the Swede besieged Copenhagen (if I rightly understand the
meaning of what I read) that he then promised, that if it pleased God to give
him the Victory, he would make his Scholars bear their proportion with his
Nobles, I can give it no other interpretation but serting up of Lords Bishops
in his country. But as for the kingdom of England, you know what King James
spoke prophetically, No Bishop, no King; and it proved too true, for no sooner
were my Lords the Bishops cast down, and the Archbishop beheaded, but
immediately it fell sore upon the King himself, even to the loss of his life,
though the Covenant ran for his preservation.

Dr. Doubtless the sense of the Covenant has lately quickened many men's
cosciences in their Allegiance to the King, so to bring him (as David) home
with infince joy and triumph.

I think the Doctor has pleased you now, for you grow presently very high in
your own commen sacion Who acted most in reintroducing the secluded Members, in
procuring a free Parliament, ara in bringing home His present Majesty (whom God
bless and preserve) and let all the people say Ameny but Covenanters?

But was this the fruit of your Covenane? we know what effect it had upon his
so mer Majesty Charles the I. can the same fountain b^ing forth bitter water
and sweet? We know God draws light out of darkness, and makes use or contrary
means sometimes to bring about his purposes: By accident the Covenant has made
many deluded men more sensible of their duty, but I cannot find that it
wrought any thing directly to the Kings preservation and establishment, more
then the Jews murdering our blessed Savior obliged all men to be thankful to
them for man's Redemption: where then is the Blasphemy to be abhorred of all
sober Christians, in saying the Covenant is contradictory to former oaths?

Touching the Oaths of Canonical Obedience to Bishops, they took upon them to
impose such a tyrannical yoke upon many of their brethren, sed quo jure, and
how far were such Oaths obl gatory?

The Bishops took no more upon them in this, than they had authority from the
Kings and Parliaments, (whatsoever you say to the contrary) and that is right
enough: (it will be too long to fearch Antiquities for Oaths Canonical, used
in the primitive times, and to compare them with this) and therefore such
Oaths are as obligatory as other Oaths are; and had your Covenant been so
established, what would you have said for it then, that say so much for it now,
that all other Oaths must give place to it? The Oath of obedience to the
Diocesan, which many of you in Orders have taken, is wilfully broken by you:
why do you not renounce your Orders to which you received from the Bishops, and
be ordained again after your new model? You think to lick your selves clean
with such pitiful shifts as these, pretending your Covenant to be sacred and
obligatory, as if it were another Palladium, the image that fell from Juniter,
your great Diana of the Ephesians, that you, like Demetrius, plead so strongly
for, seeing your Craft is in danger to be set at naught, and your Diana to be
destroyed, whose magnificence you would have to be worshipped by the Christian
world? Yet I know not why you should quarrel with the Bishops Oath, which you
grant requires obedience only in licitis and honestis, you say is needless,
because the Laws tie men to things lawful and honest: By this reason all Oaths
are needless, for no Oaths ought to be made, but for to bind men's obedience in
things lawful and honest. Had your Covenant been only so, we would not have
made a question about it. You say the Doctor has furnished you with an
Argument strong enough to retort upon himself, by which he argues the
needlesness of the Covenant, and so do you the unwarranted Oath of Canonical
Obedience; you band it upon him, and it flies back in your own face.

If this Oath should be extended to obey such Bishops as Wren and Pieroe, as
you unreverently style them without their due honor you owe unto them and
others, in all they late enjoined, what have you to say against those reverend
Prelates and others? not one word as I find here but a flourish of your own,
as if you had some greater matters against them, and then infer, that because
of them you have more cause your Covenant be extended to extirpation of all
Episcopacy, and so farewell such an Oath: nay, rather farewell such a Covenant,
that there is more reason for it to be abolished for ever.

Touching the Kings Oath, there is nothing obliging him further than to
preserve that Government, so far as it is agreeable to, and warranted by the
holy Scripture and primitive Institution, so far he condescended at the Isle of
Wight, and who requires more?

We say so too, who requires more? so far do all the Episcopal party
condescend with him, and you are forced to yield to it: wherefore let me tell
you, and I hope His Majesty that now is will not be offended if I speak my
conscience in it, that it is neither honorable, safe, nor lawful for Him to
break this Oath of His Coronation; nor indeed can it be disanulled, but there
must follow a wonderful and dangerous metamorphosis in the whole frame of the
Government of England. I shall give you my reasons for all this, when you can
pretend any thing that has but the show of Reason, Law, or Religion against
it. Though you say this also may be changed by His Royal Assent to the counsel
and desire of the two Houses of Parliament, as this Doctor does more then
tacitly admit. How more then tacitly does the Doctor admit it? I believe it
is no more but your own fancy: But we hope the two Houses will never counsel,
nor desire any such thing, and if they should, you know that King Charles the
First would never yield His Royal Assent, and I know not why you should look
for more from King Charles the II. who will doubtless make use of his pious
Fathers Advice to Him in His (...)? and it were not Christian like for you to
attempt to divert him from it. But where has His Majesty and His two Houses
been these many years, to do it? the way you propound to change it, was not to
be had, and I believe never should have been if you could have helped it: you
had a shorter cut by your Covenant, to effect it without the Royal Assent and
Upper-House, for you would have none; and I cannot tell how you like it now.

Cannot the Legislative Power change Government by Bishops, as well as abrogate
other Laws?

This is to charge some with perjury whom he dares not name, to fright others
with men of clouts, and to condemn all the Churches of Christ which have laid
Episcopacy aside. Has the Legislative Power such Authority, and yet may not
abrogate your Covenant, but it must be like the Laws of the Medes and Persians
that alter not? No Royal Assent, nor two Houses must meddle with that, but you
scare all with bug-bears, and men of clouts, pretending that God will revenge
the breach of that, and yet you break the rest and fear no revenge, as if your
Covenant were another Pope that can absolve you from them all. We know it is
proper for Parliaments to abrogate and alter such Laws as are not good and
useful. Who I pray does this charge with per-jury, that the Doctor should fear
to name? But Episcopacie is not to be numbered amongst things unlawful or
useless, that it should be abrogated to bring in your Presbytery in the place,
which is ten times worse. The errors and evils Episcopacy lies open to, are
not more not greater than Presbytery has, and the benefits of it are
infinitely beyond yours. Lot the Presbyters draw up a List of all they can
object against Episcopal Government, and back what they say by Scripture, good
Authority, by Reason and Examples, and we shall draw the parallel against
Presbytery, and then let every man be judge which of the two has most cause to
be covenanted against: and if they please to enumerate the Benefits of their
Presbyterial Government, we shall do the like for Bishops, the work would be
large, and worth the while to be undertaken, to reconcile the Differences in
Church Discipline, and to give better satisfaction to the Christian world. I
shall now, to avoid prolixtry speak a word or two only of the benefits of
Episcopacy; for the faults it is obnoxious to, are not essential to the
Government, but merely accidental.

First then, it is more orderly, regular, and uniform, and by consequence more
free from schisms, sects, heresies, and whatsoever mischief may gather to a
head for want of good order. 2. It is more decent, graceful, and more
consistent with Monarchy: a poor creeping Clergy is not comely in Christian
Princes Courts, who will seem always to upbraid them to their faces, as if they
were not willing to be at any cost for the preaching of the Gospel; whereas the
best Kings and Emperors, as Constantine, Theodosius, and others, sought still
how with rich endowments to beautify and adorn them. Moses and Aaron must be
together, the King and the Priest, the Crown and the Miter, the Princes Scepter
and the Bishops Crosier, or else the Scepter will be soon made to stoop to the
Presbyterian Ferula. 3. It is greater encouragement to Learning and Religion:
Take away the reward of Virtue, and you do what you can to take away Goodness
itself: Pramia si tollas, tollitur virtus; but I must not let my pen run to a
volumn, 4. Consider that many Reformed Churches are in misery, and ready to be
swallowed up continually by Popish and cruel Adversaries, what can the
Presbyterian party do to afford them any help? surely little or none; whereas
when our Church flourishen under the Bishops, the Protestants abroad in all
places lived in more repose and quiet, and found continual assistance from them
insomuch that their foes did hardly dare to make any head against them: and I
doubt not but they will conress how sensible they have been since these
troubles, of the great loss they have of Prelacy in England, by whose wariness
and continual care of them, as well as of their charge at home, they were
always fostered and preserved since the Reformation. What horrid persecutions
have fallen upon them since the expelling of our Bishops here, let the
Waldenses, and the Albigenses, and the poor Protestants living about the
Valleys of Piedmont, whom the Duke of Savoy and others endeavored with all
their might to take away from the earth, speak. The like cruelties were used
lately upon the Reformed Cantons in Switzerland, also in Poland and Germany,
and the French Protestants fearing daily to be rooted out, and what remedy
could they sinde with you? I will not speak too bad of the great Collections
made by you here for them, and how they were employed for their relief. Also of
the monstrous blasphemies, damned heresies, shameful adulteries, and many other
villainies which have sprung up since Presbytery bore the sway, the names
whereof were scarcely known when Episcopacy ruled. Let some more able pen
proceed.

And however some Churches of Christ expelling Popery, in heat of zeal have
thereby laid lawful Episcopacy aside, that is, have not had since the
opportunity to restore it to its primitive Institution, yet many of them desire
to conform to the platform of the Church of England, which they suppose to
come the nearest of any to the Apostolic form.

His next quarrel is: If the Covenant abjure all Episcopacy, it runs upon a
rock of novelty and schism, and dasheth us in opinion and practice against the
judgment and custom of the Catholic Church in all Ages and places (till of
latter years) from the Apostles days.

You call this a Magisterial and traditional way: Surely such traditions as
these are not to be under-valued, the Histories and Monuments of the Church are
a great light to us in many things, especially such as are circumstancial, and
without them we should wander in the dark.

But once prove that your abol shed Episcopacy was of so ancient and universal
observation.

Abolished we praise God you cannot say, but that you did your best to abolish
it, the antiquity of it has been often proved to your shame.

Whoever shall read the Judgment of Dr. John Reynolds concerning Episcopacy,
expressed in a Letter to Sir Francis Knolls, and Dr. Ushers Reduction, will
find this man's bold assertion, etc.

I have not means nor opportunity to see that Letter, nor any of his
Quotations: but I remember when I was a Scholar in Corpus Christi College in
Oxford, whereof some years before Doctor John Reynolds had been President, I
was told he was once much given to be a Roman Catholic, and that his brother a
Protestant converted him, whom I knew in Glocester-Hall, but he fell shortly
after himself to the Church of Rome, wherein he died: now though Doctor
Reynolds was a very learned and pious man, who by a kind of Antiperistasis
because of his brothers fall, might be more violent against the Discipline of
our Church, than perhaps otherwise he would have been; yet he met with as pious
and learned men as himself at the Conference at Hampton Court, 2 King James,
that maintained it, and carried it against him and all that were of his
judgment. The same cause that provoked Dr. Reynolds, may be, prevailed with an
eminent person in this Land to favor your Covenanters so much at first,
because his brother was revolted to Popery; But this was not the Bishops fault,
it had been more honorable for them both to have followed the example of their
Reverend Uncle James, Lord Bishop of Winchester, Prelate of the Garter, and my
most honored Patron during my minority, who knew better how to direct in Church
affairs than they ever did: but for want of his Compass they ran a great
hazard, to fall upon those two dangerous Rocks that lay on either hand, of
Popery and Presbytery. As for Dr. Ushers Reduction, if that be the meaning of
it, we grant it is not held fit that the Bishops should keep too great a
distance, and estrange themselves too much from their brethren: it is
acknowledged to have been a fault in some of them, and it is proper it should
be amended. But pray give me leave to refer you to Dr. Downhams Defense of
Episcopacy, and when you can answer him, I shall say that you have answered the
Doctor.

Under color of propounding the loy land religious sense of it, he dasheth it
with unlawfulness to be taken at all, because not imposed by due Authority.

This has been so often repeated, that it is crambe saepius cocta, and needs
no answer.

Dr. The Jews sometimes solemnly renewed their Covenant with God, etc. which
God himself had made with them in Horeb and mount Sinai, punctually prescribed
to God to Moses, and by Moses (as the supreme Governor or King) imposed upon
them; but this was not the case of the Church of England, nor was there need of
such a Covenant, or any Moses, etc. as chief Governor commanding it.

Here you keep a fearful quoil and whiffle about, making a great cry, but there
is little wool, calling the Doctor Deceiver, Reviler; and that in his Writings
there are falsehoods enough, and yet show none. First you say it is false that
there was no Covenant but of Gods own prescribing: and secondly that he
prescribed but one. I do not find that the Doctor says any such thing; for ho
quoted that spontaneous Vow, Numb 30.2. You are still fighting with your own
shadow, yet you must say something, lest the Reader should think you were at a
nonplus, as Sergeant Green did, who would undertake to overthrow all
Episcopacy, but being worsted by the learned Seldom, cried out, But Archbishops
are no Bishops; then said Seldom, Judges are no Lawyers, and Aldermen no
Citizens. You instance in the Covenant of Moses, and the Princes of the
Congregation, with the cheating Gibeonites, as you call them, Josh. 9.15. But
there was Moses the chief, whose consent you never had, and therefore are less
excusable than the Gibeonites were. But because you are so much taken with the
Gibeonites example, and bring it in so often, as if it served your turn well, I
shall say more to it, when I meet with it again.

The chief Covenant indeed was that which God made with his people upon mount
Sinai, and all lawful Covenants which man makes with God are but branches of
that, as when we renew our obedience by serious repentance, as the children of
Israel, and the children of Judah did, vowing to keep Gods Commandments. But I
know not that God gave you any such command to vow against Episcopacy, and I
doubt you never asked his counsel when you entered into it, what ever your heady
zeal might suggest to you; for it is not a good intention, (fi we may be so
charitable as to think you intended no harm it) that makes a good action; but
you must have sufficient warrant for it from Gods word, show but that, and we
have done.

It is false that the Covenant was imposed by Moses, or that Moses was supreme
Governor; for Moses was no more supreme Governor or King than Samuel.

You love to move questions: Samuel no doubt whilst he was the sole Judge over
Israel, was their supreme Governor until Saul was anointed King. But Samuel
was never in Scripture called King as Moses was, as King in Jesurun. The like
blustering he keeps, who imposed the Covenant of the Law, God or Moses?
Doubtless God principally, but ministerially it was done by the hand of Moses:
this is to amuse his Covenanters, and such as will be taken with shadows; for
what of all this? here is great stir to little purpose, unless you will conclude
aright as you should do: the King in his kingdom is next under God, as Moses
amongst the Israelites, and his subjects must be guided and directed by him.

He blesses God as one would bless an idol: That Apostasy to strange gods was
not the Church of Englands case, that they should enter into a Covenant.

Tell me what meant the falling off of several Bishops to too much Popery in
doctrine, witness all their Arminian Tenants, and also their general practice
in Cathedrals, and elsewhere, seiting up Altars, Tapers, Candles, etc. devised
by man's fancies; which last is, (with many other things) in the Queens
Injunctions, Injunct. 3. affirmed to tend to idolatry and superstition, etc.
the like may be said of Church Music Anthems, etc. a thing which the judicious
Hooker censured and condemned, and the late Queen Elizabeth provided against,
Injunct. 49. and if any Hymn were sung, care must be taken that it be so done,
as to be understood and perceived, and where this is not so done, see the
Censure of the Homily of the place and time of Prayer, Part 2.

To answer to every particular would require a large volumn; but you have
answered your self, and justified the Doctor, that Apostasy to strange gods,
was not the Church of Englands Case. You quote judicious Hooker condemning
something; let him be the Umpire, if you please, between the Bishops and the
Presbyters: and you say Queen Elizabeth's Injunctions have made provision
against such things; and the Books of Homilies condemns other things: well,
what would you have then? you see there is good provision made against all
exorbitancies in Ceremonies, and the Doctrine of the Church of England is
comprehended in the 39 Articles, if any man have transgressed, and done more
then he can answer, he is liable to be questioned for it; and I think so may
you for your contempt, and covenanting contrary to all former Laws or Examples,
only what you have labored to procure since for your own security.

As for Popish families crept into England, with swarms of Priests and Jesuits.

There have more crept in since these civil Wars began with your Covenant, than
ever were since the Reformation, yet you would charge all upon the Bishops. The
Laws made against Priests and Jesuits were they put in practice, were good
enough; and had there been as good provision made against your Covenanting, it
had bin well for the Church of England. You are very pettish, because the
Doctor speaks what others believe to be true, that the Covenant was but the
petty composition of a few politic men, etc. Lawyers or Ministers, no great
Clerks or Statesmen, etc. adding, that their heads rather than their hearts,
and State-correspondencies more than their Consciences brought it forth: we
find a great deal of pretended zeal in it, but he that shall use St. Paul's
(...), and hold it against the Sun, shall quickly perceive many flaws and foul
spots that it has, and besides the rottenness of their hearts, the idleness of
their heads that made it, by mustering up clean and unclean together, making no
difference betwixt things lawful, and those that are forbidden by the Law of
God.

The Doctor said, There is no pattern for any such Covenant in the New
Testament nor in all succeeding ages, etc. no Covenanting Christians until the
holy League, ( meaning, say you, that of the bloody Papists to destrey the
Hugonots, so they termed the Protestants in France, that is but an ill
president for you to follow:) except that of Baptism, the new and Evangelical
Covenant of all true Christians.

You answer, If there were no Precept nor Pattern in the New Testament, it is
sufficient if there be any in the Old; if not Levitical or merely typical,
unless the Doctor be turned An inomian.

I wish you were as sound in both Testaments as the Doctor is. The Evangelical
Covenant of Baptism in the New Testament is vastly different indeed from your
Scorch Covenant; that has made such a rent in the Church for the devil and all
his works to enter by, against which we covenanted in Baptism; and being you
can find no shelter for it in the New Testament, you have recourse to the Old;
and there you are in as bad a case, for unless you will make use of Korah and
his Conspiracy, I know not what precept or pattern you find for it, for you
produce none: only you make a question, Is there no precept nor pattern for
covenanting against our English Episcopacy? and you make your own answer.
(There is not any for it I say) nor is it much material that he has found none
against it; for we can find no such Episcopacy in the New Testament, nor
warranted by it.

But we can find patterns of Episcopacy both in the Old and New Testament,
that were not barely typical, but an excellent form of Church Government by
High Priests, Priests, and Levites, by the apostles extraordinary, in whose
room our ordinary Bishops succeeded, under whom were the 70. the Presbyters in
a large sense sometimes called Bishops also, and under them the Deacons. This
is as clear from the New Testament as noon day, in the Acts of the Apostles,
St. Paul to Titus and Timothy, etc. and he must wilfully shut his eyes that
sees not the distinction of these Offices in the Church, which continued from
the primitive times, until this late Covenanting way pat the Church of God into
a confusion, and sought to destroy all order and uniformity; and I think they
are no little proud of it, that without either Precept or Pattern were the
first inventers of it, and would fain propagate it to future times, but I hope
they will be deceived; for it has cost men so dear already, that it is
probable they will take warning, and learn to be wiser hereafter. We have
showed you ground enough for establishing Episcopacy, show us as much if you
can, for your Piesb terial Government.

The Covenant is not only against his adored Episcopacy, but in the full
latitude extended against Popery, heresy, schism, etc. (how chance then you
break it by being so schismatical?) profaneness, and whatsoever is contrary to
sound doctrine, etc. and for Preservation and Reformation of Religion, etc.

Its well you put Preservation first, and we wish you had done so, for where
you begin to resorm you destroy all, witness your information of the Liturgy,
casting it quite out of doors: You say it was not made only against
Episcopacy; but it was principally, as if that were worse then Popery; for you
must it seems stretch it in its full latitude to take in Popery, heresy, or
any thing else; and had it not been that Episcopacy stood in your way, which
you knew not how to remove, your Covenant had never been made against any of
the rest, or else surely you would, as there was always cause enough, have
entered into it long before: but Popery, heresy, schism, and all that you were
pleased to make to depend upon Episcopacy in the Covenant, were only added to
persuade the people who understood no better, that Episcopacy was the
foundation of them all. You have put in also many sweet ingredients to make it
go down the better: to maintain true Religion. You have maintained it fairly.
Defense of His Majesty's person. And did you not well defend him? Ad populum
phaleras. And why are you so offended with the Doctor, to throw off and
abominate the Covenant merely for only one single Clause for extirpating the
late Hierarchy, if so intended?

You did intend it sure enough, and therefore is that single Clause sufficient;
were it not safer to throw the Covenant away than to take it, when the poison
lies close in it is discovered? Speak I pray you, or else let some men of more
reason and religion answer for you. For the Doctor to desor be particularly
what Episcopacy he would have retroduced, I think you understand his meaning,
or let me tell you, such as it was before your Covenant drove it out, only
with this limitation, that particular men's errors should not be imputed to the
Government which allows them not, but declaims against them. You say you might
leave it to all sober Christians, how little your Covenant differs from the
Covenant of Baptism, etc. wherein every man stipulateth to deny all
ungodliness, and to live soberly, etc.

If you will leave it so, I am certain you will be condemned by them for it,
for they were no sober Christians that penned the Covenant, but hot-spurs and
fiery zealots, who will force all men to be guided by what they please to set
up, as Nebuchadaezar did his golden image, that every man must fall down and
worship it: do you say how little your Covenant differs from the sacred
Covenant of Baptism? You gave that Epithere Sacred to your Covenant before, and
do you th^nk they are so much of a kind because of that? they differ toto
coelo, they are no more like, as the Proverb is, than chalk and cheese, and I
believe I may safely call it blasphemy to compare the factious Contrivances of
seditious men, to Gods sacred Ordinances. And what you insist upon concerning
the Baptismal Covenant to strengthen yours, is but vain babbling, for it
signifies nothing to any understanding man.

Do true Christians truly entered in o the Baptismal Covenant, break it by
wilful and presumptuous sins?

Because the Doctor said, we break our Covenant in Baptism by wilful and
presumptuous sins, did you never sin wilfully since you were baptized? is all
weaknesses with you? who I might say have wilfully and maliciously contrary to
Gods Law, fallen away from your due obedience to your Governors, and erected a
Covenant, a Calf in Horeb, to make your selves famous amongst the congregation,
and to exalt your selves above your Superiors, you take too much upon you, ye
sons of Levi.

You say you have insisted upon this the longer, because of the Doctors words,
That by repentance we renew our Covenant in Baptism: surely, say you, no more
then it renews the remission of our sins, which no repentance but Christ in
Baptism has bestowed upon us once for all. Thus you trifle away the time by
sinister interpretations, of what will admit a very safe and Orthodox
construction; for without Christ's merits all Baptism and Repentance is of none
effect; yet you have a very acute nose that you can smell here a strong savor
of Arminianism and Popery. I shall make amends by brevity in the rest: You need
not have croubled us with so much idle discourse as you have done.

Whereas the Doctor says, That there is neither Law of God or man requiring,
or comprobating any such Covenant, at the best it is but a matter of
Will Worship, of human, private invention, etc. an Engine framed of purpose to
batter down Episcopacy, to seize their Estates, and the Church-patrimony, to
the great enrichment of some sacrilegious Protestants, to the great joy of the
Romish party and Jesuits, etc. who were thought to be, if not the Sires of it,
yet the Sibs.

You say it is so full of railing, that no wise man will hold it otherwise than
folly to bestow a line in answering to it. If this be not blasphemy, I know not
what is.

It is in vain for you to attempt to answer it, for you never can, who call
that which is the manifest Truth, and you know it well enough, Blasphemy:
having indeed nothing to say against it, you are galled, and kick, and fling
terribly, and are forced to shuffle off the business again to Dr. Burges, whose
Book, you say, making it out that it is no sacrilege to buy such Lands, still
lies unanswered: but you say further, Dr. G. has promised it, and then you may
not doubt but it will be answered. But did any of you buy them of the Bishops?
that had bin some qualification to your sacrilege, but you took them by force
from them, and then sold them to one another; and would have men believe it is
so far from sacrilege, that you will not admit that it is any sin at all.

But whereas the Doctor says, This Age is the first Parent of that Prodigy,
wherein Orthodox and reformed Christians, either Presbyters or people did
persecute Godly Bishops, etc. yea and Episcopacy it self. You deny that any
Orthodox and reformed Christians, etc. did persecute any Godly Bishops of this
age.

That many of our Bishops were Godly, you cannot deny, for you say afterward
that no doubt but some of those Bishops which he commends, were learned and
pious: And all know that they were severely prosecuted, plundered, and
imprisoned by you, and many of them persecuted unto death, for the troubles
they endured doubtless shortened their days. I would I had by me a perfect
Catalogue of them to set down, that the Reader might be his own Judge; but it
is yet so fresh in memory, that every man almost will say you speak a great
untruth to deny it: yet I believe you, they were no Orthodox and reformed
Christians did it, but rather Jews, Turks, Infidels, and yet it is possible
such would have showed them more mercy. You grant it is true, that some
Orthodox and reformed Christians did exhibit and prosecute Archbishop Laud,
Bishop Wren, and Bishop Pierce; two, if not all of them, being charged with no
less than high Treason, the first whereof being found guilty, was executed Jan.
10. 1644. Were they Orthodox and reformed Christians that did exhibit and
prosecute, how do you prove that? and as for your high Treason, you made any
thing high Treason that you pleased to call so in your High Courts of
Injustice: you know it is not the charging any man that makes him guilty; to
say nothing of many eminent loyal subjects that suffered in the same cause. Was
not his sacred Majesty Charles the I. of blessed memory charged, prosecuted,
condemned, and executed, for that you call High Treason, by the same power that
ruled? was He therefore guilty, what say you? As for the Archbishop, because
there are others better able to write in his defense than I am, I shall pass it
by, leaving him and his prosecutors and Judges to the most righteous Judge of
heaven and earth. But the other two never answered the Articles exhibited
against them to this day.

I pray whose fault was that? was not the reverend Lord Bishop Wren kept in
prison by you 14 or 15 years, and never suffered to come to his Answer? which
is argument sufficient to prove him not guilty, and your selves to be cruel and
barbarous, and unchristian, contrary to law, reason, or conscience, had not
then Dr. Gauden cause to plead as an Advocate in his behalf, since doubtless he
has been exceedingly injured by you? who endured it with much Christian
patience, being not brought to his Trial, but kept prisoner, that upon any
emergent occasion, when you knew not how to go on, you might bring him forth to
sacrifice him, to appease the fury of the people? how would you have cried out
at persecution, if the Bishops had served any of you so? but they are of a
nobler mind, and abhor such cruelty.

You say again, When Dr. Gauden' s hand was in, he bestows a Vindication or
Apology upon a known Papist, the late Bishop of Gloucester, Dr. Goodman.

I have not seen that Apology, but I am persuaded Dr. Gauden is a Gentleman of
that wisdom and integrity, that he will give you or any man else a good account
of what he has said of him.

But he could find nothing to say for Dr. Pierce, who so devontly thanked God
he had put down all the Locturers in his Diocese.

If I may believe your report, for your tongue is no slander, the Doctor could
have found enough to say for him; for it is well known Lord Bishop Pierce, who
was Vice Chancellor of Oxford in my time, was held to be as Orthodox and able a
Preacher, as most in the University; and if he did give God thanks for putting
down Lecturers in his Diocese, I presume it was because the people grew so
headstrong and disorderly, that they brought in Lecturers, not so much to hear
them preach the word of God, as to oppose their Parsons, and to raise schisms
and factions in their Parishes: but no sober and quiet Orthodox Minister was,
or would have been hindered by him, or any of the other Bishops, from following
his calling, and from preaching the Gospel; yet if any were hindered, it was not
the Bishops fault that they suffered: but to make use of your words, it was the
other ruffling violent Ringleaders that were the cause of it, who were adored
by the vulgar, as the Barbarians did St. Paul, and were ready almost to say of
them that they were Gods, sacrificing all they had in feasting them, until many
families were undone by them; you are not ashamed to deride our learned Bishops
reverend for their age, by the name of Old Episcopalians, what were your
Lecturers many of them, but young beardless Boys of 16 or 17 years old, more
fit to have been whipped at school, or to be priests to Jupiter or Bacchus, then
Teachers of the people.

Let him name one of those Bishops, unless it were such as were trapan'd by
Williams, and other caprisious Pragmaticks, to have their hands in that high
and un-Parlamentary Petition and Prorestation to the late King and House of
Peers, 1641. that were in the least persecuted, and not rather savoured (if
indeed learned and godly) by Orthodox and reformed Christians, either
Presbyters or people. If any of those suffered with the rest, they may thank
those ruffling, ceremonious etc. and not blame others who could not help it,
nor longer endure the slavery and persecution those Amaziah- like Priests and
Tyrants had exereised over them.

That they were under persecution all the time your Power lasted is most
certain, witness that famous Divine, the Reverend Doctor Featley, and others of
great worth, but that they who persecuted them were Orthodox and reformed
Christians I cannot grant, rather wolves and tigers, men void of humanity, and
much more of Christian Piety. But you have such fine acute ways to play sast
and loose, and to shuffle often a Charge, unless those that were persecuted, (you
grant there was a persecution) were such as were trapann'd by Williams, (if
they were indeed learned and godly) if any of those suffered with the rest,
they may thank their fellows: but you spared no such men as you except here,
for those suffered most that were the most pious, and of greatest wisdom and
learning, etc. for their eminent parts were the greatest obstacle to your
growing designs; if any of them stood in your way they must become the objects
of your fury, who had such tender consciences, that rather than fail of your
aim, the best must suffer with the worst, and you spared none though you knew
them to be persons of great desert, which are only hypothetically excepted by
you. Who then, I pray you, were the Amaziah-like Priests and Tyrants, your
Presbyters, or our Bishops, who were men of nobler spirits, and scorned and
abhorred such unreasonable and un-christian proceedings? But why are you so
much displeased with the Lord Bishop Williams, a man long since dead, and
maugre all your envy, died peaceably in his own country? what you speak of his
trapanning, it is well known it was not used here in England, until you
trapann'd the whole Nation by your new Covenant, but I know where your shoe
rings you. It is that un-Parliamentary Petition and Protestation, so you call
it, that he had the chiefest hand in, and a great many more honest cordial
Bishops as well as himself. This gallant Person has obliged all the Clergy of
the three Nations by this memorable Act, to have a good opinion of his Loyalty
to the King; had the Bishops then held their peace for fear or favor, their
silence would have been interpreted consent; and I know not what they could
have pleaded now in defense of their Baronies, and for their restitution into
the Upper House of Parliament, that we may once more have, as it ought to be,
Lords Spiritual and Temporal: I speak not to the honor of that reverend
Prelate, as if I meant to set forth a Panegyric of his Gallantry, for any
favor or benefit I was obliged to him for, I may truly say I was never more
beholding to him than I was to the rest, but I desire to give every man his due
character; had he not been a Person of great learning, and noble parts, surely
King James, so wise a Prince, would never have raised him to so great
preferment in Church and State. How he came to fall into disgrace with some
great Persons, I cannot say; but I believe it was by his too much leaning to
that totten Prop of Presbytery, hoping thereby to support himself against those
who laid violent siege to his honor and preferment, and as it is conjectured by
some, to his life also; which fierce dissentions amongst the Bishops
themselves, and the Clergy that sided with their divisions, made such breaches
in the Church, that the Presbyters entered upon them, and had well-nigh routed
them all: but the best and learned men in the world are subject to failings,
as St. Paul and St. Peter were divided, which make them the less able to resist
the common enemy. I hope it will be a warning to the reverend Bishops to take
care to agree as brethren among themselves

IV. Proposition.
That, maugre all this man's calumnies, and malicious aspersions, the Covenant
(even as to the point of Hierarchical Episcopacy lately laid aside) is to be
constantly and conscientiously observed and kept in the right sense thereof, by
all that have taken it, as they will avoid destruction, and damnation
hereafter.

It should appear that the Presbyterians find it best fishing in troubled
waters: they mean (it seems) that we shall never be at peace in the Church of
England, for all those that have taken their Covenant, are bound constantly and
conscientiously to observe and keep it in the right sense thereof, (that is, as
he has interpreted it all this while, to the extirpation of Episcopal
Hierarchy) as they will avoid destruction here: destruction here, this smells
strongly of some mischief hatching by them against us, and damnation hereafter.
I pray God they do not fall into the pit themselves, which they are digging for
others: but if some must fall into it, we shall pray in the words of the
Psalmist, Let them fall into their own net together, and let us ever escape
them. They that have taken it, must you say, constantly keep it, and what must,
or will they do that have not taken it? do you suppose they will let you
domineer over them? they have as good reason, and better, to maintain their
former Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to His Majesty, and of Churchmen for
their obedience to the Bishops: you put all into a confusion.

You say destruction here, and damnation hereafter, is a hard saying, but you
will make it out.

I would fain know how: you shall never make it out by your example of the
Gibeonires, Josh. 9.15. you are very much taken with that pattern, you repeat
so frequently what a lie they told to children of Israel, how crafty and wily
they were to obtain their purpose, how they cheated Joshua and all the Princes.
I am persuaded you laugh in your sleeves, to think you have done so too with
the whole Nation; but I cannot find that this makes any thing for that you
would conclude from it, because your Covenant was made and imposed, as I told
you before, without Joshua, and many of the Princes consent. It Is true, the
Gibeonites to save their lives, did this in fear; but your Covenant was made in
subtilty to usurp authority over others, and to destroy a legal, ancient
Church Government, and to take away the lives of all that should resist you,
under pretense of a Vow made to Almighty God, which you say you are bound to
perform. Now if you are pleased to observe the scope of the Text you allege,
although the Gibeonites came with their old shoes and ragged garments (as your
brethren of Scotland some say, did at first to gain their ends) [when you hired
them] yet there it seems to intimate a secret permission of God, that Joshua
and the Princes should be deluded by them, because they did not first ask
counsel from him (as men ought to do in all that they go about) whose command
was to destroy them all: (I am certain you had no such command to destroy us.)
But God did so highly favor his people Israel, that he would have them all free
men, and none of them to be employed in any servile work; wherefore the
Gibeonites were suffered by their Covenant to escape, that they might be made
hewers of wood and drawers of water, for the children of Israel. I consess your
Covenanters have played the wily Foxes as much as ever the Gibeonites did; and
by pressing their example, you seem to commend their policy and cheat they put
upon the Israelites. You are yet as free as any men amongst us, and were so
before you entered into your Covenant, but I would wish you to take heed that
you be not the cause of your own slavery, and receive the same reward as the
Gibeonites did of their cheating covenant.

But you still go on, If God were so severe for the breach of such a deceitful
Covenant between man and man, when they that procured it were so base and false
(as the Doctor would make the late Covenanters) how sinful and dangerous must
it needs be for men, upon any pretense whatsoever, etc. wilfully to break any
Covenant with God himself?

I cannot acquit you for your fraud in contriving the Covenant, and as to the
performing of it, since you say you made it with God, whose counsel I believe
you never asked, you ought to have kept it better; for I have showed already
that you have falsified your Vow in every Article of it, except in that which
was not fawful for you to make or keep, to extirpate the best Form in the world
of Church Government. What you say farther of Zedekah's breach of covenant with
the King of Babylon is against you; as is also the Text you cite, Eccles. 8.2.
I counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of
God; for you had the Kings Commandment, and your former Oaths to the King
against it: so then you have more cause to repent, and ask God forgiveness for
the great sin you have committed, than to go forward in it, adding pe severance
to your impiety; which if you do, surely God will never suffer you to pass
unpunished, neither in this world, nor in the world to come.

Nor will the imposing, or not the imposing of it by supreme Authority, alter
the Case; for it is observable, that in all such National Vows and Covenants,
neither the supreme Magistrates imposition, or so much as consant, is at all
recorded in Scripture, or mentioned; which shows there is no necessity of
either.

Surely a lie will never choke you, you have eaten shame, and drank after it:
See Genes. 35.2. Jacob makes a Vow, and all that were with him, to put away
stra ge Gods. See King Josiah's Covenant, 2 Chronicles. 34.31, 32. And the King made
a Covenant, and caused all that were present in Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand
to it. Be assured that all those instances you pick out of the Covenant of
Israel in the wilderness, Number. 21.2. or of Judah, 2 Chr. 15. do either tacitly
insinuate, or openly express the consent of the supreme Magistrate, as Moses
was visibly employed in the first Covenant as King, or Supreme. I will not
cavil about Titles as you do with the Doctor; but there was nothing done of
public concernment without him, although his Command is not always set down,
for that were needless. If Moses was not Supreme, I pray who was? were they
without a Chief Commander? He was their General, and what can be done in an
Army but by the Generals Commission, shall the Soldiers covenant to do what
they will without him? As for your second Example of the Covenant made by
Judah, 2 Chronicles. 15.8, 9. to that I refer the Reader, and as he finds you to
deal there, so let him trust you another time.

Nor can any one instance be given throughout the whole Word of God, that any
Oath or Covenant, to which the King or Supreme Magistrate would not, or did not
consent, was upon that reason or ground made null and void, etc.

You are still importunate, and will not be beaten off: I thought enough had
been said; your high animosity and proud spirit proceeds from Baal-zebub the
god of flies; for let slies be driven away never so often, they will return to be
nibling. I know you cannot find it in Scripture, and I think in no History,
that Subjects did attempt to make a Covenant, unless they went to rebel without
the Princes consent: you are the first example that ever I read of.

It is no other but blaspheming the Gods, to term the late Parliament Bungling
Reformers.

All is blasphemy with you that is not for your Covenant, Anathema, Maranatha;
but the late long Parliament were surely no such perfect workmen, to destroy
one Government that was good, and yet never be able to set up any thing but
confusion in the place of it; and therefore I cannot think it any blasphemy to
call your Gods Bungling Reformers.

Farliaments indeed may advise and consult with whom they think sit in matters
of Religion and Ecclesiastical Affairs, and vote, and pass them before they
offer them to the King; did not they so in this? and did not his then Majesty
take them into consideration, and condescend to so much as they gave him time
to consider of.

It is wisely spoken: They gave him but short time it appears to condescend, if
he would not do it presently, they would afford him no longer time to consider.

But without declaring against the rest, but only suspending consent till his
conscience might be better satisfied.

And did you ever satisfy his conscience in it? you never stayed for that, and
had he deolared against the rest, as it is palpable that he did, all that he
declared stood for nothing in your account. Parliaments indeed may, and do well
to advise and consult, vote and pass things before they offer them to the King,
but what is that unless it be consirmed by his Royal Consent with Le Roy veult.
What he did condescend to, is lawfully Enacted, but all the rest is of no
force; for it is the Kings Prerogative to consider of it Le Roy s^advisera.
What the King opposed not, may imply his tacit consent, but if there were then
violence or fear upon him, as at that time, that he must do it velens nolens,
as King Charles the II. condescended to your Covenant when He was crowned in
Scotland, I know not how the Laws do interpret Oaths of that nature that are
forced: but I believe no Deeds or Obligations made by men in prison, when they
cannot help themselves, can he pleaded in any Court of Judicature.

The Protestation May 5. 1641. which was never offered to His Majesty at all
(being no way contrary or contradictory to the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance) was never opposed or contradicted by him, etc. Good: you do as much
as grant that the Covenants that followed, were both contrary and
contradictory, and contradicted by him, but you cared not for that.

And what ails the man to make such a noise about the imposing the Solemn
League and Covenant without the then King, who was then absent? etc. You allow
that he was then King, but he was then absent. How absent was he, was he gone
out of his Dominious? and who was the cause of his absence? did you not drive
him away with your popular Tumults, and all the affronts you could or then
durst put upon him? and what ail you to produce such impertinent proofs of Ezra
and Nehemiah, saying, That they made a Covenant without special Commission from
the Persian Monarchy. The Tezt is clear, that they were more obedient to the
Heathen Persian Monarchy, than you have been to King Charles a pious Christian
King, and shall rise up in judgment against you; for they asked leave, and had
their Commissions granted from Cyrus and Artaxerxes, to do what they could for
the service of the most High God, and to build his Temple; but you took leave
without his consent to dishonor God, and defile his Temples: had Ezra and
Nehemiah for all their Commissions for Gods service, entered into a Covenant to
have taken up arms, and to have destroyed the idolatrous priests in Babylon, as
you did to destroy a Christian well-ordered Church Government here, and those
that were better Christians than your selves; you may be assured the Persian
Monarchy would never have endured such Rebellion against them. Whether his late
Majesty did ever command the renouncing of your Solemn League and Covenant, as
you say he did not, I cannot tell, or whether there were any Proclamation or
Declaration against it, yet as I remember there was: but be it so, or so, it is
all a case with you.

He did publish a Proclamation June 21. 1643. against that other Vow and
Covenant, which was about that time taken by the Lords and Commons, and by them
appointed to be takeu by every man in the Cities of London and Westminster, and
suburbs thereof, and through the whole kingdom; the administering and taking
whereof (by such as had not taken it) were by that Proclamation, and the
reasons therein contained, forbidden, etc.

It should seem that your Solemn League and Covenant was taken by both Kingdoms
Sept. 11. 1643. but it is very strange that both Kingdoms should take it in one
day, you made haste for fear of the Kings Proclamation to forbid it, but that
is most for your purpose, because there was no Proclamation against that, yet
they that had taken the former Covenant, were not forbidden by the
Proclamation, because the Proclamation came too late, and they had taken it
before it came. I doubt not but the reasons therein contained were sufficient
to convince them who had taken it before, that they had not done well in taking
it without the Kings consent; and will you tie them that had taken that
Covenant which was forbidden by the King afterward, as well as you do to the
Solemn League and Covenant, supposing they may one contradict the other: but if
they were both of the same metal, certainly the Kings Proclamation that forbad
the one, did expressly forbid the other, and argues you to have proceeded to a
great height of impudence that durst go on further, being forbidden by him; and
you hold those that took the Covenant after the Proclamation, as much bound to
perform it, as those that took it before; for you say in many places that the
Kings consent is neither necessary nor requisite, nor is there any example in
Scripture for it, and to what end then do you make such a stir about the
reprinting of this Covenant without warrant, (you mean your warrant) by one who
was an enemy to the other Solemn League and Covenant, (to one as well as the
other) as if it had been an interdicting and prohibiting of those that had
taken it, to perform it. To retort your own words upon you, This is but a mere
cheating and gullery of yours, of which it behooves all honest men and sober
Christians, to take heed and beware.

Nor are Oaths and Covenants once solemnly taken, to be cast off and
disclaimed upon any pretense whatsoever, be there never so many defects and
failings in the imposing or making of them, unless the matter of them be
sinful, as the Jews was to kill Paul, Acts 23.14.

You say, you have said enough already, and too much too I think to little
purpose; for you run round in a circle until your brains are giddy, and know
not what you say. Those that took the Covenant before the Kings Proclamation
are bound to perform it, and those that took it after the Kings Proclamation
are bound to perform it, what then do you talk of the Kings Proclamation? all
the question is, if the matter of the Covenant be sinful, and in some clauses
of it you need not question that, for we have proved that already, whatsoever
saered Title you bestow upon it. But your absurdity for want of the Kings
consent, you would make up by a Book you say you since met withal, concerning
the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, which have been laid aside so many
years.

Its true, they have been laid aside ever since the Covenant justled them out
of doors, but I pray by whom but by those that were perverted by your Covenant?
Now you would apply the words of that Book to your purpose, which as well fit
you as a sow does a saddle. The words are, That though there be many
infirmities and misearriages committed in the making and taking of public
Oaths, etc. yet no pretense can make such Oaths void, etc. Those Oaths I say
were confirmed by King and Parliament, and the matter of them is just and
equal, which your Covenant wants; and there were so many infirmities in the
contriving, pressing, and taking of it, that many wise men held it utterly
unlawful to be taken at all, and that those that did take it should repent of
their error, being restrained by the Law of God and man from the performance
of it. The reasons, you say, alleged by the University of Oxford in a full
Convocation, June 1. 1647. why they could not take this Covenant, and another
Negative Oath, no way concern the present Case; for those reasons tend only to
their own justification for their not taking of the Covenant then tendered to
them, but not to fall upon others who had already taken it.

What irrational evasions are you forced to? They that took it, are bound to
perform it; but the University of Oxford had reasons to justify them why they
should not take it: was it not calculated for the Meridian of Oxford? if it had
been lawful, what reasons could they have to justify them more than the other
Subjects had? so then it seems some simple Proselytes that you made, because
they wanted reason to defend themselves, are hampered in your net, and there
they must stay upon pain of hell fire, and eternal damnation. I have heard of a
fool tied by the leg with a pack-thread, who would stand, and roar and cry as
if he had been bound with iron bonds. You strain at a gnat, and swallow a
camel; you that were bound with legal Oaths before, as strong as the wit of
man could devise, and snapt them asunder as if it had been but a twine thread,
what do you then prattle so much of the strength of your Covenant, which is far
better broken than kept? and if the Covenanters had brought His Majesty to his
Crown, they could have been no more importunate for their Covenant than they
are; when as it is manifest that it was not the Presbyterians that effected
this great Work, but it was the apparent hand of God, by making use of such
Instruments as he thought good, the Noble, Valiant, and Discreet General Monk,
and the prudent and well-advised Lord Major of London, Sir Tho. Alleyn, Sir
Geor. Booth, Sir Tho. Middleton, Alderman Robinson, and some other persons of
note and eminency, who were no ill friends to the Episcopal Government, that
the Presbytery have no reason to lay all the claim to what they did, but they
must needs allow us to have as great an interest in them as themselves; for
these are persons of a sublimer judgment, and are equally inclined to do
justice to all, not biased by any factions, or surely God would never have
prospered the work in their hands.

Rex Jupiter ommibus idem.

In your Covenant there was contained renouncing of Popery and Superstition,
Preservation of His Majesty's Person, etc. and what Reasons then could the
Scholars of Oxford give that they should not take this? If, as the words sound
in common apprehension of them they are very good, but if they must be read
backward, or be construed another way, and signify nothing else but a
trapanning of Subjects to disobedience against their lawful Sovereign, and
breaking of his Laws, why should any man that had unadvisedly taken it, be so
strongly obliged to keep it?

In casting dirt upon that Covenant which His present Gracious Majesty has so
highly honored, etc.

You are resolved it seems, to hold His Majesty to it; but if it shall not
stand with His Majesty's Honor, you are none of the best Subjects to press it
upon him, taking advantage of his then sad condition; but we hope that you
returning to your due Obedience, to which you are strongly bound by the Laws of
God, and man; and calling to mind your former Loyal Oaths, that you will
confess that you had no lawful Authority to impose such a Covenant upon his
Gracious Majesty, and therefore will of your own accord freely absolve him from
it; or you know (and then it will be no thanks to you) that the King and
Parliament (as you grant before) can disanul and abrogate former Oaths and
Contracts, or else you will charge some with perjury which you dare not to name.

You tell us that the Kingdom of Scotland entered into a Solemn Covenant amongst
themselves, without their King, before their joining with England in this, and
the King and Parliament of England upon a through Debate theneof, declared,
though at first they resolved to chastise them with a puissant Army, That our
Brethren of Scotland had done nothing but what became Loyal and Obedient
Subjects, etc.

It is very credible that some of your Brethren of Scotland first taught you
this Covenanting way, and there were too many in England confederate with them;
and if the King and Parliament, at first so highly offended, did afterward to
avoid civil Dissentions, and shedding of blood, compose the Differences in an
amiable way, yet God who sees the hearts of all men, would not suffer such
Rebellion to go long unpunished, but chastised them severely soon after, by the
hand of Oliver Cromwell, who made a full Conquest, wasted and ruined what he
pleased, and brought them into irrecoverable bondage, had it not pleased God at
length to set them free by the most happy Return of His Excellent Majesty
Charles the Second, to His just Inheritance; and therefore I hope the Scots
will not prove so ungrateful to Him, but as good Subjects, being now set at
liberty by Him, leave off their Covenanting amongst themselves without His
consent, and submit to His Royal Government, as their duty binds them.

You tell us of Queen Elizabeth and King James, both of blessed memories,
assisting the Netherlands, (combined not only without but against the unjust
violence of Philip the Second of Spain, first and chiefly in matters of
Religion) and entering into League with them as Free States; which was afterward
continued by His late Majesty, And why not of blessed Memory, as you said of
the two former Princes? in his Expedition for the Relief of Rochel, and
Alliance with the Prince of Orange.

That Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles, all of blessed Memories,
did assist the Netherlands, being then poor distressed States, oppressed in
their Consciences by the King of Spain, all the world knows sufficiently, for
by this means they are grown from a poor contemptible condition, to be the
Potent Hoogen Mogens, the High and Mighty Lords of Holland and West-Friezland,
etc. which has cost the best blood of Subjects that England had, besides
multitudes of Gentry and Commons that lost their lives in their defense. The
Netherlands were under Philip King of Spain indeed, but they state the Case far
otherwise than it was, or is with us in England, how rightly they best know.
But how far, and upon what grounds of Religion and Policy Princes may afford
Relief to Subjects of other Princes that are oppressed and enslaved by them,
especially for Conscience sake, is too long to dispute now; certain I am, that
the Netherlands were bound in the sight of God and man, to a great measure of
thankfulness to the Kings and Queen of England for their Assistance, and by
consequence to their Successors and subjects; but whether they did show it to
His late Majesty during the Wars in England, or to His Royal Issue in their
exile amongst them, and to such poor subjects as followed them, I know is a
question easily to be resolved.

Thus I have given you some Pattern of Covenanting Christians, besides the holy
League in France.

Why Sir, what Patterns are they? when you speak of the Netherlands, you
mention no Covenant they took, but say they combined together; but your
Patterns are, you say, the two Houses of Parliament in England, and your
Brethren in Scotland.

Surely the man is besides himself: The Doctor complains of your Scotch
Covenant, and that which was set forth by the two Houses of Parliament without
the Kings consent; and he says further, that there were never any such
Covenanting Christians heard of until the Papists covenanted together to
destroy the French Protestants; and if you have any other Patterns to produce,
he challenges you to do it. In answer whereto you say idem per idem: your
Patterns are the two Houses of Parliament, and our Brethren of Scotland: the
Boys in the streets will hiss at you.

You add, that you forbear to mention Germany, the Cantons the Albigenses, and
others, because you had said enough already, when as you had said just nothing;
and what you now say is as ridiculous as the former. You will not mention
Germany, etc. when as you do only mention it and no more; but for any
Covenants they entered into without their Princes consent, if you knew of any
you should have mentioned that, or else hold your peace, but it is clear you
could find none, which is sufficient to show your falsehood and folly, and
blasphemy in the close, who dare compare your Covenant with our sacred Covenant
made with God in Baptism, wherein we are sprinkled with the blood of Christ,
and spiritually washed from the guilt of original sin.

Give me leave to make a short digression, if it be any, to show how hurtful it
is to bind the King and his Subjects to stand to the Covenant: We honor our
Kings here, as Christ's Vicegerents upon earth, and although they are compassed
with human infirmities, and are restrained by good Laws from doing wrong,
because of the largeness of their power, yet they ought not to be bound with
Saint Peter's bonds, or hindered from doing any good they can. You know that God
has given to the Kings of England a miraculous Gift of Healing most
scroffulous Tumors, called The Kings Evil, (for every good gift comes from God)
and that many hundreds have been healed by His Majesty's touching of them since
His happy Return, who could find no remedy before from Chyrurgions or
Physicians, and diverse perished for want of help; and if the Christian Kings of
France can do the like, it is but a farther Confirmation of the certainty and
lawfulness of it: now when they perform these Cures, some worthy Bishop or
Episcopal Divine waits on them, repeating the Promise of our blessed Savior
to his Church (over which the King is held by us to be Supreme in his
Dominions) They shall lay their hand upon the sick, and they shall recover,
Mark 16.18. If your Covenant will not allow this to be done by them, but that
poor people must perish for want of Cure, when God has so graciously provided
it for them, how do you think it possible the people will endure such a
Covenant?

I have been told that some sons of Belial should speak evil of it, who would
speak no better of Saint Paul's Napkins, or of the shadow of Saint Peter passing
by. I do not find that this way of healing was practiced here, at least so
frequently, before Edward the Confessor's days, who is well represented on the
Royal Exchange, under a double capacity of King and Priest, with a Crown on his
head, and a Bible in his hand; and from him it descended to his Successors; yet
if I forget not, I have read something of King Lucius to this purpose, who was
the first Christian King here, when Joseph of Arimathea lived in this Island.
But should any man ask a reason why the King does not cure all Diseases as well
as that, or why it was not practiced so often at least, in former days? it
would be to, tedious to discourse of Sympathies and Antipathies, of Thora and
Antithora, or of such providential ways wherewith our good God does always
supply mankind with helps against all defects and inconveniences where we
stand in need: One may as well forbid the use of the Mariners Compass, as if it
were performed by sorcery or enchantments, because we cannot give a certain
reason why the Loadstone should attract iron as it does; or the Needle should
point always to the North. I shall only assign two reasons of His Majesty's
curing the Evil. The first shall be, that it is very probable that this Evil is
more frequent, and increases more now than it did of old, by reason of change
of Diet, or from what cause soever it may proceed wherein we differ from the
Ancients, and therefore God has furnished us with this remedy against it. And
secondly Christianity waxing cold, and men being more subjoct to rebel against
the Supreme Magistrate than of elder times; for so Saint Paul writes to
Timothy, That in the last days perilous times should come, that men should be
Traitors, heady, highminded, etc. 2 Timothy 3.4. And Saint Peter says, 2 Pet. 3
3. There shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after the rown lusts,
such as despise Government, chap. 2.8. presumptuous, not being afraid to speak
evil of Dignities, and therefore 1 Pet chap. 2.13. he commands all, Submit your
selves to every Ordinance of man, to the King as Supreme: and verse 17. Fear
God, honor the King.

Now that Subjects might live more peaceably in obedience to the King, this may
be none of the least occasions, God having hereby discovered unto us, that he
has bestowed upon the King this divine Virtue of Healing some of the most
general and spreading Diseases amongst the people, more than he has given to
any other men.

I would we knew the extent of your Covenant, if we must obey it, I do not see
but most degrees of Honor, the Nobles as well as of the Clergy, must be
levelled by it. It may be the Order of the Garter will be allowed for no better
than an old Popish Ceremony, fit to be abolished, if you may tanquam ex
cathreda, interpret the sense of your Covenant, which you hold to be as
infallible as Rome does her Church, all must believe it under pain of
damnation, call but your Covenanters the Church, and I find no difference. But
to return to Episcopacy, methinks it is high time Bishops should be restored
with more power than formerly, which will be but moderate Episcopacy, in regard
of the great increase of Schisms and Heresies, and the dangerous times we are
fallen into.

But whom do you call your dear Mother of the Church of England? Pray what is
she?

Here according to your scurrilous way of jeering, you proceed to speak
nonsense, it seems you are but an ungracious, disobedient son, your Mother is
grown poor by many of your plunderings and sequestrings, and now you will not
know her. Does not St. Paul call himself the Father of those Churches he had
begotten in Christ? and why then cannot the Church of England spiritually and
metaphorically be called our Mother, whose breasts we suck in the two
Sacraments of Baptism, and the Holy Eucharist. The Scripture says, That Kings
shall be the Churches Nursing Fathers, and Queens Nursing Mothers: Are you such
a Critic, and understand not that, or will you quarrel with the Scripture for
it?

As for your Postscript of Doctor Vshers Model of Reformed Episcopacy, the
Learned Doctor Bernard being now living, is able to give the best account of
that; but I hope I have given you a good account of all the rest.

POSTSCRIPT.
THe Reader may, if he please for his own better satisfaction, compare the
Arguments of Anonymus with those of Mr. Zachary Crofton, who is reported to be
the Goliath of the Covenanters in London, and he shall find them to be birds
of a feather, having little more to say for themselves. Qui utrumvis recte
noverit, ambos, immo omnes noverit: answer one, and answer them all. I would
counsel them, if they will take my advice, to live peaceably, and not to
disturb the Church of God, whereof they are members, considering how dangerous
Schisms are to let in Popery, Judaism, Turkism, Paganism, and all manner of
impiety, to the subversion, if it were possible, of the Christian Faith, we are
all as brethren traveling to the Heavenly Canaan: Let us remember that Charge
Joseph gave to his brethren going to their earthly Canaan, See that you fall
not out by the way. God grant us all a right understanding in all things.

There are others since Zach Crofton, that plead for a Reformation of our
Church in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, let them by strength of Argument
prove the necessity the pretend, and let us have the same liberty in an amiable
way to defend it, and I doubt not of a good issue; always with this proviso,
That the Covenanters shall not when they are at a loss, run back to shelter
themselves under their Covenant, as they use to do. We know what Ajax said of
Ulysses, Et quaerre censciui Arma: they need not blaze it about so much, to
persuade the people things are so extreme bad in the Church of England: their
best way will be, if they mean peaceably, to make their Addresses to the
reverend Bishops, and by their advice, if there be any thing that will not
agree with these men's queezy stomachs, something may be more fully explained to
give them satisfaction, which I believe for my part is impossible for any men
to do, they are so inconstant in their judgments and resolutions; and that it
would not please them long, if they were suffered to make the Alteration
themselves: they will stand to nothing unless their Dalilah, the Covenant, may
be allowed to be Supreme Governor; and that is the main reason of the great
noise they make for want of Reformation; which if there were such necessity for
it as they would make the world believe there is, nothing hinders more than
their Solemn League and Covenant: for to what end should the wisest men upon
the earth allege Scripture, Councels, Fathers, to confirm any Truth, if when
all is done, it will not square with their Lesbian Rule, their leaden Covenant
which will bend every way, and which alone they will admit to be the measure of
it, it shall be held by them for no Reformation at all. Wherefore all that are
dis-satisfied with our Church in Doctrine or Discipline, must renounce the
Covenant, if they expect any thing to be amended, and, which is the readiest
way to set things to rights, rest in the wise and pious determination of our
Ancestors, who settled Episcopal Government here, the livelyest pattern this day
in all the world, whereby all erroneous and heterodox Opinions may be kept
down, and Religion settled and continued according to the true Rule, which is
the word of God.

My Coronis shall be an Hexastick of Sir John Sucklings, never to be forgotten:

IF I were of your Covenant,
Then you would call me John of Gant,
Or one of high renown:
But now I am John for the King,
You will call me a poor Suckling,
And so you will cry me down.
FINIS.

