A SERMON Preached before His GRACE the Kings Commissioner, And the Three
ESTATES OF PARLIAMENT, May the 25th. 1690.

By GILBERT RULE Minister of the Gospel at Edinburgh.

EDINBVRGH, Printed at the Society of Stationers Printing House in Harts-Close,
over against the Trone-Church, for George Mosman Bookseller at his Shop on the
Southside of the Parliament-Close, 1690.

READER,
IT was not Choice, but the Appointment of the General Meeting of the
Presbyterian Ministers, which made me (with much Reluctance) to appear before
so Great and Discerning an Auditory: I was led to the Subject here treated of,
by observing that the Affairs of this Church* and its Settlement, after a long
time wherein things has been not of Course in it, were under the Parliaments
consideration: And I was moved to allow the Printing of this Discourse, only by
the Command of Authority, without which nothing could have prevailed with me to
have made it so public; wherein there is nothing to commend it, save the
Divine Truths that are the matter of it. As the Interest of Religion was our
solicitude when these Thoughts were conceived and delivered: So now we are
filled with Joy, while we behold the Religious regard, that the High, and
Honorable Court of Parliament have showed to the Mountain of the Lords House,
above other Mountains, (which they truly are, and ought to be concerned about)
in the great step toward the establishing thereof, that they made by their
Vote 28th. Instant, Settling the Protestant Religion, and the Presbyterian
Church Government; and their proceeding to consider the other things needful,
for promoting Religion in this Church, and Nation. That the Lord may help them
to go on as they have begun, and hitherto acted, and reward them for their Good
Deeds toward his House, and that he may bless what here follows, for Soul
advantage to them who read it, is the earnest Prayer of

Thine, and the Church's Servant G. R.
Edinburgh May 30th. 1690.
A SERMON ON Isaiah. 2. Chap. 2 ver.
And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the Mountain of the Lords
house shall established in the top of the Mountains, and shall be exalted above
the Hills: And all Nations shall flow unto it. REligion, and the Church (which
is the Chief mean of propogating it in the World) is the most contemptible
thing to many men, that can be, and that which most men are least concerned
about. But as it always ought to be otherwise, so the Lord here promises,
that there shall be a time when it shall be more regarded. This promise was
made to the Church before the Captivity in Babylon, that it might be a support
to the Faithful in that dark Hour: And it is repeated Micha. 4. and 1. As that
which was needful, and yet hard to be believed. We are here to consider, First,
the certainty of the event, It shall come to pass, Or be; Whatever
unlikelyhood, or letts, may be in the way. God has said it. Secondly, the time
of it, the last days, the days of the Gospel: Or when God has exercised his
People with Trial, he will at last put an end to their trouble, and bring this
about for their comfort. Thirdly, The subject spoken of, the Mountain of the
Lords House. By this, no doubt, is meant the Church, or the Religious interest
of Men: Mount Zion (that is one of the two tops of it, called Mount Moriah,
where the Temple was built) was a name ordinariely given to the Church of God:
And from the Dialect of the old Testament, it is transferred to the new
Testament. Wherefor, by the Mountain of the House of the Lord, is meant the
Church. It is she, It is the Religion owned and professed in her, and Gods
ordinances whereby she is distinguished from other Societies, that is here
promised to be exalted so high. The Church or the concernments of Religion may
well be called a Mountain, both from her Eminency, and also from her stability.
Fourthly, two things are said of this Mountain* her preference to other things,
and her increase are both asserted For the former it is to be considered,
First, absolutely, that she shall be Established (...) signifies both
preparation and fixedness: And indeed has a great Emphasis in this place The
Church shall be prepared: That is Men shall use the greatest application, the
greatest Care, the greatest Wariness, Consideration, and Zeal; they shall
employ all their Wit. all their Activity and Care: And not only so, but the
Lord will employ his infinite Wisdom and Goodness* for her being settled on
lasting Foundations: Rashness, Headiness, Indifferency, and worldly Designs,
are not like to make good work when Men are about settling the Church. It will
make an ill contrived building that will not stand long The Church (says the
Text also) shall be Established That is fixed, made impregnable, so as the
Malice and open enmity of Enemies, nor the treachery of false Friends shall not
be able to brangle her Constitution* And the Lord will make her firm on the
Rock* that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against her. It is also said
that she shall be exalted, or be made great and glorious. God will put a Luster
on Her. And men (when the Lord pours out the Spirit on them that seems to
be promised in the Text) will contribute what they can to promote her Spiritual
Glory. 2ly. Comparatively. The Church must be fixed and exalted above the
Mountains and Hills, That is, preferred to all the other Interests of Men,
however great they he in the Eyes of the World, the Lord will make Her more
Glorious then any other Society or false Church: And men will (when this
promise is fullfiled) prefer Her Interest to all that can be dear to them, or
great in their Eyes. The other thing that is said of the Church is, that all
Nations shall flow to Her, when God shall thus exalt Her, and when men shall
thus show their zeal for Her, many will come to Her, join with Her, submit to
Her, it will be a Terror to Enemies and an allurement to Strangers.

Diverse practical and important Truths might be observed from this Text: But I
pitch upon this one, as of great use and necessity to be considered by this
Audience at this time, to wit, That God will, and Men ought to prefer the
Interest of the Church and Religion, to all other Concernments whatsoever.

Let us (for our more distinct procedure) consider First, What this Religious
Interest is, and what are the great things to which it must be preferred.
Secondly, How God will prefer it. Thirdly, How men should do it. Fourthly, Why
it should be so.

For the First, we must consider that Christ is a King* Psalm. 2. v. 6. And
though his Kingdom be not of this World* Jo. 18. 36. Yet it is in this World:
And his Royal Power is exercised visibly among Men. Math 28. 19, 20, with the
18. And that as distinguished from (though no way opposite to, and far less
inconsistent with) the Kingdoms of men. If it be managed according to his Laws,
it does not tend to depress, but to exalt men's greatness; neither can it
otherwise curb their Excesses, then by holding forth his Law, which sets
bounds to all the Actions of Men with respect to the moral good or evil that
may be in them: Now this glorious King must have a people (for here it must not
be questioned, That the people are for the King, and not he for them, Isa. 43.
1. 7, 21) There must be a Seed to serve him, Psalm. 22. 30. Psalm. 2. 8. That the
Doctrine that he has taught be owned and believed. That he be Worshipped in the
right Management of his Ordinances: That his Laws be declared, submitted to,
and obeyed: That the government and order of his House be observed, as he has
held it forth and enjoined it: And all this for the promoting of Holiness,
restraining of Sin, and the Salvation of Men. This, I say, is that Mountain;
that great Concernment, that the Lord does, and Men should prefer before all
things else. There are indeed other Mountains; things that are great and
Momentous in the Eyes of Men, which may and ought, in their own place, to have
a due regard. But must no ways vie with the Mountain of the Lords House, with
the great things that concern the Church and Religion. The greatness and
Prerogatives of Kings; the Establishment of Earthly Throns; and the Liberties
and Privileges of People, the security and safety of the present Government
and Constitution of a Nation, the advancement of Trade and enriching of a
Nation: These are great things, and by all good means must be secured, so far
as Men can do it: Yet none of these separately, nor all of them in Conjunction,
are of so much value, as that they should be preferred to this Mountain that
the text speaks of: But it must be set above them all. It is true there is
such a Connection betwixt this Mountain and some of these Mountains, that the
one cannot be safe, if the other be Ruined: And therefore, even for its safety
they are to be Regarded (of which more after) But when this Spirit, that is
here promised, is poured out on Men, these will be minded but in the second
place.

2ly I am to show how the Lord does, and will prefer the Mountain of his
House, the interest of Religion, to all other Mountains, or interests, that are
great in the Esteem of Men. This will appear if we consider, First, what is
positively declared in the Scripture of his special respest to his Church, and
her Religious concernments, above all the other interests, not only of the rest
of the world, but even of his own People. A notable place to this purpose is
Psalm. 87. Where Gods esteem of his Church is purposely insisted on: It is His
Foundation: It is indeed the ground of all his Dispensations to men; with
respect to it is all the conduct of providence. And then, He loves it better
then all the dwellings of Jacob, neither the Kings palace* nor the Stately
buildings of the Nobles, none of the Civil, Public, or Private, concernments
of his people, did bear so much bulk in his Eye; yea such Glorious things are
spoken, (by the Lord in his Word) of the Church, as of no other thing on Earth.
And the Lord reckons the honor of men not by their noble Blood, but by their
relation to his Church, and concern in Religion verse 4th Egypt (under the name
of Rahab) and Babylon, were then the most flourishing Kingdoms in the World:
But it was a greater honor to be of poor Israel then of any of these: A well
reformed Church is a greater Glory with God, then a flourishing Kingdom: Yea
the warlike Philistines, the Rich trading Tire, the ancient Aethiopia, were
nothing to him, in comparison of poor Judea: Because Gods ordinances were
there: ye shall please God better and do him better service, if ye make poor
Scotland a well reformed Church, than if ye could make her richer, more potent,
and splendid than any of her Neighbor Nations It is Religion that makes
People truly Honorable, for it is that which makes them precious in Gods
sight Isaiah. 43: 4. Nothing does so truly, and in the esteem of God, and good
Men, so exalt a People, as the Truth, the Purity, and the Power of Religion
flourishing among them.

2ly. The Lords special respect to men's Religious* above their other Interests,
will appear, if we consider what he has done for his Cuhrch. The greatest
Manifestations of God and of his Attributes that ever the World was witness to;
The most Glorious things of his word, and the most eminent of his Works* have
all had a special respect to the Church, and the true Religion. His choosing and
purchasing a Church to himself was a Glorious passage: And that both his
setting up the Jewish Church, Deuteronomy. 4. 34. Or has God assayed to go and take
him a Nation from the midst of another Nation, by Temptations, by Signs, and by
Wonders, and by War, and by a mighty Hand, and by a stretched out Arm, and by
great Terrors, according to all that the Lord your God did for you in Egypt,
before your Eyes? And yet more in erecting the Gospel Church: The eternal Son
of God became a man, and laid down his Life for this end Tit. 2, 14. His
preserving and mantaining his Church is a Tract of Wonders, interlaced with
Miracles. For the Churches Emblem is a Bush burning and yet not consumed Exodus
3. 2. We may, with good warrant, say, that the whole conduct of Providence is
managed with an Eye to the Church and Religion: which cannot be said of any
other interest in the World Hence Christ is not only head of his Church to rule
her; but head over all things for her behove Ephesians. 1: 22, He made the World that
he might have a People to serve him on Earth, and to praise him for ever in
Heaven. Isaiah 45. 18, 19. He made all the interests of the Nations of the
World, in his settling of them, subordinate to his designs for his Church.
Deuteronomy. 32. 8 9. When the most high divided to the Nations their inheritance,
when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the People according
to the number of the Children of Israel* For the Lords Portion is his People:
Jacob is the lot of his inheritance So the best Interpreters apply that text.
The greatest revolutions that the World has seen, have had respect to this
interest* in the design of God: An instance is in destroying the Chaldean and
setting up the Persian Monarchy, Isaiah. 43 14 Thus says the Lord your
Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel, for your sake I have sent to Babylon, and
have brought down all their Nobles, and the Chaldeans, whose cry is in the
ships. The one persecuted the people of God, It is pulled down: and the other
is set up to relieve them* So Cyrus got the Crown on their Account, Isaiah 45.
the 1: 2: 3: 4. Thus says the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand
I have holden ^o subdue Nations before him: And I will loose the loi^s of Kings
to open before him the two leaved gates and the gates shall not be shut. I will
go before thee and make the crooked places straight: I will break in pieces
the gates of Brass* and c^t in sunder the Bars of Iron And I will give thee the
Treasures of Darkness, and hidden Riches of secret places, that thou may
know, that I the Lord, which call thee by thy Name, am the God of Israel. For
Jacob my servants sake, and Israel mine Elect* I have even called thee by thy
Name: I have surnamed thee* though thou have not known me. Though the World did
not so construct these events.

3ly. The same is clear by what he has promised to do for his People: as in
the Text: And Isaiah 54. 1 etc. Dan: 2* 44. Math. 16. 18. The like promises no
State, Kingdom, Family, nor interest in the World can lay claim to*

I proceed to the third thing above mentioned, to show how men (even all men in
their several Capacities) should imitate God in this; and contribute their
endeavors to advance Religion above all things that are great or precious in
the Eyes of the World. And lest any should mistake the tendency of this
discourse; I shall show what is not to be expected of them who have true zeal
for Religion, which possibly some may look on as an advancement of its
interest. As First, it is not advancing of Churchmen unto Worldly dignities or
power: We plead not for a Papacy, to be Cardinals or Prelates: Neither do we
think it any advancement to the Church, that her Ministers have a share in the
Civil Government. As Christ's Kingdom is never of this World, so its dignity and
advancement lies in nothing that is Worldly: Nothing but a Worldly Spirit, and
a false Idea of Reliligion, could make Men think this an advancement to the
Church* For it is truly a depression of Her; and puts that as a diadem upon
Her head, which the Scripture places under Her feet, Rev. 12 1. Her Glory is
the Sun, Christ; and the twelve Stars; the Light of Apostolic Doctrine; Not
the Moon, this inferior and changeable World.

Neither lies the Churches advancement in Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical
Domination, to be Lords over Gods Heritage, or Masters of Peoples Faith. 2.
Cor. 1. 24, Not for that we have dominion over your Faith, but are helpers of
your joy: for by Faith ye stand. 1. Pet. 5* 3. Neither as being Lords over Gods
heritage: But being examples to the stock. 2. Cor. 4. 5 For we Preach not our
Selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our Selves your Servants for Jesus sake.
We pretend not to make Church Laws. But to declare these which Christ has
made, and to impose them (not what we think sit) by his Authority, and to
Censure such as will not obey his Laws; not as we will, but as he has
appointed. We set up no Imperium in Imperio; but a Ministerium* It is true
Christ's servants are Clothed with his Authority (and men should advance the
Church by allowing them the free exercise of it) to declare the Laws of Christ,
and to require obedience to them: And all men from the highest to the lowest
ought to bring their Necks under this his yoke Yet this is far from Clashing
with, or diminishing the Magistrat^ Authority; or restaining the Exercise of
it* Because they differ in their Objects* in their Ends* and in their manner of
Exercise But time does not permit to enlarge on this. Neither do we plead to
be advanced to an exemption from the Laws and Authority of the Magistrate as
some others do.

3dly. We plead not to be advanced to worldly Pomp and Riches: Let not the
Church be so depressed* as that her Ministers be under anxious Penury; that
hinders minding their Work or contemptible Meanness; that the world be not
tempted to vilify them and their work too: And we have enough.

4thly. Neither is the Church preferred, nor Religion promoted, by setting up a
Pompous, Gaudy, Theatrical kind of Worship: by pretending to adorn it by modes
and Religious Rites that Christ has not instituted* Her greatest Beauty and
visible Luster is Gospel simplicity. So far as we go from Apostolic Purity, so
far we depress Religion, and deform the Beautiful face of Christ's comely Spouse.

Let us then consider positively, how men should set the Mountain of the Lords
House upon the top of the Mountains: What way they must prefer Religion to
other Concernments. First* They must Labor to secure that Interest: Not to
leave it at uncertainty. If they be Careful (as wise men will) to make sure
Work about their worldly Affairs* whether public or private; much more should
that Care be used in this Case. And for this end, they should be careful to
build upon a good Foundation: Apostolic Doctrine, as it holds forth Christ
in all his Offices; and particularly, his Kingly Office, is the only Foundation
for Church work, Ephesians 2 20, 21, 22. And are built upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone. In
whom all the building fitly framed together, grows unto an holy temple in the
Lord. In whom you also are builded together for an habitation of God through
the Spirit. Men's Devices and men's Politics, lay no sure ground for the
Church-Care is also to be taken, that nothing may be laid on this Foundation,
but what is suitable to it: Let all things be done for the House of the God of
Heaven, according to his will. Even a Heathen knew this to be Duty. Ezra 7. 23
See 1 Cor. 3 9 10, 11. Likewise, men should be sure, That they build upon this
Foundation, and not act by Guess, in this matter: And they should build
strongly; that neither open Enemies may batter, nor false Friends undermine
this Building. Let Laws about Christ's matters be well digested, and wisely
considered, and fixed with all Care.

2dly. Let Christ's Church enjoy all the Privileges that he has granted her. If
men with hold any one of them, they do not advance the Mountain of the house of
the Lord as they should. Sound Doctrine, Pure Ordinances, a Godly Ministry, a
Government drawn from Christ's Institution, and Apostolic practice, and that
tendeh to advance Holiness: That it be managed by its Friends, and not by them
that would Supplant it; that they may Assemble as often as is needful for this
end: That Church Officers be looked out, and chosen by the People of God, and
not Imposed on them by Men's will, Acts 6. 3 That the Fountains out of which a
godly Seed for the Church may Issue* be kept pure: That Discipline may be duly
Exercised: And whatever lets to Religion, and snares to the Serious Godly, men
have framed into Laws, may be removed. This would conduce much to the
Advancement of the Church* And if any of these be neglected, She is not set on
the top of the Mountains, but somewhat else preferred to Her. Half Reformations
are often condemned, when the high places were not removed, though many things
were commendably Reformed there is always a mark set on that Reformation as
Sinfully defective.

3dly. The promoting of Holiness is one chief way of advancing Religion, and
making the Church Glorious. Holiness is Her Beauty and Cognizance, Psalm 93. 5
Ezekiel. 43. 12. Let Laws be made and executed, for restraining the horrid
Immoralities that have defaced the Church; and for encouraging true Piety.

4ly. Let no Interest be preferred to, or come in competition with, the
concernment of Religion. As it can never Clash with any of the true Interests
of Men: So where it is so apprehended, that men think, that either it, or they
must suffer inconveniency; let it always have the preference, as being of most
value, and on account that due regard to it, is the way to engage the Lord to
take care of men's other Interests, even when they seem to be in hazard: See for
this Exodus 34 24. For I will cast out the Nations before Thee, and enlarge thy
Borders; neither shall any man desire thy Land, when thou shall go up to appear
before the Lord thy God, thrice in the year. This should be minded mainly, with
the greatest zeal* with the greatest tenderness, lest any wrong step be made
about it. An error about other matters should be looked on as of less moment,
and less dangerous consequence. If any thing must run a venture, let it not be
Christ's Interest.

5thly. It belongs to this preference* that Religion should have, that it be
postponed to no other concernment. As we are to seek the Kingdom of God first,
with respect to our own Souls, Matthew 6. 33. So must we use the same Conduct
with respect to the public and more general advancement of that Kingdom: This
is to be understood, when the time of considering this Affair, may import
either its esteem, its safety, or any other advantage to it. Then all things
should yield to it, even in that circumstance. Let it not be thought (when we
thus plead) that they who do most concern themselves in the Church, are either
Impatient under necessary delays, or would prescribe to them whom the Lord
has entrusted as the Nursing Fathers of the Church: They can with confidence
Trust this to the Wisdom of such Worthy Patriors: But we are confident that
zeal for the Church, the consideration of her present Confusions, and regard to
the Souls of Men, will suggest this to them. If David was allowed to plead with
God (as Psalm 70. 1 5.) That the Lord would make have to deliver and help him,
and that he would make no tarrying: I hope we shall not be blamed if we so
plead with men.

6thly. They that are truly zealous for advancing the Interest of the Church
and Religion, will also be careful that the State be well settled. There is a
connection betwixt these two, as between the Soul and Body: The illness of the
one affects the other. If the Government be not supported, if that
Establishment of it that is Friendly to Religion be not secured, if it be in
the hands of either open Enemies, or false Friends to Truth, and to the right
ways of God, the Church cannot be safe It is true the Lord can support her
(and has done it) amidst her most Bloody Foes: But a Godly Magistracy is the
ordinary means for that end. They are Nursing Fathers, Christ has committed
the care of his Spouse (as to externals) to them: And this Trust they cannot
well perform* if they let the House go to ruin over Her head. Wherefore if men
will establish the Mountain of the House of God above other Mountains, They
will also be duly careful of the Interest of the Nation, and that for the
Churches fake, for the sake of the Protestant Religion here, and elsewhere, as
well as for theit own sakes.

The fourth thing proposed to be Discoursed, is to give the Reasons why the
Interest of Religion should be so minded* and that with preference to all other
Interests. I may confidently affirm, that few Reasons will be needful to
persuade them of this, and to incline them to it* who in leed understand what
Religion is, and who are truly concerned in it* But that I may give you a few
hints to this purpose. Consider First, The advancement of Religion is that
whereby God is more honored then by any other way. The Riches, Power, Splendour
of his People* or of a Nation, or of great Ones, does not so much honor him,
as this does: Neither does their meaness and contempt, and low* condition in
the World, so dishonor him, as abounding Sin, Idolatry, Superstition, Church
Confusion, or other sinful courses do, see Psalm 48 1, 2, 3. Great is the Lord,
and greatly to be praised in the City of our God, in the Mountain of his
Holiness. Beautiful for Situation, the joy of the whole earth is Mount Zion, on
the sides of the North, the City of the great King: God is known in her palaces
for a refuge. Christ is King of Kings and therefore his interest is to be
preferred to that of all the great men on Earth.

2ly. The Salvation of men is nearly concerned in this, the advancement of
other interests may be conducive to their riches, power and Worldly greatness:
But this is the mean to save their Souls. The soundness of Doctrine, the purity
and liveliness of Ordinances, yea the order of the Church of God, is of great
use for this end: Even that tends to preserve the truth and ordinances of
God: To curb vice, and to engage men in the ways of God: And therefore they
who desire to be holy or to see holiness promoted among men, cannot but think
it of high concernment that the Church be well settled. If then ye have any
regard to your own immortal Souls, If ye value the Souls of People more then
your Worldly concernments, make it your care to advance Religion rather then
any other interest.

3ly. True Religion, and the flourishing of it among a people is the greatest
Glory of a Nation The poorest and most contemptible People may, by this means,
have their reputation advanced in the sight of God, and in the esteem of all
good men: Yea often in the Eyes of them that are but moral and intelligent,
though Enemies, Deuteronomy 4 6. 7, 8 v. 6 Keep therefore and do them for this is your
Wisdom, and your understanding in the sight of the Nations, which shall hear
all these statuts, and say* surely this Nation is a wise and understanding
People v. 7. For what Nation is there so great, who has God so nigh unto them
as the Lord our God is in all things that we call upon him for? v 8. And what
Nation is there so great, that has statutes and Judgments so righteous* as
all this Law, which I set before you this Day. And not only so; but (...) is
the way to bring down National blessings, as the neglect of Religion brings
National Curses and Ruin. As may be observed in the whole current of the
Writings of the Prophets, and in the History of the Judges and Kings of Israel
and Judah. If ye will set Christ on high in this poor Church, he will set the
Church and Nation on high. Scotland has in former times been renowned and
esteemed among the Churches of the Reformation, upon this account. It may be an
honor in after ages to your Posterity* that such a man was active and Faithful
in that happy Parliament, that settled* Religion and the Church, when it had
been almost ruined.

4ly Yea this is the way to secure us that we need not fear our Enemies, or
them that are unfriends to our way: But rather shall be feared by them.
Religion well settled and flourishing in a Nation, will render it more
formidable, then strong* Armies or Navies could do. Gods presence among a
People (and that is best obtained by the advancement of Religion amongst them)
uses to strike terror into the minds of their Enemies. 1 Samuel 4: 7: 8. And the
Philistines were afraid, for they said God is come unto the Camp: And they
said, woe unto us* for their has not been such a thing heretofore. Woe unto us
who shall deliver us out of the hands of these mighty Gods. These are the Gods
that smote the Egyptians with all the plagues in the Wilderness Psalm. 48. 4. 5,
6. For lo the Kings were assembled, they passed by together, they saw it, and
so they marvelled. They were troubled, and hasted away: Fear took hold upon
them and pain as of a Woman in Travel. Cant. 6. 4 -- Terrible as an Army with
Banners.

And now to conclude with a few words for applying of what has been said: Ye
see what the Lord gives us hope that he will do for his Church: Ye see what he
calls you in your present Station, and in the high trust that God and the
Nation have reposed in you, to do for Religion. That ye should be careful to
set this Mountain on the top of the Mountains, and advance it above the Hills.
Wherefore let me beseech you, and obtest you in the Lord, that ye would bring
home all that has been said, to your own practice, in these three things.
First beware of being defective in this, either by luke warmness, neglect and
indifferency, or by preferring any thing else to the well being of Religion:
Beware of venturing it for a Worldly interest, either public, or private, and
selfish: For your humor, to maintain a S^iekle, or in pursuance of private
Piques. Let all Christ's friends lay by their animosities, that they may secure
and promote his interests. Religion makes a small figure in our account* if it
cannot thus far influence us. Beware also of enmity* and ^ll designs against
that which the Lord will thus advance: For it will prove a Burdensome stone to
any who so design or endeavor. Zech: 12. 3, And a Cup of Trembling to them,
Verse. 2. How this texr suteth with a Maxim that some men advance, that the
Government of the Church should be modelled as is most suitable to that of the
stare, let any Judge. For this were to set the mole* hills of this World above*
and on the top of the Mountain of the Lords House. It was not so under the old
Testament: For the Government of the State was often changed, but that of the
Church remained the same* And if this were always observed, Popery behoved to
be under Monarchy: Episcopacy or Presbytery under Aristocracy* and
Independency, with Democracy. Which I think none will plead. 2ly. Let this
encourage every one to venture, and Act for Religion: The text tells us, that
interest will be uppermost. If we believe this, it will inspire us with courage
and zeal: Gods hand is at this work, and therefore men may be encouraged, with
the greatest resolution, to put their hand to it. Hag. 2: 4. Yet now be strong,
O Zerubbabel, says the Lord; and be strong O Joshuah Son of Josedech, the high
Priest and be strong all ye people of the Land, says the Lord, and work, for*
I am with you, says the Lord of Hosts. Most of the Prophesies of Zechariah are
to this purpose See Chap: 8: 9: 13.

3. Let this engage you to contribute all your endeavors to promote the
Interest of Religion; get your heart engaged to it, and then your hand will not
be wanting: Love the Truths and ways of God; and labor to get your Hearts
bent for Holiness: Without this, and where Men's own Hearts are nor first gained
to God, their actings for him are like to be faint, and unsteady. Pray, and
wait for Light and Guidance from the Lord, and for his help that ye may do him
service in this matter. Resolve to be Faithful, and that ye will thus lay out
your selves for the Lord: And be careful to lay hold on the happy occasion that
the Lord has put in your hands to do him service, in promoting of true
Religion. Consider what peace it will yield you in the day of trouble, and at
Death, that ye have sincerely appeared for God and Religion* And what a terror
the contrary will bring What a Blessing it may entail on you and your Families:
And what a Curse will be on all them who are Enemies or false Friends to
Religion. Also that the Work will be done, deliverance and establishment will
come to the Church. The Text assures us of that: As also do other Scriptures.
And if ye be wanting in your Station, and when opportunity is put in your
hands, Mordecai has pronounced what will be the issue of it. Esth 4. 14. For
if thou altogether hold thy peace at this time, then shall there
enlargement, and deliverance arise to the Jews rom another place; but thou and
thy Fathers House shall be destroyed* And who knows whether thou art come to
the Kingdom for such a time as this. I have not in this Discourse been very
particular in bespeaking your Care and Zeal for the things controverted among
us: Partly, because time does not allow to insist on such Debates; and partly,
because I am confident that were men cordially for the Advancement of the Life
and Power of Religion and unbyassedly for Christ's Kingdom among us, they would
readily fall into accord about the things that have been the matter of our
Differences.

FINIS.

