SIR Benjamin Rudyerd HIS SPEECH Made in answer to the Spanish and French
Ambassadors request for our Soldiers at their Disbanding,

August 28. 1641.

LONDON Printed Anno Domini, 1641.

Mr. Speaker,
THis is a Business of great Consequence, and therefore requires a wel-advised
Resolution. I will put France and Spain together, take them both before me,
because the Reasons will serve one another, as they stand in Relation to us.

We are, Master Speaker, so bounded by the nature of our Situation, as we are
not so proper to extend our selves upon the firm Land of our Neighbors; Our
Aptitude is rather to Balance, which being rightly used may make the King the
great Arbiter of all the Affairs of Christendom, by Assisting, Withholding,
or Opposing.

Henry the Eighth is an Example of This; He was sometimes of the side of the
Emperor, other times of the French Party, according as he faw either side of
the Scales to weigh heavier or lighter; Some might think this to be
Inconstancy in him, but it was certainly out of a true and peculiar
understanding his Power.

The present State of Christendom is apparent, That the House of Austria
begins to diminish, as in Spain, so consequently in Germany. That the French
do swell and enlarge themselves: if they Grow and Hold, They will be to us but
Spain nearer hand.

Alliances do serve well To make up a present Breach, or mutually To strengthen
those States who have the same Ends; but Politic Bodies have no Natural
Affections, they are Guided by particular Interest, and beyond That are not to
be trusted.

Although it may be good Policy to breed a Militia at the charg of other States
abroad for our own use and occasions at home, yet That ought rather to be done
amongst Friends of the same way, and so the Low Countries have been an Academie
to us.

His Majesty has now an Ambassador treating with the Emperor about the
Palatinate, If we send away our Men, it will so damp and discountenance the
Affairs of the Prince Elector, as the World will believe, we never had, nor
ever shall have any Intentions, to Assist him at all.

I have observed for diverse years, That England is not so well Peopled, but we
do want Work-folks to bring in Harvest, Our disbanded Soldiers will least
dislike that kind of work, and if they be speedily dissolved, That Employment
will entertain them for the present, and inure them to labor for hereafter.

Upon these Considerations, Mr. Speaker, I cannot give my advice to add more
strength to France, by weakening both our selves and our Friends.

As for sending the Irish into Spain, Truly, Sir, I have been long of Opinion,
That it was never fit to suffer the Irish to be promiscuously made Soldiers
abroad, because it may make Them abler to trouble the State when they come
home. Their Intelligence, and practice with the Princes whom they shall serve,
may prove dangerous to that Kingdom; They may more profitably be employed upon
Husbandry, whereof that Country has great need.

Besides, it will be exceeding prejudicial to us, and to our Religion, If the
Spaniard should prevail against the Portuguez.

It were better for us He should be broken into lesser pieces, his Power
shivered.

If the King of Portugal had desired these Irish, I should rather have given
my vote for Him, then for the King of Spain, because it would keep the
Balance more even; Spain has had too much of our Assistance, and connivence
heretofore; I am sure it lost us the Palatinate. Now that it is come to our
Turn to advise, I hope we shall not Do-over other men's faults again.

If the present Government of Ireland be not able to restrain their disordered
People, there is a Noble Lord already designed to that Charge, who by his
knowledge in Martial Affairs, and other his great Abilities, will be, no
doubt, abundantly capable, to reduce them to a due obedience.

Wherefore, Mr. Speaker, upon the whole Matter, My Opinion is, That we should
not be forward to spend our Men, but rather to Preserve and husband them for
our own use and Employments, for our Friends, for our Religion.

FINIS.

