THE Royal Project: OR A clear Discovery of his Majesty's Design in the present
Treaty.

Whereunto is annexed a seasonable Caution for the Parliament of England, the
Army under the Command of Tho. Lord Fairfax, and all that thirst to be for ever
freed from a long established Course of Tyranny, and to see this Nation
restored to its pristine Glory, Freedom, and Tranquillity.

Wherein the rottenness of the present Treaty, and the impossibility of making
the People thereby secure, and absolutely free, is palpably declared, and
detected.

By Verity Victor.

Prove. 26.24, 25. He that hates, will counterfeit with his lips, but in his
heart he lays up deceit.

Though he speak favorably, believe him not, for there are seven ( that is,
many) abominations in his heart.

Veritas non quaerit angulos. Printed in the year 1648.

For the Parliament of England, the Army under the Command of Tho. Lord
Fairfax, and all that thirst to be for ever freed from a long established
Course of Tyranny, and to see this Nation restored to its pristine Glory,
Freedom and Tranquillity.
TO omit William the Conquerors own persidiousness and false dealing, in
confounding, obfuscating and altering the Laws and Customs of this Realm,
(which were those just and good old Laws of Ed. the Confessor) after he had
solemnly See Dan. Hist. fo. 31, and 33. and fo. 36. he grants them by Chr.
sworn to maintain and keep them, and of his whole progeny successively;
especially of King John, who was of Dr Barnards mind, that proud prelatical
Priest, now justly Prisoner in the Fleet, that See the articles exhibited
against him this Parliament, 1642. when he was Curate of Burntwood Weal in
Essex under Dr Baker
wished the King had ten thousand Turks to assist him against the Parliament.) I
will come to instance certain late and fresh examples of Princes and great men,
their perjury, perfidiousness, and false dealing with the common people in
point of public trust and liberty; that so all the world may see, as in a
glass, the incertainty and instability of building and depending on such men's
Oaths, Vows, Promises, Contracts, and Articles.

Old Christianus, the late King of Denmark, endeavoring in the beginning of
these dire Wars between the King and Parliament, to send over a ship with Arms
and Ammunition for the supply of his Nephew our now King, had the said Ship and
all therein taken at sea, and made prize for the Parliament: the which old
Christianus resents so ill, as that he purposes, for this just fact of the
Parliaments, to seize on the next ships and goods the Merchant-Adventurers of
London should send into those parts; the which the provident Company foreseeing
and fearing, sent over Commissioners to know the Kings mind, Whether they might
safely trade as formerly without having their Ships or goods seized? He
answered, It would be time enough to resolve them when their ships came. But
they press to be assured beforehand, otherwise their ships should not come;
whereupon he promises free Trade, and gives an assurance under his hand and
seal. Yet nevertheless so soon as the Merchants ships came, he caused one of
them, and all the goods therein to be ceased at Luxstadt, and enforced the
Merchants to redeem it with 40000 l.

The Prince of Wales promised the States of Holland, upon his honor and
Princely word, that he would not stop Merchants ships at sea, nor any way
impede Merchandising and Traffic, if that they would give him leave to
accommodate the revolted Ships, and loose from Gory Harbor to assist his
Father, (or to this effect:) How truly he kept his Promise and Princely lord
and valued his own Honor, let all men judge, and the Merchants testify. As the
old Cock crows, says the proverb, so does the young. Why shall I stand to
remember (those worthy of no remembrance) the perjured perfidious Earls of
Bedford and Holland, with many more of like tallness and statute, both of this
Kingdom and of Scotland. Truly I have observed, That our Nobles and Grandees
have generally, of late years, had no more regard to their Oaths and Honors,
then I have to my old slippers, or a thing of naught: Yet these must be termed
honorable and honored. The old rule is, Virtus est unica Nobilitas. But this is
obsolete and like an old Almanac quite out of date. Thus much for the
Prerogative branches and sprigs. Now to the root, CHARLES REX.

Did he not, in his first expedition into the North against the Scots, upon the
Bishops quarrel, conclude and assign Condititions, or Articles of Peace with
them, and nevertheless so soon as he returned, disclaimed the Agreement, and
declared against it, and crused the Papers containing it to be burnt by the
hands of the common Hangman, as if it had been enforced or surreptitiously got
from him; and contrary to his Agreement, raise Forces and march with an Army
against them? Are these things already forgotten? Did he not openly swear upon
the holy Evangelists, and solemnly promise, at his Coronation, to keep all the
Laws and rightful Customs of this Land, and to uphold and defend the same? How
he has fulfilled this Oath and Promise, in the behalf of our Laws and
Liberties, I will not determine; Let his own Party (if they can speak truth) be
Judges.

In June 1642. He professes and declares before God, and the world, that he
intended not to make War against the Parliament, book D^c. 1 part, pa. 356. Yet
in August following he sets up his Standard at Nottingham, proclaims open War
against them, and all those Rebels and Traitors that adhere unto them, or that
do any ways aid and assist them.

At Stamford 1641. He makes a Proclamation, strictly commanding all Officers of
Justice to put the Laws in execution against all Papists and Popish Recusants,
book Decl. pa. 19. And afterward he generally entertains all the Papists in
the Kingdom, the most inveterate and implacable Enemies of this Church and
State, and secures and protects them in his Garrisons, giving to some of them
the chiefest places of trust and command in his Armies, as to the And was not
this a dishonor to all the Protestant party that was with him?
Lord Leven his General, Sir Arthur Ashton, the Earl of Glamorgan, Cum multis
aliis, etc. And at Oxford 1642. even before his face he did tolerate Mass to be
publicly said and used in Merton College Chapel, whither all, that would,
might freely resort; and who durst except or contradict? And whereas he avows
that he is grieved at his very soul for the calamity of his good Subjects in
Ireland (I fear he meant the bloody Rebels, for so he calls them, as you shall
hear afterward) and therefore was resolved to go in person to chastise those
wicked and detestable Rebels: See his Message, book Decl. pa. 133. Yet did he,
after order of restraint by both Houses of Parliament, give Warrant under his
hand for passing several notorious Irish Papists into Ireland, who joined with
the Rebels, and became chief Commanders in their Armies. And whereas he
seems, by his passionate expressions, so vehemently to abhor that odious
Rebellion, as that he would join with his Parliament to execute the utmost
exemplary vengeance on all that should be discovered to have a hand in it, See
his Declar. in book Decl. fol. 106. He not only detained the Ear of Leicester
from going thither from the Parliament, as Lord Deputy chosen by them, with
clothes and supplies, for the Protestants assistance; but also seized all the
said clothes and supplies to clothe his new-levyed ragged Romish Soldiers: And
afterward not only remaund the Forces that the Parliament had sent into
Ireland to subdue the Rebels and so expoted the remainder of the unmassacred
Protestants to destruction; but also made Peace with the Rebels (those blessed
Creatures) and called them over to assist him to destroy the Parliament and
people of England, terming them (as I have said) his good Catholic Subjests:
And who were more in favor and countenance with him at Oxford, then the L.
Dils^n and the L. Taff, two Cardinal Irish Papists? and the L. Taff since a
chief General of the Rebels against the poor deserted Protestants* but no more,
lest I turn your stomachs. For who and where is he that can enumerate all his
lies, falsehoods, and fallacies, or dilate his clandestine practices, and
continued Series of conspiracies and treacheries, from time to time, throughout
his reign, against this Nation? What, have we ever gotten, by him or his
Country, any thing but trouble, beggary, slaxery and ruin? And yet we must
idolize his person, and dote upon a deceitful (now most happily violated)
union. I will only here relate, what, I well remember, Iustus Lypsius, that
exact Observator, and grand Politician of his time, denotes in his Epistle to
the Bishop of Croia, of his Majesty's late Father King James. viz. Elizabetha
(says he) Anglorum Regina abjit; Cui succedit Iacobus, Scotorum Rex, summus
simulandi, and dissimulandi Artifex. Such a Father such a Son. But when the Fox
preaches, let the Geese beware.

These things seriously pondered, with multitudes of other occurrences (too
many here to demonstrate) of like nature and consequene, together with his
impenitency, the virulency and indefatigability in destructive plots and
conspiracies of his party and adherents, and their insatiable desires and
sedulous endeavors, per fas and nefas, of ruin and revenge upon the Parliament
and all their friends, may surely serve for sufficient cautions to avoid the
snares of a Treaty, (Anguis latet sub herba,) and not to lose that by feigned
words, which we have redeemed and delivered our selves from, which the expense
of so much treasure and blood, by our swords. What faith or truth can there be
expected from him, who has all his lifetime manifested himself an Enemy to
God and good men, honored and favored none but persons unworthy and wicked, men
of corrupt principles and destructive councels, haters of the Laws, and
caterpillars to the Commonwealth? And is his mind and affection changed? I
wish they were, then there were hopes. But it is too apparent (pretend he what
he will, and did ever any pretend always more fairly, and intend, (as all his
Acts do testify) more falsely?) that he is, as he always was, and that his mind
and affections are not changed. For has he not lately showed more sorrow and
discontent of spirit for the just execution of two of his party, blood-thirty
men, firebrands of the Kingdom, (Lucas and Lisle,) who were principal Authors
and Instruments of the misery and ruin of hundreds in Colchester that never
offended, then for the sea of innocent blood, which he has not only
occasioned, but commanded and encouraged to be shed both in England, Scotland,
and Ireland? I will not here mention his primary design against the Isle of Ree
to the overthrow of Rochel, and all the Protestant interest in France, not his
sending a Fleet to Cales to dishonor the English, and show the Spaniard where
we could hurt him, nor his private Letters to the Pope, and many negotiations
and transactions with Rome and Spain; to what end, the true Protestant party in
all the three Kingdoms have woefully found.

King Edward the second of this Land, a Prince more weak, then wicked; and far
inferior in evil to King Charles, (for he is more wicked then weak, and so much
the more dangerou^, and the less to be trusted, by how much he is the more
empowered with abilities) was See Dan. Hist. at the end of the life and reign
of Ed. the 2.
deposed by the then Parliament, for far less mischief and enormities by a
tenth, then this our King has committed. And nevertheless when that mortifying
Message of the Parliaments rejection of him from being any longer King, and of
their election of his Son to reign in his stead, was told him by some of the
Commissioners sent for that purpose from the Parliament unto him at Killing
worth Castle in Warwickshire, where he was kept Prisoner, he expressed that
unfeigned sorrow for his misgovernment, the which this obstinate obdurate
Prince never did; confessing how he had been misguided (the common excuse of
wilful Princes) and done many things whereof he now repented, (but this man is
so far from repenting of the abundance of blood he has spilt, and manifold
evils he has done, that he has lately given countenance and consent to the
spilling of more blood, and still persists in his destructive plots and
practices,) the which was he to govern again he would become a new man, (did
this man ever promise any such thing?) and was most sorrowful to have so much
offended the State (this is rather sorrowful that he has not utterly destroyed
the State, and cannot avenge himself of them) as it should thus utterly reject
him. But yet he gave them thanks that they were so gracious unto him as to
elect his eldest son: the which was Ed. the third, who indeed was then young.
And I b leeve this example upon the Father, did the Son emin^nt good all his
life. For of all the Princ^s that ev^r I read of, of the race of the Conqueror
that enjoyed this Crown, he was one that was most observant of the Laws and
Libe^t^es of his Nation, and reigned long both fortunately and righteously and
so dyed both h^nored and beloved: And it is observable, this K. Ed. the 3. when
he came to years, did Justice on those who murdered his Father; but our K.
that now is, would never so much as d nit the Duke of Buckingham, the manifest
murderer of his Father, to b^ questioned. Mal^ Omen. But to the point and the
argumentative part of this subject.

The King and his Court Sycophants did always say and affirm, that as he was a
successor to the Conqueror, he held his Crown by the sword, and that whatsoever
Charter, Law, or Statute he passed either for confirmation or augmentation of
any immunity or benefit to his people, it was ex mera gratia, of his mere grace
and favor, and not as his duty, or our due; yea, his clawback, helbred Clergy
taught publicly in their pulpits, that both our persons and estates were at
his Majesty's dispose, and that he might take whatsoever he pleased: Well;
grant that his tenure of the Crown was by the sword, and so ours by his mere
will and favor, as he and some of his creatures have vainly conceived, and
impudently asserted. And true it is, that the Conqueror may by the right of
Conquest change the Laws and Customs of any Nation, and impose what Laws and
Customs he pleases: yet then by the same Law and right of Conquest, we having
conquered the Conqueror, have not only put the Crown aagain upon our own heads,
got the scepter into our own hands, and (to use Mr mr. Ja. Howel is in that
treatise quite beside the cushion; he should have first rightly stated the
case, but sure he was either a cup too low, or a cup too high, for he loves to
steep his brains in sack, and then he turns antic.
Ja. Howels own phrase, in his late printed simple piece of flattery, called,
The Instruments of a King,) put the sword to our own sides; but have now power
also to dispose of, and to impose upon the King as we please, and to speak
plainly, (though in Court language) it is of our mere grace and favor, if that
the Parliament do suffer him to reign upon any terms or conditions whatsoever.
He put us out of protection, disolved the Government, and disobliged us of our
allegiance and obedience to him, the day that he set up his standard in
defiance of the Nation: And, as I have been credibly informed, he has often
said, (and his obstinacy and obtumacy to the last declares evidently he was so
resolved,) that he would win it by the sword or lose all; the which in the
effect is only thus much, that he would either rule us by power as slaves, or
lose all his three Kingdoms. And seeing that by Gods just hand it is come upon
him according to his wish or purpose: That he has not only forfeited all by
way of equity and justice, but also lost all by way of war and force: Why
should he have any thing? let it be given to one that is more worthy: At least,
why do we treat (or rather entreat) for our own? Why do we stand to word it,
for that which we have so dearly and difficultly won and purchased, and is now
irrevocably in our own hands and commands, with him, that would never treat or
parl with any purpose of peace, or good to this Kingdom, while he was able to
hold up a sword against us? Did he not always baffle and abuse us upon all
treaties, and use them only for the more inabling him to the prosecution and
achievement of his tyrannous destructive purposes? And are not his intentions
palpably discovered to be the same at this instant? Read and consider the
Letters that have of late been written by some of his Agents, and intercepted.

Let him but get in his hand, and he will soon have in his head, and then how
easily will follow his whole body, with that tail of scorpions which will soon
sting us to death. Although as Edward the second, he should repent, confess and
promise amendment, (the which I know his gracious Majesty has so much grace as
to scorn,) let not us trust him: What will not a dissembling Synon feign and do
to accumplish the ruin of Troy, when all the power of Greece could not do it?
He that cannot act the Lion must act the Fox. The old Maxim is in policy;
Trust not a reconciled enemy, that is, one so seeming to be, least Ioah like,
he smite thee under the fifth rib, when thou neither fear nor suspectest.

If a potent man had a long time kept mine inheritance from me, and would
hearken to no reason or persuasion, nor be induced to stand to any referrence
or abistrament, but put me to sore trouble, hazard and charges, by Law to
recover it: and that after I had so recovered it, and he could no longer hold
it, he should offer to treat with me about it, and desire to have it referred:
Would thou not account me a fool if I should condescend? What need I then to
treat what or how much I should have or enjoy of that, and in what manner,
which I have wholly recovered as mine own, and is wholly and solely in mine own
power and command? Was not this tacitly, and by consent to grant him still a
right where he has none? Again;

If a thief upon the way should by force take thy purse and therewith escape,
and afterward thou meetest him, and by force recoverest thy purse, and take
him captive; would thou now stand to dispute the cause with him, whether thou
should have all, or only part of thy money, or refer it to be debated,
whether it was thine or his? sure no. For it follows not, that because
another has stolen my cloak, or taken it away fraudulently, or by force, and
worn it, that therefore he is the true owner of it. Again;

If a Tenant wilfully forfeit his lease, (be his Farm never so good, and his
privileges never so great,) and the Lord make a re-entry, may not the Lord
then, if he will, justly let this Farm to another; or if he will be so
favorable, because he that forfeited was an ancient Tenant, as to let him
repossess it, may he not, if he will, increase his rent, diminish his
privileges, and impose upon him stricter terms and conditions then before? He
may without doubt, and none can justly censure or condemn him.

If the King must reign, (yet it is meet we should first see a change of spirit
in him, or else we do but beat down a Tyrant, and raise him up again,) let us
propound our own Laws, prescribe to him strict limits and boundaries, and let
him take his Crown, as of favor from the people, on a new agreement and
stipulation, and be thereunto publicly, solemnly sworn, and not treat with him
on old terms, and lame, broken Propositions, and grant him a right where he
has none. No, let us deal plainly and positively: This you shall do, these
things you shall subcribe, and according to these Laws you shall rule, if you
will govern or enjoy your Crown; if not, your destruction is of your self; we
will turn to another. For let him grant the Propositions fully and totally. We
are all in eminent hazard: For he is retaining his old poison and his Queen,
whose spirit is like her mothers, a Member of the Church of Rome, and her
principles inconsistent with the Religion, Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom;
will by their Jesuited Agents, and Machiavilian Instruments, so insinuate and
deceive the people, that within a short time the Parliament, if not the very
next after this, shall be compact of such Members, his friends and favorers,
and this Parliaments now enemies and opponants, that all which his Majesty
shall now grant and enact shall be reversed and made null, and so we shall be
fitted with a Colchester Bull. And where are we then? What course shall we
take? Stand and cry, what shall we do? Post est occasio calva. Let us therefore
beware in time, least we repent when it is too late: And what need the
Parliament, their friends and Armies in this case, either a deceitful Pardon,
or a stinking Act of Oblivion. To crave or receive either, in my judgment, is
but to cry peccavi, and render that their cause inj^st, which his Majesty
himself has justified and acknowledged to be just. Let them rather demand an
Act of Justification and perpetual Commemoration: Let a Pardon or Act of
Oblivion, in this case, rather pass for his Majesty, and his adherents, who are
herein the only offendants and transgressors against the fundamental Laws and
peace of the Kingdom. And this mercy (I conceive to be) more then they do
demerrit: To me it is a Paradox, that we should upon the rules and principles
of right Reason, and of the Law of Nature, be enforced to take up arms for
self-defence, and the preservation of our lives, wives, children, estates, and
(which is more precious and valuable then all) our native liberties, against a
tyranous, destructive, blood-thi^sty enemy; and then after we have subdued him,
to seek or accept an act of Inde^pnity, or Pardon from him, or any one. My
reason is surprised: I understand it not; Is not this in the eyes of all
judicious men to rejustifie the King in this case, and all his proceedings, and
condemn our selves? I would have the Parliament seriously to consider, whether
the King, if he had conquered and prevailed by the sword, would afterward
admitted us to treat for our estates and liberties? Then it only remains to do
unto him as he would have done unto us. He was dividing the skin before he had
caught the Bear: For he gave diverse of the Parliaments friends estates a way to
some of his ruff^n Cavaliers before he had made a Conquest; by which it is
easy to conclude how he would have dealt with us for the whole, if God (as
blessed be his name he has not, and I hope never will,) had delivered us up
into his hands.

And now I will only mind the Parliament of a wise saying and observation of
their own concerning the King, when in their fears he had given them as strong
assurance of security, as any mor^al could device or expect; and nevertheless
at that very instant had he thoughts of d^ssipating and destroying them, and to
them, all Parliaments, and our liberties. See book, Deels. page 101. 102. But
it is not words, says the Parliament, that can secure us in these our humble
Desires; we cannot but too well and sorrowfully remember what gracious Messages
we had from you this Summer, when with your privity, the bringing up of the
Army, that is, the Army which was then in the North, was in agitation: We
cannot but with like affections recall to our minds, how not two days before you
gave directions for the abovenamed accusation, (that is, the Accusation which
then was against the five Members,) and your own coming to Commons House, that
House received from your Majesty a gracious Message, that you would always have
as much care of their privileges, as of your own Prerogative, and of the
safety of them persons as of your own children. What could be said more
(especially from a Prince) to assure? (Nor was the Lion then half so provoked
and enraged,) yet what then destruction was at that time more intended? Are
these notorious dissembled treacheries, so soon out of mind and remembrance?
Let it never be said in future ages, that this Parliament of England were at
the first wise and sagacious, and afterward became stupid, blind and foolish.

Besides this true example of our wings own making; behold another since, even
of yesterday, of a brothers of his, the perfidious King of Spain, with the
people of Naples; who after he had granted whatsoever they demanded, together
with a general pardon, (a thing much insisted on at this time) and obliged
himself by solemn oath, and receiving of the Host, or holy Sacrament, and all
other Religious Ceremonies (as in all Popish Kingdoms are generally used in
such cases,) for the true performance: Did notwithstanding so soon as he had by
these means recovered the chief Holds, and regained his power, put multitudes
of the principal men of Naples, that had been most active and zealous for the
people, and public liberties, to death; and at present exercises more cruelty
and violence upon them then ever before. But let the Spaniard know, for all his
great (as he supposes) policy, that nil violentum, est perpetuum; and this
very action shall be his ruin: And in the mean time he deserves to be branded
for a Caitif, and one denying his God to the worlds end.

And have not we (notwithstanding all these known Presidents, the abominable
wickedness and perfideousness of Princes and great men, and of the little
faith, credence and confidence that is to be given to them,) a company of
Members of both Houses of Parliament, and of scotified London, as wicked and
perfidious as any; who contrary to their trusts and duties, Oaths and
Declarations, and the manifold Bonds of gratitude, that are upon them from the
people, have privately complotted and conspired, and are willing and ready,
studious, diligent and active, even at this instant, (if they can accomplish
it,) and that under the notion of this Treaty, to fell us and our posterities,
our lives, estates and liberties, to the will of a merciless irreconcilable
Tyrant, and his adherents, so that they can but secure their own traiterous
heads, and the vast sums which they have purloined and stolen from the Kingdom:
I wish we had no such creatures; but if there be a Sun in the firmament, there
are such both in Parliament and City; and we shall never be at peace, nor
prosper, until these Achans be brought forth unto justice. Albeit so
desperately are they wicked, that having through insatiable converousness and
ambition, for want of conscience and the fear of God to restrain them,
contracted to themselves the guilt of public shame and death; they had rather
see the whole Nation laid in ashes, and turned into an Aceldama, or shackled
for ever in fetters of iron, then to have themselves made public examples, and
rendered (according to their just demerits) a scorn and an abhorring to
succeeding generations. For it is with them as with a thief beset, who had
rather kill, or be killed, then be taken. Happily I could name some of them,
but it is needless, for they are already discovered; only I will assure them,
that it shall be with them as it was with the Dove, which Noah sent out of the
Ark; so double and dangerous shall they find the King and his friends in all
their ways and Councels, and the present state of things, as that they shall
not find whereon to rest their feet: And let them remember, and have always in
mind how the King of Spain has lately dealt with the Prince He cut off their
heads as traitors, and confiscated their estates.
De Ognate, and others of Naples; who receiving his rewards, and confiding in
his written Grants and promises, did basely and treacherously comply and
condescend to re-admit his Viceroy, to the ruin of the people. A just guerdon
for such abhorred falsifyers of their trust, and detestable Traitors to their
Country. But what need I go so far; did not Rich. 2. in his time, contrary to
his faith, solemn promise and engagement, cause the Duke of Gloucester to be
basely murihered at Callis; the Earl of Arundel to be as basely beheaded, and
the Earl of War wick [which 3 had acted for the Public, and strongly opposed
his tyrannous courses,] albeit he granted him his life, to be kept prisoner all
his days in the Tower of London? See the English Chronicle. And now give me
leave only to relate one particle of a Spanish Chronicle, 1. Vol. of the life
and death of Charles the 5 K. of Spain, written by Father Prudent Sandival.
and I will conclude, and leave all* I have here rudely penned, to the
application and serious consideration of all judicious and unbiassed judgments.

In the year 1519. in the Reign of turbulent Charles, the fifth King of Spain,
there was a Parliament called in that Kingdom, which acted in the beginning
[as this of England did] for Liberty; whereupon Charles their King raised War
against them, and they, for the defense of themselves, and the peoples rights
and liberties, raised several Armies, and by force of Arms visibly subdued the
King, as we have really done ours, and rescued the Kingdom from all Prerogative
Tyranny. This Spanish Parliament did at the first make such special Ordinances
for the good of the Public, as their very enemies styled them holy and
religious: And, says the Chronicle, had they been duly executed, Spain had
been the most glorious Kingdom in the world, and the said King Charles, had
appeared a most cruel and tyrannical Prince, if he had not confirmed them.

But (says the Chronicle) That Parliament spoiled all, when the Wars were
ended, by falling into ambition, covetousness, and faction, betraying and
selling one another, and sharing the Kingdoms treasure amongst them: And so
notwithstanding all their famous Acts in the beginning (they not keeping and
observing them, themselves, but looking after private ends) did thereby lose
the affections of the people, destroyed themselves, and betrayed their 3
victorious Beware Lord Fairfnx, etc.
Generals: viz. the Earl of Salvatora, the Bishop of Samoora, and Don John of
Padillia, with 70 of their best Look about you, ye that are honest men in both
Houses.
Parliament men into the hands of their conquered King; who did forthwith put
them all to death: And that Parliament (says the Author) was the last in that
Kingdom that acted for the Peoples Freedoms; ever since has the whole Nation
layen under inextricable bondage, tyranny, and oppression. And does not this
seem to be written for our admonition and instruction? Foelix quem faciunt
aliena pericula cautum.

Lastly, What benefit can we the Commons of England receive by this Treaty, in
case all be granted that is required; while the name of the Norman Conquest,
and so many several shameful badges thereof, (as multiplicity of Laws, and they
in Pedlers French, or the Norman language, super-abundant vexatious Courts, and
Officers, strange slavish tenures, fealties, and services,) such as this Nation
never before knew, do still continue? And that still, after so much bloodshed,
and expense of treasure, about the Militia of the Land, in whom it is
originally, whether in the King or People? it must be granted and continued, to
be in the King, and in his power and dispose, at his will and pleasure (as he
has already done) to cut our throats. Grant him this, and grant him all. Grant
him but this to remain (according to his request) unquestionably in the Crown,
and his Negative Vote also; and grant him to be a Tyrant per statutum
imperpetuum, both him and his (for indeed they would be so likewise) from
generation to generation. And for us now to accord, that after so many years
(were the twenty years an hundred] he or his should have the Militia again in
their own hands and dispose, is but, as if a man that had by a a long and
strong contest recovered his inheritance from one that had a long time
illegally and injustly held it from him should notwithstanding for
quietness-sake [as fools often say] agree to accept of a lease of it, for
certain years, and still to grant the title to be in his adversary, and after
the expiration of those years for ever to exclude himself and his. And this his
Majesty plainly shows, in propounding to lease the Bishops Lands, and not to
sell them, to the end that the propriety of them may still continue in the
Bishops. If we have a right in the Militia for years, why not for ever? But it
is undeniable, that at this time it is absolutely and wholly (where it was in
origin) in us (the People) and in our power and dispose: and why should we
give, or grant it, be it but for a moment, to another? In a word to grant the
Kings desire in this, would be like the hewing down Nebuchadnezzars mighty
Tree, and cutting off the branches and leaves thereof: yet leaving the stump of
the roots thereof in the earth with bands of iron and brass. No, let us up with
root and all; that there may be more remembranca of Prerogative, Tyronny, and
Norman Bondage amongst us.

Note, that while the K. pretends a Treaty for Peace, He intends and
countenanceth a War against us. What else mean his Sons and Confederates their
preparations? If any say, It is not by his Command: I answer, Why does he not
prohibit or countermand it? Qui non prohibet, cum potest, jubet?

FINIS.

