Casimer, KING THE NORABLE JOHN CROPLEY ARONET.

LONDON (...) Printed for Charles Smith at (...) Angel in Fleet Street, 1681.

TO THE HONORABLE Sir JOHN CROPLEY BARONET.
SIR,
SO many circumstances Conspire, and I am prompted by so many obligations to
make you this present, that I can no way decline it; without taxing my self
with ingratitude. And yet after all I must Confess. I think this less an
acknowledgement than a just tribute to your merit and your Virtues. For
notwithstanding you have all the advantages of Body and Mind, you are so far
from valuing your self for them, and making Parade of your accomplishments,
that you use all your endeavors to conceal them from the world, and contemn
all those vanities which Persons of your age and Circumstances do usually
pursue and hug with so much eagerness and passion. Thus Modesty seems to be
your Darling Virtue, tho you entertain and practice all the others on every
Occasion. Wherefore to comply with that Modesty you so much cherish I shall
quit this point, which is indeed above description, and proceed to give you,
Sir, some account of the offering I make you, which is an exact Relation of the
Wars of the Crown of Poland with the King of Sweden in Casimers Reign, who
being an Amourous Prince, it likewise contains an Account of his Love
intrigues, which indeed occasioned his own Ruin and the desolation of all, or
the great est part of his Kingdom. All herein related, being generally matter
of Fact, you will find but little of Fiction or Romances, and therefore cannot
pretend to meet with that delicate turn of Thought and of Expression that
might be expected in a piece that depended wholly, or principally upon fancy.
Yet the Naked truth has such charms, as I hope will more than countervail for
that disadvantage. Such as it is, Sir, I lay it at your feet and beg it may
meet with your acceptance, which I was the more encouraged to do, and am in the
more hopes of, for that of all the parts of Learning, I have found History to
have ever had most of your kindness and favor; for which reasons I apprehended
you would be the more willing to grant it your Protection, and me a Pardon for
this Presumption, who am with all manner of Zeal and respect,

SIR, Your most Humble and most Obedient Servant. F. S.

CASIMER KING of POLAND.
THE Kingdom of Poland is Elective, and yet the Polanders have that laudable
Custom of ever choosing a Prince of the Family of their Kings. Thus Ladislaus
was no sooner dead, than that Prince Casimer his Brother was Elected in his
place. He was of a middle stature, brown, and something too Corpulent. He was
as brave as one could be: Of a kind disposition: His Ruling passion was love,
and one of the best Princes that ever Reigned. A dispensation was obtained from
the Pope for his marrying the Queen Widow of Ladislaus, formerly known in
France by the name of Princess Mary. He had ever had an esteem for her, and for
her part she had likewise very much considered him: Insomuch that they were not
much troubled to change the names of Brother and Sister for those of Husband
and Wife, tho the example was something rare. The good of the State served for a
pretext to the real inclination they had a long time had for one another. The
Ceremonies of their Marriage were hardly finished, than that the troubles which
were newly appeased began again in the Kingdom, through a particular quarrel of a
Polish Gentleman, with Chilmilenski General of the Cosaques. Those people are
composed of several strangers, and principally of the Polish Peasants, who to
deliver themselves from the slavery of the Nobles have abandoned their Country
to retire into the Vkraine, a Province bordering upon the Tartars and Turks,
and abounding in all that is necessary to life. They are of the Grecian
Religion under the obedience of a Patriarch, whose Residence is at Kiof, a very
fair and large City, Governed under the Authority of the King of Poland. The
Cosaques being obliged to defend the entrance of the Kingdom against the
Infidels, they are ever Armed when they work, that they may not be surprised,
and without taking any pay of the King or the Republic, they generously expose
their lives, contenting themselves with the booty only that they take from the
Enemies of the Crown. They are very affectionate to the King, but their hatred
against the Nobles is so great, that the least quarrels obliges them to take
Arms and to revenge themselves cruelly for the offenses they receive. They
have never any other Leader to Command them than such as they have chosen
amongst themselves: And tho he were but a Shepherd, provided he be brave and
fortunate in fight, they obey him very exactly and have for him a great respect.

Chilmilenski their General was the Son of a Miller, but the Victories he
gained over the Turks and Tartars, rendered him so illustrious, that he passed
for one of the greatest Captains of the age. After the Death of his Father
having demanded of King Casimer leave to build up again the Mill that his
Father had left him, and of adding to it some Houses for the Honoring his
Memory, it was granted to him in consideration of his Merit and the services he
had done him and the Republic. Jarinski a Polish Colonel opposed
Chilmilenski's design, and forbid him to pass farther, saying that the Water
of his Mill incommoded him, that the King commanded upon his own Lands and he
upon his. But these haughty words not having at all discouraged Chilmilenski,
the Colonel in his absence caused his Mill and Houses to be burnt, and misused
his Wife and his Son who would have hindered him. It is easy to imagine what
impression this outrage made in the Soul of that great Man. He promised no less
to his revenge than the exterminating all the Nobility, and his Courage so well
seconded him, that having raised a powerful Army, he ruined all the Nobles, on
one side as far as Lublin, and through all Podolia as far, as Rustemburg. Women
and Children were no more spared than the Churches, and those whom fire and
Sword had left, were sold to the Turks; insomuch that for the burning of a
Mill sixty Cities were destroyed. The Senators of the Kingdom, without whom the
King undertakes nothing that concerns the Republic, beseeched him to Arm for
the destroying the Cojaques, but the King refused them, saying that it was
their fault, and that Jarinski ought not to have burnt Chilmilenski's Mill.
Notwithstanding this refusal the Nobility composed an Army of fifty thousand
men, and marched directly to the Cosaques, who expected them in good order. The
Battle was given. The Polanders lost it, and ten thousand of them were killed
upon the place. The Runaways were pursued more than twelve Leagues, and the
Cosaques laden with spoils and Glory returned to their homes, destroying all
the places through which they passed, except the Lands belonging to the King.

The Nobles irritated with this great loss, and breathing nothing but
vengeance, made a Convocation of the seventh man, which is called in the
language of their Country Pospolite Russin, and having joined some German
Troops to that levy, they renewed the War contrary to the Kings sentiment, who
councelled them to agree, because that the Cosaques defended the Kingdom
against the invasion of Infidels. But instead of following this good advice,
the King became suspected by them, tho he went himself to command their Army.

The Cosaques having notice of these preparations, took the field with fifty
thousand men, and their spies having informed them that the Polanders were
encamped beyond the Nieper, and were not upon their Guard, relying on their
great Numbers, they passed secretly the River one Night, and having surprised
the Enemies they killed six thousand of them upon the place, put the rest into
disorder, and persued them as far as Zamosh, took all the baggage and four and
twenty pieces of Canon, which they sent to Kiof for a mark of their Victory;
and having laid feige to the City after the Trenches having been opened a
Month, they became Masters of it. Chilmilenski by these great advantages having
made himself formidable, proposed to the Duke of Walachia an offensive League
against Poland, and the Marriage of his Son with the Dukes Daughter; but there
being some difficulty made in it, whether because of the unequality of their
conditions, or because that having married his Eldest Daughter to Prince
Radezivil, he could not quit the party of the Polanders. Chilmilenski threatened
to drive him out of his states: Insomuch that for the avoiding of the War, the
Duke consented to the Marriage, upon condition that after the Death of
Chilmilenski, his Son should succeed in the Generalship; which was granted him
by all the Cosaques. The Polanders having notice of the day that the Nuptials
were to be celebrated, drew up with design to trouble the Feast, well
imagining that the Cosaques would not be upon their Guard. In truth, these not
dreaming of any thing but Mirth, were surprised in the City of Kiof, which the
Polanders ruined without much trouble. The Nobles who were detained Prisoners
there, were freed, the Greek Churches destroyed and pillaged, the Patriarch
carried away prisoner, and the Cosaques were so weakened by this unexpected
blow, that they appeared to be in the extremest consternation. Being however
recovered from their astonishment, they sent an Ambassador to the King, to
demand of him if it was by his order that action had been done, pretending
their Patriach should be restored them, and a reparation made them
proportionable to their loss. The King having answered that Ambassador that he
had neither ordered Chilmilenski's Mill should be destroyed, nor that the City
of Kiof should be ruined, but that the Nobility had done it of their own motion
to recompense themselves for their losses; the Cosaques joined themselves to
the Tartars, and entered Podolia, committing all the Hostilities that War
inspires desperate people with. The Nobles being acquainted with this new
irruption, told the King plainly, that if he did not march at their head, they
would have recourse to Ragoski Duke of Transylvania, and choose him in his
stead. The King, who had reason to apprehend it, and who had a long time known
their ill intentions, promised to march with the German Trops; with which they
were not pleased, because they would have had them mingled amongst them. In
fine the Army came to Cantinitz Podolski, which is a very strong City, where
after several little rencounters, was sought a bloody Battle, wherein the
Cosaques were beaten, being constrained to fly. But as they had made their
Magazines in the Marshes, and that they expected succor, they retired thither,
and the Palanders believing that they should infallibly Perish there, blocked
up the Casaques, whose succors being arrived they cut off from the Polanders
all passage for Victuals, and constrained them to make immediately a
disadvantagious Peace. This Peace was not signed, insomuch that Casimer retired
to Warsaw, and the Nobles to their Houses, extreat^ly humbled by their great
losses, and very ill satisfied with him, accusing him of favoring the Cos^ques.

The King having a tender Soul, and being no longer possessed with thoughts of
War, Love appeared to him more agreeable. The Vice Chancellor Ragieski, had for
some few years been Married to a young Lady whose Beauty had made a great deal
of noise at Court. She was in her two and twentieth year, of a middle Stature,
but very well Carriaged, her Eyes were black, full and well turned, and whose
Luster and sweetness inspired affection in all who saw her, her Nose well made,
her mouth pretty, and all parts of her face so well proportioned, that having
therewith a Wit very gay and Gallant, few persons have been seen more
accomplished. The Vice Chancellor usually kept her at a Country House near
Warsaw, as it is the Custom of all the Polish Lords, whose Wives go seldom to
Court, giving them a kind of Governesse for to watch over their actions when
civility obliges them to bring them thither. The Reputation of the
Vice-Chancellours Lady had given the King that pressing desire that one has of
seeing persons whose Beauty is famous, and her presence at Court so well
completed what her Reputation had begun, that he became infinitely in love. He
felt in his heart all those violent motions which we usually are sensible of at
the birth of great passions; but this violence so agreeably deprived him of his
liberty, that without considering he should have a thousand obstacles to
conquer, he abandoned himself without referve to the power of that Lady. There
are Kings who are so made that they need only to speak to make themselves
beloved, but Casimer was not of this Number, and his power did not reach so
far. He feared the Queen, and he knew to what excesses the Polanders proceed
when they are jealous. Wherefore he contented himself to show in the ning more
complaisance to the Vice-Chancellours Wife than to the other Ladies of the
Court, and sometimes fixing his looks upon her they made her clearly see what
hers had produced in his heart. But his passion was too violent to remain long
in silence. The Baron de Saint-Cir, a French Gentleman, had been some years at
the Court of Poland, his good mien, his wit, his conduct and his Bravery had
acquired him the Reputation of a very Gallant man. He often saw the
Vice Chancellor Ragieski, who seemed to be much his friend, and the King who
naturally loved all the French, honored him also with a particular esteem,
whether for his merit, or that he was a Relation of the Marchioness des Roches
the Governesse of the Queens Maids of Honor, who had a great kindness for him.
All these considerations obliged the King to choose him to be the laterperter
of his Love, and to deceive the foresight of those whose interest it was to
traverse him. Wherefore he caused him to come one day into his Cabinet, where
after having given him new marks of his bounty, he gave him in charge to make
known his Sentiments to the Vice-Chancellours Lady, declaring to him of what
importance it was for his repose. Tho the Commission was nice, the Baron
knowing the jealous humor of Ragieski, he made no difficulty of accepting it;
and of telling the King that he esteemed himself so happy in the Honor that he
did him by trusting him with so important a secret, that he should willingly
sacrifice his life to render his Majesty all the service he was capable of. The
King, who expected no less from the Barons inclination, promised to make him a
Royal acknowledgment, and having immediately took the Measures they judged
necessary for the succeeding well in this enterprise, which was to be so fatal
to Casimer, and all the Kingdom; the Baron retired to his apartment to think of
it at leisure. As he had the liberty of going often to Ragieski's House, he
applied himself more particularly than he had done before to show kindness to
all those of the Family, and having an insinuating and an agreeable wit, he
became so much in the favor of her who was instead of a Governesse to the
Vice-Chancellours Lady, that being enarmed with his Civilities, she was mighty
complaisant to him. He took occasion to speak often of the King and then
exaggerated his liberality, his tenderness, his goodness, and his other great
Qualities, in terms so advantageous that it made this Woman desirous of trying
them. After having thus disposed her mind, he cunningly made the
Vice-Chancellours Lady observe the earnestness the King was in of seeing her
when she was at Court; and even sometimes told her smiling, that he believed
she had made him her conquest: and he so often repeated it to her in the
presence of her Governesse, that being fair and having no less ambition than
Beauty, he remarked that it did not at all displease her. He informed the King
thereof, who redoubled his cares. The Lady perceived it with joy, and the Baron
having made the Governesse his consident in the affair, who fancied her fortune
was thereby made, they resolved together that the King should write to her that
he might explain himself more precisely. The Governesse promised to do her
devoir, and some days after the King wrote to the Lady in these terms.

I Love you, Madam, and this ought not to surprise you. You are so Beautiful
that it is impossible long to resist your Charms: and in what Elevation soever
we are one is very glad to wear your chains. Wherefore try if you please,
Madam, the most sincere passion that ever was. Let not my greatness give you
any ombrage; and surmount as I have done all the vain seruples which might
hinder as from becoming happy, since never Prince was more disereet, than

CASIMER.


The Baron having taken an occasion of speaking in particular to the
Vice-Chancellours Lady, gave her the Letter that the King sent her. She changed
color several times as she read it, and there appeared such an alteration in
her face, that he looked upon it as a good augure; however after having read
(...), she said nothing more to him, than that she was very much obliged to the
King for the Honor ^he did her, and that she had no answer to make. The Baron
would have spoke to her, but persons of Quality coming in, he retired and went
to give an account to Casimer of what he had done. This Prince was so satisfied
with what he acquainted him, tho he could not fix any certainty, that after
having told him the most obliging things he could have hoped, he presented him
with a Diamond of great value. While that the King flattered himself agreeably
with the hopes of being beloved, she for her part felt agitations that were not
usual to her; and calling back into her memory all those obliging and
passionate looks by which he explained himself when she was at Court, she did
not at all doubt of her Conquest. But his Letter so positively assured her,
that notwithstanding all the confiderations which ought to have discouraged
her, she took a delight in believing it. Casimer was as well made as Ragieski,
tho a King, she was young, he promised to be discreet and faithful, all this
very much shaked her mind, and she became more thoughtful than she used to be.
Her Governesse who was not ignorant of the cause, asked her however the
occasion of her Melancholy. She excused her self a long time from telling it
her, but she pressed her to it after so engaging a manner, and with so many
Protestations of serving her faithfully, that she could not resist any longer.
She embraced her tenderly, and after having told her that the happiness of her
life consisted in keeping the secret she imparted to her, she showed her the
Kings Letter. The Governesse pretended to be surprised, she read it seriously,
and having remonstrated ^o the Lady the danger she exposed ^er self to by the
noise that this passion would make in the world, she ^hen spoke to her in so
advantage^^s a manner of the Kings tenderness, that after having eyed her with
a ^ind of compassion, she promised ^o manage things so cunningly, that there
needed no more to determine ^er to receive favorably his Vows. Whereupon going
to Court in the Evening, the King explaining to her as his custom was the
condition his Soul was in she answered him so obligingly, that he did not at
all doubt but that he should be happy. He appeared on the sudden in the gayest
humor imaginable, and without showing any affectation he approached the
Vice-Chancellours Lady, to whom he reiterated the Protestations he had made her
in his Letter of loving her Eternally. That Charming person whom the King
discourse caused to blush, replied with a great deal of Modesty and sweetness.
It is so little credible Sir, that you can be in the condition you would
persuade us, that i^ I could flatter my self that a great Prince as you are
could love sincerely, I should take a sensible delight i^ your passion: But,
Sir, so many things oblige me not to add Faith to your words, that I dare not
tell you I could wish they were real. How agreeable was this Confession to the
King! His joy made him for a long time immovable, and then of a sudden that
same joy having furnished him with the Eloquence o^ satisfied Lovers, the
Protestatoin^ and Oaths that he made to that Lady perfectly conquered her. It
wa^ thus they were engaged, there wa^ nothing more wanting to complea^ their
happiness, than the finding (...) convenient place to entertain on^ another
without witnesses. The ^ince gave order to the Baron to ^^ak thereof to the
Vice-Chancellours Lady. But as he was endeavoring it, and that the King
expected with impatience that happy moment, he was obliged to go into the
^^mpagne to defend himself against the Invasion of the Great Duke of Moscovy,
who without any reason broak the Peace that King Ladislaus had made with him.
That Prince assisted by the Cosaques took the City of Smolensko, and they made
such other considerable Progresses in Lithuania, that the ruin of the Kingdom
was with reason apprehended. Casimer caused of his own proper motion succors
to be demanded of the Duke of Transylvania, of the Hospidars, of the Tartars
and of the other people of those Countries; but all these Forces not being
equal to those of the Enemies, he could not hinder the ruin of Vilna the
Capital City of Lithuania; all persons there above fifteen years old were put
to the Sword, and the rest were carried to Moscovy, to be brought up there in
the Greek Religion. It is easy to imagine the deplorable Condition these sad
Conjunctures put the King in. He loved his people tenderly, but he loved his
Mistress more; Insomuch that one may say that never was Prince agitated with so
many passions at a time. The Vice-Chancellours Lady was no more at ease than
he, for he begun to be dear to her: She apprehended the losing him amongst the
hazards of War, or that absence might diminish the passion he had showed her
before his departure. All that the Baron could say to her to assure her of the
Contrary did not satisfy her: And if the Winter had not brought the King back
to Warsaw, that fair person would not have been able to have concealed any
longer, the displeasure she had in Her mind. But all these Clouds were
dissipated at the moment they saw one another again; the King neglected the
sares of War, to think of nothing but pleasing that Lady; and she likewise
abandoned her self to the motions of her Passion, after a manner so obliging to
him, that he had nothing more to wish for, than the vanquishing a weak
resistance. They enjoyed for some time, all the softest pleasures that a
blooming passion usually gives; and Love took care of banishing from their
minds, all the ill humors and disquiets that might traverse their contentment.
But whether that Ragieski had perceived any thing, or that the necessity of his
affairs obliged him to go into the Country, he carried his Lady thither, and
departed so suddenly from Warsaw, that she had not time of bidding Adieu to
any body. Casimer was not a little astonished when he was told the news of it;
he had in his mind all that Choler could inspire the most furious with; he
vowed the ruin of the Vice Chancellor, and in fine became so out of humor,
that all the Court perceived it, each One endeavoring to penetrate into it is
Cause; The Baron was the only One that knew it, and it was to him alone he
discovered his most secret thoughts, and to whom in the first transports of his
grief, he said the most touching things imaginable. But as this violent
Condition could not last long, and that the Vice-Chancellour's House was not
far distant from Warsaw; the Baron in some manner eased the Kings sufferings,
in giving him hopes, that under pretense of hunting he might procure him an
interview with his Mistress, and adding to that, that he should likewise find
the Convenience of conveying to her his Letters, and receiving of her Answers
with safety; He seemed satisfied, and left to him the care of mannaging the
business. The Vice Chancellor kept a breed of Race Horses in his Park; he had
several times desired the Baron, who understood riding very well, to go see his
Horses; he took that time to satisfy him, and to deliver to his Lady a Letter
the King had given him in Charge. Ragieski received the Baron with a great deal
of joy; but his Lady saw him with much more, she needed him for the diminishing
the grief that the Kings absence caused in her: And when the Baron had given
her the Kings Letter, she recovered her good humor: It was in these terms.

MAy I ask you, Madam, what has obliged you to quitt me so promptly? But how
could you do it without bidding me Adieu? do not you very well know that being
the most ^n Love of all men, it was to abandon me to all the greatest Cruelties
one could suffer in the World? Return hither Madam, and bring back the joy and
pleasures which have followed you, or let what will happen I will go see you:
Life is insupportable to me, when you are absent, and never any one loved more
passionately, than

CASIMER.


The Vice-Chancellor's Lady, who went into the Country against her will, was in
no less pain there, than the King at Warsaw; and her passion for him was come
to that point, that Ragieski seeing her in an extraordinary melancholy, begun
to observe her more strictly, to endeavor to discover its cause, and even
pressed her very often to tell it him; But as his importunities augmented her
ill humor; the Baron came very conveniently to remove it, and Casimer's Letter
dispersed all her fears: She' had at the least as much impatience as he to be
at Warsaw; she pretended to be sick that she might return thither. But Ragieski
not beleiving the disease very pressing, still delayed his departure. In the
mean time she passionately longed to see the King, and yet she apprehended his
impatience would make him come, because that her Husband would have certainly
discovered their Commerce. In this uncertainty a middle way was to be found
out. There was a very fine house two Leagues from theirs, belonging to an
Officer of the Crown; the Baron proposed to the Vice-Chancellor's Lady to make
a party for hunting there, where he would cause the King to come; she approved
the expedient, and as nothing is impossible to women of wit, she so well
managed the business that Ragieski himself proposed to the Baron the hunting a
Stag two days after: for the better concealing his design, he pretended to have
business which obliged him to return. This caused his stay to be the more
pressed, and all being thus resolved, he wrote to the King, marking precisely
the Place where he might see the Vice-Chancellors Lady; and that he might add
faith to his words, she wrote him this Letter.

YOu know I love you Sir, and it is enough to persuade you that I was brought
hither against my will. But is it true that you endure as much as you say? Ah
^af it be so, I have reason to be contented with the trouble your absence
causes me. But why should you deceive me? Ought not my tenderness to assure me
of yours? And why should not you suffer? Come then Sir, to the place appointed,
and believe that besides the pleasure of hunting, you will likewise have there
the pleasute of Jeaing the person of the world, the most really Yours.


The Baron gave this Letter to his Gentleman of the Horse, to carry it to the
King. But tho the success of his voyage ought to have given him a great deal of
joy, as he passionately loved the Marchioness das Reches, whose absence made
him in an extreme pain, he could not help showing his uneasiness: Ragieski
beleiving that the Baron was weary of his house, did all he could to divert
him; and seeing that notwithstanding his Caresses and his good Treatment, he
still reserved so great a Melancholy that he could not conceal it, he fancyed
him to be in Love, he had already rallied him upon that point several times at
Warsaw, seeing him so assiduous with the Marchioness des Roches his Relation.
But tho they were often together, he had never made him his Confident.
Wherefore he renewed his earnestness in so civil and galant a manner, that the
Baron did really avow to him his passion. Ragieski beleiving there must needs
be something extraordinary in their intrigue, obliged the Baron to make him the
recital of it, and after having promised secrecy, the thing being of
consequence enough, the Baron thus began his History.

THE HISTORY OF THE Baron de SAINT-CIR.
DUring the last Civil wars which caused so much disorder in France, my Father
who is of one of the best Families of Guyenne, sent me to Paris, where the
Queen Regent Anne of Spain kept her Court. I was then four and twenty years
old, and tho I had not all the necessary qualities to make me be distinguished
in the finest Court of the world, I dare however affirm that in a little time I
procured a great many Friends. As I had ever had a great passion to see Italy,
and that my Father had hindered me from it, because that I was the only Son, and
he loved me tenderly, it was with a great deal of trouble that he consented to
my making that voyage. But after having taken all the necessary measures for
the satisfying my curiosity: One day as I went to the Louvre, to take leave of
a friend of mine, a person of Quality; I met a young Lady, who being left a
Widow without Children, saw her self obliged to dispute with the Heirs of her
deceased Husband, a piece of land of great value that he had given her at his
Death: Her shape being of the most advantageous, caused me ^o stop to consider
it; I felt in my heart so great a desire of knowing nor, that I could not hold
from following her; she being deirous to present a Petition to the Queen and to
beg her Protection, she adressed her self to the Captain of the Guards, who was
the same I was also looking for: Love being resolved to make me feel its darts,
would make use of that Occasion to learn me his Laws; for the Marchioness des
Roches (thus was that Lady called) made the recital of her affans, in so witty
and galant a manner, that being likewise as you know very pretty, I interessed
my self in her affairs, as if she had been very consider able to me. I forgot
the design I had made of traveling, and believing that I could never do any
thing more agreeable or advantageous to my self, than to make my applications to
that fair Widow: I thought of ^o thing but the means I should make use of for
the acquainting her with my sentiments: Wherefore after having thought a while,
I in^^^^ the Marchioness, whom I had still eyed very attentively, for to cell
my friend, that tho I was persuaded that his Generosity would insallib^y move
him to serve her, I however joined my Prayers to hers, and conjured him to
employ his Credit, and to procure her a favorable Audience of the Queen. And
then addressing my self to her, I told her, with an air that made apparent the
part I took in what concerned her. I could not hope, Madam, to be happy enough
to offer my services to so lovely a person as you, but since my good fortune
has given me some part in my Lord's friendship, I could not let this occasion
pass without testifying to you, in recommending to him your interests, the
extreme passion I have of serving you; and I should heartily desire, Madam,
that time would furnish me with more favorable Ones, that I might the better
make appear, the zeal and respect I have for your Ladyship. The Marchioness,
whom these words caused to blush, answered me with a Modesty that perfectly
charmed me lought, without doubt, my Lord, to attribute to your generosity
alone, the obliging offers you make me; for not knowing in my self any quality
that might procure me so galant a man as you for Protector, I should be very
vain to believe that my merit had engaged you to take so much part in my
interests; and Heaven, that always protects afflicted persons, must needs have
sent you on purpose hither, to give me mark of your goodness. While we were
thus discoursing, an Officer came and informed us that the Queen was going out,
the Captain gave his hand to the Marchioness to present her to her Majesty; she
was received very favorably, and after that the Queen was mounted into the
Coach, I did all that I could to accompany the Marchioness to her house, but
she would not consent to it; Insomuch that I returned to my house with
sentiments very opposite to these that had brought me to the Louvre Paris
seemed to me a thousand times more charming than I had ever found it, and felt
my self so taken with the Beauties of the Marchioness, that I entirely
renounced the desire of traveling, to think only of the means of pleasing her.
Love, to be well received in fouls, enters them usually attended with graces
and joys, that he may the more easily Master them, represented to me the
Marchioness as the most lovely person in the world, in making me sometimes
remar^ue with pleasure that sweetness which accompanies all her actions, and
then the vivacity of her Wit, and that galant turn she gives to things;
insomuch that never having been in that condition, I admired so extraordinary a
change, having thus made several reflections upon my adventure, I went to bed,
thinking to sleep; but I had hardly shut my Eyes to abandon my self to sleep,
that that the Marchioness represented her self to my fancy, with yet more
Charms than I had found in her. I awaked contrary to my custom which surprised
me, and after having in vain endeavored to fall asleep again, I discoursed
thus to my self: Whence proceeds it that in a moment all my Curiosity is
vanished? I have no longer that strong passion which has so long tormented me;
and only for one time seeing the Marchioness des Roches, I find my self
disquieted and pensive: What will it then be when I shall know her more
particularly? No, no, I Will have no engagement with a person who produces so
extraordinary effects, the Consequences would be too fatal to my repose, and I
should deprive my self of the thing I esteem the most in the world: Wherefore
He depart and remove my self from these places before I Will be engaged; Neither
can I well justify a delay of this Nature to my Father, or all my friends, of
whom I have taken leave. But alas what do I say! to go from Paris^ my heart
cannot consent to it, what I should leave there is more worth than all the rest
of the Universe. My fair Widow, ought to be to me instead of all my voyages,
and I shall take an extreme pleasure in seeing her, perhaps she will not be
insensible to my Vows, and that in fine I shall be happy enough not to
displease her. Let none talk to me any more of traveling, I have lost the
thoughts of it; and since we must once lose our liberties, and become slaves,
Ah! may it be the adorable Marchioness, who has not her like. Having besides
made several other Reflections, it was impossible for me to sleep: Insomuch
that the day being far advanced without any of my servants having been in my
Chamber, one of my friends who was surprised to see me so long in Bed, came by
his presence to interrupt my privacies: and as he had a great power over me, he
asked me what obliged me to be so lazy, seeing I had not too much time for the
giving order for my departure, and having answered him that I had been very
much indisposed all the night, but that I found my self something better; I rose
presently after, and went to the Palace of Orleans, to try by the Beauty of
those gardens, to divert the troubles this budding passion gave me: But instead
of finding there the Remedy I sought, after having walked through with little
application all these fine walks, I was the more confirmed of fixing my self in
the service of the Marchioness, and I returned home so pensive, that I found no
pleasure but in the agreeable Idea I preserved of her Beauty: Insomuch that two
days after I went to make her my first visit, and as our conversation was
pretty long, I had time to discover the delicacy of her wit. She said the
finest things imaginable upon the point of our acquaintance, and I returned so
satisfied with the Marchionesses Civility, and so much charmed with her, that
Love had never been better established in a heart. I began from that time to
take more care of my person than I had done, I became more pensive than usual,
and all that was nor the Marchioness seemed to me so insupportable, that even
my friends perceived me to be changed. But the time I had taken to depart being
passed as well as my curiosity, I feigned an indisposition, of which I gave
notice to my Father, who having with pain consented I should travel, was very
glad to hear I was no longer in have to leave the Kingdom; and as he had a
design of buying me a considerable Charge at Court, helet me know it was his
will I should stay there. It is easy to imagine the joy this news gave me, as
it agreed with my Love; never any thing was more welcome; and having then no
other passion than of serving the Marchioness, I ^aw her daily, and lost no
occasion of making known to her my passions. All the difficulty was to make her
see I loved her; my languishing Eyes, and redoubled sighs made it apparent that
I was not insensible: But all this did not satisfy me, and when I went from
her I could not bear with any company: And when alone I passed over in my mind,
all that I had said, and all that I had done; sometimes I blamed my self for
having been too fearful, and then again for having been too bold. And I was
ever as ill contented with my self, as I was fatisfied with that lovely person.
In fine time furnished me with an occasion which I made use of luckily enough.
The Marchioness had a friend who was often in our Company, and who having some
inclination for me, did all she could to discover her for whom I sighed, and
even pressed me so agreably upon that point, that I was put to much trouble to
conceal my passion. One day as we went all three of us to walk in the Gardens,
the Marchioness and I insensibly fixing languishing looks upon one another,
that friend perceiving it, told me with great surprise, Ah! Sir, I know at
present what you have concealed from me with so much care, and then held her
peace and would say no more. We did all that we could to break her silence, and
especially the Marchioness pressed her to tell her the cause of it, but all was
in vain: Insomuch that not being willing to stay any longer in the Gardens, we
were constrained to return. Tho the Marchioness had not had the curiosity that
is natural to the sex, this Mystery would have given it ^er: Wherefore making
her a visit the day after, she did not fail as soon as she saw me to press me
to discover the secret, well imagining I was there for something. As I knew not
precisely its cause, I found my self perplexed, I did all that I could to
defend my self from telling my thoughts; But as in those sort ^f occasions, the
more we excuse our selves from telling Ladies what they would learn, the more
it augments their Curiosity; the Marchioness redoubled her earnestness, and
would absolutely know my opinion thereof: Insomuch that that Conjuncture
seeming to me very favorable for the discovering to her my passion, I tried
two or three times to tell her what I had resolved, but I found in that moment
the Power of an amourous respect, and it was with a great deal of fear and
Confusion, that with a trembling voice I told her, that her friend had
perceived I loved her, and that it had put her into so ill an humou^ Yes,
Madam, added I, it is impossibl^ to love you more, and if you consi^er what
your Charms are able to effect, you would easily judge they cannot but produce
extraordinary passions. The Marchioness expecting to learn quite the contrary,
was extremely surprised to hear me speak so seriously; she was upon the point
of being angry, of banishing me from her presence: But having pressed me to
declare my thoughts, she contented her self with telling me, with a tone
however that showed her agitation: if I had been less curious, it is ^ertain,
Sir, you would not have taken the liberty of speaking to me after the manner
you have done, and that the respect you owe to our Sex would have hindered you:
but since I my self have occasioned this fault, I will not punish you as I
might otherwise have done; and if you desire we shall see one another ^gain, I
pretend it be without passion, and I forbid you to tell me again you have any
for me: These words having something encouraged me, and not being ignorant,
that when it is once said We, love, Love repeats (...) a thousand times; I
turned the thing galantly, in saying to the Marchioness, that she had obliged
me more than she thought in forbidding me to speak of my passion, seeing I
^ould not express it well enough by words, and that it was impossible to
explain the sentiments of a heart so much in love as mine. That I would obey
her and keep silence; but that I hoped my Eyes, and all my actions would so
well supply the defect of my tongue, that at length she would be persuaded that
nothing could be added to the respectu^ous and sincere affection I had for her;
I had hardly done speaking, when the Marchioness's Companion entered the
Chamber: But the Marchioness being ill satisfied with her Curiosity, she was
careful not to ask her also the reason of her Melancholy; insomuch that the
Conversation falling upon general and indifferent things, it quickly finished,
each one retiring. From that time I had some kindof hopes the Marchioness would
hear my Vows, and as hopes flatter and ease the sufferings of Lovers, I almost
ever interpreted to my advantage all she said to me. But it was not however
till after a years assiduity, that that fair Person let her self be vanquished,
and that she gave me all the marks of esteem and kindnes^ I could have expected
from a Person in whom Virtue was in the supremest Degree. Never was so pure and
innocent a passion seen as tha^ we had, nor did ever Lovers pas^ their time so
sweetly as we did du^ing some Months. But these fine lays were eclipsed, and
Love made ^e know that if he lends for a time is joys and favors, he pays
him^^lf with Usury. The Marchiones^^s merit being known by all persons of
Judgment, it happened to ^y misfortune that a Lady of great Quality having been
desired by the ^^een of Poland, to send her a ^rench Lady to be Governess of
^er Maids of Honor, she cast her Eyes upon the Marchioness, and so well
persuaded her of the impor^ance of that employ, that at length ^^e resolved to
accept it. Ambition which is natural to the sex, seemed to her in that moment
the strongest passion; she imagined I would with joy subscribe to her absence,
and that I even would follow her; and in that opinion she secretly took all the
necessary measures for her departure, being resolved I should not know it till
the day before. But a ill News is ever learnt sooner tha^ one would know it, I
had noti^ given me of the Marchionesses design. Never was a surprise equ^ to
mine, and as if I had been struc^ with a thunderbolt, I was a lo^^ time
immovable without being ab^ to speak one word. At length re^ covering my self,
I examined all m^passed Conduct, to see if I had do^ any thing that might
oblige the Man chioness to treat me thus, and afte^ having exactly recollected
to the very least Circumstances, findin^ my self only guilty of too much Love,
I accused her a thousan^ times of injustice and infidelity and then referring
my case to Lov^ himself, I made him the Author (...) my misfortunes, and my
disorde^ was so great that I did not spa^ my self: Insomuch that after havi^^
taken a hundred several Resolu^ons for the breaking of this voy age, things
even the most extravagant came into my imagination, and all agitated with
different passions; I went to the Marchioness to reproach her with her
inconstancy: but I had no sooner seen her, than that Love recovering the Empire
of ^^y heart, as faithless as she was, I found her with the same Charms as
formerly. All my Resolutions vanished, and if the Marchioness perreceiving
grief in my face, had not asked me what caused it, I should not have been able
to have complained of my misfortune, so true is it that it is impossible when
one loves very tenderly, to be able to reproach the beloved Object, Whom we
ever excuse through a kind of shame of seeing our selves deceived, or for fear
of displeasing. Whereupon the Marchioness acquainted me with the reasons she
had to accept the offers that were made her, and Love made me find them to be
the best imaginable, during all the time was with her: Insomuch that the
Marchioness seeing her self free^ from this dangerous point, fancye^ she should
certainly take that vo^ age, and was possessed with nothing but the thoughts of
it. But as Ambition only had made her resolve the undertaking it, and that
before she had engaged her self, she had neither consulted her Heart no^ her
Love, they made her know when she the least thought of it. That they ought to
be of the Party and that nothing is well done with out them. Having thus taken
al^ the measures that were requisite for her journey, she quitted Paris, to g^
to Havre, where a Ship attended her. Her absence rendered me the mos^
unfortunate of all Lovers, causing in me an extreme grief, and in my despair I
made Complaints capable of moveing a heart of Marble. B^^ at length having
spent many sighs took Post and went to expect her Havre, with design to use in
that ^ace the utmost efforts for the perwading her from that Voyage. The
^archioness arriving after five days ^^rny, was much furprized to find (...)
there in a disguised habit. Her love was renewed in seeing me, and (...) felt
in her heart a motion of ten^erness which made her blame her ^^bition: As I
perceived something ^f it, I made use of that good mo^ent; for after having
given her a ^pposed Letter, which served me (...) a pretense, having obliged
her to (...) see the Citadel, which is one of (...) finest and strongest in
Europe, as (...) walked upon the Bastions, at (...) foot of which the Waves of
the (...) beat, I took an Occasion to speak (...) her of the infidelity of that
Ele^^ent: and some wrecks of a Vessel (...) had been cast away a little be^^^e
in the Road, presenting themselves in that moment to our view, it so luckily
seconded my Design, that fear and love procured in the mind of the Marchioness
the effect^ had promised my self. She changed the Resolution she had taken of
quitting me. We renewed our ancient Protestations, of never parting, and for
the better covering this change with a specious pretense the Marchioness
feigned to be very ill; and it was resolved that I should not appear till after
the Vessel (...) put to Sea; Whereupon she (...) carried immediately to her
Lodging, where, as soon as she came she di^^ not fail to go to Bed, and to
conplain as may be imagined. The ablest Physician was sent for to her, and I
had so well instructed him, that he needed no more to persuade all the world
that she was very fick, and that every one believed her life in danger:
Insomuch that the Captain of the ship, after having waited fifteen days in vain
for her recovery, was constrained to make (...) for Poland. Having noting ^^ore
to desire, I made known (...) the Marchioness that for the ^^king away all
suspicion, that (...) had contributed to her stay, it ^^as requisite I should
return as I ^ame, to which she consented; and (...) days after she also
arriving at (...), she so well persuaded the ^^dy, who had engaged her, the
^ief she had to have fallen sick, and at having been able to take the oyage,
that she discovered no af^^ctation, and ever preserved for her ^all her esteem
and affection: Both of us well satisfied with one another, we passed very
sweetly six months together: But in sine Love having resolved to part us,
renewed the Occasion of going into Poland at a time I least dreamt of it; for
the Queen impatiently expecting a Governess, and not seeing her arrive in the
Vessel that was to have brought her, fancying her Orders were neglected,
addressed her self to another Lady to send her One, which the Marchioness
having notice of, she so employed her interest with the former Lady who had
engaged her, that by her means she was again destined for that employ, having a
real design of going. All that I could do to persuade her from this fancy was
of no effect; and the Marchioness apprehending a second sickness, obliged me
not to leave Paris. Wherefore I was constrained to consent to it, and to
content my self with the assurance she gave of never forgetting me. My tears
and sighs had no Power, and the time she had demanded to settle her affairs
being expired, she went aboard the Vessel which was to carry her, and arrived
safely at the Court of Poland, where she was received by their Majesty's with
all the kindness she could have hoped. Of all the displeasures that Love causes
in us, abfence is certainly the most sensible; There are its true several
Others, whose stings are very piercing, but when we are far from what we love,
nothing certainly lies heavier upon us: Wherefore it is easy to imagine what
my trouble was. As I loved the Marchionels tenderly, I looked upon that
separation as a kind of Death; and that Thought made such an impression upon my
mind, that in a few days I appeared so changed, that my friends were all
surprised at it. I was no longer seen in that gay humor which I had before,
and tho I endeavored to conceal my melancholy and recover my mirth, there
appeared a certain languishing in all my actions, which made known that my soul
was far from me. As much as Paris had been dear to me, I as much abhorred it
since the Marchioness had left it, and in the middle of that great City I lived
as if I had been in a Wilderness. The remembrance alone of my Mistress
possessed all my thoughts, and not being able to live any longer without seeing
her, I took the resolution of following her. But such a voyage being very
long, I was willing to take such precautions with my Father as that it might
not afflict him: I went to see him, and stayed four or five months at his
house, during which time having made known to the Marchioness the design I had
of going to her, she took measures with the Queen of Poland, and supposing that
I was her Relation, she made her Majesty think fit I should make a voyage to
her Court. She had even the goodness to declare to her that I might not be
useless there, and that she would certainly let her see that she took part in
all that concerned her. The Marchioness being thus assured that I should be
well received, gave me notice of it by this Letter.

The Marchioness des Roches, to the Baron de Saint-Cir.
IT is very difficult to have such Relations as you, my dear Cousin, without
passionately desiring to see them, principally in a Country where I cannot put
Confidence in many people: Wherefore if you still persevere in the design of
traveling, you will never meet with more pleasure than in Poland, being I
shall receive you there with all the joy imaginable, and that the King and
Queen have had the goodness to declare they should graciously consider you. As
the Court is all French, you will find nothing in it that is savage, except the
habits, and I hope when you are well acquainted with it, you will find it as
diverting as that of France. But tho these Considerations are very powerful, I
will however believe, that they are less inviting than the desire you have of
seeing a Relation who loves you tenderly, and who should esteem her self very
happy, if she might once more assure you by word of mouth that she will as long
as she lives be entirely Yours

The Marchioness des Roches.


As I expected with the usual impatience of passionate Lovers News from the
Marchioness, I received this Letter with all the tenderness I was capable of: I
kissed it a thousand times, and read it over as often: Insomuch that only
thinking of going to see her, I in some measure recovered my briskness; and
after having caused my Father to consent to my absence, I made a very
magnificent Equipage, and went to Havre with design to go on board there the
first: Vessel I should find: But not being willing to surprise the Marchioness,
I acquainted her with it in these terms.

The Baron de Saint-Cir to the Marchioness des Roches.
YOu never made a more equitable judgment than that of believing, ^y dear
Cousin, that you alone could ^blige me to go into Poland: Not but that I have an
extreme acknowledgment ^f the kindness their Majesty's have de^ared they should
have for me, and that it might agreably flatter the ambition of a young
Gentleman. But the ties of Blood, and a certain I know not what, which I find I
have for you more ^han for all the rest of the world, makes much more
impression upon my mind: and when I think I shall again see the most lovely
relation in the world, and that she her self will be delighted with it, my soul
is filled with an unexpressible joy, and I complain of all the ^oments that I
employ for the preparing my Equipage, Wherefore you may judge if I shall
neglect to embark in the first Vessel that goes from this Port, my Father
having likewise given me leave t^ travel; and if the Winds would hea^ my vows,
I should certainly have the honor of seeing you suddenly, and (...) making
appear to you the acknowledgement I have of your Cares, and the happiness you
are willing to procure m^

The Baron de Saint-Cir^


After having sent this Letter to the Post, I waited at Havre more than a month
for the convenience of a Vessel, which was come to take in Marchandice for
Poland, my impatience may be better imagined than I can express it, and in all
my life I never found the days so long I went every moment to the Port to see
if the Ship could depart, and when I found the wind fair I was mad we were not
to make use of it; But Seamen are a people without Reason, as well as without
Love, wherefore I could not oblige them to put to Sea before the time they ^ad
projected, what prayers soever (...) made them. Being thus constrain^d to wait,
I took the resolution of ^eing a pretty woman, and of the ^^st Quality of the
City, I had known her at Paris, and if I be not deceived she had some kind of
esteem for me. She received me with all the testimonies of kindness and joy I
could have hoped for; and if I had been capable of relishing the divertisments
of the season, I should not have been weary with her; but all that lovely
person could do, it was impossible for her to see me one day without
melancholy. In fine the time being arrived I expected with so much impatience,
that Lady would needs accompany me on Board, where after having wished me all
manner of happiness, she tenderly embracing me bid me farewell. The Son that had
not appeared in more than a week, showed by his return the part he took in my
good fortune, and it seemed according to all appearances, that I was to make a
happy voyage. But we were hardly twenty Leagues at Sea, than the great
agitation of the ship made me so sick, that in two or three days I lost my
speech, and could not make my self understood otherwise than by signs. During
my sufferings in this manner, there arose on a sudden so furious a tempest,
that the seamen not being able to govern their ship, were constrained to tear
down the sails, and to abandon it to the mercy of that Element. Death presented
it self on all sides, and the most daring apprehended to find there their
Grave; insomuch that I had been extremely happy in my disease, if the Master of
the ship, who was a man naturally barbarous enough, and of those sort of people
who are given to superstition, had not fancied that I was the cause of this
change, because he had seen that Lady embrace me upon the Deck when she bid me
Adieu. Wherefore notwithstanding all the resistance of his people he would
needs cast me into the Sea, saying that the tempest would certainly cease, and
that they should be delivered. In this cruel design assisted with some of his
seamen, he took me and carried me upon the Deck, and they had already half put
me into the Sea, when that a Religious touched with Compassion, courageously
opposed his Barbarousness, and held me by a foot; But as the Master persevered
to drown me, tho he remonstrated to him, that being a person of Quality my
death might be revenged and cost him his head. At length seeing that his
reasons were not heard, and wisely considering that to oppose was the means of
rendering his Charity useless, he found this expedient, that if I did not speak
the next day, and that I were still sick, he consented they should cast me into
the Sea, to which the Master agreed and I was left upon the Deck, without my
servants daring to take care of me. Not having lost my hearing, and
understanding very well all that was said, it is easy to imagine with what a
fright I was seized. The certain death I saw presented it self to my
imagination with all the horrors which accompany it, and I thought of nothing
but preparing my self for it, when that Heaven made a miracle in my savor, for
the air clearing up about three a clock in the morning, there fell a little
shower, which having awaked me out of the trance I was, I crept as well as I
could to some tackling, and having sucked with my tongue the water which dropped
down, it so well moistened my throat, that it took away the sharpness which
hindered me from speaking: Insomuch that with the day light I recovered my
speech, and the Sea being also become calm, the Master surprised with these
alterations, not only left off persevering in the base design he had; But
having told him I went to the Court of Poland by the Kings Order, (which put
him in a terrible fright being his Subject) He took so much care of me, that
some days after I recovered my perfect health, and had so absolute a power over
the Ship, that I disposed of it as if it had been mine. Wherefore we thought of
nothing but of making use of the fair wind we had, when that being ready to
enter the Baltique sea, having taken his Glass upon the notice they saw a sail,
he discovered that that ship endeavored to get the wind of him, and that it
was an English Man of War; as he apprehended with reason he should be insulted,
he did all he could to avoid their coming up to him, but after having used all
his efforts one whole day to prevent being taken, the man of war in the evening
coming within Canon-shot, made three shots upon our Vessel, which made the
Master resolve to cast Anchor to expect him. I did what I could to oblige those
who traveled with me, to put our selves in a posture of defense, but
notwithstanding my remonstrances and the desire I had of fighting we were taken
by those Pirates, who entering our ship, so terrified them that were in it, that
two of the six Hospital Maids that the Queen of Poland caused to come from
France to establish them in her Kingdom, cast themselves into the Sea where
they were drowned; they stripped all the others and took from them what they had
of value, and discovering by my clothes that I was no common person, and that
they might have a good ransom from me, they made me only lay down my Arms, and
treating me with more Civility than I could have hoped, we were carried to
London; Cromwell the Usurper of the Kingdom reigned there at that time under the
name of Protector. The Master of the ship remonstrated to him that he had been
in France by order of the King of Poland, and that all that was taken belonged
to him, he showed his Passports and demanded his liberty; but it would not be
granted him, and we were constrained to wait above a month, for news from the
Court of Poland. The King being surprised to hear what had happened to us, sent
an express to the Protector, to whom having confirmed what the Master had
advanced, the Protector ordered that all should be restored that had been taken
from us, which was punctually executed, insomuch that putting again to Sea
after incredible fatigues, we arrived at length at Danzick, from whence
thinking to have gone to Warsaw, I was much surprised when they told me that
the sickness had drove the Courtaway, which was wandering from City to City, for
the avoiding that Cruel disease which depopulated all the Kingdom. But having
learnt that it stopped at Lublin where it would stay sometime; I sent one of my
servants to the Marchioness to give her notice of my arrival, and to know where
I might see her. But when he arrived at Lublin, the King was already gone from
thence for the Duchy of Lithuania; He joined the Court at Vilna, and delivered
my Letter to the Marchioness, who having as much impatience to see me, as I had
of making known to her, that she alone still made all my happiness, that
nothing might hinder me from making all the expedition possible, she sent me
back my man with one of hers, who knew the language and the ways. In effect
they had no sooner delivered to me the Letter the Marchioness wrote to me, than
that I begun my journey for Vilna. My impatience made me make a thousand useless
vows, and I cannot express to you the greatness of my trouble: But in fine I
arrived at the place where I desired to be with so much passion. The
Marchioness whose absence had not at all diminished her affections received me
with much joy, and as she found in me also the same sentiments I had ever had
for her, Our first interview produced the usual effect of extreme passions. We
were a long time without being able to speak; and after having acquainted one
another with what had happned to us since our parting, I had the pleasure of
receiving from her in that occasion, all the most obliging marks of esteem and
kindness that I could have expected. Two days after the Marchioness having
presented me to their Majesty's, who believed me her near Relation, I was
received by them with so much goodness, that I shall preserve the memory of it
as long as I live. All the Court did me likewise more honor and civility than
I could have expected; and especially you, my Lord, treated me after so
obliging a manner, that being the man of the world, the fullest of
acknowledgment, I vow to you that from that day, I have ever had a very great
passion of serving you, and of being of the number of your friends. Ragieski
who had very peaceably listened to the Baron, having interrupted him to answer
his Civility, and to make him new Protestations of frienship, he continued his
discourse thus. As I had no other ambition than that of loving the Marchioness
and of being beloved, the liberty I had of seeing and speaking every time I
could wish it with Civility, rendered me ^e most happy of all Lovers. The ^ing
gave me Employs, as you ^ow, wherein I have endeavour^^ to answer the good
opinion he (...) of all those of our Nation. The ^archioness continued to love
me, love her with the same tenderness as I did the first day; and it is that
^^ich makes me something melan^^oly, notwithstanding the good ^ear; and the
other pleasures I receive in your House. This is, ^y Lord, all of consideration
that ^ean acquaint you with; and as ^ou are the only One I have intrust^d with
my secret, I hope it will re^^in so with you; since you see it (...) of
considerable consequence, and that you take part in all that con^erns me. The
Baron having left off speaking, Ragieski neglected nothing that might confirm
him in the good opinion he had of him. And after having applauded his Constancy
and his Choice; Supper time approaching, they went to the Vice-Chancellor's
Ladies apartment, whose Letter the King received with so tender and passionate
transports, that after having read it several times, it seemed as if he could
never part from it; he was no longer seen in that gloomy humor he was in
before. All people were surprised at it; and tasting already by advance the
pleasure that was promised him, his joy was read in his face, waiting however
with impatience for the day of Rendevouz. He gave orders for hunting exactly
half way from the Vice-Chancellor's house, and as the days were something
short, he departed in the morning, and in the heat of the Chase, stealing from
the crowd of Courtiers, he was not long before he came to the place, where the
Vice-Chancellors Lady as impatient as himself, expected him, the King being
only followed by one Officer in whom he put great confidence. It was a Country
house in the middle of the Forest, and far enough from the high ways. Being the
dwelling place of a Nobleman meanly rich, who was not at all surprised to see
hunters there. But as a pretense was requisite for staying, the
Vice-Chancellor's Lady being only followed by her faithful Governess and the
Baron's Gentleman of the horse who knew the ways, had had the precaution to say
at her arrival, that she had fallen from her horse and was something hurt. The
Nobleman had left his house to her that she might take rest, and went to see
his laborers work. Thus the King finding no obstacle to his contentment, had
so agreeable an entertainment with the Vice-Chancellor's Lady, that nothing
could be added to the pleasure they had together: They recompensed themselves
with Usury for the time they had lost; and while that all those that had
followed Casimer to the chase, were in extreme pain of finding him, as well as
Ragieski was on his part for his Lady, whom he believed lost, because she was
not at the death of the Stag. They passed their time sweetly together. They
were two hours in that manner, and in that time a great many things are said
when we are as much in love as they were. But the Governess fearing a surprise,
and thinking the time long, came and told them they ought to think of
retreating: Insomuch that they must part, but it was not without extreme pain
they did so, and that each of them went their way. The Lady was not long before
she joined her Company who were in search of her; she told them she had lost
her self in the wood, they easily believed her, and as she was very well
satisfied, and that they were so likewise with the good success of their
hunting; they all returned with much joy to Ragieski's Castle. The rest of the
day passed very agreably; the Vice-Chancellor's Lady acquainted the Baron in
few words with the success of the Rendevouz. Casimer not being obliged to give
an account of his actions, had an overplus of pleasure to see at his arrival at
Warsaw, how earnest they were to know what had been become of him: and the
Baron returning the day after to Court, after having been well regaled at
Ragieski's house, who was charmed with his Wit and his other Qualities: They
would have all had reason to have been well contented, if the Marchioness,
knowing nothing of what passed, had not taken ombrage of the Baron's visit: But
as she was naturally jealous, and that the Vice-Chancellor's Lady was pretty
and young, she could not hold from reproaching him with the long stay he had
made in her house, and making likewise reflection of his earnestness to speak
to her when she was at Court, there needed nothing more to persuade her of his
being in love with her: Insomuch that in the first transport of her jealousy,
she spoke such sharp and vexatious things to the Baron, that he seemed to be
the most treacherous of all men. I do not at all wonder, said she to him in
anger, that for some months you have not had that application for me that
caused all my joy, my kindness too well assured you of my heart, that you
should still make it your delight and your pleasure, you love -- There she
could not proceed, nor detain her tears; but a moment after recovering her
speech, yes you are unfaithful; and do not think I am ignorant you have been at
Ragieski's to give your new Mistress a heart that belongs to me, and of whom I
shall revenge my self. The Baron being extremely astonished at these
threatenings did all that he could to undeceive the Marchioness of the error
she was in; he cast himself at her knees, which he very tenderly embraced, he
sighed, he wept, he swore a thousand times that he still loved her with the
same sidelity, and that his passion should be eternal. But tho he told the
truth, all this did not cure the fair displeased One; the Vice-Chancellor's
Lady made her afraid; and tho he was persuaded it was dangerous for him to
discover the Kings secret, he chose rather to risque all events, than to see
her any longer displeased with him. True Lovers cannot conceal any thing from
their Mistresses, he knew she only treated him ill because she would not lose
him; wherefore he acquainted her with what we have said of the Kings Amors
with the Vice-Chancellor's Lady; this settled her mind, and the Baron and the
Marchioness were so well reconciled, that he did not apprehend she would impart
to other people the secret he trusted her with.

While that all this passed in this manner, his affairs of War were not in so
good a posture. The Diet assembled at Warsaw; where the Vice Chancellor was
obliged to be and to bring his wife, who could stay no longer in the Country by
reason of the season. The Nobles appeared there allarmed, and in strange
divisions: The Ecclesiastics complained highly that their Privileges were
violated, and that the King had consented in favor of the Cosaques to the
rupture of the Union made between the Roman and Greek Church, and that every
one might live according to his belief: and both the one and the other in stead
of Uniting to hinder the ruin of the Republic, consumed the time in particular
disputes, and that great Assembly was hardly able to take the necessary
Resolutions for the approaching Campaign. It would be a kind of Miracle if a
^ing could long entertain an amorous intrigue without discovery. Kings are so
used to be absolute in their Wills, that they cannot always constrain
themselves. Casimer took so much pleasure in entertaining the Vice-Chancellor's
Lady every time she came to the Palace, that tho he saw her else where more
conveniently, he could not hold from speaking to her. It was perceived, it was
talked of, she was pretty; all the world knew that Love was the Kings ruling
passion, every one likewise believed that the Vice-Chancellor's Lady possessed
his favors; Ragieski took notice of it as well as the others, but the honor
Casimer did him, not being for his convenience, he made known something of it
to his wife who informed the King thereof. They were for sometime more
reserved, which augmented his cares and jealousy, and as the Lady was not
cautious enough in concealing her passion, in the end her love betrayed her.
Ragieski unluckily found one day her little Cabinet open, she kept the Kings
Letters in it, as glorious marks of his defeat and of the power of her eyes, he
took them and was in despair to see what he was very unwilling to have found.
In the first transport of his fury, he more than once deliberated to sacrifice
her to his Despair; but as unfaithful as she appeared to him, he loved her too
well to lose her; he contented himself with outraging her by terrible words,
and to shut her up in a Chamber of which he took the key: This was not yet
enough or a man so irritated as Ragieski, he knew the Queen could not patiently
suffer the amorous thefts of Casimer, he went to her immediately, and dilivered
into her hands the Letters he had found: The Queen seemed no less outraged than
himself, and as she had more than one reason, that obliged her to wish Casimer
might not be won from her, she promised Ragieski to hinder the continuance of
their dishonor: She was a Woman of her word, neither did she fail to show her
Resentment to the King, and he so impatiently suffered the Queens Reproaches,
that it did but augment his passion for the Vice-Chancellor's Lady, and
Ragieski well knowing to what dangers one is exposed, when in disgrace with his
Prince, resolved to seek his safety in his retreat; Wherefore he returned to
his house, whither he carried his wife, believing that time which allays the
greatest ills, would appease the Kings anger, and extinguish his flames.
However it happned quite contrary, for the King who found in the airy
Conversation of the Vice-Chancellor's Lady, Charms which eased his mind of
those troublesome fatigues from which Monarchs are no more exempted than other
men, and who still hoped for greater favors, finding himself on a sudden
deprived of the pleasures she gave him, sent an Order to Ragieski to return to
Court to render his Majesty the service he was obliged to by his Charge. All
Courts are full of such people as insult over the unfortunate, and that to get
by their disgrace, or to revenge themselves, ever find out concealed Crimes. In
a short time Ragieski was accused of caballing against the interests of the
State, and was convicted of some secret Intelligences with the Enemies of the
Crown: Insomuch that the Senators and Nuncios of the Kingdom deposed him from
his Charge, banished him for ever, and confiscated his goods: All the efforts
of the Archbishop (...) Gnesne Primate of the Kingdom, could not prevent this
Thunder^olt, and the unfortunate Ragieski ^as constrained to go seek refuge
(...) foreign Contries. But as he had many considerable Relations, and that he
was a man of wit, he so well knew how to discover to the Swedes ^he weakness of
the Republic, that ^n the end he rendered his vengeance ^^tal to Casimer, as
we shall quick^^ see. Thus the King having no more obstacle in his love, and
the Queen not being able to hinder ^s being entirely the Vice-Chan^ellor's
Ladies; he caused her to ^ome to Court under pretense of ^ringing up there an
Only Daugh^er she had had by Ragieski, and ^aving given her all the confiscated
^ands and goods of her Husband, he continued the seeing and loving her with yet
more tenderness and passion than he had done before. He triumphed over the
Queen and Ragieski for some months, not keeping any measures for the concealing
the Love he had for the Vice-Chancellor's wife, whom he publicly saw as often
as he pleased. Some of Ragieski's Relations begun to murmur very highly, and
the Vice Chancellor who was retired to Stockholm to the Queen of Sweden, so
well inflamed them by the correspondences he held with them, that having made
them comprehend that the honor of all the Nobility was branded in his person.
As the Nation is naturally jealous as well as haughty, at the length all the
Nobles so publicly complained of Casimer's proceedure, that tho nothing was
Criminal that had passed between him and the Vice-Chancellor's Lady, he was
constrained to yield to the reasons of State and to abandon her. To express
here the greatness of his and the Ladys grief, is what cannot be done by words.
Tho a King and highly sensible of the in^ury that was done him, he was forced
however to suffer it, and to stifle his love and his anger: Tho Ragieski's
ought to have been lessened by this kind of victory which he gained at his
turn, and that he ought to have spared his Country; yet the particular hatred
he had conceived against the King overcoming all other considerations, he made
use of this way for the fully satisfying his Revenge. All the world knows that
Charles of Sudermannia being become King of Sweden by the Revolt of the Bishops
and the people, who had embraced the Doctrine of Doctor Disteben, he maintained
himself there against his Nephew Sigismund Father of Casimer, who had been
elected King of Poland, and to whom the Crown of Sweden belonged by right of
Inheritance. Gustavus Adolphus that famous Conqueror likewise maintaining
himself therein, notwithstanding all the efforts of Vladislaus; after several
bloody Wars, they made a Truce, during which they were to labor for a good
Peace. But these two Kings being dead, Casimer renewed this Truce with
Christina, the only Daughter of Gustavus; who having resigned the Crown in
favor of Charles her Cousin German; Casimer who pretended that this abdication
could not be made to his Prejudice; the Crown of Sweden Legitimately belonging
to him, sent a Gentleman to the States of Sweden assembled for the Coronation
of Charles, that he might form an opposition on his part: But this opposition
not being considered, and Charles touched to the quick with this proceedure:
Ragieski seeing the Occasion favorable for the pushing on his resentment,
employed all the talents of his wit for the animating Charles to resent the
affront that Casimer had newly done him, and adding to that the great
Correspondencies he entertained with the principal Lords of the Kingdom, who
could no longer suffer his Government, he gave him so certain hopes that he
might be elected in his place, that at length Charles resolved to break the
Truce, and to make War upon Poland. In the mean time there were Ambassadors at
Lubec who labored for the Peace; Casimer seeing the Nobility alienated, his
Authority lessened, a thousand Contradictions in the Assemblies, Lithuania in
the power of the Moscovites, and the Cosaques revolted; all this obliged him to
desire it, and to yield up several points which he would not have abandoned in
another juncture. But Charles animated by Ragieski changed Policy in changing
Design. His Ministers sought out new difficulties, and tho Casimer had
renounced in favor of Charles all the pretentions he had upon the Kingdom of
Sweden, and had even consented the three Crowns he bore in his arms should be
taken away, which was the only subject that had obliged Sigismond and
Vladistaus to make War. The Swedes passed to other demands, that under pretense
of still laboring on the Peace, they might make their preparations, fool the
King of Poland, and dispossess him without his being able to defend himself.
Charles caused likewise to be published his pretentions upon the Duchy of
Cleves and Juliers, for the better concealing his Designs. And as the truce
ought to have lasted six years longer, Casimer could not imagine that Charles
would break it, and therefore took no precautions. He thought at that time of
curing the Melancholy the forced retreat of the Vice-Chan^ellor's Lady had cast
him into, his ^eart could not live without loving, (...) was his natural
inclination: he had formerly cast his Eyes upon one of the Queens Maids of
Honor, He daily saw her without going out of the Palace: she was no Polander,
she was younger than the Vice-Chancellor's wife, and was not less fair. Casimer
fancied he could not do better than to love her, and endeavor the being
beloved: The greatest obstacle he found in it proceeded from the great severity
with which the Marchioness lived with her Maids of Honor, observing the least
of their actions. That Lady being affectionately beloved by the Queen, appeared
likewise so fixed in her interests, that the King was not a little perplexed.
But the faithful Baron was a great help to him, for having discovered to him
his new passion, as he was much in the Marchionesses favor, he promised him to
employ the credit he had with her, for the obliging her to furnish the King
with the means of seeing his Mistres in secret. The Baron interessed himself
too much in all that might please Casimer, to omit any thing for the engaging
the Marchioness to serve him. He knew her Delicacy, and was not ignorant that
the proposition he was to make her, would furiously displease her; But he
resolved to suffer all for the contenting his Master. She for whom the King
sighed was called Mademoiselle de Schanfeild, she was a German, and but
eighteen years old; Her shape was fine, and of those that may be called
advantageous, her face oval, her Eyes blew, well turned, and in which there was
seen a certain languishing mixed with vivacity, vacity, so great a proportion
in all (...) person, that one more beautiful could hardly be found. But with
(...) these advantages she had so quick (...) it and so just a discernment,
that (...) is not to be wondered if Casimer and in her wherewith to comfort in
for the loss he had. As the noise (...) his first passion had ruined (...) and
that the Queen continually ^atched the least of his actions; ^s love disguised
it self a long time ^^der the name of good will; and (...) Eyes alone made
known to Made^^eiselle de Schanfield, that he had in is heart something more
for her ^an that general esteem One has ^or all fair Persons. The King lost ^o
occasion of speaking to her, and ^hen he did it, it was in so obliging ^erms,
that it might be easirly ima^ined his was not indifferent. The Marchioness
perceived it, which made her the more strictly observe the Conduct of
Mademoisellede Schanfield; she also spoke of it one day to the Baron, and
declared to him that this passion of the King extremely perplexed her. The
Baron made use of the occasion to qu^^ himself of what he had promised Casimer,
and looking upon the Marchioness with a passionate air. I am so used, Madam,
said he to her, to ask you favors, and to receive: marks of your goodness,
that I know not if you will have tha^ of disengaging me from the word I have
given to the King, that you shall not traverse the passion h^ has for
Mademoiselle de Scanfield I very well know that what (...) demand of you is
extraordinary that it is in a manner affronting you to pretend it. But likewise
Madam, added he, the more violence you shall use upon your self the more shall
I be indebted to you^ There are Kings like Torrents who destroy all that
opposes their passage: You know what it cost Pagieski, and also the little
satisfaction the Queen had in showing ^er jealousy. The King's love is so
violent that it cannot suffer any engmentation; He is liberal and ^akes care of
raising me, but this (...) not what most engages me; He ^onours me with his
Confidence; he discovers to me the most secret, thoughts of his heart. In fine,
Madam, I judge of the pleasune you shall do him by that I should receive, if
the like service was ^endred me in regard of you. The Marchioness who had
hearkened to all this discourse with much attention, was very much perplexed
now to answer it; she clearly saw that all the Baron told her merited
reflection to be made upon it. But what she owed the Queen and what she owed
her self at that time overcame all these considerations, and she was so
displeased with the Baron, that he was constrained to come to submissions for
the appeasing her exasperated mind. However he did not despair of bringing her
to the point he desired; and having acquainted the King with what he had done,
this difficulty ^^d but augment his ardour, insomuch that he was upon the point
of declaring himself openly. In that thought the amourous Prince made a
thousand different Projects, but coming to consider the impression that this
would make upon the Queens Spirit, who would use all manner of means for the
ruining his hopes; he conjured the Baron to make a second effort with the
Marchioness, for the conquering her scruples, for the suceeding in it; the
Baron redoubled his cares and applications, he never quitted the Marchioness;
and as nothing is impossible to Love when it concerns it self, the Baron's
tenderness so touched the Marchioness, that at length she resolved to be of ^he
intelligence. Casimer had an ^^expressible joy; he made magniscent presents to
the Marchioness, and promising himself the enjoyment of thousands of pleasures,
^e means was to be sought for the ^aking him see his Mistress with ^^fety. The
Marchionesses apartment was judged the most conve^ent and the least suspected;
but ^he difficulty was to come secretly ^ere. The other maids of Ho^ours
Chambers were to be passed (...), and to win two Guards who ^er kept sentinel
in the Gallery, which appeared an invincible ob^acle, because these Guards were
^aily changed: Wherefore they those the most dangerous means ^ut likewise the
most certain, which ^as to pass through a window which ^oked into the Court, through
which ^he Baron took the King with a Ladder into the Marchionesses Chamber:
there is nothing to which we expose not our selves when we are in Love. Casimer
approved this expedient, tho dangerous for his person; and all being disposed
in that manner, the Marchioness begun to caress Mademoiselle de Schanfield more
than usual, she made her the Consident of her secrets, that she might have part
in hers, and rallying her agreeably upon the Complaisancies the King had for
her; in a little time she won her good Opinion, and discovered to her all he
was resolved to do for the giving her marks of his Love. As Mademoiselle de
Schanfield was haughty, she received very coldly the proposition the
Marchioness made her, which rendered her very uneasy; but in fine the pleasure
of being beloved by a King, whose tenderness was known, too agreeably flattered
her imagination to despise the Conquest. She consented to the Rendevouz the
Marchioness had appointed her; and the hour appointed being come, the Baron
^^st out a Ladder to the King with which he mounted into her apartment. There
it was that this Prince found that Love treats Kings as other men; all his
greatness quitted him as well as his Courage. Made^oiselle de Schanfield
appeared to him the most formidable person in the world, tho she was there more
soft, yet he durst hardly offer her his heart. Neither is there any thing which
more perplexes a Lover than to say he loves: all his actions publish his Love,
and he very well contented; but when words are to be found to explain them, a
certain Confusion mingled with fear so seises on all his Spirits, that he
cannot discover what he even dies thoroughly to persuade. Wherefore the disorder
the King was in was not useless to him; and tho he had told Mademoiselle de
Schanfield all he had resolved to say to her, perhaps it would not have made
the same impression upon her mind as his silence and his sighs. It is the usual
effect of great passions to be ever mute, Nothing touches more a fair person
than to see greatness humbled at her feet, a King suppliant to Charms that are
very powerful; and in truth it was all these considerations that made
Mademoiselle de Schanfield lose a part of her natural haughtiness in that
Occasion; she felt in her heart unusual motions, and if her bashfulness hindered
her from declaring to the King that his passion did not displease her; it is
certain that she conceived a great esteem for him, and that she secretly
interessed her self. But the glory of conquering a young heart which had never
been touched being joined to his Love, it may be said that that uncertainty was
not without delight; One loves naturally to surmount all that makes resistance,
and the hope there is of ^anquishing and recompensing our selves, causes
sometimes more joy ^han favors would do. But all the ^^ings hopes had like to
have been ^uined by an accident which put ^^s person in extreme danger. There
^as ever been observed at the Court ^f Poland the Custom of setting ^wo Guards
before the apartment ^f the maids of Honor, that they ^ay know what passes
there. One ^ay that the Baron de Saint Cir ^ould not go to the Marchionesses
^partment, by reason of an indisposition which obliged him to keep ^is bed; the
King not being able ^o pass the window as he used to do, would needs go through
the maids of Honors Gallery: But after having passed the first Sentinel
without being perceived, because it was late and that, the Soldier was without
doubt asleep; when he was upon the point of entering the Gallery, the other
Soldier stopped him by a who goes there? to which the King not thinking fit to
answer, still continuing his way, the Soldier believing that it was perhaps
(...) Theif, who would make use of the darkness of the night, called his
Companion and both together seized the King with much violence; he did all he
could to get out of their hands, to the end he might not be known: But it was
in vain, and the noise they made having awaked most part of those who were in
the neighboring apartments who came to help the Sentinels; the King whom they
would have killed was constrained to make himself known. Never were people so
surprised as those Guards were; their boldness turned into fear, and they would
have fled to avoid the punishment they believed to have merited, when the King
commanded them to stay, and to tell those who came to know what passed, that
having quarrelled with one another they had caused the noise that had been
heard. As they did not expect to be quit for so small a thing, they willingly
obeyed, and the King covering his face, and pressing to know the occasion of
the noise, for the better concealing himself, retired to his apartment. The
Marchioness and Mademoiselle de Schanfield not seeing the King come, imagined
some ill might have happned to him, which made them very uneasy, especially
Mademoiselle de Schanfield, beginning to have an inclianation for him, appeared
very much concerned. He for his part was no less out of humor, whether for not
having seen his Mistress, or because he feared that adventure coming to be
discovered, it might break all his measures; Insomuch that he could not sleep,
and kept his bed the following day, loaded with ill humor and vexation. The
Baron being recovered he went to see the King, who told him what had happned,
and that he had only received some blows of their fists. He was willing to make
a Galantry of it to Mademoiselle de Schanfield and writ her this Letter.

IF it be as difficult to engage your heart, as it is uneasy to surprise the
vigilance of your Guards, without doubt, Mademoiselle, you will quickly render
me the most unfortunate Prince of the world, as you have made me the most
amorous. I was stopped yesterday evening notwithstanding all my precautions, I
was treated as a Thief, all the Neighborhood was alarmed, and I had like to
have lost my life: However, I do not complain, and it is only to put you out of
pain that I give you this notice; for it is so pleasant to suffer for what One
loves, that I esteem my self very happy to have been in danger: But if after
this, Mademoiselle, you still doubt of the greatness of my passion, and if you
persevere any longer in that coldness which makes me despair; when I see you it
will be only to dye at your feet of Grief and of Love.

CASIMER.


The King having given this Letter to the Baron, he went immediately to the
Marchionesses, where finding Mademoiselle de Schanfield, he acquainted them
with the forementioned Circumstances, and gave Mademoiselle de Schanfield the
King's Letter, it being the first he had writ to her she blushed, appeared much
amazed, and it was with a great deal of fear she opened it. But the Baron
pressing her to give an Answer she was in great perplexity: yet after several
irresolutions; whether out of respect or inclination, she wrote this Letter to
the King.

THo the acknowledgment I ought to have of all the favors you have done me,
should not oblige me, Great Prince, to take part in all that concerns you; your
life is too dear and too precious to remain insensible when One learns it has
been in danger: Wherefore I am as much moved as One can be at the accident that
happned to you last Night, and as I am the cause of it, I cannot tell you
precisely the impression it makes upon my heart: But I can assure you that it
begins to fear you, and that it will suddenly also want Guards, if you
continue thus to attaque it.

Mademoiselle de Schanfield having given this Letter to the Baron, he went
immediately to carry it the King who was at the Queens apartment. But tho he was
used to stay longer there, his impatience made him go out as soon as he
perceived the Baron; and hi^ heart being between fear and hopes, he opened his
Mistresses Letter with much precipitation; tho it was not very kind, he felt so
extraordinary a joy that he could not hold from showing it in the least of his
actions. In effect it is certain that of all the pleasures we find in Love, the
most sensible is that which gives the first glimpse of being beloved; for tho
those which follow are usually more solid, it may be said however they are not
so agreeable, and that they are less moving to a Lover. The same evening the
King had a very tender Conversation with Mademoiselle de Schanfield, who being
something bolder, said to him a thousand things which made him find her more
lovely than he had done before: insomuch that he returned the most satisfied of
all men. But if Love was favorable to him, his joy was quickly changed into
trouble. The King of Sweden did not sleep, and Ragieski had given him too fair
hopes for to neglect them. Wherefore he broke the Truce which was to have
lasted six years longer, as we have said, and turned all his Designs to the
Conquest of Poland. Casimer in his first furprize offered Peace to the Cosaques
with a general Pardon, and the Confirmation of their ancient Privileges, and
likewise the liberty to brew Beer, make Metheglin, and burn Brandy. But he
could not reduce those Rebels to their Devoir; and at that time Prince
Charles, Alexander, Bishop of Nuis and of Plosko, his only Brother being dead,
few Monarchs have been afflicted like him. This was not yet enough for the
shaking his of his great Courage, Prince James Rodrivil, One of his Generals,
took the part of Charles King of Sweden, after having failed in his duty at the
^^ege of Mohilon, and for the completing his misfortune, the Tartars ^oyned to
Casimer's Troops, having ^eaten Chilmilenski before Husman, killed fourteen
thousand men, taken two and twenty Pieces of Canon, as many Colors, and Arms
for six thousand Soldiers; they returned into their Country after having set
Chilmilenski at liberty, whom they had also taken Prisoner. He sent the Lords
de Chilmilenski and de Norviscovite for the States of Lithuania in Embassy to
Stockholm, who offered to Charles all he could desire for the making a good
Peace with him: But having answered them that he was resolved to pass the Sea:
Two days after Charles departed with an Army of fourteen thousand men, and the
greatest Lords of his Kingdom. General Wittimberg commanded another Army of
sixteen thousand men, and Count Magnus ^e la Guard expected also in Liseland
the Orders of Charles with a third Army of fourteen thousand men. All these
Forces joined to those of the Electour of Brandenburg, which were no Iess
considerable, cast a terror and fright through all Poland. Casimer demanded
Succors of the Emperor against the Moscovites, and en deavoured to reunite
the Nobemen for the saving the Republck: But Ragieski who was with Charles, had
so alienated them from their duties, that the Pospolite Russeniques would have
had another Chief than the King, which caused great distrusts. The
Ecclesiastics also offered to bring twelve thousand men on foot upon condition
that Christopher Peziemski might command them. Informuch that all being reduced
to this State, Count Magnus laid sieg to Dunembourg, which the vigorous
resistance of the Governor had newly caused the Moscovites to quit, and having
taken it in few days, it was found that the same Governor had been corrupted,
and that he was of intelligence with the Swedes. General Wittemberg was no less
succesful in upper Poland; for tho the four Vaivods were encamped with fifteen
thousand men near the River Notterlach; they basely abandoned Casimer's side,
without making any defense, and took the Protection of the King of Sweden, upon
this Condition amongst several others; that if they took 'Arms again for
Casimer, their goods should be confiscated at the Kings pleasure. Some short
time after this Conquest, which gave to the Swedes more than forty Leagues of
ground without losing one man: Charles came and joined Wittenberg near Pozen
with twenty thousand men; but in stead of observing the Conditions that
Wittemberg had granted, all manner of violences were committed, and a Bishop
had his throat cut for the having his money. Casimer being abandoned by the
greatest part of his Subjects, and Charles become Master of great Poland, he
marched with all his Troops directly to Warsaw for the besieging it: He ruined
all the Cities in his passage which made the least resistance, and being at
Colo, Pesiemski came to him in Quality of Casimer's Ambassador for to demand
Peace of him: But Charles having made answer that he was too near his Cousin not
to see him, he dismissed him, and told him smiling that he hoped to visit him
very shortly. Casimer having no more than fourteen thousand men, went to
Warsaw, wherein he put a good Garrison, and from thence followed the Queen who
was upon the way to Cracow. But as all these misfortunes did not lessen the
kindness he had for Mademoiselle de Schanfield, and that on the contrary
absence seemed to have augmented his flames, he dispatched the Baron toward
the Queen, under pretense of informing her of what passed, and encharged him
with this Letter for his Mistress.

DO you remember, Mademoiselle, the trouble I was in to quit you, and the grief
that appeared in my face, when I was as forced from my self to go appose the
violences of my Enemies, Alas! since that fatal day, my good fortune has seemed
to abandon me, and by the degrees I removed from you, my disgraces have
increased as well as my Love: Yes, Mademoiselle, I still love you more than my
life, and with what ill success soever fate does influence my Arms, I shall
have constancy enough not to complain, provided you do not banish me out of
your memory: But if I was so unhappy as to be forced from thence, I should
certainly be distracted, and dye for grief: Wherefore if you will preserve a
Prince who adores you, let me know what share I have in your heart, and I hope
that if that heart begins to yield to the most faithful passion that ever was,
my Enemies will not be able to resist me.


Ma^^omoiselle de Schanfield being made sensible by the Kings misfortunes, was
extremely touched to learn all that the insidelity of his Subjects made him
suffer. And no longer doubting but that he loved her, since he gave her marks
of it in the greatest fatigues of War, would no longer conceal the tender
sentiments of her heart. And the Queen having given her dispatches to the
Baron, Mademoiselle de Schanfield made the King this Answer.

IF the luster of your Crown had engaged me to love you, you would have reason
to apprehend, Great Prince, that the ill success of your Arms had done you some
ill Office in my heart. But as the beautiful Qualities of your mind had only
acquired it you, you ought not to fear the being forced from it by so shameful
a way. May your Enemies, Sir, but preserve your person, and I abandon to them
both the State and all the world besides: But, Alas! the dangers I am informed
you are ever exposed to, give me troubles and allarms, and I shall not be at
ease as long as you are absent. Ah! if you love me as much as you would
persuade me, preserve your self Sir I conjure you; and provided I may see you
suddenly I have nothing more to desire.


While things stood thus between Casimer and his Mistress, the Baron was not so
well satisfied with the Marchioness, for having found her in a certain
coldness, that made him suspect some body had made use of his absence, and
pressing her to acquaint him with the cause of her change, instead of clearing
his doubts as formerly, she was so vexed he should accuse her of inconstancy,
that the Baron could not hold from saying to her all that jealousy could
inspire the most amorous man with, and would have thus returned to the Army, if
Mademoiselle de Schenfield, perceiving their misintelligence had not reconciled
them. But as the Baron had not all the reason on his side, and that the
Marchioness still loved him with the same constancy; he asked her pardon for
his transports, and returned to the King, who expected him with an extreme
impatience. As Wittemberg persued Casimer, Charles took Warsaw without much
pain, and then having rejoyned the General, he marched toward Cracow. He was
n^^ med in his way that Casimer waited for him with an Army of fourteenthousand
men, he went to seek him, he found him, and the Polanders fled and saved
themselves in the Woods. Insomuch that Charles laid sieg to Cracow which was
valiantly defended: But after several assaults, having no hopes of succors,
the Garrison capitulated and yielded at the end of five Weeks. During this
sieg, Casimer was upon the River of Buck, where the Baron not having been able
to join him sooner, gave him Mademoiselle de Schanfield's Letter: he received
it with all the testimonies of joy he was then capable of, and as he found in
it all he could desire, he hoped by the good success of his Love, to vanquish
also his Enemies. But having notice that Charles was become Master of the
capital City of the Kingdom and of other the most considerable Places, would
likewise endeavor to seize his Person, he sent a Courier to the Queen that she
might come to him with the Troops she had for her Guard, which having happily
performed, Casimer resolved to retire into Silesia in the Duchy of Eopol,
which belonged to him. But as he passed through the Frontiers of Hungary, a
Palatine obliged him to stop, and threatened to charge him if he did not retire
out of the States of the Emperor. As neeessity gives expedients which One
would not make use of at another time: The King not being able to obtain the
passage by force, had recourse to address. He gave an Order in writing to
Morstain to go to the Emperor's Court, to offer him his Crown, and Morstain
having shown his Order to the Palatine, without further examining the thing, he
escorted the King as far as Eopol, where he still continued to love and see
Mademoiselle de Schanfield. Charles having learnt the retreat of Casimer, and
General Potoski having been defeated near Cominice by Chilmilenski General of
the Cosaques, he made use of those favorable conjunctures for the continuing
his Progresses with safety. He drew Chilmilenski on his side, as likewise
Charles, Alexander, Conitspolskin, who commanded the Quartains. And as victory
acquires friends, Ragoski Prince of Transylvania, sent to him also Ambassadors
for their making an Alliance together. The Principal chiefs of the Nobility of
little Poland took also Charles his Protection; and all but the great Treasurer
of the Kingdom, the Lords, Charneski, Preziemski, and Volf abandoned Casimer.
But while every One submitted to Charles, and that he caused the Diet to be
assembled at Warsaw, the Elector of Brandenburg endeavored to assure himself
of Prussia by the means of Negotiation. But the Dantrichers having discovered
his artifices, remained faithful to Casimer, and he referred the declaring
himself to a more proper season. The Moscovites on their side took Lublin where
they committed unheard of cruelties. The Count of Steembock asisted by
Ragieski, presented himself before Torn, and the Burghers animated with the
remonstrances of this last, and with the fair promises they made them, rendered
without any resistance. Charles made his entry therein, and was received with
all the testimonies of imaginable joy. But being willing to see the Burghers in
Arms, he ordered them to carry them to the townhouse, reproaching that they
had defended themselves too ill, and that he would give them to others who
should make better use of them. Thus Charles punished them the first day, for
their unfidelity to their King. After this expedition ^e went to Warsaw, to
assist there (...) the Diet he had convoqued, ho^^ing that the Senators would
not fail to offer him the Crown: But beginning to discover the fault they had
committed, in not disputing with Charles his entering into the Kingdom, they did
not answer his expectation: And Casimer having con^^oqued another Diet at
Eopol, in Silesia, and invited the Nobility to come thither; the first who
appeared was the valiant Charneski with his Troops; Volf would have followed
him with his, but was hindered by the Swedes. Nothing could be added to the
Caresses the King made him, and he had great reason to do so, since in the
Sequel he was the restorer of his affairs. He sent Ambassadors to all the
Princes his Allies to demand succors; that to Rome obtained a considerable Sum
from the Pope; that to Vienna good hopes, and the Queen having sold all her
Jewels, he hoped to put things in a better Posture. His Court was not very
great at Eopol, and he needed consolation for the supporting all the disgraces
that Forrune had sent him. He found none greater than the Conversation of
Mademeiselle de Schanfield, whom he still loved with much passion, and by whom
he was likewise beloved. They continued to meet in the Marchionesses Apartment:
But at length the Queen discovered it, she highly resented this new Intrigue,
and in the first transport o^ her jealousy would have removed Mademaiselle de
Schanfield from Court, and have sent back the Marchioness into France. The King
had occasion of managing the Queen, and things were no longer in the same
posture they were in the time of the Vice-Chancellor's Lady: Wherefore he used
peaceable means and ^ppeased the Queen, by promising ^er to think no more of
Mademoi^lle de Schanfield: The Queen was ^^^tisfied with this promise; and
Sasimer having constrained himself for some days, she easily believed ^e would
keep his word. But as ^e was not able to live without seeing Mademoiselle de
Schanfield, and that he likewise considered on the other side, that if the
Queen should again discover that he still loved her, ^^e would not fail to send
her back. In this grevious extremity that caus^ed in him pains that sensibly
touched his heart, ^he resolved to marry Mademoiselle de Schanfield to the
Prince of Zamoski, in the opinion he might at least continue to love her, and
be beloved; whereas if the Queen sent her back, which was in^^llible, he should
lose her for ever. He communicated this design to the Baron, as to the person
he designed for the negotiating this Marriage* and after having given him all
the necessary instructions for his succeeding in it, he ordered him to be ready
to go to Zamoski. And that it might no^ be believed that this was the occasion
of the Baron's journey thither, he gave him Orders addressed to the Prince for
the fortifying the Place^ The Marchioness was of the confidence; neither did
the Baron make any difficulty to discover to her his business. The voyage was
long and dangerous, she could not forbea^^ being greived, and shed tears; the
Baron was also concerned; and Mademoiselle de Schanfield having found them in
this posture, knew not to what she should attribute this great sadness.
Wherefore she asked them very obligingly what was the cause of it, and assured
them if she could contribute to their satisfaction, she would do it with all
her heart. The Marchioness madesome difficulty to ^^ll it her, apprehending the
King ^ould take it ill; But in fine Made^oiselle de Schanfield pressed her with
(...) good a grace, and with so much ^^rnestness, that the Marchioness did
really avow to her what was the ^^bject of their grief. Yes, Mademoiselle,
added the Marchioness, we are only afflicted for your sake, and ^f I loved you
less, I could with more case bear with your removeal. They talk of marrying
you, the Baron has Orders to negotiate your marriage, and perhaps he will
innocently contribute to the rendering you unfortunate the rest of your days;
for it is very uneasy to disengage One's heart when it is fixed by such
pleasing ties as are those of a great Prince, who loves you, or rather who
adores you; and when One is sensible, it is very hard to be on a sudden under
the laws of a husband, who never having been a Lover, imperiously uses the
power he has over us. Mademoiselle de Schanfield who knew nothing yet of the
design the King had of marrying her, was so surprised with the Marchionesses
discovery, that she eyed her a long time, after a manner that made her judge
she had spoke too much; For that fair Person after having changed color
several times, fell into a swoon into the Marchionesses arms, and when she came
to her self, she could only say these sad words! Ha! Sir, since you do not love
me, why will you render me unhahpy! and then fainted the second time; But in
fine the tears which fell from her fair Eyes, having something recovered her
from her surprise, she said the most moveing things imaginable; and the Baron
and Marchioness could not forbear mingling their tears with those of
Mademoiselle de Schanfield. It was the usual hour that Casimer came to see her,
he entered the Chamber they were in without their taking notice of it; He was
not a little amazed to see them all three in that posture, and not being able
to ^magine the cruse, he stood as im^ovable; the Baron being the first that
perceived him, rose immediat^y to give him a Chair, those two lovely persons
did all that they could to recover their briskness, fancying the King had not
seen them, and Mademoiselle de Schanfield being willing to turn the thing into
Rallery, told him, truly, S^^, it is not civil to surprise Ladies thus, and to
walk as softly as if you were to pass by Sentinels in your way to a Randevouze;
the King remembering the danger he had been in, told her, that he was no less
grieved than the day he was so ill treated, since that having found her crying
without knowing the Cause, he stopped, not being able to walk. But if you love
me, Mademoiselle, added he, as much you would persuade me you do, you should
acquaint me with the occasion of it, if it depends on me, it not being just you
should conceal the thoughts to the person in the world, who takes most part in
all that concerns you: Sir, answered that Charming Maid, it is so natural to
those of our sex to have Compassion of persons that are ill treated, that the
Baron de Saint-Cir having made us the recital of a very tragical story that he
had learnt, we could not forbear shedding tears, and I am certain tho you are
less tender than we, you would have been no less concerned; This, Sir, was the
Cause of our sadness, nothing being able to grieve me long, while that your
Majesty shall honor me with looking upon me favorably. But if I was so
unfortunate that you should resolve toabandon me, I avow to you that I should
never be able to receive any satisfaction. I believe, replied Casimer,
^^mething blushing, that you are so just as to allow, that from the time I have
loved you, I have done all that depends on me, to persuade you that you are the
dearest person to me in the world: and thus I cannot see how I could resolve to
abandon you, seeing if I had the thoughts of it, I should render my self more
unhappy than you. Wherefore be assured that let what will happen I shall never
forget you; but after this assurance that I make you, do not find, it strange
(at these words he made a deep sigh) that I my self acquaint you with a piece
of news, that will without doubt as much surprise you, as it has a long time
afflicted me. You know that the Queens jealously moves her to send you back to
your Relations; I shall not brag of what I have done to ^^^der it, it being
useless: But app^^hending that at length she may come to that extemity, I have
resolved to get you a Husband. How! Sir, replied impatiently, Mademoiselle de
Schanfield, could you take such a resolution, after all the Protestations I
have so often made you of never marrying. Ah! If you loved me you would not
give me to an Other. No, Sir, you do not love me, you ever deceived me when you
told me you loved me. When we are deep in love, we always know how to find the
means of preserving what we love. Love never fails such as are faithful to him;
and it is in those occasions he shows his Power. But if you have been able to
fail in your word to him, believe, Sir, added she crying, that I will keep
mine with him, and that my Constancy shall reproach you with your infidelity.
What you say, answered Casimer, wholly amazed, is too advantageous for me to
blame it, and I ever expected this usage from you. But if you make but the
least Reflection upon the necessity I am in of having you married, or of losing
you, for ever I believe that you will grant that what you call a defect of love
in me, is one of the greatest marks of passion I can give you in so ill a
juncture. For as Love ought not only to consist in loving the persons who loves
us with all the tenderness and passion they are capable of, but that we ought
likewise to love their Reputations, and all that can be advantageous to them,
tho it may be sometimes repugnant to our inclinations. It is certain that if we
act otherwise, and that we only consider our pleasures as the only objects of
our passion, it would be rather a self love than a real affection. And thus you
see, Mademoiselle, that it is love maintained by reason that obliges me to act
in this manner. I very well know you may answe^ it is no great sign of Love, to
resolve to share with an other what we ought to possess alone, and that this
may be even called by the name of a Civil falling out. But not only beleiving
you to be too just as to have one thought which would be so disadvantagious to
me, my dignity would shelter me from that reproach, since that Kings, tho
Sovereigns, may not act as other men. Their hearts as well as others are
susceptible of all passions; they love, and yet their greatness which ought to
be a help to them with their Mistresses, is what the most ruins them. The
Queen knows I love you as much as one can love, and notwithstanding the
promises I made her, she cannot fail of discovering that I do not keep them.
She would send you back to your Relations, they would put you into a Convent,
both the one or the other would equally injure your reputation, and would
deprive me of ever seeing you. Wherefore I cannot do better either for you or
my self, than to marry you within my Kingdom: I have cast my eyes upon Prince
Zamoski, who might make an other happy, and I will so strongly engage him in
the Court, that we shall be both of us happy. Resist no longer to give your
consent, keep it secret, and do not accuse me of inconstancy and of having
little love. Sir, replied Mademoiselle de Schanfeild, who was still weeping,
since your passion must stoop to the Queens jealousy, and that I must part from
you, permit me to shut my self up in a Convent, rather then to see my self
under the power of a Husband, whose Caprichio would be without doubt fatal to
me; in such a place I should satisfy my inclination and what I owe to you; and
if I may not have the liberty of seeing you, at least I shall have the joy of
giving you all my thoughts, you shall ever Reign in my heart notwithstanding
the Queens transports: Love shall not be shared with divorce, and in fine the
hopes I shall be in, that you will ever love me, will make me suffer my
disgrace with constancy and without complaining. Casimer seeing this
resistance, was in a strange perplexity, and his Soul divided between love and
fear, made him take a thousand different Resolutions; but after having kept
silence some time, he answered with a tone that made apparent the pain he was
in. As the repose both of your life and mine is concerned in the choice you are
to make, I should be too unjust, if I obliged you to give me instantly a
positive answer. I leave you alone to think of it seriously, but especially
remember, Mademoiselle, that liberty is the greatest happiness, and that you
will have no sooner lost it in shutting your self up in a Cloister, than that
you will make useless vows for the recovering it. In sinishing these words,
Casimer not being able to continue this conversation, having bid the Baron
follow him, he left Mademoiselle de Schanfeild with the Marchioness in an
unexpressible affliction. As he was no less agitated for his part, he was a
long time without speaking, but after much walking, he acquainted the Baron
with the Cause of his disquiet, and ordered him to be ready to depart in four
days, and in the mean time to use all his endeavors with Mademoiselle de
Schanfeild to get her consent to this marriage. After which he dismissed him.
The Baron returned to the Marchioness, whom he found all alone, and having with
grief acquainted her, that the King was resolved he should depart without delay
(which extremity surprised her, she expecting his passion for Mademoiselle de
Schanfield would have made him change his design; he also retired to his
lodging. Sleep; which eases the most stirring griefs; was not that night known
by those four persons, who having all their several afflictions, passed it in
that trouble that is easy to be apprehended: So that the day hardly began to
appear, than that Mademoiselle de Schanfield went to the Marchioness extremely
dejected: There was no longer seen in her fair Eyes that sparkling that made
their glances hardly to be supported, and her whole person was so languishing,
that she would have inspired Compassion in the most savage minds. She no sooner
saw the Marchioness, who was in bed, than that she said to her, with the most
moveing air imaginable; well Madam, have you found any remedy to my misfortune,
or will you avow with me, that never any one was greater, and that on what side
soever I look, I find my self unhaply? I grant, answered the Marchioness, that
you are much to be pitied, and that a heart must be harder than Marble, that
is infensible to your just grief. I do certainly take all the part that a real
friend ought to take in it, and it has so disquieted me all the night that I
could not possibly shut my Eyes. But as of two ills the least is to be chosen,
I still think it better to marry, than to be shut all ones life in a Convent:
For tho our liberties be engaged in marrying, and that we are obliged to
support the ill humors of our husbands, and sometime their contempt, we do not
however so absolutely lose it, but that there remains that of telling him our
sentiments; and for the finding the means of satisfying our inclinations, a
little Complaisance when we cannot have Love, may lul a sleep his vigilance, if
he be of a jealous humor, and even very often get into his confidence, how
morose soever he may be; In fine, Mademoiselle, you will be at Court, you will
see the King there, and methinks this is not to be very much a slave: But in a
Convent you cannot do the like, you must give an account of all your actions to
your Superior, never see any body, but by her permission: and that which I find
most insupportable is, that you must pass your whole life without being
suffered to follow your will! It is for you, Mademoiselle, to determine and see
which you like best, for the Baron must depart within four days to go to Prince
Zamoski, whom the King designs you; and if you would follow my advice, added
the Marchioness, you should chose this Party. Mademoiselle de Schanfield was a
long time without answering otherwise than by sighs, which showed the condition
her heart was in; but after having said a great many things more, which made
appear the cruel agitation this choice reduced her to: In fine she resolved
rather to please the King, than out of any inclination she had to Wedlock, to
marry Prince Zamoski. The Baron coming in a moment after, the Marchioness
informed him that Mademoiselle de Schanfield would submit to the King's will.
He thinking to carry him welcome News, went immediately to give him an account
of it: But he found this Prince in so unequal a diposition of mind, that tho he
had declared to him the evening before, that he desired nothing with more
passion than to see Mademoiselle de Schanfield in the Resolution she was now
in; Casimer appeared however so extremely afflicted at it, and after having
walked some time with precipitation; how unhappy am I! cried he on a sudden,
to labor with earnestness for what will cost me so much grief: I oblige a
person who loves me, to put her self against her will under the laws of a
Husband, and yet I cannot be content that she grants me what I demand of her.
Ah! how true it is, added he a moment after, that Love and Reason are
incompatible: From whence proceeds it that I have so little resolution after
having had the power of making my self such a proposition: It is without doubt
some good genius that expressly occasions my irresolutions, to set my mind at
rest, by preserving my Mistress: But also what will the Queen say? What will
she not do, if she perceives I have failed in my word to her? as it is
impossible but that I must fail: She will shut up my Mistress, or send her away
for ever; I shall see her no more, and I shall dye for grief: No, no, I must
keep to my first sentiments as being most just, since in marrying out
Mademoiselle de Schanfield I shall content the Queen, and still possess her
heart. But alas! replied this amourous King, sighing, Who will assure me that
this heart will be still faithful to me when it is engaged? Prince Zamoski is
young, handsome, lovely, she may love him, and would have reason to do so: Why
am not I in his place? and can One be more unfortunate! After having still held
some such like discourses as these, he told the Baron that if he had been so
long a time without giving him an answer, it: was because he had much ado to
vanquish some scruples he still had, but that he should depart within two days
at the farthest for Zamosbi. In effect Casimer gave him his Orders for the
Prince, and the Baron of Saint-Cir having settled his affairs, he begun his
journey the day after for Zamoski. If the King was much afflicted by being
forced to marry his Mistress for the preserving her, he was no less at the news
of the continuation of his Enemies Progress. Charles had not found at Warsaw
what he had promised himself, but fortune gave him the cosolation of reducing
the City of Elbing, which followed the example of Torn, through the Treachery of
a Burgher-Master they had corrupted. Charles was received there in Triumph, and
this happy success was followed by another, which being more advantageous,
might absolutely have ruined Casimer. The Elector of Brandenburgh had not yet
declared himself, and remained in Prussia with his Troops. Charles divided his
in two, of which he sent one part to besiege Marrembourg, and with the other he
went directly into Ducall Prussia, where the Quartians made great ravages. He
met Count Mgnus de la Guard in Lifeland, with an Army of eighteen thousand men,
which he joined to his own, and made known to the Elector if he would not take
his part, he would besiege Koningisberg, and ruin his Province. The Elector
declared he would defend himself; but Charles approaching within five Leagues
of Koninsberg, He made Charles Godfather to his Son, and the Elector was the
like to his. Chancellor Oxonstierne went to him (...) the King's part, and
carried him such an answer as he desired. The King and the Elector conferred at
Barestain with testimonies of friendship and joy, which promised no less than
the shareing of the Kingdom of Poland: They made a Treaty of Alliance together,
by which amongst other things the Elector acknowledged the King of Sweden the
Lord of the fire for Ducal Prussia. And in acknowledgment Charles granted to
the Elector the Bishopric of Varminia, in reserve of Bronsberg, a very
Catholic City, and a University of the Polanders. The States of the Country
were not very well satisfied, but they could not hinder it: The Elector
returned to Koningsberg, where he caused to be published that all the Polanders
who should refuse to make Oath to the King of Sweden, should retire. Insomuch
that Casimer had no more left than the Cities of Danzight, and Mariemburg. The
first rendered its fidelity remarkable to Posterity, the Inhabitants set fire on
their Suburbs, and what promises soever that were made them of preserving their
Privileges, and even of augmenting them, they were unalterable in the
Resolution they had taken of defending themselves to the last extremity. This
City is the largest, most powerful, and has the greatest Commerce of all those
of the North, and the Magistrates seeing their King abandoned, and without
forces to succor them, augmented their Troops, sent Deputies to the Hague for
the remonstrating to the States the interest they had to aid them, that the
liberty of Commerce might be preserved; and in fine they omitted nothing that
might conduce to their maintenance. Yet Charles had therein his Partisans who
powerfully caballed for the making him Master of that important Place: They
decryed Casimer in all kinds, even accusing him that he would exterminate all
those who were not Catholics, and this began to make for his advantage: But
befides that Casimer destroyed those impostures by the Letters he sent to the
Magistrates, to whom he promised powerful succors: The people of Danzick
having learnt that Charles had disarmed the Burghers of Tornes, and done some
other things contrary to the terms of the Capitulation; this so animated them
against him, that they begun to decry him, and caused a new Oath to be taken to
defend themselves without being suffered to propose yiedling upon pain of
Death. Charles having left General Steembock before Mariembourg and settled all
in Prussia, went into Poland for to chase Casimer entirely away, who was
gathering Troops upon the Frontiers of Hungary to try the recovery of what he
had lost. Some of the Nobility beginning to be weary of the Swedish yoke,
having joined Casimer, he sent Morstein to the great Cham of Tartary to demand
of him succors, and obtained forty thousand Horse, and Charneski having made a
Body of four and twenty Cornetts of Cavellery, without Canon, and without
Infantry. Charles quitted Warsaw, and went to seek him with all his Troops in
the neighborhood of Lublin. Tho Charles was Inferior in Troops to Casimer,
his great courage obliged him to ^ight. The King of Sweden gave ^he right wing
of the Battle to ^ittemberg, and the left wing to Duglas. The two Armies met,
the Shocque was terrible, and the Swedes who were not used to find resistance,
were surprised at that they met with. Charneski being desirous to revenge
Casimer, did all he could to find out Charles; more than twelve hundred Swedes
fell by their sables, Prince Adolphus was wounded in the knee, and constrained
to return to Warsaw: The King was likewise in very great danger; but in fine
Charneski seeing he could not join him, and fearing to be surrounded, made his
passage with his sable in his hand and retracted, after having given marks of
an extraordinary valor. The loss was almost equal, and the Polanders flight
was much more prejudicial to them than the battle, of which the King of Swedon
had however the glory. Charneski^ retreated to Samoski, where the Baron de
Saint-Cir had delivered his dispatches to Prince Zanoski, who caused the
fortifications to be repaired, which Charneski found in a good posture, and
while that he made his Troops repose there, the Baron acquitted himself with
success of the Commission that Casimer had given him. In effect the Prince
having asking him the News of what passed at Casimers Court, the Baron
cunningly made him so advantageous a description of Mademoiselle de Schanfield
that he conceived a great esteem for her. Some days after falling again upon
the same discourse, he so exaggerated that Ladies Beauty and the other
Qualities of her wit, that the Prince seemed desirous to see her; to which the
Baron having made answer that he might do it if he pleased, and even marry her,
being assured that the King would consent to it. Perceiving that this discourse
was not unpleasant to the Prince, he also offered to make the propositions, and
to negotiate the thing; assuring him that being a great Prince, and very rich,
he could not do better than to take a Wife who would render him the happiest of
all men. The Baron pushed the thing further and so inflamed the Prince for
Mademoiselle de Schanfield, that he obliged him to write her this Letter.

YOur Beauty makes so much noise and it is maintained by so much ^erit that it
is not to be wondered, Mademoiselle, if notwithstanding the furies of the War
you create ado^ers. For my part, to whom all fine things are infinitely
agreeable, I really avow that the description that has been made me of your
person, has deprived me of my heart and Liberty. If this Confession does not
displease you, Mademoiselle, and that you will give me leave to come and
confirm to you my deseat, I dare assure you that of all those who have the
honor to wear your Chains, there is not one who is more perfectly subdued than

Prince Zareoski.


The Baron de Saint Cir having received this Letter from the Prince, sent it to
Mademeiselle de Schanfield who showed it the King. But the Queen having
discovered the true occasion of the Baron's voyage, and not being willing to
suffer that Mudemoiselle de Schanfield should be so well settled, sentan other
Gentleman to Zamoski for to persuade the Prince from this marriage, and propose
to him that of another Maid of Honor called Mademei. selle d' Arquiem by birth
a French-Woman. This Mademoiselle de Arouiem was no less beautiful than
Mademoifelle de Schanfield, and had likewise the advantage of being much in the
Queens favor. Wherefore Casimer gave the Baron notice of it with order to
traverse this Envoy, and to make known to the Prince that he acted without his
orders. He also writ to Zamoski that he approved his marriage with Mademoiselle
de Schanfield. And that he might the more engage him, he consented she should
make the following answer.

I Did not expect, My Lord, to make conquests so far off, nor so considerable
as those you have done me the Honor to mention; and I had hitherto believed my
solf so much below the praises that you give me, that if an other Prince had
made me such assurances, I should have been far from having thoughts of
meriting them. But My Lord, I find my self so inclined to give credit to
persons of your rank, that if you never so little continue to wish me well, I
shall have reason to think my self perfectly happy.


This Letter and the Queens envoy arrived almost at the same time at Zamosk,
and the Prince appeared so well satisfied with the wit of Mademoiselle de
Schanfield that the Baron believed him, too much in love to forbear marrying
her. But as the Envoy spoke no less advantageously of Mademoiselle d' Arquiem,
the Prince seemed very much perplexed, especially because the Queen proposed to
him the marrying this last, and the giving him proportionable advantages. The
Baron endeavored to destroy all that the Envoy had done, in declaring to the
Prince that his glory was concerned not to appear inconstant, that the King
might likewise be offended with his procedure; and in fine that the offers the
Queen made him would more stain his reputation than they would be of advantage
to him; that such great Lords as he ought never to do any thing out of
interest. These reasons were convincing, the Prince made reflection on them,
and answered the Queens Envoy with much indifference in all the other
Conferences they had together. But that which quite determined the Prince in
favor of Mademoiselle de Schanfield, was a piece of the Barons cunning. He was
used to play very often with Zamoski, as well for the diverting him, as because
it gave him the more liberty to tell him his sentiments, and in effect he had
acquired by these means a great familiarity with him. The Baron had some days
before lost a Discretion to that Prince, he thought to acquit himself of it
handsomely the Conjuncture appearing too favorable to him for to neglect it.
Wherefore he cunningly made the Prince accuse him of not being punctual in
paying. And after having accused himself of the impossbility of finding any
thing that was agreeable to him, he took out a fine embroidered, Purse, in
which was Mademoiselle de Schanfields Picture, and giving it to the Prince he
told him; I hope my Lord, you will grant one cannot be too discreet when a
present is to be made so considerable as that I offer you; neither do I know
added the Baron smiling, if what I offer you in my purse may not make you
uneasiy. The Prince whom these words made very curious, hastily opened the
Purse, and having taken out of it Mademoiselle de Schanfie'ds Picture (which
was in a little golden Box set with Diamonds) he appeared in so great an
astonishment that he remained (...) long time immovable. And his surprise
continuing, the Baron being desirous to know his opinion, told him, well my
Lord, could I have given you a finer thing? I am so Charmed, answered the
Prince, I have not words capable of thanking you nor of expressing my joy; but
is it possible that the Original of this picture is as hansome as the Painter
represents herd far more, replied the Baron, for tho art endeavors to imitate
nature, and that Painters are usually great flatterers, I dare assure you that
there are certain features in Mademoiselle de Schanfield's face which are so
fine, and delicate, and so much sparkling in her Eyes, that it is impossible
for the most able Painters to describe them. Thus you see, my Lord, that I have
not surprised you, and what advantage soever the Queen proposes, she can never
make any that approaches the satisfaction you will have in possessing that fair
person, whose Wit is answerable to the Charms of her face. The Baron finding
the Prince disposed to hear him favorably, and to believe what he said, added
several other things to what I have mentioned, insomuch that at length Zamoski
dismissed the Queens Envoy, to whom he declared he had other engagements he
could not break. The Queen was too haughty to be therewith satisfied, and
fancying her Envoy had not acquitted himself well of his Commission, she found
the means of causing Prince Zamoski to come to Court, in the opinion he could
not resist what she should tell him her self. The Baron accompanied the Prince,
and his voyage was not approved of by Casimer, because he could not openly
oppose the Queens Will; Yet he received him with testimonies of esteem which
made appear the great consideration he had for him. The Queen for her part
forgot nothing that might engage him to marry Mademoiselle de Arquiem, and to
that end was more civil to him than she would otherwise have been: Insomuch
that the Prince might have thought himself very happy, if he had not fallen as
much in love with Mademoiselle de Arquiem as he was already with Mademoiselle
de Schanfield. But as he could marry but One, and that he was pressed to
determine the uncertainty he was in, rendered him the most restless of all men.
He went to visit those two fair Ladies one after the other, regularly every
day, and as Mademoiselle de Schanfield spoke to him with more liberty than the
other did, by reason of the Letters that had passed between them, she
reproached him so agreably with his inconstancy, or rather to say his
irresolution, that as long as he was with her, he did not think that
Mademoiselle de Arquiem was in the world. And as he was very handsome, and had
about a million of livres a year, and appeared very passionate, Mademoiselle de
Schanfield began really to love him, and to resolve to possess him entirely,
Mademoiselle de Arquiem was younger, but the Queen was a good Mistress, and as
she had commanded her to be very complaisant to the Prince, tho before she had
been more inclined for young Zobieski, to whom she had even promised her in
marriage: When that Zamoski took his turn to visit Mademoiselle de Arquiem,
that bashfulness which is almost inseparable to all young persons, so charmed
the Prince, that he was ever as well contented with his two Mistresses as he
was dissatisfied with himself. Casimer perceiving Mademoiselle de Schanfields
inclination, suffered no less on his side than the Prince did on his, and there
was this diffence between their pains, that the King could not complain with
Justice of the ills he endured, because he himself was the cause of them.
Mademoiselle de Schanfield and Mademoiselle d' Arquiem, who had thitherto
agreed very well together, could not forbear being jealous of one another, they
disputed for the preference, and each of them thought to merit more than her
Companion, insomuch that notwithstanding the ill successes of the War, all this
intrigue did not fail to give delight, and to render the Court agreeable.
Casimer was the first who was weary of it, he could not conceal his jealousy
from the Baron, and the Baron had too much Complaisance to let the King suffer
any longer. So that he found the means of carrying the Prince back to Zamoski,
notwithstanding the defire he had to stay at Court. The Queen did all she could
to detain him, But the Baron who had rendered himself very agreeable to the
Prince, remonstrated to him, that he ought for his Honors sake to return,
that he might avoid the affront he would infallibly do one of those Ladies, if
he resolved to marry, in fine they went back to Zamosch. The Prince, who was
passionately in love, was no sooner arrived there, than that he would have
returned. Tho the Baron remonstrated that it would do him an extreme injury;
all this did not persuade him from his Resolution. Insomuch that not being able
to hinder his depart, he gave the King notice of it, who ordered him to stay at
Zamosch to defend it against the Swedes who were to attack it: This News put
the Prince into the worst humor imaginable, he found nothing pleasant, and he
would have fancyed it had been done on purpose, if the King of Sweden had not
some days after effectually sent Troops to invest the place. As it was of
extreme importance to the Republic, the approach of these forces caused some
trouble in him at first in the opinion he had the Sieg would employ him a long
time. But the interest of his Country and his own Glory having suspended for a
time the impetuous motions of his passion, he applied himself very seriously to
the giving the necessary orders for the making a vigorous Resistance. In effect
the promises that were made him did neither shake his Courage nor fidelity,
Insomuch that the King resolved to make that siege in person. He himself
assigned all the Quarters for his Army, he caused the lines of Circonvalation
to be made with an admirable promptness, and as he went to view the place and
to appoint one for the raising a Battery, having a Scarlet Coat on with a white
Feather in his Hat, a Canonnier of the Town who knew him by these marks, and
because there were several Officers near his Person, pointed his Canon so
right, that one of those who talked to the King was killed, and with the same
shot this Prince fell, and was above an hour in a Swoon without any sign of
Life. Being however recovered from his Swoon and not wounded, he continued with
eagerness what he had begun, and having opened the Trenches within Musket
shot, he pressed the place in such a manner that it made appear the extreme
desire he had to take it. As it had five Bastions, and was environed on one
side with a very deep Pond and of a very great breadth, that there was likewise
outworks in a Condition of resisting some days, between two and three thousand
as well Burghers as Soldiers for to defend it, with all sort of provision and
Ammunition in abundance. The Prince was not at all astonished at the Kings
presence nor at the number of his Troops. He was young and vigorous and one of
the bravest men of the Nation. He was seconded by the Baron de Saint-Cir, and
the Love he had for Mademoiselle de Schanfield who then alone Reigned in his
heart, being joined to his great Courage, it may be said he undertook suprizing
things. Charles's Troops had but thitherto met with effiminacy, and found by
some sallies that were made upon them, that the Polanders are not a people to
be easily Conquered, when they are well headed and well united. Several Swedes
lost there lives, and in the three days the King spent in taking the outworks,
he lost above a thousand men. The Prince was more concerned that he learnt no
news of his Mistress then he was for the well defending his Town: and as he had
promised her to return suddenly to Court, and that he could not make known to
her what it was that bindred, the fear he was in she should think him
unfaithful, put him into an extreme pain, he could not forbear making it known
to the Baron, and being one night retired together to take rest: Am not I very
unfortunate, said he to him, to see my self in the impossibility of keeping my
word with the most lovely person that ever was, will she not have reason to
believe that I am unfaithful, and to lose all that esteem and kindness she has
showed me with so much goodness? I confess my Lord answered the Baron, that
Mademoiselle de Schanfield not knowing you are beseiged, may perhaps complain
you have forgot her. And having that consideration she has for you, her
complaints would be well enough grounded. Yet as the King will not fail of
being informed of the condition we are in, I dare assure you that she will no
sooner know it than that her fear with be dissipated, and she will make vows in
your favor. The Baron had hardly pronounced these last words, when one of the
Princes Gentlemen entered on a sudden into the Chamber they were in, and told
him that the Enemies taking the occasion of the mighty darkness of the night,
having seized on the Counterscarpe of the great Bastion, began already to
lodge; that on the Pond side they had done the like, and that in fine if they
did not hasten to repulse them, it was to be feared it would much advance the
taking of the Town. Any other than the Prince might with justice have been
allarmed at this News. But having told the Baron that after having chaced away
the Enemies they would continue their discourse, he caused his Arms
immediately to be brought, and without the appearance of any concern in his
face having drawn up his people, he divided them into two Troops, and having
put himself at the head of one of them, and given the command of the other to
the Baron: Flambeaux were lighted upon the Walls, and the first discharge was
made so luckily upon those that labored on the lodgings, that in less than a
quarter of an hour the Counterscarpe was almost Covered with the dead and
wounded. The Baron likewise behaved himself admirably well on the Pond side,
insomuch that the Enemies notwithstanding their Canon and Bombs, were so
vigourously repulsed, and with so much loss, that Charles begun to despair of
taking the Place, which he thought to have won in eight days. However the
Canon having made three great Breaches the day after, and Charles imagining
that the Bombs had desolated the City, out of a kind of Raillery sent to demand
of the Prince if he desired a truce for the putting the Ladies out of fear and
in safety: But as he had taken such order that neither the Canon or Bombs
caused almost any damage; he let the King know that be thanked him for his
generosity, that the Canon had only killed one old Woman, and that if he made
no greater efforts with his forces he hoped in few days he might likewise
offer him a truce for the giving him time to bury the dead and retreat in
safety. Tho the King was extreme haughty he seemed not at all vexed at this
generous answer, and being willing to use his utmost endeavors for the winning
the place, The gave orders for a general attack. He had in his Army three
thousand Jews whom he had forced to take Arms, and to lay by Commerce which
that Nation is wholly addicted to. Especially in Poland where they are very
numerous, and where all manner of Religions are permitted. These Jews commanded
by the Swedish Officers were the first that mounted to the attaque by three
several places. But whether they were not yet well martialized, or that the
courage of the besieged augmented out of the necessity of fighting for the
defense of their Walls; it is certain that almost all those Infidels were
killed upon the place, and in that occasion the King lost above four thousand
men: However he believed it a dishonor to him to raise the sieg, and not being
willing to omit any thing for the succeeding in his Enterprise, he sent a
Trompetter to the Town Gate to demand to speak with the Prince, who was in his
Cabinet with the Baron de Saint-Cir, where they were contriving together for
the finding some Expedient to learn news of Mademoiselle de Schanfield, with
whom he became daily more in love than he had ever been: Whereupon he gave
Orders the Trompeter should be brought as near as could be to the great
Bastion, which being done, the Prince went thither incontinently, where after
having made himself known, the Trompeter told him that the King before he would
make the utmost trial for the taking him and his town, desired to have a
Conference with him, and to that end he might come into his Camp in all safety,
and that he hoped a discourse of two hours would terminate great differences,
and save the lives of several persons. That if he made difficulty to rely upon
the word of so great a King, he would send one of his Officers to acquaint him
with his intentions. The Prince perceiving that for want of force, Charles
would use address and endeavor to surprise him, was upon the point of sending
the Trompeter back without an answer. But his Town being in a very good
posture, and the abundance of all things there so great, that they found
wherewith to satisfy themselves with as much profusion as if it had not been
besieged, he imagined that what the King thought would be favorable to him,
would certainly oblige him to raise his sieg by the faithful account the
Officer should give him. Wherefore he called a Council of War, that he might
not be reproached with any thing, and having in few words exposed what we have
now rolated, it was resolved the King should be allowed to send an Officer: The
Prince let the Trompeter know, he should return with that account to his
Master. And half an hour after returning with Col. Wrangel, Count Podelctoski
the Princes favorite, accompanied with the Baron, and followed by fifty
Hey-Dukes of his Guard, went out to meet him. After the Compliments his Eyes
were bound over with a Scarf; and being introduced through the Pond-gate, he was
conducted in that manner into the lower Court of the Prince's Castle, where
they gave him the liberty of his sight. It was there that Wrangel appeared in
an extreme surprise, to see so much magnificence in a City of War. But it was
much augmented when Zamoski, followed by two hundred Gentlemen, and the bravest
of his Court, came and received him in his second Court, and treated him with
all the civility he could have expected. After the first Ceremonies, he led him
into an apartment, whose furniture was so rich, and all the rest so well suited,
that he had never seen any thing more magnificent; he could not forbear looking
and admiring. But the Prince having a mind to surprise him after another
manner, and had secretly given order for the preparing a great supper, where
Delicacy and Profusion made it equally perceived, that he was not in a
Condition of apprehending to want Victuals. When all was prepared, he conducted
the Colonel into a great Hall, where several Tables were served in the same
Order; and having caused him to sit by him, while they were thus feasting, a
Concert of Music and Trumpets diverted them so agreeably, that Wrangel fancied
himself in an Enchanted Palace. But after having been well entertained, the
Prince who was no less Gallant than he was brave, carried Wrangel into another
Hall, where all the Ladies of the Town, and several others of the Country who
had took refuge there before the ^eg, coming here a moment after in
extraordinary dresses, he begun the Ball which insted a good part of the night;
insomuch that the Colonel not being able to testify his satisfaction to the
Prince, went to bed without speaking of affairs. The day after Zamoski coming
to him in his Chamber, after that all the people were retired, Wrangel told him
that the King his Master having a particular esteem for his person, both for
his merit, and the great courage he had shown since the sieg, he had conceived
the thoughts of marrying him to a Princess of his blood, and that in
consideration of this marriage, he would erect Zamoski into a Sovereignty, with
a greater extent of land than then depended on it. That for this he only
demanded the Right of investiture in the same manner as the Elector of
Brandenburgh held Prussia, and that for surety he might during three years keep
a Garrison in the Place. And having likewise added several other Circumstances
capable to seduce a weak man; the Prince, who was not of this Character, and
whose zeal and fidelity for King Casimer had appeared in several Occasions,
eying Wrangel, told him with a haughty air, that having done nothing that might
oblige the King his Master to make him Propositions so prejudicial to his
honor, he prayed him to assure him that he would find in the sequel of the
sieg, as much courage and resistance in the least of the Inhabitants of his
Town, as he had found weakness and insidelity in Casimer's other Subjects, and
that he should defend himself to the utmost extremity: and that if fortune made
the King his Conqueror, he believed him so generous, that he would treat him
like a man of his Quality, and that he would honor him with his esteem. After
this discourse having drawn up all his Troops in Battle, and asked Wrangel if
having so many brave men he would counsel him to render. The Colonel who was
charmed as well with tho Prince's good Entertainment as his generous
Resolution, after having thanked him for the honors he had received, assured
him that he would all his life time be full of acknowledgment; and asked his
permission to retire: whereupon Wrangel himself bound his scarf upon his Eyes,
and those who had brought ^im, having ieconducted him to the place where they
had received him, the recital he made to the King of all we have mentioned, so
surprised this Prince; that his Army being already much diminished, as well by
the number of the dead and wounded, as by diseases and disertions, he resolved
to raise the sieg, which he did the night following, and retired intored-
Russia, upon the River D^zane. Zamoski being thus gloriously delivered,
abandoned himself entirely to the cares of his Love, and having caused the
Baron to enter into his Closet, it is time, said he to him, with a very
passionate Tone, that I acquit my self of what I have promised; we have no
longer any Enemies to fight with, nor a City to defend: Wherefore let us return
to Court and assure by our presence her for whose sake life is only pleasant to
me, that I am ever faithful. If I stayed longer here she would have reason to
complain, and I would rather die than give her the least occasion to do so. The
Baron was extremely pleased to see the Prince had so tender sentements for
Mademoiselle de Schanfield, and was no less impatient than he to be there. But
being informed the same day that the sieg was raised that Casimer had quitted
Oppol, and was come with all the Court to the Castle of Glogow, belonging to
Count Dosbrestol; he made the Prince comprehend that the Enemies having several
flying Camps in the field, it was to be feared he might fall into their hands,
and thus it would be more convenient he alone should take a voyage to Glogow,
since he would not only render an exact account of all that had passed in the
sieg, but that he would make likewise known the state his passion had put him
in, and that he would take such measures as were requisite for their seeing one
another with safety, and entertaining a Commerce of Letter. And that it might
otherwise come to pass that the King of Sweden coming to know that he had
quitted Zamosch, would not fail to besieg it again, which would occasion
without doubt the loss of the place. And therefore that he ought for all these
reasons let him run the risque of a journey, which Zamoski could hardly be
persuaded to: Yet after having still a long time persisted in his first
Resolution, having at length drawn up an account for the King of the Principal
Circumstances of the sieg, he referred to the Baron the care of acquainting him
with the rest, and dismissing him gave him this Letter for Mademoiselle de
Schanfield.

IT was very just, Mademoiselle, that after having rendered you the absolute
Mistress of my heart, I should likewise vanquish the King of Sweden, that I
might make you a double homage of his defeat and my Own. But what glory soever
I have procured by having stopped the Course of his Victeries, I shall have
reason to complain of my fate, if you are not persuaded that I think the
passion I have of serving you, a thousand times more glorious. Yes,
Mademoiselle, nothing is comparable to my love; and absence which destroys the
greatest passions, has so augmented mine, that I die with impatience to ^^e you
again. How happy should I be if you had the same earnestness! but, alas! how
great is my misfortune to be forced to stay here; and why must a beaten Enemy
hinder me from going to declare my self entirely Yours

Zamoski.


If the Prince was much in pain to part with the Baron, this last had yet much
more to get to Glogow; he had a above a dozen times like to have been taken by
Swedish parties, and it was through a Kind of miracle that he came at length to
Court. Casimer who had been informed of the sieg of Zamosch, and who knew not
what the success had been of it, took an extreme delight in learning from the
Baron all the particulars of what had passed, and that the Prince had
determined in favor of Mademoiselle de Schanfield, for whom he begun to have
no longer so much passion, tho he had still for her a great deal of good w^ll.
All the Court took part in this good success, as may be imagined. But after
that Mademoiselle de Schanfield had read the Prince's Letter, and that the
Baron had likewise acqainted her with several particulars that persuaded her of
his passion. That fair person had such a contentment of mind as cannot be
described. The Queen observed it with vexation, and Mademoiselle de Arquiem as
young as she was, being but fourteen years old, would also have suffered it
very impatiently, if her heart had been very sensible for the Prince. But as
Sobieski, tho he was but (...) of the Crown, pleased her more, and she in some
manner acted more out of Complaisance to the Queen than inclination: Her
displeasure against Zamoski, who had neither writ to the Queen nor her, had its
real source only from the jealousy that Ladies usually have the one for the
other, when they are to dispute for the prize of Beauty. The Marchioness had
likewise all manner of reason to applaud the Barons constancy: And as he had
extremely well succeeded in his voyage, and that they had made it a point of
honor to conclude the marriage of the Prince with Mademoiselle de Schanfield.
Casimer whosaw her daily in her apartment, had there several Conferences upon
this subject: But well knowing that the Queen would use all manner of means,
for the destroying in the Baron's absence all that had been done at Zamosch; it
was resolved he should return with all haste, under pretense of thanking the
Prince, and of causing him to raise a Regiment: Wherefore he caused a
Commission to be expedited and delivered the nececessary money to the Baron,
with whom having concerted how he should address all the Prince's Letters and
his own to the King, who gave order to Baluz. Gentleman of his Chamber to
receive them, he returned to him again with a very kind answer from
Mademoiselle de Schanfield. The King of Sweden during the Sieg of Zamosch, sent
Duglas with Troops to besieg Premiflie; but tho that City was not in a posture
of maintaining a Sieg in the forms, the Burghers were so apprehensive of the
Swedish Government, that the they had but simple Walls, they resolved rather to
die than to render the place. They shut up the Women and Children in the
Churches, and while that these implored the succors of Heaven, Duglas having
passed the River over the Ice to seize on the gate, they repulsed him with so
much vigor, that he lost above two hundred men in his attacque, and the Ice
breaking in his retreat he had many more drowned. Inso much that he returned
with much confusion to his Master who was extremely surprised with all these
ill successes. Charneski having notice that he caused a Bridge to be made over
the Zane, and that a thousand Horse guarded the Carpenters, he advanced with
his Troops into a Wood, where he laid two Regiments in Ambuscade. And having
sent two others Armed after the Tartarian manner, to charge the Swedes, they
engaged them to fight, and by pretending to run away, having drawn them beyond
the Ambuscade, the thousand Swedes were defeated, except some few who escaped,
the bridge was broken and almost all the baggage taken by Charneski, who
retired without having lost more than thirty Troopers.

The King seeing his Troops daily diminished by diseases, by the rigor of the
season, and by all the advantages that Charneski gained, he resolved to retreat
and recovered the banck of the Vistule, for the preserving what was left him.
Charneski did all he could to draw him into open field that he might endeavor
by a Battle to settle the affairs of Casimer upon a good foundation; and to
that purpose he attacqued him rather like a desperate man than a good Captain.
But Charles being no less cunning than himself, and whose good fortune begun to
diminish, having penetrated his design, employed all his prudence to avoid him,
insomuch that he would never quit the Rivers banck, and all the Swedes who went
a stray or could not follow, were cut in pieces without quarter. As the most
part of the great Lords ^ad engaged themselves with Charles upon Ragieskies
solicitation, and the others without making reflection that they delivered
themselves up to their greatest Enemy, the good successes of Charncski made
them justly afraid of being one day punished for it. This made them resolve to
return timely to their devoir. Lubomierski Marshall of the Kingdom, Calinski,
Broscoski, Alexander Coniespolski, Nicolas Potoski, and Sapieska quitted
Charles Party, and joined themselves with their Troops to the brave Charneski.
Only George Niemiviez with some of his continued in his Rebellion. It is easy
to conceive the extreme perplexity that Charles was in after this desertion. He
dissembled his vexation as well as he could, and seeing that it was very
dangerous to stay any longer in the field, he retired to the Castle of Rudnie,
where Charneski having joined him, there was a very sharp fight. More than two
thosand Swedes lost their lives, and if the succors Charneski expected had
arrived, the King of Sweden had been entirely defeated. He was obliged to make
a hasty retreat, not being able to reach Sandomer, where he had a good
Garrison. Charneski followed him with the same diligence, he fought him the
third time, and it was with inconceivable dangers that Charles got to Warsaw,
accompained by few of his men, and was persued as far as the Suburb. There run
a report that he was killed, and all Europe so positively believed it during
some Months, that it was a kind of crime to doubt it. The Queen his Wife was as
much allarum'd as others and she passed the Sea to learn the certain News of
it; and it was of that advantage to Casimer, that his affairs thereupon
entirely changed face. General Steembock was before Mariemburg, which had been
admirably well defended for six Weeks that the Siege had been formed. Baron
Spar, Originally a Swede, and whose Father had dwelt in Poland from the time of
Sigismond, was Commander of it, with James Veyer and his Brother, they did
certainly all that could be expected both from their Conduct and Generosity.
But the Ammunition beginning to fail in the place, and the three thousand men
that were sent from Dantzick to succor it, being deceived by the Swedes, who
under pretext of deserting made them believe the City was taken, which obliged
them to retire without expecting further News. Spar seeing he could not hold
out any longer, rendered upon an Honorable Composition. This loss tho
considerable was in some manner repaired the same day. For the Marquess of
Baden being informed of the extremity Charles was in, came to his succors with
fresh Troops, but was fallowed by Charneski, who immediately defeated three
Troops of Horse. The Marquess not being in a Condition to fight him, passed the
River de Pilsee over a Bridge designing to get to Warsaw. But Charneski being
desirous to engage him, and to take the advantage of his disorder, swam over
the River with his men. Baden not being able any longer to avoid it, prepared
for sight and hid part of his Cavallery in the Woods. The Battle lasted above
two hours, and several were killed on both sides. But infine Baden fled, and
Charneski persued him as far as Warsaw, tho above seven leagues thither. The
Swedes were almost all cut in pieces, their Canon their bagage and most part of
their Colors were took by the Polanders. All these happy successes made
Charles know that fortune is not always constant. Charneski recovered with the
same vigor Lovitz, an Archiepiscopal See, where the Swedes had much booty. And
General Israel having endeavored to oppose him, he was no more successful than
the Marquess, insomuch that Charneski being advanced into Domerella, he took in
several small Cities, and sent three Senators to Dantzick to acquaint the
Magistrates with these good successes, and the succors that Casimer was
preparing. The Queen of Sweden was coming to Prussia. The Danzickers fitted out
several Vessels to try to take her, but could not do it. She landed at the
Pillaw, where the Electour of Brandenburg received her with Honors and
Testimonies of very great joy. The King her Husband having something refreshed
himself at Warsaw, and given the remnants of his Army to Wittemburg, he went to
meet her with Baden, Sulsback and Radzivil, he passed by Elbing, and being
arrived at the Pillaw, his presence, his tenderness and all his Caresses made
the Queen forget the Pains she had suffered. After having stayed there some
time, they returned to Elbing with greater designs than ever of continuing the
War.

Charles to this effect writ to all the Palatines and Polish Lords, who had
quitted his Party, to return to their duty, calling them Rebels, and protesting
that if within twenty days they acknowledged not their fault, he would never
pardon them. And being desirous to repare with his pen what he had lost by his
Sword, he writ likewise to the Magistrates of Dantzick, and complained that
they would have succored Mariembourg, and surprise the Queen, tho he and his
Predecessors had done them several, favors, that however being willing to use
Clemency, if they returned to their duty, he would receive them upon favorable
conditions, if not they were to expect all the rigor that War permits. But
that Letter made not any impression upon their minds, and the Magistrates
answered him in few words, that having preserved for two hundred years an
inviolable fidelity to the Kings of Poland, nothing was capable of making them
abandon King Casimer, upon whom he made War without any reason; That if after
having defended themselves like men of honor, the fortune of War should bring
them under his Power, they hoped he would treat them better than the other
Cities that had not done their Duty. Tho this answer was not conformable to
Charles's sentiments, he could not forbear commending their fidelity; and not
being in a condition to reduce them by force, he lest Steemooth before the
psace, expecting the Succors that was coming to him from Germany, having
joined Wrangel near unto a wood, he was informed that Charneski was on the
other side with his Troops, he gave order to the Colonel to attacque him, which
he did: the Shoque was terrible, and cost several lives. But Charneski seeing
the King approach at the head of the rest of the Army, he retreated in good
order with the advantage he had won. The Night favored his Design, and the
King being advanced as far as Torn, learnt there the extremity his Garrison
was reduced to at Warsaw. Casimer who was preparing at Glogow to return into
his Kingdom with the succors of the Tartars which he expected, learnt likewise
there the happy successes of Charneski, with all the joy imaginable; and the
Baron de Saint-C^r who was arrived at Zamosch without any danger, having also
let him know that the Prince hoped in a little time to join him at the head of
two thousand horse, and that he persevered in the design of marrying
Mademoiselle de Schanfield, for whom his passion was still the same, one may
say that from the time Casimer had quitted his Realm, his mind had never been
more agreeably disposed. But the Queen whose admireable penetration made her
discover the most secret intrigues, and who was not easily changed, was not
long without knowing the true Occasion of the Baron's stay with the Prince;
great successes as well as great troubles cannot be well concealed;
Mademoiselle de Schanfield was too well pleased, not to let something of it be
known, and did not fail to impart it to one of her Companions, whom she
believed her friend; and the Queen likewise observing her more strictly than
usual, knew at length all that passed. Her promises and civilities having not
had that effect upon the Prince she had expected, she changed her Conduct.
Count Podelotoski was the Prince's Favorite, and absolutely governed him,
wherefore she engaged him to serve her as well by her presents as by his own
interest. For having made him comprehend that if the Prince married
Mademoiselle de Schanfield, whose wit he was acquainted withal, she would not
fail to destroy his favor, and ruin his fortune, for that she would
particularly inform her self of all things; whereas Mademoiselle d' Arquiem
being a young person of fourteen years old, without any experience of the
affairs of the world, if the Prince married her, this Marriage would not only
be much more advantageous to him, but he might also continue in the favor his
merit had procured him, to which she would contribute on her part, and even
augment it if it was possible. And adding to all these considerations great
hopes, and that the King was in love with Mademoiselle de Schanfield, which
obliged him to wish she was Married with the Prince. There needed no more for
the determining the Count to oppose the Baron. In effect from the time the
Queen had opened her self to him in that manner, he fought all possible
occasions to traverse his designs. And as he had acquired a great familiarity
with the Prince, whose affairs he absolutely governed with the same Authority
he did his own; Being one day informed that Zamoski and the Baron were together
in an Arbor, he went thither in all have with a resolution of interrupting
their discourse, and to begin by something that should make a noise to make his
Court to the Queen: But the Arbor door being shut, he knocked so hard that the
Prince was angry, and notwithstanding all the kindness he had for this
indiscreet Courtier, had like to have discarded him as briskly as he had shown
little respect. Yet being a man of wit, and perceiving an alteration in his
Masters face; he told him he was to speak to him about an important affair, and
having insensibly led hem into a shaded Alley far enough from the Arbor, where
they had left the Baron, he presented him with an open Letter and prayed him to
read it, which he did. But taking notice, that it was addressed to the Baron,
and that it had been opened, he took it ill, and with some heat let him know
his surprise. Insomuch that he told the Prince that a Soldier of the Garrison
had delivered him that Letter, which had been given him by an unknown person,
who had retired himself, and observing that mention was made therein of him, he
thought his duty obliged him to bring it him in all have to dispose of it as he
should think fit. You had done much better replied the Prince very sharply, to
have given it to him to whom it is addressed to, and not to meddle with an
others secrets, and not giving the Count time to reply, he returned to the
Arbor, where he acquainted the Baron with what had passed in the Alley. As
this Letter was from Mademoiselle de Schanfield, and that she therein gave
notice to the Baron that the Queen had discovered their secret, that he ought
to suspect the Count, and in fine that she apprehended the Prince would abandon
her to apply himself wholly to Mademoiselle d' Arquiem. After having read it
over together, and looked upon one another for some time without speaking a
word; at length the Prince sighing, interrupted their silence, and held this
discourse to the Baron: Am not I much to be pitied to love with so much
tenderness and sincerity as I do, and yet to be suspected of inconstancy, after
having given so many testimonies of my fidelity; and are not we very unhappy,
in that our secret is discovered, and that to surprise me, the Queen has
engaged the Count to travers what makes all my joy? What you have said, my
Lord, (replied the Baron) is so reasonable, that I can only applaud your having
so generous sentiments. But if I durst tell you my thoughts, Mademoiselle de
Schanfield is not to be blaimed for being in fear of being abandoned, since it
is an infallible mark of the esteem she has for you, the Queen is against her,
she makes you very advantageous offers: Mademo^selle de Arquiem is young and
pretty, and has the honor to belong to her; and the Count promises to make you
change the good sentiments you have for her; all this joined together makes her
with justice be alarmed: But my Lord, that you may not condemn her of being
so too groundlesly, you must know that the Marchioness sends me word, that the
Queen has promised the Count a Staroftie of a thousand pound yearly income, for
to oblige you to think no more of her; and having spoke these words she showed
the Prince the Letter; this news made such an impression upon his mind, that
after having been in a great passion against the Count, he resolved not to give
credit to any thing he should tell him; and if he had not had the care of the
affairs of his Family, he would without doubt have discharged him. He lived for
some days with him after a more reserved manner, and purposely avoided all the
occasions of being alone that he might not discourse him. But it being
impossible to live long in that constraint, because he was to render him an
account of his affairs, this cunning Favorite did not complain of the Prince's
indifference, and being in some manner reestablished in his former liberty, in
the end he fancied he might succeed in his design. The hopes of a Starosty, and
the honor of being the Queens Confident so sensibly touched him, that he could
not forbear intermixing with his affairs something of the Prince's Amors, for
the endeavoring to oblige him to explain himself to him: However he did it
not, because he would keep them secret till all was regulated for the
concluding his marriage. This reservedness augmented his curiosity, and the
Queen pressing him to make known to her the state of affairs, he resolved to do
his utmost for the satisfying her. The Prince loved hunting very much, and as
it was his ordinary Recreation, the Count fancied it might furnish him with a
favorable Occasion to discourse him. In the Woods that are near Zamosch, there
are seen numbers of Bears, Wild-Boors, and other Beasts of that kind, he
ordered the Count to prepare the necessary things for this Divertisement:
Wherefore he assembled two or three thousand Peasants; and having caused the
Woods to be surrounded with Nets, as is usually practiced in that Country,
while the Peasants beat the Woods, and the Dogs pursued the Beasts, the Count
being alone near the Prince in a place the thing ought necessarily to pass
through, seeing him attentive and pensive, I allways fancied till now, my Lord,
said he to him, that my services were pleasing to you, and I flattered my self
to have so well corresponded to the honor you have done me in trusting me with
the affairs of most importance, that I believed my fidelity being known to you,
you would not conceal from me the sentiments of your heart. But if it was
permitted me to complain of my ill fortune rather than of any thing else, have
I not reason to believe, that you have no longer the same kindness for me that
you have been pleased to honor me with; since that you have not only been very
reserved of late in the discourses that necessity obliges me to have with you,
and you do not even give me all the time I have occasion for. But if I durst
say it, my Lord, I am the last of the Kingdom who knows not that you are going
to marry Mademoiselle de Schansield. And you have made to me a mystery of the
most important thing of your Life, and wherein I might have given you a great
and most sensible mark of my fidelity. Yet in stead of murmuring, Heaven is my
Witn^ss that I would never have spoke to you of it, if my honor had not forced
me rather to incurr your displeasure than to fail telling you, that it is not
for your advantage, and that endeavors are used to surprise you in flattering
agreeably the passion you have for her, Yes, my Lord, you are played upon, and I
have advice from very good hands that the King has a long time loved her, and
that he is again beloved. Insomuch that the Queen being jealous, the Baron de
Saint-Cir only stays with you for the endeavoring to oblige you to marry her:
But, my Lord, if you are resolved to marry, you will find matches at Court,
much more worthy and becoming you both by their Birth and Fortune. The Princes
of your Family have ever made illustrious Alliances, you ought to follow their
Examples for the maintaining your Rank, and if I durst give you Counsels, it
would be much more advantageous to think of Mademoiselle de Arquiem; she is
younger and more beautiful, and will better comply with your humor, and has
likewise the honor to belong to the Queen. In fine you possess her heart
without fearing that any other has reigned there before you, and this reason
alone should oblige you to prefer her, since you will only have the Person and
not the heart of Mademoiselle de Schanfield.

The end of the first Part.

