A WARNING TO THE Inhabitants of Barbados,
Who live in Pride, Drunkenness, Covetousness, Oppression and
deceitful-dealings; and also to all who are found acting in the same excest of
Wickedness, of what County soever, that they speedily repent, and return from
the evil of their ways, and no longer make a sport of wickedness but seek the
Lord while he may be found, least the Lord destroy them in his fury, and take
them away in his anger, and give them their portion in utter darkness, (who now
spend the day of their Visitation carelessly, out of the fear of the Lord) where
shall be weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth for ever.

Also, something to the Rulers of Barbados, that they rule rightly, and do
justice on the wicked, who are Peace-breakers and Transgressors of the pure Law
of God.

Written by one who waits for the redemption of the Seed of God, and the
destruction of the wicked one, the man of sin; written by a friend of Truth and
Righteousness, John Rous.

OBardoes, Barbados! who excels in wickedness, pride and covetoustousness,
oppressing, cheating and cozening, dreadful and terrible (...) practices; the
Lord who is a consuming fire and everlasting burning will render to every one
of you according to your ways; horror and (...) will take hold on you, you
covetous ones, who strive to get you care not how; who enlarge your Estates by
violence, and increase your wealth by wickedness; the cry of the oppressed is
entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath, who will speedily come to pour
forth his plagues upon you, you wicked ones, and execute his righteous
Judgments upon you who live in fraud and deceit, and act trecherously against
your neighbors; the day is come nigh wherein you shall have no excuse for your
filthiness, but the wrath of God shall be revealed in flames of fire against
you, ye Earthworms. Tophet is prepared of old, wherein ye shall be turned if
ye repent not, and in that place you shall have doube returned upon your heads;
now if you slight the day of your visitation, and go on in your ungodliness,
heaping up wrath against the day of wrath, wherein God the righteous judge will
render unto the wicked according to his works, then shall the goods which ye
heaped together by violence and oppression, torment you; and of the fury of the
Lord God ye shall drink, who now do spend your time in ungodliness, and do make
your hearts as adamant, and harden your foreheads as brass against the Lord,
who has given you a day to repent in; but unto you who spend your time in
wantonness will the portion of the wicked be given, which is in the Lake which
burns with fire and brimstone for ever. Remember Dives you that trust in your
riches and despise the poor; your Riches will not save you from partaking of
Dives portion, if you repent not, and turn to the Lord, and forsake your
oppression, pride and filthiness wherein you are exalted.

Woe unto you Drunkards, who are like Swine, wallowing in your filthiness, and
devouring the creatures upon your lusts, who think nothing good enough for your
selves, but shut up your bowels of compassion toward them that want; the wants
of the poor the Lord does see; the cry of the hungry does bear witness against
you, ye Gluttons, who spend the creation on feasting and rioting, but regard
not the wants of the needy; you rejoice in the destruction of the creatures,
and in your feeding without the fear of the Lord, but feed not the hungry; how
many have perished for want of the creatures which you have devoured upon your
own lusts? how many have been murdered by many of you, by detaining of that
which was necessary for them, from them? will not the Lord enquire for the
blood of those who have been destroyed through your hardheartedness; yea the
day is coming wherein the Lord will inquire diligently for their blood; then woe
unto you oppressors and tyrants, you gluttons and drunkards; for the Lord will
return double to you if you despise this the day of your Visitation; you gather
together, and rejoice in spending the creatures which you have gathered upon
your lusts; you eat and drink, and rise up to do that which is wicked, and say
in your hearts, Shall we be controubled by any one? or who shall have dominion
over us? ye eat and drink, and spend your time in vanity, but remember not that
the Lord will visit you for these your ungodly actions; and if you turn not
from these your evil ways your portion shall you have in utter darkness, where
shall be weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth for ever.

Howl you proud ones, who are exalted in your own strength; the day is coming,
yea and near at hand, wherein the Lord will strip you of your pride, and take
away your glory, and shame and confusion shall cover you, ye that beautify the
outside, and deck your selves with dainty colors, and new invented fashions,
that men may admire your beauty, and honor you for your gay clothing; dreadful
and terrible will the day of the Lord be to you; how beautiful will you be when
the just judge shall appear? And know you careless ones, who are at ease in the
flesh, sporting your selves in the day time, the Lord will strip you of your
beauty, and instead of joy and lightness of heart, shall you have sadness and
mourning for ever, if you repent not; your glory and your beauty is odious unto
the Lord, he hates your painted outsides, your fashions are abomination to him;
and you that now despise the beauty which is acceptable in the sight of God,
even the forsaking uncleanness, and departing from wickedness, and walking in
that which is just and upright; you shall have instead of beauty, burning, and
instead of ease, sorrow, howling and lamentation, and instead of flattering one
another in your deceit (as now you do) you shall with one consent curse the day
of your birth, and howl and lament for the woe and misery that shall come upon
you.

Now seek the Lord while he may be found; To day if you will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts, go not on still in your wicked practices, and spend not
your time now in idle vanities, lest you be taken away in the midst of your
pleasures, and be cast into the Pit, from whence there is no redemption.

And all you young men and young women, who have not yet acted in the same
excess of wickedness, as you Parents have done, whereby they have provoked the
Lord to anger, and have rebelled against the holy one of Israel; remember your
Creator in the days of your youth, and spend not your time in vanity; take
heed unto that which checks you in secret when you do that which is contrary to
God; minding it, his will lead you out of the ways of the wicked, and you will
come to see wherein your forefathers turned aside from the counsel of the Lord,
and have despised the love of God, and have crucified the Lord of Life;
harkening unto that which checks and reproves for swcaring and lying, scoffing
and scorning, and speaking evil of the things you know not; you will come to
see that which leads out of it and leads into the way of God; and that those
who are out of the way of God, have no right to the Promises that are made to
the righteous; and look not at those that are elder then you as examples to do
wickedly, but wherein that which is unclean and contrary to God is discovered
and manifested unto you, forsake it, least you walking in the paths of the
wicked, and forsaking the way of the just, with the wicked be condemned; do not
do wickedly because your Elders do so; but in the time of your youth seek after
the Lord, that you may be hid when he shall rent in pieces and destroy those
that despise his commands, and will none of his reproofs; though you be young,
yet is there something that testifies against sin in you, which does condemn
you when you act that which is unjust, and do to others that which you would
not be done to your selves; living and abiding in this, you shall be examples
to thofe that be old; and keeping to that which is just, in moderation and
sobriety, you shall exceed those who have lived many years, and have spent
their time in vanity; better is it to forsake the vanity and pleasures of your
youth, then spending your time in vanity, to come to repent when it is too late.

O be not vain in your minds, nelther be exalted in that which will not frand,
but seek after the Lord, that in his will you may come to delight, and in his
presence you may come to rejoice.

And you whose Parents are great in the Earth, and do seek to make you great in
the Earth also, take heed to your selves, seek not the pleasures of this world,
for they will endure but for a time: I have seen the pleasures of this world,
and I know what it is to rejoice in the world, and what it is to delight in
vanity, and have seen the end of all this, That it is but vanity, and folly,
and madness; for if one should enjoy what heart can defire, yet an end of that
would come, and a time when that joy shall be left, when the beauty of earthly
things shall fade away; then will sorrow and trouble take hold of all those
that delight in earthly things, and have not delighted in the Lord. I have
delighted in vanity, and set my heart upon folly; but blessed be the Lord I
have forsaken it, and now do know I have a reward, though not in the earth, yet
in that which will endure for ever; if I had lived in pleasure, and spent my
time therein, woe would have been the end of my pleasures, and lamentation the
end of my delight; but now is my joy in the denial of that which formerly I
delighted in, and peace, and joy and delight I find in forsaking that which
formerly I lived in, which naturally all youth do eagerly desire after: And so
I desire, That in the same in which I live, ye also who are young may come to
live, that so no longer you may delight in the earth and earthly things, but
seek after the Lord and the things that belong to your peace; seek not after
riches in the earth, for riches make them wings and fly away; but lay up
treasures in heaven, which will never decay: Seek not after the horror of the
world, for that honor must be laid in the dust; but seek that honor which is of
God, which will endure for ever. Glory not in any thing which is below, for the
Lord is coming to stain the glory of all flesh; but seek ye the glory of God:
Delight not your selves in youthful pleasures, but delight in walking in that
which will lead you to uprightness and a godly couversation if you walk in it;
this will show you what is contrary to God, and will lead you to God who are
faithful to it; but will be your eternal condemnation who despise it.

And all you Enemies of God, who have made your bands strong in wickedness, who
have made a Covenant with Hell and Death; who because the Judgments of the Lord
are not speedily executed have set your hearts to do wickedness; woe is me for
you, ye hard-hearted ones, who have not hearkened to the Lord, but have been as
deaf Adders, which have not heard, though the charmer charmed never so wisely;
you have made a mock of the Servants of the Lord, and have despised those that
have been sent unto you; but have rejoiced in your own corrupt Teachers, whom
ye have heaped up according to your own ungodly lusts; your Teachers will not
stand in the day of the Lord, for they are in the steps of the false Prophets
which the Lord ever sent his Prophets to cry against; they are greedy dumb
dogs, who lie down and love to slumber, who make a prey upon the people, their
desires are after the Earth, they seek the fleece, and not the good of the
flock; they are such as go in the way of Cain, and their desires after the
earth are large; long have they been teaching among you, and are you not still
as wicked as ever you were? They are not sent of the Lord, therefore shall they
not profit the people at all; though they be drunkards and live in filthiness,
yet will you hold them (...); the Lord abhors such Teachers, for they
strengthen you in your wickedness by crying peace unto you when destruction is
near at hand; and when these Teachers are made manifest unto you by the
children of the Light, and they are moved in love to your souls to declare
against your deceit that is held up by you under the pretense of worshipping
God, these you take hold of as Transgressors and as your Enemies, though you
have nothing to say against what they declare: How can you stand before the
Lord? How will you stand in the day when he shall appear, when his Wrath shall
burn as an Oven? Think you that God is not the same God against wickedness as
ever he was; ye cannot serve God and the Devil; be not deceived, God will be
avenged of you who despise the day of your visitation, and turn the grace of
God into wantonness: You that now laugh shall mourn; and you that still go on
in wickedness shall howl and lament when sorrow shall take hold on you, and
misery which shall have no end.

O that you were wise to consider! O that you would consider and forsake your
wicked actions, that so in the day of the Lords wrath you may be hid; for truly
great is the abominations wherewith you have provoked the Lord to anger: Ye
have multiplied your iniquities beyond many Nations; you have gone beyond the
heathen, who have not heard of God; in your wicked cursed sinful practices have
you provoked the holy One of Israel; the heathen seeing your abominations which
have dwelt among you, looking at you as to have more Knowledge, have committed
the like filthiness as you have done, and you have been to them as patterns and
examples of wickedness: The Lords controversy is great with you.

O ye Inhabitants of Barbados, you have exceeded the sins of Sodom, the
abominations of the Heathen are found among you, and think you to escape the
fury of the Lord if you still go on in wickedness? O no; do not deceive your
selves, for of the righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, who will not condemn
the righteous, nor acquit the wicked, shall you receive a just reward, even
according to your abominations. O consider betimes! be not as the horse and
mule, who are without understanding; let the love of God, and the patience of
God draw you to obedience; you cannot escape the hand of the Lord if you still
walk with hard hearts and stretched out necks: Large has the love of God been
toward you, that for all your abominations he has not consumed you, but has
given you a time to repent, and has sent his servants among you to declare his
Truth among you, and his will, that you might be left without excuse; and you
have despitefully used them, and have made a scoff of what they have declared;
ye cannot long stand, you cannot reign for ever; though you be exalted among
the Stars, yet will the Lord bring you down, even to the dust.

Take heed, take heed, repent, repent ye sturdy Oaks and tall Cedars; the Sword
of the Lord is drawn, which is for the slaughter of his Enemies, and for hewing
in pieces those that despise his love; for the wickedness of Sodom and
Gomorrah, did the Lord destroy them with fire and brimstone; and the same
wickedness is found among you, and your sin is far greater, in that you have
despised the couniel of the Lord, and have delighted in iniquity above measure,
that has been declared among you (O ye Inhabitants of Barbodoes) which was not
declared in Sodom nor Gomorral; for if it had, it would not have been resisted,
as it has been among you.

Tremble before the Lord you wicked ones; tremble before the Lord you
oppressors of the poor; tremble before the Lord ye Enemies of goodness, whose
delight is in doing wickedness, and in acting that which is contrary to God: Ye
persecutors, ye persecute Christ; for your enmity is not against the creature,
but against the spirit by which the creature is guided; and because you cannot
reach that (for it is out of your reach) you seek by all means you can to cast
lies and false accusations upon the creature, and if it lay in your power you
seek to destroy it; but blessed be the Lord, who is the preserver of those that
trust in him, that keeps those that serve him, for he it is that preserves us
out of the hands of unreasonable men: Remember the portion of those that saw
Christ naked, and clothed him not; saw him hungry; and fed him not; a stranger,
and took him not in; and in Prison, and visited him not; their portion was
Hell, prepared for the devil and his angels; and think you to fare better then
them who live in the same wicked practices? and you do exceed them; for they
were to depart into hell because they did not show kindness unto Christ; but
you show him all the unkindness that lies in your power; you will not only
keep from visiting him in prison, but you will seek to cast him into prison;
you do not only see him a stranger, and not take him in, but you will (he being
a stranger) cast reproaches and false reports upon him, that none may take him
in: O that you were tender to consider of your ungodly practices, and seek for
remedy while it may be had, for truly the day will come when it will be too
late to repent: Shut not your eyes against the Light, stop not your ears
against the voice of Equity, for if you do, the time shall come when you shall
cry and shall not be heard.

Woe is me for you, ye are a sottish children, a people that delight in rioting
and uncleanness; how often would the Lord have gathered you, but ye would not?
Darkness has been your delight, to keep company with whores have you rejoiced
in; your love is gone after harlots, there is no love in you toward the Lord;
from the highest to the lowest is covetousness loved, yea pride and oppression
is delighted in; and by your wicked practices are the hearts of the righteous
made sad; the proud man among you is accounted blessed: Will ye not yet
consider, O ye people! How long will ye delight in vanity, and rejoice in
setting your selves against the Lord; Ye cannot prosper in your way, your
desires are to do lewdness; wickedness and unrighteousness do ye delight in;
but justice and uprightness, purity and holiness is made a laughing stock
among you; the simplehearted ye deride as a fool; he that departs from iniquity
ye look at as if some strange thing had happened unto him; blood is found in
the midst of you, yea, the blood of the innocent, which cries in the ears of
the Lord; and he is risen in much indignation against the ungodly: Wherefore
now take heed to your selves, for you cannot fly from his presence, you cannot
hide your selves from his all-seeing eye; ye who fight against the Lord shall
be destroyed; you have not only resisted man, but ye have resisted the Lord of
life; your hearts are made fat, you live at ease in the flesh; but a day of
sorrow, a day of woe and misery will speedily come upon you; ye earthly-minded
ones, who account gain godliness, who glory in that which is your shame, who
are feeding your selves against the day of slaughter; woe is me for your
wilfulness, you are a people who drink iniquity as an Ox drinks water, and draw
iniquity with the cords of vanity: And this do I declare to you in plainness of
speech, for I cannot flatter you in your wickedness as your Teachers have done
for many years; but in plainness of speech do I declare against your wicked
Practices.

From one who is a lover of your souls, but an utter Enemy to your cursed
practices, known by the name Iohu Rous.
Bardoes 10. d. of the 8. month. 1656.
TO you who are Rulers in Barbodoes am I moved to write; see that you turn not
the Sword which is put into your hands against those that do well, but against
those that do evil; so will you be a terror to the evil doers, and a praise to
those that do well: To the Light of Christ Jesus in all your consciences I
speak, by which you shall see if you abide in it, who are those that do well,
and who are those that do evil; he that is in Cains way, in strife, hatred,
envy, and seeking after the reward of Balaam, he does evil, and has cast the
Law of God behind his back, and is for judgment, and is condemned with the
Light; now if any are moved of the Lord to declare against these blind Guides,
beware, I warn you from the Lord of taking hold on such as peace-breakers and
evildoers; for he is a peace-breaker and an evil-doer who is in those ways
that Christ cried woe against, and the Law of God takes hold of him, and he is
for judgment; the Light of Christ Jesus in all your consciences shall witness
what I speak to be true; the Prophets and Apostles were sent of the Lord to
declare against such as sought for their gain from their quarter, and did
preach for hire, and divine for money, and did make trade upon the people, and
if men did not put into their mouths, they did prepare war against them, and
such as had cast the Law of God behind their backs, and these were upheld by
the Powers of the earth; and because the Servants of the Lord declared against
them, they (many of them) were put in Prison and suffered much; now you will
confess that these were not Christian Magistrates, neither did they rule for
God, but did with their power oppose him in his ways, and persecuted his
servants for reproving both Magistrates Priests and people for their wickedness
and idolatry; Jezabel threatened Elijah because he was zealous for the Lord of
Hosts, and slew the Priests of Baal, 1 King. 19.2. Ahab caused Micajah to be
put in Prison because he witnessed against the false Prophets, and declared the
truth as he had received it, 1 King. 22. Jeremiah was put into the Dungeon
because he declared the word of the Lord faithfully, Jer. 38.1, to the 7. Jesus
Christ who was the dear Son of God, when he was manifested in the flesh, was
crucified by the powers of the earth because he spoke the truth; and Barabbas,
who was a murderer, was let go, as you may read in the Scriptures. And by the
Light I see the same ruling now as was then, that a drunkard may come to a
house of Worship, and stay there quietly; but if one come to witness against
the deceit there committed, and spiritual wickedness in high places, he is
straightway taken hold on as an evil doer; are not you who live in their
practices opposers of Christ so well as those which Christ spoke of, who should
hale them out of the Synagogues, and bring them before Rulers for his name
sake? are ye not Enemies of God, ye who persecute and imprison those who come
among you to declare against your false ways? are you not in the same ways as
the Rulers and People were who persecuted Stephen to death, and slew James, and
imprisoned Peter, Silas and Paul for witnessing against their false ways and
worships? and truly it is so come to pass in this generation, that though he be
a drunkard that is set up to be a Teacher, or a vain person, or a liar, or a
profane one, yot if any come to declare against his filthiness in obedience to
the Lord, they are taken hold of as evildoers; but the day is coming wherein
the secrets of al hearts shall be made manifest, and you who are set to do
justice shall be called to an account, for the power wherewith ye have been
entrusted; remember the portion that the Lord will give to the evil Servant
when he comes, who eats and drinks with the drunken; He will cut him assunder,
and will give him his portion with the hypocrites; there shall be weeping and
wailing, and gnashing of teeth; be not exalted in your own strength, and make
not your own wills your Law; but see that the righteous Law of God be exalted,
which respects no man's person, but does justly toward all, and does take
hold on the evil doer, whether he be rich or poor, high or low; for he that
respects persons commits sin, and is convinced of the Law as a transgressor,
and is for judgment. Now you who are Rulers, I charge you in the presence of
the living God, That to the Law of God in your consciences you take heed, which
does judge the King and the Beggar; the Ruler, and he that is ruled, for doing
that which is contrary to Truth and Justice; by this if you are ruled, you rule
for God; and he that is not obedient to you, is an evil doer, and the sword of
the Lord is against him, and he is condemned by the Light; but if you forsake
the Law of God, then pride and oppression is exalted, and the righteous are not
regarded, but he that departs from iniquity is made a prey upon.

JOHN ROUS.

THE END.

