A farther ACCOUNT OF THE DISPENSARIES AT THE College of Physicians, and in St.
Martins Lane, Westminster, and others to be Erected in and about London, for
the Service of the Public.
Les Apoticairs d' Angleterre sont une grande Compagnie
des Coupeurs des Bourses, and les Medicines les y aident.
Guy Patin. Med. Prof. Reg. Paris. Let. 410.
THE value of Health, which is Universally acknowledged to be a Blessing, is
yet more intrinsecally known to those, that have labored under Sickness, who
all unanimously confess the great usefulness of Physic, Skilfully Directed,
and faithfully Administered.

Yet notwithstanding the general agreement about the usefulness of that Art, it
has of late Years fallen in our Nation (where perhaps it has been carried the
farthest toward Perfection of any part in the World) under a sort of neglect,
next to Contempt, to the great hinderance of the improvement of the Art it
self, discouragement of its true Professors, and the general injury of the
People.

The causes of this decay, though in themselves obvious enough, are yet generally
unheeded. Because the Persons most immediately concerned, (I mean the Sick)
having scarce any understanding of the Art, are usually misled by implicit
Faith in the confident, false pretensions of some, or the officious
recommendation of others, who act with a different view from that, which they
are supposed to have by the sick Person, who seldom trusts his own Judgment, or
consults his own Reason in that, which most nearly concerns his Life.

Thus are the Sick abused, by the self interested recommendation of the
Apothecaries, who have engrossed to themselves the sole Administration of
Physic, and for the most part the Direction of it, both which were anciently
lodged in the Physician alone, though since unhappily separated to the discredit
of the Art, the injury of the Physicians, and the irreparable damage of their
Patients, as will appear.

While the Medicines in use here were but few, the providing and selling of 'em
was a part of the Grocer's Trade, and Business. But Medicines in time
multiplying considerably, they were thought to require the whole Care, and
Attendance of him that dealt in 'em, that they might be faithfully made up, and
carefully delivered in just Weight and Measure, as prescribed by the Physician.

Thus were the Ap^thecaries separated from the Grocers, that they might give
their whole attendance in their Shops on the making, and dispensing Medicines,
carefully and faithfully; which reason holds much more strongly, at this day
upon the account of the vast increase of the Galencial Compositions, the
Invention or Introduction here, of the numerous Tribe of Chemical Preparations,
the daily familiar Custom of the Physicians, to order Extemporary Compound
Medicines, a mistake in any of which may, and does often prove fatal to the
Patient.

Since this separation, they have multiplied so excessively, that at the time
of obtaining their Charter they were 114, a prodigious number in respect of
what most well regulated Cities abroad find sufficient, diverse of which (as big
as London was at that time) do to this day restrain 'em to a Number, not
exceeding Four or Six. But at present they are increased to near 1000, all
Partners computed, who, though joined in a Shop, have Families to maintain
severally.

This overswarm of Apothecaries, not having whereupon to subsist at Home, by
degrees, and in process of time overran their Neighbors. For the honest
profits of their Employment being too narrow to Support such Numbers in their
present way of Living, they have of a long time endeavored by all manner of
Artifices to encroach upon the Physicians, and exact upon the Sick, their
Customers.

In order to which they began first by Officious Visits, under pretense of
carrying the Medicines themselves, to procure the reputation of careful Men,
though in so doing they changed Offices with their Boys, and left them at Home to
do the Duty of the Master, while themselves ran on the Errands. Yet by this
they gained opportunities of insinuating themselves into Nurses, Servants, and
other weak Persons, frequently attending on sick People, and by their means to
be admitted to give their Opinion, and thence under pretense of good Husbandry
for the Patient, to repeat the Physicians Bills without his Order, and so at
length to prescribe without his Advice.

Upon the same pretense of good Husbandry for the Patient, they wrought
themselves into the sole care of such slight Indispositions, as of course were
likely to determine in a short time without Medicine, which they failed not to
improve into terrible Diseases, and mighty Cures, by Frighting the Sick, and
those about 'em with Malignity, and dismal Prognostics. This gave 'em credit
and authority enough with the Patient, to censure the Bills of Physicians, that
did not please 'em, and behind their Backs to deliver Opinions contrary to the
Physician's; to do which required no Judgment, a little craft sufficing: For
they had it in their Power in many cases, to disappoint the Physician in his
Prognostic by falsifying the Medicines prescribed, a fault they knew how to
remedy for themselves, or the favorite they helped in, (when the other was
dismis'd) by making up the same Bill truly and well. Thus they made profit of
their crimes, and gained the repute of honest knowing Men, by the skill of the
Physician at the expense of his Fame and Interest.

This point once gained, no bounds could hold 'em; there was nothing in
Practice so bold, which they dare not venture at, nothing in Pharmacy so
corrupt which they would not admit. They were now Physicians, and their
Business was abroad, and the Boy at home, that scarce could write his Name, was
good enough for an Apothecary. But as this new Dignity was not to be supported
without an extraordinary Expense, New Methods were to be Invented, to lay an
additional Duty upon their Medicines, to be paid by their Customers, now their
Patients. Decoctions and Juleps must be divided into Draughts, and Electuaries
into Boles. By this means a Quart of Bitter Decoction, very well paid for at a
Shilling, would fetch Twenty, and a Pound of Venice Treacle, perhaps worth Four
or Five Shillings, as many Pounds, and so for all the rest.

Nor was this all: For the Patient was sure not only to pay extortion for what
he had, but even for what he had not, while Russian Castor, Pearl, and English
Saffron, etc. were put into the Prescription, and New England Castor, Oyster
Shells, and Turmerick, etc. into the Medicines. But what was yet worse, if
under the direction of the Apothecary alone, or any Confederate of his
recommendation, the Patient was sure to be Crammed with abundance of nauseous,
unnecessary, and consequently hurtful stuff, till either his Stomach, his
Purse, or the Grave put a stop to further Charges, which was done only to swell
the account, and raise the Apothecary's gain, whose Fees by these Arts
generally treble the Physician's under whom he is Employed, so obliging must
the Physician be, that expects the recommendation of an Apothecary: Nay,
farther some Apothecaries are, like Conscientious Men, arrived at taking Fees
in ready Money, without making any Allowance, or Discount in the Bill.

A farther, and perhaps yet greater Mischief, arising from the Apothecaries
absenting themselves from the Duty of their Shops, is, that they cannot attend
the making of the standing Shop Compositions, which require great Care and
Exactness to be well made, and many of 'em having been bred under Masters of
that Humor, know not how to do it were they disposed. This obliges 'em to
furnish themselves from the Wholesale Apothecaries, a sort of Men that deal in
corrupt, sophisticated Ware, with which the Retail ones content themselves, out
of Avarice, Ignorance, or Laziness, to the Destruction of the People. Hence it
is plain, that most of 'em cannot warrant the Physic they Sell, nor the
Physician depend upon it, most of it being made by the Wholesale Man, and
Chemist, and all of it dispensed by the heedless Boy, whom every amusement
diverts from his attention to his Business, and any slight resemblance betrays
into fatal mistakes; especially as their present use is, of putting Medicines
indifferently into the Pots and Glasses, marked with other Names, which
insensibly leads the Boys into very dangerous Errors.

Nor is it from the corruption of the Wholesale Men, and the mistakes of Boys
only, that the Sick are endangered. The unfaithfulness of the Shops in
Sophisticating Drugs, Substituting one thing for another, vending perished
Medicines, and making up Bills contrary to the direction of the Prescriber, is
grown so general, and so notorious, that the ablest Physicians scarce know,
what they are to expect from the certainest of their Prescriptions, as they are
made up in the Shops.

Another great mischief of the most Ruinous consequence to the Sick, is the
early Officious Visits, which to show their Impertinent Care, the Apothecaries
make in a Morning, and by their Unseasonable, Injudicious Prattle, Rob the
Patient of the only time, wherein after the fatigue of an unquiet Night, he is
usually inclined to Rest, which temper, thus ruffled by the Officious Intrusion
of the Apothecary, is not again to be recovered in the whole Day, whence
frequently follow a perpetual Inquietude, Delirousness, etc. And the Apothecary
reaps Profit, and Thanks for his Mischievous ostentation of care.

These Abuses were long since seen through and condemned by many Physicians, who
all along abhored such scandalous practices. But the Apothecaries, whose
interest it was to oppose any Reformation, entered into an Association to
decry, and (as far as in them lay) to turn out of Business all Physicians, that
should have the Honesty, and Courage to disavow these sinister Practices, and
to recommend those only, that would confederate with 'em, and Countenance,
Abett, and Justify their Irregular proceedings.

To this end Lists were handed through their whole Company, wherein the
Physicians were all Named, and Distinguishing Marks prefixed to their Names,
that those who adhered firmly to the Interest of their Patients, and the Honor
of their Faculty, might by all possible Shifts, and Artifices, be supplanted in
their Business, and those that were in League with the Apothecaries, to
support, and promote their enormous Gains, and Abuses might be brought over
their Heads.

This Method fastened to 'em diverse, who were ready to sacrifice their
Patients, and prostitute their own Honor, and Consciences to the Service of
the Apothecaries, and their own immediate Profit. By these was introduced the
Fashion of writing such expensive long Bills, that he that did not order enough
every Day for the Apothecary to charge in slight cases at Twenty, Thirty, or
Forty Shillings, was sure to be aspersed by him to the Patient as a Trifler,
one that neither took the Case right, nor ordered any thing to the Purpose;
though in most cases it is difficult for the Patient to take in one day to the
real value of Half a Crown, Two Shillings, or in many even of One Shilling
prudently Prescribed, and moderately Rated.

For these Reasons are these Men cried up by 'em, their Fame is proclaimed in
Coffee-houses, and whispered in the Ears of dying Men, as the only Persons able
to put a stop to Fate, and reprieve from the Grave. To carry on this Intrigue
the more smoothly, they have their Tavern Cabals with the Apothecaries, where
they invent scandal on the rest of the Physicians, and contrive Ways and Means
to spread and diffuse it, in order to destroy their Credit.

In return of these Favors the Confederate Physicians are obliged, whenever
they are called in by the Apothecaries, where no Physician has been consulted
in the case, to Approve and Justify the Practice of the Apothecary, though the
Patient be dying of bad or improper Medicines, or for want of sufficient help
in due time. But if any other Physician, whom the Apothecary does not like, has
been first advised with, his Method, though never so proper, and well directed,
is to be Condemned, and his Medicines laid aside, and the poor Patient, if he
lives, is to run the Gauntlet afresh through all the Forms of Physic.

These Artifices have frightn'd many Gentlemen, of better principles than to
comply with 'em in all their measures of iniquity, from asserting themselves,
and disabusing the World with that Vigor and Courage, that they ought to do,
for fear of being worked out of their Practice.

Yet there wants not a sufficient Number of Physicians of Integrity, and
Resolution to redress these Grievances, and to assist all Persons of what Rank
or Condition soever, who are willing to open their Eyes to their own Interest.
In order whereunto they have erected an Office at the College of Physicians,
called the Dispensary, where all Officinal Compositions, Galenical, and
Chemical are faithfully prepared, of the best Drugs, and where already near
Twenty Thousand Prescriptions have been made up, and delivered, and about Three
Hundred Bills are Weekly dispensed by Servants of their own, and under their
own Inspection, at a Price put upon the Bill by the Prescriber, which is at
least Fifteen Shillings in the (...) Lower, than the most modest Rates of the
Apothecaries.

The extraordinary relief, that vast Numbers of People have found, from their
Distempers at such ease Rates by the Dispensary, has brought so much Business
to it, that it begins to grow impracticable to serve 'em all at one place. And
therefore, that no Person of what condition soever, may be denied the benefit
of Good Medicines at easy Prices, the Physicians have resolved to erect diverse
others in several parts of the Town.

In persuance of this resolution they have already fitted up another in St.
Martins Lane, Westminster, where constant attendance is given by their
Servants, in order to make up all such Bills, as shall come to their Hands,
from the Physicians Subscribing, and where likewise the Physicians themselves
will meet every Monday, and Thursday in the Afternoon, for the particular
Service of the Poor, where such of 'em, as resort to 'em there, may have their
Advice Gratis, as at the College on (...), and Saturdays.

And that these Dispensaries may be made as serviceable as possible to the
Public, the Subscribers have there lodged very considerable Arcana in Practice
unknown to any Apothecary, of which they were before Masters, but unwilling to
prostitute to the Adulterations, and Corruptions, which other Medicines undergo
in the Shops. The Subscribers likewise have resolved, according to the Ancient
Laudable Practice, of the Physicians of London, to set apart some Hours in the
Morning and Afternoon, for the Service of such, as in the Less acute and
Chronical Cases, shall think fit to consult 'em at Home.

The Apothecaries have made their Boast, that they Command all the Families in
Town, in respect to Physic. But unless the People are resolved to be led by
the Nose, they will have no cause to brag at that rate for the future, the
advantages of these Dispensaries to all Mankind, that are visited with
Sickness, are so self-evident. For unless Men have a mind to purchase Diseases,
or take Physic out of wantoness, they will shut the Apothecaries out of their
Doors, till they shall keep to their Shops, and Carefully, and Faithfully, make
and dispense such Medicines, as shall be ordered by Physicians, make their
prices supportable to the People, lay aside their dishonest Arts of swelling
their Bills, and Debauching Members of the College, to the Scandal of their
Profession, and Destruction of their Patients.

If any Gentlemen shall think the foregoing Charge upon the Apothecaries, and
their Confederates too severe, or the Expressions too harsh, let 'em rest
assured that every particular therein shall be made undeniably clear from
sufficient Evidence of Fact, whenever the Apothecaries shall call for such
Proofs. As for the Expression, let 'em but consider how rudely and scandalously
the Honest Physicians have been, and are daily Treated, both in Public and
Private, by the Apothecaries and their Adherents, and they will excuse some
warmth, (if any appear) especially when the general Good is in view, provided
it transports 'em not beyond the Bounds of Truth and Decency, which, it is
hoped, are not trangress'd in this Paper.

There remains one Objection, which sticks to some compassionate Persons,
otherwise convinced of the Justice and necessity of this Design; which is, that
should it obtain universally in this Town, the Apothecaries, who are a great
Company, must be inevitably ruined. But the Answer is easy, that if to Reform
'em, be to Ruin 'em, they are ripe for Destruction: For no Civil well
Constituted Government, ought to suffer one Party of Men to Live upon the Spoil
and Plunder of the rest, especially in their Distress: It Is like Robbing Houses
on Fire, under pretense of help. If therefore the Apothecaries think a
Reformation of these Abuses of such ruinous Consequence, they ought to
consider, how by retrenching their Extravagancies to suit their living to
honest Profit, or in time to betake themselves to some more Honest Employment.

FINIS.

