The Humble DESIRES OF Prince Rupert, Prince Maurice, and others their
Adherents, To the Kings most Excellent Majesty; TO Be tried at a Counsel of
War.

Together with His Majesty's Letter TO Colonel Samuel Sands Governor of
Worcester, Concerning the Persons aforesaid.

London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of the Golden Dragon in Fleetstreet,
near the Inner Temple, December 30. 1645.

May it please Your most Excellent Majesty,
Whereas in all humility we came to present our selves this day unto Your
Majesty, to make our several Grievances known, we find we have drawn upon us
some misconstruction by the manner of it, by reason Your Majesty thought it
appeared as a Mutiny. We shall therefore with all humbleness and clearness
present unto Your Majesty, That we the persons subscribed, who from the
beginning of this unhappy War have given such testimony to Your Majesty and the
world, of our fidelity and zeal to Your Majesty's Person and Cause, do think
our selves as unhappy to lie under that censure, and as we know in our
consciences, our selves innocent and free from it; We do in all humility
therefore (lest we should hazard our selves upon a second misinterpretation)
present these Reasons of our humblest Desires unto Your Sacred Majesty rather
in writing then personally, which are these:

THat many of us, entrusted in high Commands in Your Majesty's service, have
not only our Commissions taken away, without any reasons or causes expressed,
whereby our Honors are blemished to the world, our Fortunes ruined, and we
rendered incapable of trust or command from any Foreign Princes, but many
others (as we have cause to fear) designed to suffer in the same manner.

Our Intentions in our addressing our selves to Your Majesty were, and our
submissive Desires now are, That Your Majesty will be graciously pleased, that
such of us as now labor under the opinion of Unworthiness, and incapacity to
serve Your Majesty, may at a Council of War receive knowledge of the causes of
Your Majesty's displeasure, and have the Justice and Liberty of our Defenses
against what can be alleged against us, and in particular concerning this
Government. And if upon the severest Examination, our Integrity and Loyalty to
Your Majesty shall appear, that then Your Majesty will be graciously pleased,
to grant us either Reparation in Honor against the calumny of our Enemies, or
liberty to pass into other parts: Which are the humblest Desires of

Your Majesty's most obedient and loyal Subjects and Servants, Rupert.
Maurice. Charles Gerrard. A. Thacket. Rich: Wyllies. Cha: Compton. Edw:
Villers. Cha: Wheeler. Simon Fanshaw. Tho: Daniel. William Willys. John Fisher.
William Rolleston. William Bellenden. Some: Fox. Hen: Osborn. John Skrimsher.
Rich: Hatton. Sebastian Bunckley. James Rob: Dallison. George Bunckley. John
Daniell.

Octo. 26. 1645.
To Our Trusty and welbeloved, Colonel Samuel Sands, Governor of Our City and
Garrison of Worcester.
Charles R.

TRusty and Welbeloved We greet you well; By Our former Letters We expressed
Our care to prevent the Inconvenience that might arise to the country and Our
service, if Our Nephews, Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice, with their train and
followers, should make any long abode at Worcester or other our quarters; which
by your Letters to Sir Edward Walker We perceive was not without cause, as your
care therein, and of Our service, is very acceptable unto Us, so We desire your
continuance thereof. Our Nephews stay in Our quarters, has already bin longer
then We expected; and because We presume it is like to be enlarged, in regard
the Passes which have been sent them from London are such, as they thought not
fit to accept of; Our Will and Command is, That you declare unto them, that Our
pleasure is, That they deliver unto you a List of all their own Servants, which
they intend to take with them; who We will you to accomodate as well as you
may, with quarters and other necessaries for them, during their residing with
you, which We presume will not be long. And that for all others who adhere unto
them, as well those who have Passes from Us, as those who have not, Our Command
is, that you signify Our pleasure unto them, That they leave Our quarters by
the first of December next, for that We may not bear the Inconvenience of the
eating out of Our quarters, by those who have so abandoned Our service. Herein
you are to be very careful, and to give Us a speedy account of your
proceedings, for which this shall be your Warrant.

Given at Our Court at Oxford, Nov. 23. 1645. By His Majesty's command, Ed:
Walker.

FINIS.

