INFLUENCES OF THE Life of Grace. OR, A PRACTICAL TREATISE CONCERNING The way,
manner, and means of having and improving of Spiritual Dispositions, and
quickening Influences from Christ the Resurrection and the Life.

BY SAMUEL RUTHERFURD, Professor of Divinity in the University of St. ANDREWS
in SCOTLAND.

John 3. 8. The wind blows where it lists. Cant. 4. 16. Awake, O
North Wind, and come thou South, blow upon my garden, that the Spices thereof
may flow out: Let my Beloved come into his garden, and eat his pleasant fruits.
LONDON, Printed by T. C. for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold by James Davies
at the gilded Acorn near the little North door in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

Books published by Mr. Samuel Rutherfurd professor of Divinity in St. Andrews
in Scotland.
1. THe due Right of Presbytery. 2. A Disputation against Liberty of
Conscience. 3. The Rise of Antinomians, Familists, and Libertines. 4. Christ's
dying and drawing Sinners to himself. 5. A Sermon preached before the
Parliament. 6. Influences of Divine Grace. 7. De Providentia Dei. 8. A Survey
of Mr. Tho. Hooker's Church Discipline.
CONTENTS.
GOd intends that no man should be saved by the Law. p. 1. c. 1. p. 1. True
liberty, grace loves to be restrained from evil, p. 1. c. 1. p. 2. That the
first Adam was to pray for perseverance is not clear. p. 1. c. 1. p. 3. Adam
was to rely on God for perseverance, but as promised by the covenant of works.
idem. Our grace in the second Adam choicer then that in the first idem. The
Lords Influences in all, p. 1. c. 2. p. 4. Infinite almost Influences of God p.
1. c. 2. p. 7. To look not spiritually on influen^es is brutish, p. 1. c. 2. p.
8. What influences are, p. 1. c. 3. p. 9. Influences of God are suitable to Gods
end idem Influences of God for nilling, and willing, most rare and excellent,
idem. How Christ and the promised spirit must be the causes of gracious
influences, p. 1. c. 3. p. 10. We are to believe that he who purchased by his
merit the habit of grace shall give suitable Influences, and to fear also our
propension to fall, p. 1. c. 3. p. 12. The promise of Influences in Christ, p.
1. c. 3. p. 13. The necessity of Influences, p. 1. c. 4. p. 15. Reasons of
renewed Influences, p. 1. c. 4. p. 16. The first Adam might want Influences,
the second cannot, idem. Satan's actions always destitute of Influences, p. 1.
c. 4. p. 17. How God withdraws Influences in particular acts hic et nunc and
yet has promised to bestow Iufluences in the regenerate, by promise, p. 1. c.
4. p. 18. The Lord acts on us by his Influence, but we act not on him, ib. How
we cannot pray away desertion and the tryings, withdrawings, and yet are we to
pray submissively for the removal of desertion, and are to pray against
withdrawings, p. 1. c. 4. p. 19. The Lords withdrawings makes not the Holy One
the author of sin nor destroies liberty, p. 1. c. 5. p. 20. The cause why God
is not chargeable with the act of disobedience, and man is chargeable, p. 1. c.
5. p. 21. Our interpretative wanting of Influences, and our formal sinning in
the same act, cleared, p. 1. c. 5. p. 24. The soveraignety of God is destroyed
by Pelagions to the end they may exalt man's free will, p. 1. c. 5. p. 25. Of
our acts and spiritual duties under the spiritual withdrawings of God, p. 1. c.
6. 26. We are to do our part in duties under withdrawings, grace sweetens
duties, p. 1. c. 6. p. 29. What soveraignety is, and how it differs from
omnipotency, p. 1. c. 7. p. 33. We storm more at permissive providence, then
at our own permitted sins, p. 1. c. 7. p. 37. They are most graciously active
to do the will of God who are most graciously passive to suffer his will, p. 1.
c. 7. p. 38. The unsearchablenesse of the Lords dispensation into the eternal
standing and falling of angels and men, idem Its vain to determine that the
providence of never sinning is choicer then the providence of your imbringing
of Christ God-man to dye for sinners, p. 1. c. 7. p. 39. The righteousness of
God through faith is incomparably above our inherent righteousness. p. 1. c.
7. p. 4. Its a more eminently declarative glory which is brought forth in the
second Adam nor possibly could have been in the full and final obedience of the
first Adam, p. 1. c. 7. p. 41. By justification we are not only negatively
freed from guilt and wrath but also possitively righteous, p. 1. c. 7. p. 43.
We are not to struggle with permissive providence, but to be low because of the
deep result of that providence, our own permitted sins, p. 1. c. 8. p. 45. The
soul humbling thoughts that should flow from holy soveraignity, p. 1. c. 8. p.
46. Soveraignety is eminent in holding of possible wills and in determining the
measure of suffering. Of the soveraignety of God in the works of Creation and
Providence, p. 1. c. 9. p. 52. Who ever flatteringly complains of the want of
influences of grace hates these influences. Nature cannot complain of the want
of gracious influences, p. 1. c. 10. p. 58. How we may lawfully complain of
withdrawings of influences of grace, and how we may lawfully desire influence,
p. 63. The faultiness in not praying is not because the holy spirit moves us
not to pray but because we stir not up our selves to pray, p. 1. c. 10. p. 64
We are to act duties before we feel the actings of the spirit p. 1. c. 10. p.
71 How to wait upon the breathings of the spirit how its lawful how not, p. 71.
Our impotency to duties being reproved cannot excuse us in the omitting of
them, p. c. 11. p. 73 The Lords withdrawing of Influences is conjoined with our
guiltiness and cannot be found an excuse for not praying, p. 1. c. 11. p. 74
The sin of the creature is not from the Lords withdrawing of his physical
Influences but from our withdrawing from his moral command, p. 1. c. 11. p. 76
Natural men wish Physical Influences of God, but they hate moral honesty, p. 1.
c. 11. p. 80 Riches cannot add mercifulness to men, p. 1. c. 11. p. 82 Faith
and grace do not depend on extraordinary means and teachers sent from hell, and
we are much deceived, thinking had we more grace we should be more gracious, p.
1. c: 11. p. 84 If free will be weak in the improving of a natural power, it
will be so in the improving of supernatural grace, p. 1. c. 11. p. 85 God ties
us to his one way of removing of sin, not to our empty wishing that it were
removed, p. 1. c. 11. p. 93 What sort of Influences we are to seek from God, p.
1. c. 11. p. 94 The using of means is an approved way of God, p. 1. c. 11. p.
96 Some violently brought into Christ, some more mildly, p. 1 c. 12. p. 101
Whether by prayer or any other way we may wrestle out from under Gods
desertions, p. 1. c. 12. p. 109 Influences are given of God to various
temptation, p. 1 c. 12. p. 110 Its a gracious temper to weep when the Lord is
absent or angry, p. 1. c. 13. p. 113 Christ's absence is sometimes as good as
his presence, p. 1 c. 13. p. 118 S^metimes we may pray again the degree of God
but its not lawful to resist his commanding will, p. 1. c. 13. p. 120 We may
weep over our own dry hearts when we want Influences but we cannot weep against
the Lord because he gives not those Influences, p, 1. c. 13. p. 121 We are to
meet all conditions of life with cloasing with Gods holy dispensations, p. 2.
c. 1. p. 123 The word is the rule of doing, the spirit the real efficient
cause, p. 2. c. 1. p. 127. How the Lord can lay by a command supernatural
duties on men impotent and dead in sin. p. 2. c. 2. p, 129. God in creating man
is both a Creator and also a law giver, p. 2: c: 2. p. 138 We are to be humbled
for sin original, p. 2. c. 2. p. 140 How to fetch Influences, p. 2. c. 3. p.
142 The fetching of Influences is by supernatural actings by the word and
spirit, idem How the Lord brings himself under a sort of necessity of
conferring gracious Influences, p. 1. c. 2. p. 147 A considerable difference
betwixt the Lords promise of grace and his practice of grace, p. 2. c. 3. p.
148 Civil professors are nearer to conversion and to Christ then the openly
profane and flagitious, p. 2. c. 3. p. 149 It requires of the dead that they
live, and that we must not cease from running when the Lord ceases from
drawing, p. 2. c. 3. p. 152 Its a sinful shift to put away duties because of
indisposition p. 2. c. 3. p. 154 We are to pray away indisposition as a great
affliction, p. 2. c. 3. p. 155 Influence, of grace are due to the saints by
promise, p. 156 The Lord has given Influences by necessity of a promise, idem
The three persons the Father, the Son, and Spirit, give Influences p. 2. c. 5.
p. 159 The fullness of Influences on the man Christ ib. fluences p. 2. c. 5.
159 Christ has the dispensing of prederminating Influences by office and
covenant, p. 2. c. 5. p. 161 The Influences in the Son are all for our use and
good p. 2. c. 5. p. 163 The Influences of the spirit are mainely to be eyed, if
any have the spirit he cannot want the Influences of God p. 2. c. 6. p. 164 The
glorious things which the spirit of God shows, p. 2. c. 6. p. 165 The Spirit
prevents nature, nature prevents not the Spirit, p. 2. c. 6. p. 169 We are to
pray for Influences, p. 2. c. 6. p. 170 Obedience is to be yielded to the
Spirit as to the Father and the Son. p 2. c. 7. p. 173 Much renewal will is a
note of a spiritual disposition, idem There is four expressions in Scripture of
wrongs we do to the Spirit. 1 Vexing. 2. Quenching. 3 Tempting. 4. Resisting.
p. 2. c. 7. p. 176 How to improve spiritual feelings, p. 2. c. 7. p. 183
Watching is a spiritual condition and near to receive gracious Influences, p.
2. c. 7. p. 184 To converse with the Saints is a mark of a spiritual condition,
p. 2. c. 7. p. 186 Spiritual conference frequently used speaks a spiritual
condition, p. 2. c. 7. p. 189
The Contents of the third part.
SOme influences are from God, some from Satan Part 3. Chapter 1. Page 189 Satan
keeps correspondence with the heart, p. 191 Its not lawful to dispute with
Satan, yet with his instrument we may p. 192 Christ sought neither the
temptation nor the tempter, p. 193 Difference betwixt Satan's instruments, and
these of the Lord, p. 194 Christ under a necessity of giving sanctifying
influences, ib. Moral and physical influences, 195 Moral influences that are
only moral are weak, ib. Ordinary and extraordinary influences 296 Prophetical
influences, ib. It is dangerous to resist strong light, and the influences
thereof, p. 197 Private and public Church-influences, ib. Strong influences
under the Messiah in the New Testament, p. 199 Gospel-influences are strong, p.
200 Some influences are for the habit, some for the actings of grace, some for
both p. 201 Influences proper to the head Christ, and influences on the
members, p. 202 Mediatory influences are some way due to the broken in heart,
and what sort they of right have thereto. A fourfold right to influences is
considerable, p. 203 Strong and mighty influences in Christ p. 204
Gospel-providence how far above the Law-providence of Adam p. 205 Mr Gee treats
of prayer, Sect. 4. p. 187, 188, 195. p. 207 Influences of Christ fundamental
and not fundamental, ib. The comfortable necessity that lies on Christ to
confer influences of grace, p. 208 Influences not fundamental, not simply
necessary p. 209 Influences of grace for the habit of saving grace, and
influences for a gift, p. 210 How we may know when we act, pray, or hear, etc.
from a gift, and when we act from a grace, p. 210 Some pray from a mere gift,
when they mistakingly imagine they pray from the saving habit of grace, the
mistake is habitual in hypocrites, only actual hic and nunc to sound believers,
p. 211 Grace sanctifies the gift used in all due and spiritual circumstances,
but the gift can never sanctify the grace p. 213 The same word, but not the
same influences, act upon all within the visible Church, p. 214 We are not to
rest upon the actings from a gift, but watchfully to try when we act from a
gift, and when from a grace, ib. Differences from the influences of grace, and
these of glory, p. 221 The habit of grace is a permanent disposition, chapter 2. p.
222 The habit of grace is given through the merit and grace of Christ p. 223
From the habit of grace we perform suitable actings p. 224 Vital actions flow
from supernatural habits p. 225 The difference of the habit of grace from other
habits, p. 226 We are to follow holy resolutions with prayer. 2 godly
trembling. 3 faith, 227 The falsehood of ^owes, ib. A strong habit of grace
produces easy, and connatural, and strong actings of grace, p. 229 Actions
supernatural, and influences suitable, are some way due to the habit of grace,
cap. 3. p. 232 Sometimes the habit of grace is qualified with heavenly
dispositions, p. 233 We should pursue the dispositions of grace, when they are
added to the habit with spiritual actings, p. 234 We are to stir up the habit
of grace, though deadned, ib. The Lord by infusing the habit of grace comes
under some necessity to give suitable influences thereunto, cap. 4. p. 235
Diverse necessities under which the Lord is to confer influences of grace, p.
236 Christ advocates for the Elect, yet not converted to bring them to himself,
p. 237 The Spirits office puts him under a necessity of giving influences, p.
241 Uses from the Lords necessity of giving gracious influences, p. 242 First
to frame doubts about predestination to life, and to miss eternal love before
we miss inherent saving grace, is Satan's method, p. 243 Whether the habit of
grace may cease in the regenerate from all its opperations p. 244 The habit of
grace is not eternal, ib. The habit of grace cease not, p. 445 How many acts
may we bring out of the habit of grace, p. 237 There is a consenting to the
temptation, which is a wishing that Gods law and our lust might both stand, and
a virtual wishing that the law of God had never had being, p. 238 Eight
evidences that in the regenerate the saving habit of grace never cease from
emitting some influences, p. 239 What dispositions spiritual are, and how they
differ from the habits of grace, ca. 5. p. 240 Get heavenly dispositions, and
influences follow conaatur^lly p. 242 Dispositions are not ever alike, but
various and changeable, ib. Evidences that dispositions go and come p. 243
Spiritual dispositions are different from the affections, 244 There are
heavenly dispositions in the mind as well as in the affections, ibid Bad
spiritual dispositions creep on in the children of God, p. 246 There is some
acting and life under much deadness in the regenerate, ibid Many sweet
spiritual actings may be under indispositions p. 247 No agreement betwixt these
two Champions, the flesh and the spirit, p, 248 Its fit to go about duties
under indispositions, ib Less of sweet real influences, and more of moral
influences, from the word makes obedience more perfect, p. 249 We can tell the
actings when they are on, and after they are over and gone, p. 3. c. 6. p. 251.
Differences betwixt spiritual heart burnings of the love of Christ, and literal
heat, p. 252 1. Difference, ib Feeling may be stronger after actings of the
spirit are gone, p. 253 Spiritual burning of heart leave some impression
behind, which literal heat does not, p. 254 2. Difference, ib Improving of
spiritual heat is known whereas in literal heat there is no such thing, p. 3.
c. 6 3 property of an heavenly disposition, ib. What we are to do under
dispositions spiritual 301 Spiritual dispositions are at length victorious ib.
How to get heavenly dispositions, ib. 4 Property, 302 Heavenly dispositions
connaturally cast out acts suitable, 303 5 Property, 304 Heavenly dispositions
cause a man act upon himself, ib. The meetings of believers for godly
conference is owned by the Lord, cap. 11. p. 308 Small means of grace, and
short visits of Christ, are to be highly esteemed at some time, especially when
love-flowings have been neglected, ib. Sense is prouder then faith, 309
Withdrawings of Christ teach us to try whether we have abused his
manifestations formerly, 310 Except we find Christ we cannot pray, 311 How to
judge of the nature of praying, ib. Praying fitteth for praying, 312 There
degrees of discerning an answer ib. The real withdrawings of Christ make no
change of legal interests in Christ, ib. The life of grace depends on
influences of grace, 313 Christ's right and acts in redeeming of us, stand
entire when we are deserted, ib. What love-sickness is, 314 The Lords wisdom in
suspending influences of grace, 315 Withdrawing of comforts upon wise and holy
reasons, ib. The wisdom of God appointing that we depend on him, ib. How we
may pray for comforts, 316 How we may deprecate languishing pain in
love-sickness, ib. How we may pray for gracious influences, 317 A two fold
contradicting of the Lords will, 318 Love-sickness from the want of Christ, 319
As touching peace with God, we have peace de jure and de facto, but as touching
the blot and in-dwelling of sin, we ought not to have peace with our selves
under that blot, ib. Ingredients of love-sickness, 320 Pain of love-sickness,
ib. The righting of the complaining of the damned, ib. Faith above sense, 321
Faith with stronger influences then ordinary, controuleth sense under
desertion, 322 The Idol of indignation an enemy to zeal, 323 Spiritual
savouriness active and passive, 325 In Christ, in his Spouse in his members,
ib. Q. Whether God commands all use of means external and internal, and every
part thereof, p. 3. cap. 12. p. 328 Nature and grace, whether grace be above
natural dispositions, 330 Whether grace be above natures properties. 2 merits.
3 actings, ib. Whether God gives, or denies sufficient grace to the man who
does what he can, 331 The natural wicked inability in all to know, believe, and
love Christ, prove there is no universal sufficient grace, 332 The Jesuit
Martinez de Ripalda cites diverse texts for universal grace, 333 That praevious
actings in heathens must be the rule of the Lords giving or denying the Gospel,
is an unwritten tradition, 335 Sinners under the fall are interdicted heirs,
ib. The connection betwixt literal actings and supernatural influences, p. 336
The new supernatural providence is set up by the second Adam By which the
conversion of the Elect is brought to pass, p. 337 The order betwixt natural
and supernatural acting, p. 338 What renewed and unrenewed men can do in their
respective places, p. 340 Corruption and temptation both increase, the
difficulty of using means, p. 341 Influences work as God set them on, ib The
gracious heart may reflect upon it self in spiritual actings, and purge it
self, ib. We may do more by the habit of grace then we do, p. 342 3.
Difference, ib 4. Difference, ib There is a sweet leading, no violence
spiritual in heart burning for Christ, it is not so in the literal heat, p 255
5. Difference, the heavenly heat goes along with the Scripture opened and
applied; not so in the literal heat, p. 256 Hence considerable differences
betwixt motions of the spirit and loose Enthysiasmes, ib Literal heat is all
upon the letter and forms, not so as the spiritual heat, p. 260 A believer may
be under some straitning, p. 3. c. 7. p. 262 A true and a false missing, ib
What straitning is and whence it is, p. 263 Diverse sorts of straitnings, ib
Rules to be free of straitning, and to get enlargment of spirit, p. 264 Every
heaviness is not weakness of faith, p. 265 How far we may undertake obedience
upon supposal of grace, ib How dispositions necessarily fetch influences, ib We
have not assurance to be delivered from sin hic et nunc, p. 266 Except from
hanious sins inconsistent with the state of saving grace, ib How we are to rely
on God for influences, ib What enlargement of heart David speaks of Psalm. 119.
32 p. 267 We cannot engage in our strength of habitual grace to run in the
ways of the Lord, p. 268 Isa. 63. 17. O Lord, why have thou made us to err,
etc. opened, ib. What use we are to make of our inability to run, except God
enlarge the heart, cap. 8. p. 270 How men naturally complain of sin original,
271 We do not so much as by strength of nature we may do, and we add to our
own lameness, and then we unjustly complain of God, for our sinful impotencie,
ib. That spirit as the spirit lays no obligation on us, but to move in
Scriptural duties, 276 No violence but from our selves hinders us to believe,
ib. God loves using of external means pro tanto, ib. How far we may act to
fetch the wind, and to get influences, ib. We are not to judge of our selves by
occasional enlargednesse, or deadning of the heart for the time, cap. 9. p. 280
Enlargedness of heart, and influences are near of kin, 281 Branches of
enlargedness of heart, ib. Influences on the Angels and the glorified ones, 283
Many straightened and dead ones reproved, 284 Prayer begets holy dispositions to
pray, and heavenly dispositions to pray, begets prayer and faith, etc. cap. 10.
p. 287 Holy acts begets holy acts, and holy dispositions beget holy
dispositions, ib. The Lord so frames his precepts and promises as our actings
are suitably required to his influences, 288 The differences of the 1.
spiritual estate. 2. of the temper. 3. of the condition, 289 What David's
present disposition was, 291 The doubling of words notes, 1. certainty. 2.
addition of assurance. 3. fieriness of affection, ib. Its fit to make an eike
to the holiness of influences which the Lord offers to us, 292 We may speak to
God, and profess in prayer the sincerity of our heart to God, and the causes
why, 294 Its hard to guide well grace and glory, so long as sin dwells in us,
ib. The Lords giving of grace lays bands on him to give more grace, and to
add new influences to old, 296 What a heart the repenting thief, and what a
heart Hezekiah brought out before the Lord in his dying, ib. ^ properties of
holy dispositions, 298 Dispositions spiritual are seeds of holy actings, ib.
Zeal brings forth holy actings, 299 Heavenly dispositions are real helps to
holy actings, ib. Properties of heavenly dispositions: to act under
indispositions, ib. A disposition counterworking a disposition, 300 The spirit
in an heavenly disposition at length prevails, ib. (8) Pride and (9) Wordly
mindedness hinder influences of grace, loveliness and heavenly mindedness
promote the same, p. 362. etc (10) Bastard zeal (11) Uncleanness (12) Malice
(13) Wordly sorrow, hinders the contrary graces promote influences, p. 395,
etc. (14) Wordly and false joy (15) False love, p. 398, etc (16) Ignorance and
hatred of the Gospel, p. 400 (17) Wrestling against providence obstruct the
influences of God, p. 402 God by his influences, first acts and stirs, by order
of nature, and in the same moment of time we act and stir, without any
violence, p. 404 (18) Heavenly and spiritual thoughts and considerations draw
along heavenly influences, as unclean thoughts do the contrary p. 405 Keep the
oil of the spirit clean, if you would have heavenly influences to fall on the
spirit. p. 407 We are to act both morally and physically with the spirit, p.
408 Prayers conclude not soveraignity, ib Other impediments of influences from
the mind, will and affections p. 4. c. 4. p. 409 Heritical light, ib A corrupt
will, p. 410 Hating of Christ and his grace obstruct influences, p. 411 Diverse
actings of the spirit in the Spouse sick of love for Christ hold forth
influences, the spirit as is cleared by the song of Solomon, p. 412 Hating of
Christ, p. 414 The soul loathing of God, ib The spirit gives no influences
where there is no knowledge, p. 415 Influences of the spirit are connatural to
the spiritual man, ib Sensuality and influence of the spirit are inconsistent,
ib Soul desires after God have sweet influences, p. 416 Spiritual joy speak
strong influences, p. 417 Literal crying should not exceed the impulsion of the
spirit within, ib How hope and audacity hinder or promote influences, p. 419
Moral acting cannot avail us whithout real influences of the spirit, p. 420
Frequent acts of faith promote influences of the spirit, ib Hope promotes
influences, p. 421 Sinful boldness obstructs influences, ib Anger hinders
influences, p. 422 How Elisha could not prophecy by reason of anger, The
influences of Music therein ib A meek spirit is a fit workhouse for
influences of grace and high revelations, instanced in Mos^s, the man Christ,
John the beloved disciple, p. 423 Horror and unbelieving fear an impediment of
influences, p. 425 Influences are considered two ways, 1. Physically, 2.
Morally how men resisted the spirit p. 4. c. 5. p. 426 The Lord seeks not our
consent to the first infusion of a new heart, p. 427 We are married to Christ
before we consent to be married, p. 430 The Lord determines free will and does
no violence, ib We are unexcusable in not doing our duty, though the Lord deny
his necessary influence, p. 432 God acts in all both by the immediate influence
of his power and of his person, p. 433 The Lord most particularly leads his
own, p. 435 Two sort of causes one in fieri, for the producing of and giving
being to a thing, another in facto esse for the preserving of the same in
being, God is both ways the cause of gracious actings, ib. The right missing
is to miss influences not of gifts, and of common grace only, but of special
grace, p. 436 A reprobate can no more miss the special guidance of the
sanctifying spirit, then a horse can miss the wings of an eagle that are not
due to him, ib Of the giving of the heart of God, p. 437 We are more our own by
law, and less our own by Gospel, ib Christ cares more for his own body, then
the members care for themselves, p. 438 Christ care is rather now more, when he
is glorified, then less. ib. We vainly think that the habit of grace is given
to be our justification, and that as a dispensation from sin, ib Inability to
do without grace is pretented both by the lawless bankrupt, and by the humble
convert, but for diverse ends, ib The unrenewed man would have come down to his
way, p. 343 There is a sad threatening against not using of outward means,
though no promise be made to the using of only outward means, p. 344 The
opposition made by hypocrites is only in the outward gate, p. 345 Reprobates
resist not the formal acts of regeneration, p. 346 Mr. Baxters order of
repentance, p. 347 Doubts and reasons against Mr. Baxters new remedying law of
grace made to all mankind. p. 349 Universal redemption extols nature and free
will, and makes a moral season which heals not nature, all the graces that the
Gospel owns p. 352 The law teaches but heals not, p. 357 Our formality in
praying, ib How nature begins and the spirit acts on and with our literal
acting, p. 3. c. 14. p. 358 Some truth we must first physically hear and
consider before we believe, p. 359 Though it be true if the Lord had given me
efficacious grace, I should have been converted; yet it follows not, therefore
I am not the culpable cause of my own non-conversion, or that the Lord is to be
blamed therefore, p. 360 Our sinful will, not the Lords refusal of power, is
the culpable cause of non-conversion ib Schoolmen make conversion the purchase
of free will, p. 362 Sin original must be pardoned to pagans, in Christ, of
whom they never heard. p. 364 Domiuicans no less gross then Jesuits in the
matter of grace free will, ib There may be much seeking and using of means, and
no influences, p. 4. c. 1. p. 369 Using of means would be in humility, ib
Influences not entertained breed loathing of the Gospel, p. 370 We may mar
influences, ib The Lords order in conferring of influences, p. 372 A confluence
of influences at one time and at one work, ib Resisting of the word hinders
influences, and so does resisting of ordinances, p. 373 Resisting of the
operation of the spirit obstructs influences, ib Praying and praising promote
the influences of the spirit, p. 374 Despising of the Prophets and persecuting
of them, obstruct influences, ib Hardening of the heart, not profitting by
means, obstruct influences, p. 375. Remaining in nature, bitterness, wrath,
malice, rancor, obstruct influences, ib Influences of the spirit are
contempered according to the habit of grace, p. 4. c. 2. p. 276 Wordly sorrow
obstructs influences, p. 377 The spirits motions are swift, ib Plenty of means,
sweet dispositions and yet scarcity of influences, p. 4. c. 3. p. 379 These are
often together, prayer and actual influences, and duties following thereupon;
the former according to the Lords will of precept, the latter according to his
will of pleasure, see Psalm. 119. p. 381 The nearness betwixt the love of the
word or the hiding of it in the heart, and spiritual influences, p. 382
Impediments and helps of influences, ib Of the word hidden in the heart, p. 383
Many evils of the heart, reckoned out to the number of it which obstruct
influences, and the contrary promote them p. 384 As the light of faith and
softness admit influences, so rockiness obstruct the same, p. 385 (2) Unbelief
obstructs influences, p. 386 Influences of grace do no violence to the rational
power of ^illing and willing, ib (3) Deadness (4) Security (5) Athisme, p. 387
388 (6) Inconstancy of the heart (7) Deceitfulness and falsness of the heart,
p. 396 Obstruct influences, p. 390. 391
TO THE GODLY READER.
THis Subject of Divine Influences (Christian Reader) is most obvious to daily
practice, but a path untrodden (I conceive) to the travels of the pens of the
godly and experienced Divines who have written practical Divinity, That is
called the pillar of predetermination, which is indeed new and wild Divinity
to some; But it is no other way new, then the new trust which the Lord has put
upon the Mediator Christ, whose it is to lose none, to bring many Children to
Glory, to cast none away who comes to him, for grant an efficacious and strong,
but sweet and none compelling, yet a mighty drawing and love-forcing violence
and dominion to Christ Jesus over the proudest piece of the six days works of
creation, to wit, over man's free will, so as insuperably, and without a miss,
he must drive his flock to their eternal green pastors, and overdrive none.
And modest spirits, and such as are in love with truth, need not contend; for
me, I shall desire none to be farther in love with the Lords strong flection,
bowing and turning of man's will whithersoever God will, then we may save the
holy and strong dominion of the sovereign Lord, that he may have a more
powerful mastery over the entrance of the free and contingent acts of the will
of men and Angels then the creatures themselves have. And reason would say that
sovereign and independent former of all, of whom, through whom, for whom are
all things, Romans 11. should be above the clay. Hence these introductory
considerations by way of preface.

1. There cannot be a knocking without but there must be hearing within, Cant.
5. 1. for the Lords knocking internal, whether at first or renewed conversion,
has something peculiar, as hearing and learning of the Father, John 5. 45.
has something of which a natural man is not capable, and so has instructing
with a strong hand, Isa. 8. 11. If Christ had spoken to the graves and corpse
near to Lazarus corpse, Come forth, as he speaks indefinitly to all in the
Gospel, Come to me, believe in Christ; and rebuke such as will not come, John
5. 40. yet all should not be raised out of the grave, as Lazarus.

2. It Is the same letter and sound of gracious word that comes to all the
hearers, Acts 16. and to Lydia, but the same heart opening of the spirit goes
not along; as many externally hear the noise of the report of Gospel-tidings,
to whom the arm of the Lord is not revealed, Acts 16. 13, 14. it is better
experiencedly to feel, then literally to search how the word is the chariot,
the Spirit the driver of the chariot.

2. Such as receive the ingraffed word, or the word and Spirit, shall not much
dispute how or by what clift qua rima the Lord came in, here he is now, the
word is the instrument: the blind man's word, John 9. 25. one thing I know, that
whereas I was blind* now I see: is enough, though some cannot write a
chronicle, or tell the history, or aim, how place, manner of their conversion.

3. Some are troubled how Sovereignty of quickening influences in the gracious
Lord, who quickens hic and nunc, in every duty, and withdraws his sovereign
concurrence as he best pleases, can consist with our debt of duty. It Is safest
to look to duty and the commanding will to rise up and be doing, and not to
dazzle the wit with disputing the sovereignty of God, nor to enquire into his
latent decreeing will.

4. A gracious heart is so taken up with care to pay the rent of commanded
duties, as he has no leisure to argue why? and if the Lord had decreed to give
me quickening influences I should not thus decline. The thesis of an heart of
unbelief is a more edifying them to dispute against, and to weep over, then to
quarrel with, and agitate the question concerning the Lords withdrawing of his
congruous applying of the word to the heart, or his praescience and permissive
decrees: duty is mine, Sovereignty is his.

5. Faith supposes this truth, though saving influences be wanting, and holy
Sovereignty withdraw them for reasons far above the reach of Angels and men's
capacities, yet it is my sin that I lay under unresisted deadness. It may be
asserted that it is a sinful inclination in us to make the high decree of God
our Bible, and to be unwilling to be ruled by the revealed will of God. So Evah
was less willing to believe the revealed threatening ( in the day thou eatest
thou shall die) and most bent to climb up to a knowing state with God; which
the Lord in his ^atent purpose and decree did deny to man. So the devils
quarrel is not with their own apostasy, but with the holy Lords dispensation;
art thou come (...) to torment us? and (which is another fault) before the
time? Matthew. 8. 29. nor can we move questions concerning the decrees and deep
dispensations of God, but we must fall upon the Almighty to defend our own sin;
the damned in hell eternally rail against the decrees of holy and spotless
justice, and his decrees of giving to them life and being, and denying to them
the benefit of death, Rev. 6. 15, 16. but as they blaspheme the God of heaven
because of their pains, so they never repent of their deeds, Rev. 16. 11.

6. It Is safe sailing in declining of rocks; when we adore the Lords
withdrawing of influences, and justify him, and bewail our own sinful choice,
and condemn our selves: in the Psalm. 51. David, and in the confession Daniel,
c. 9. Ezra 9. the humbled people of God do not hint at any heart wrestling with
the decree of God, but only bewail their own rebellion, and not hearkening to
the voice of the prophets, and desire to sit patiently and in silence in their
lot of suffering, and reproach and shame. It is true, they complain, Lam. 3.
13. He has caused the arrow of his quiver to enter into my reins; but yet they
believe, 24. the Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I hope in
him. And 2. they check unbelieving complaining, 39. Wherefore does a living man
complain, a man for the punishment of his sin.

7. It cannot be conceived how a soul in guiltiness must be in a case of
invincibly necessitated despair, if he conceive and believe the Lord gave me a
power to will or not to will free from all divine determination, and before any
act of his foreknowledge or decree, I was finaly and wilfully to reject the
Physician Christ, and this the Lord did foreknow, but could not efficaciously
hinder; what place can be left for consolation in God, or submission to the
holy will of God, for this was invincibly to come to pass, before any act of
his will or praescience.

8. Nor can I pray in faith, Lord, incline my heart unto thy testimonies: if
the voluntary determination of my own heart to his holy testimonies, or the
wicked vital refusing to yield unto, or to be led by his testimonies, go before
the act of the Lords knowledge or will, or before any efficacious, congruous,
internal and victorious drawing of me to Jesus Christ.

9. It cannot be denied but this very way which the Lord has taken in denying
of his influences to the eternal standing of Adam, and to law-doing and
law-living is the most excellent course, and that flesh and blood dare not to
appear to countermand herein either infinite wisdom, or admirable sovereignty.

For 1. The Law-heaven the Garland, the crown and reward of Law-merit should
have been a paradise where there is no tree of life, as Rev. 2. 7. no river of
water of life, no Lamb which is in the midst of the throne, to feed and to lead
them to the fountain of living waters, as Rev. 7. 17. yea, it should be darker
and a less glorious heaven then the Gospel-heaven.

For 2. There should have been there no new heaven nor new earth, no chair of
estate, no high lifted up throne for the power of the Kings of the earth, who
has loved us, and washen in his blood.

Nor 3. Should there have been any new song, nor any such redeemed Musicians,
who sing with a loud voice, as Rev. 5. 12. Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to
receive power and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and
blessing: and what an heaven should that be that wants the fairest rose in that
garden? it should be only the heaven of God Creator, which though glorious, yet
not so kindly nor so desirable to us, wanting the savor and delicious smell of
the man Christ, head of men and Angels.

4. Nor can there be more lovely Christians then that great and fair mystical
body of the ransomed of the Lord; the lovely company that are before the
throne, clothed in white with palms in their hands, in sign of eternal
victory; who have come out of great tribulation, and have washen their
garments, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb, and with them their
glorious head, so that here shall be completed and perfected Christ mystical.

It is boldness to weave a web of carnal difficulties against the Lords holy
providence; he hated the first sin as he does all sin, but to say he was weak
and impatient about its entrance in the world, blames his omnipotency, to say
the watchman of Israel was; as to all care and vigilance of holy providence,
sleeping or slumbring, and was thoughtless and drowsy, not valuing whether his
noble Sons of creation, Angels and men, should fall, and irrecoverably and
eternally be broken, and become fuel for everlasting fire, or stand and be
eternally happy, is injurious to infinite wisdom, and the perfection of his
holy will, to say that the Lord loved such a guest as sin, must blame his
spotless holiness: but if any say,

Obj. But did man by any necessity of a divine decree sin?

Answ. A compelling necessity everting the creatures liberty there was none,
but a necessity by which the man was determined to one distinctively to stand
or fall, not copulatively both to stand and not to stand, to obey and disobey,
there was in created free will, if we suppone there had been no decree. Now the
holy decree brought no necessity, 1. Compelling, such as is of a man bound hand
and foot. 2. No natural necessity, such as that of the Sun to give light, the
fire to cast out heat. Nor 3. No brutish necessity void of a discoursing
faculty, such as that of the swallow building her nest, the Be making honey;
but we must say there was some eminent, holy and spotless necessity of decree
in Christ's thrice rather then seven times praying: why King Joash smites the
ground thrice and stays, and smites it not six times, 2 Kings 13. 19. why the
Lord writes in his book, Psalm. 139. 16. such a number of drops of rain, such a
number of drops of snow to make up such a treasure; and God determined, Job 38.
22. such a number of pound weights of mountains, Isa. 40. 12. and it was
necessary the Lord should determine the names and number of the Stars, Psalm.
147. 4. and why ten acres of a vineyard should yield one bath, not two; why
every man's number of his months should be determined by the statute of a divine
decree, Job 14. 4, 5.

2. Nor wrong we the Lord, or free will either, to say God decreed that Joseph
should be sold by his brethren: David cursed and reproached by Shimei: Judah
carried away captive by the Babylonians: Israel oppressed by the rod of God,
the Asyrians: Job spoiled by the Caldeans and Sabeans: Christ Jesus crucified
by Herod, Pilate, and the Jews. Otherwise the Lord could yield no comfort in
his word to the godly, when oppressed by the wicked, but the like, Comfort not
your selves, my dear people, under persecutions from the wicked, for I
permitted these evils, but these calamities befall you before I knew them,
contrary to my will and holy determination, I cannot without forcing of wicked
will hinder them, or safely and indeclinably secure and save you; Joan.
Strangius de voluntate and actionibus dei circa peccatum, l. 2. c. 9. p. 211.
Sequitur dari priorem actionem cur voluntas ( Adam) elegerit primum actum
vitiosum quecunque ille sit; nempe quia deus cum praemovit ac praedeterminavit
ad istam electionem aut Actionem, etc.
therefore stay your prayers to me, and believe not that I can avert these
evils. Here is a most cursed necessity which our adversaries lay on God, while
as they would eschew an holy, harmless, and most wise necessity of providence.

Ob. 2. But by the adversaries way it follows that there is a foregoing reason
why the will of Adam made choice of that sinful act because God predeterminated
the will thereunto, and the reason of the first omission, or not consideration
in Adam, or his sleepiness, is ob defectum praedeterminationis divina, because
of the defect of divine praedetermination. Therefore because (2.) God withdrew
his actual influence of praedetermination, it was no more in the dependent
power of Adam to obey that, Eat not, then the Sun can move when God draws away
his actual influence, so must the original of sin be reduced on God. So strange.

Answ. 1. A reason ratio why any man sins, is, in good Grammar, a moral motive
inducing a man to sin, and that works by way of persuasion. Let not the Reader
be persuaded that we teach that the real influence of God, or that his holy
concourse any way is a moral motive of obedience, or of sin, as if Adam had
been persuaded to sin because he saw and felt the Lord did first withdraw his
concourse or influence whither it praedeterminate or move by praedetermination,
or collateral joining, therefore Adam was morally induced to sin; this is a
goodly dream.

2. Ratio, a reason here must be taken for a physical and a real, not a moral
cause; now the adversary abstained from the word cause.

And 1. we say Adam not through defect or want of the Lords holy
praedetermination, as if therefore, ideo, for that cause he sinned, because the
Lord did withdraw his influences; but the adequate, culpable moral cause of
Adams sinning, and of his chosing of a vicious action (for Adam in sinning is
only and properly a moral cause under a law) is his own free will, freely
declining from the rule; there is no defect or moral want of Gods
praedetermination, because the sovereign Lord, who is above a law, was not
obliged to join his praedeterminating influence to Adam, but rather obliged to
withdraw his praedetermination from the man, who in the same moment of time was
willing to want that praedetermination; for God out of holy sovereignty
withdraws in the same moment his influence, in which Adam sinfully rejects the
same influence.

3. This Adversary, if he would turn the word ratio, reason, into the word
cause, or concurrence, would see himself at a loss; it will follow that the
cause why Adam sinned, is because God denied his causative concurrence, and so
the Argument shall hurt his cause; for the concurrence of God is causative,
then must the Lords withdrawing of his concurring influence be the collateral
cause of Adams sinning, except he say that man has in his power the
concurrence of God, and if so, Adam and all men's free will must be Lord of
omnipotency and omnipotent concurrences, and then why but God must rather make
prayers and requests to our free will to incline and move his omnipotency to
concur to acts of obedience, then free will should make prayers to God that he
should by his grace incline our hearts to his testimonies. 2. Must not the
created free will of man by this be placed in the royal seat and throne of
divine providence, to domineer over and dispose of all free acts of obedience
and disobedience as it seems good to the Creature? And (3.) so must the
sovereign King be Lord of all free acts at the second hand, with the good leave
of created free will. And (4.) the number of all free actings of final
obedience and disobedience, and of the saved and damned, must be in the hand of
created free will, and that primarily, and so in the crea^tures power must be
the Book of Life; first by way of free determination, and with the Lord and the
Lamb the Book of Life is but as a second copy, and a conditional roll,
containing so many as the creature first determines. (5.) And so must our
Immanuel, God manifested in the flesh, ere he can get entrance in the world,
have a pass subscribed by free will, and God shall come in the flesh and be
Mediator and King absolutely, as man will, it is not then eternal love who
foreordained the medicine, and the Physician before ever the man was sick; and
if free will had so pleased, Christ God man should have been holden out of the
world, and the gates for ever closed on him, so as knock as he pleases,
free will might have refused to open and let him in. (6.) Experimental grace
and pardoning mercy might have stood afar off, and lost man never have tasted
thereof, yea such riches of grace should never have been in the world. (7.)
Man's free will, if it be the only determiner of it self and his own free acts;
and if the strong dominion of grace, for fear of strangling of liberty created,
had no determining power, might well have sent that saving Redeemer back to
heaven again to his Father, and none of mankind should ever have received
Christ, tasted of his precious love, his sweet promises, and the offered
salvation; for created free will is such as may nill, will, refuse, let God
decree and allure, draw, move, determine as he can or will, yet omnipotency of
grace cannot ravish free will. (8.) Yea, such is free-wills nature that by its
independent self-determination, the holy Ghost in all his sweetest attractions,
in the emanations and flowings of love, which is stronger then death, his
strong and powerful breathings, and mighty drawings, by a power not inferior
to that which raised Christ from the dead, may be frustrate and broken, for
free will may stand out as a rock of iron and adamant against the strong
actings of omnipotent grace, and be not a whit moved at the perfume and sweet
smelling ointments of Christ, his beauty, the refreshments of the house of
wine, his tenderest consolations. (9.) For if free will say not Amen, though
Christ work completely his work, make his soul an offering for sin, yet shall
not Christ see his seed, nor be satisfied with his wages, for free will may
refuse to yield the redeemed over to God, as captives overcomed by his soul
delighting, and powerful drawings. (10.) Nor shall it be in the power of the
Almighty to be faithful and true in fulfilling his promise of giving a new
heart to the elect, Jer. 31. 31. Ezech. 36. 26. Heb. 8. 8, 9, 10. for though
the Lord of free grace give, wicked free will may refuse to receive the new
heart. (11.) The faithfulness and power of God, interposed in the promise of
perseverance, 1 John 4. 4. Joh. 10. 27, 28. 1 Pet. 1. 5. Jude v. 24. Ephesians. 5.
25, 26, 27. Isa. 54. 10. Isa. 59. 20, 21. Jer. 32. 39, 40. must be broken, if
free will may resile from God, and disanul and resist all the actings of God in
bringing many sons to glory. 12. There can be no place to infinite wisdom,
free grace, pardoning mercy; to the merits of Christ in dying to bring us to
God, 1 Pet. 3. 18. in delivering and redeeming us from a present evil world,
Gal. 1. 4. from all iniquity, Tit. 2. 14. from our vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1.
18. that we should live unto righteousness, 1 Pet. 2. 24. as wisdom, grace,
mercy, are effectually experienced in sinners, if it be in free-wills
independent power to admit or reject the saving actings of God in these, let
any teach and show a midst betwixt the Lords granting of effectual grace to any
one rather then to another, from his absolute dominion, will, and differencing
grace and predeterminating grace.

4. Since the Adversaries grant that the concurrence of God to the entitative
act of sinning is causative, they are obliged to roll away the stone, and to
clear to us how the Lord is not as well by their way the joint and collateral
cause of sin (hallowed be his Name) as he is the praedeterminating cause (as is
pretended) by our way; See Rivetn. in Cath. orthodoxo tom. 2. Q 6. tract. 4. n
33. Meratins tom. 1. tract. de bonitate and mal. hum. acta. dispu. 11. sc. 7.
n. 4.
for Francis. Silevias, Lo. Meratins, Schoolmen not to be despised, with reason
say, If he be the cause of theft who concurs, and consents, and helps a man to
climb in at a window to steal, no less then he who praedetermines the man to
steal by either command or counsel, or then by real efficiency, then must the
holy Lord be judged the cause of Adam's first act of sinning, as it is an act,
both the one way and the other.

5. Neither does the concurrence or non-concurrence either way hurt the natural
way of free-wills working, Strangius.
though the Author make out-crys, O here be three necessities; what if there be
four or ten? the Author well knows the learned of both ways teach there be
diverse necessities that hurt not freew ill.

6. Neither is it to be forgotten that the Lords saving concurrence to bring
the Elect to glory, is of an higher and more excellent nature then the
influence of God to Adam: For that influence to Adam was 1. connatural, and not
the fruit of Christ's merit, as are saving influences in Christ. 2. That
influence to Adam, was not given to Adam as praedestinated to obtain the
Law-reward of life. I judge Adam was not praedestinate to any such Law-life,
but to obtain life and pardon in the satisfactory death of Christ. Nor 3. was
that influence given to Adam in order to perseverance, for perseverance was
commanded indeed to Adam, but it was neither promised of God to him, nor was it
ever in the purpose or decree of God to bestow it on him; therefore Gods
influence to Adam's obedience must be a far lower and weaker causality then the
saving influences of Christ. It was said by me, that God withdrew his influence
from A^am, who in the same moment was willing to want it; not that Adam
formally refused it, but that materially, interpretatively, and in his actual
consenting to sin he refused it. The Adversary cries out, but soft words and
strong and hard Arguments were best. It is questioned (says he) whether Adam
's will to eat was before the Lords denial of his influence, Stranguis, ib.
or posterior and later then the denial, or at once (it is of no moment whether
they were at once in time) they dare not say before, because then Adam had
sinned before he sinned; if his will to eat be posterior to the want of God's
influence, there is manifestly an antecedent necessity: therefore Dr. Tuiss.
says they were coexistent in the same moment of nature; and so the necessity
yet stands.

Ans. Armini. in his collation with Junius could have made this Argument
stronger. But 1. The Lord by order of nature withdraws his influence, and in
the same moment of time (which is of great moment) Adam sins and refuses the
influence: And it follows not that Adam sins before he sins, nor follows it
that Adam sins by any necessity destructive to the liberty of the will; yea, it
is a necessity helping and aiding freedom, because the Lord withdraws no
influence from Adam against his will, but in the same moment of time that the
Lord withdraws his influence from Adam to the act, Adam withdraws his consent
to the act, and virtually subscribes to the wanting of the influence of God.
The Adversary is most angry at the distinction, as dark and not intelligible,
and says it cannot be taught the people: Strangius de vol. and Act. dei circa
p. l. 2.
why? The want of the influence of God by order of nature is before the virtual
and interpretative merit of wanting that influence; if the virtual merit be an
evil merit, malum meritum, or a sin, so it must be posterior, and later then
the want of Gods influence, and not before it; but it is like a fiction, that
there be two demerits in Adams sin, one culpable, another unculpable. Ans. 1.
It is still said by me, that the want of divine influence, by order of nature
is before Adam's sin. 2. It is not theologically spoken, that the merit of sin
reatris penae is sin or evil; it is a fiction that the merit of sin is either
culpable or unculpable, it is rather good, and an obligation to wrath, and a
consequent of sin, and is not sin. No merit of reward is either formally
obedience, but posterior to obedience; nor is a merit or demerit of punishment
is formally sin, but posterior to sin. Christ is liable to punishment for our
sins, and as an engaged surety debet puniri ought to be punished for our sins
that were laid on him, Isa. 53. 6. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Gal. 3. 13. but there was
formally and inherently no sin in Christ, nor any evil, or any thing culpable
in Christ. 3. Adam's virtual consenting to want the influence of God was his
very first sin formally; he who refuses to stand, and wilfully falls, he
virtually refuses a staff or a pillar to lean upon; he who formally wanders, he
virtually hates his guide and leader; he who formally loves darkness, and
practically walks therein, he virtually hates light, and desires virtually that
the light should not have shined on him; and so he who willingly falls, and
willingly shu^s his eyes, virtually deserved the staff should have been taken
from him, and that the Sun should not have shined on him; he who willingly
wanders out of the way, does virtually deserve to be depraved of his guide; and
who so wanders are said to despise the word of the Lord their guide and rule.
So here is no fiction, but evident truth, Adam in the very act of sinning
deserved, because he sinned, that God should have withdrawn his influence, but
it was a virtual deserving, and formally a sin.

Ob. If for this reason Adam interpretatively put away divine influence,
Strangius, ib.
so that the fault is imputed to him, not to God; it would seem by that same
reason Adam should interpretatively will and desire the predeterminating
influence of God to a godly act of obedience; and so a godly and pious work
should be ascribed to man and not to God.

Ans. 1. The virtual demerit is not the adequate cause why the sin is ascribed
to Adam, but the actual crooking and deviating of the mind, will and affections
from God, as the true nearest cause, especially since Adam is under a Law not
to sin, nor to refuse virtually the Lords influence; and because the Lord is
under no Law to give influences, his free withdrawing can never make the sin to
be imputed to God, for God does nothing contra debitum in withdrawing his
influence, but Adam against a law virtually rejects the influence, and formally
sins. So there is no reason why the good work should not be ascribed to God for
power to act, to wit, the image of God, and actual acting are his free gift;
but a power of sin and actual sin are wholly from us, only not from God at all;
I speak of the power formal to sins, which is a crookedness of power, such as
is a power to blindness.

Ob. Whereas they say that Adam materially and interpretatively in the effect
wants the praedeterminating influence of God. I ask whether they understand the
effect and material and interpretative consent or the formal and direct actual
consent, if the former be said, it is a ridiculous clavering, for they say that
Adam desired interpretatively and materially to want the influence of God
quatenus in se, as he desired to want the influence of God, if the latter be
said, the necessity of sinning stands, for if God deny his influence to one of
the opposites, and gives it to the other, it is a necessit^ the strength of
our argument is that, that is not to be imputed to Adam as sin, which was both
necessary and inevitable.

Ans. 1. The argument is weak, for one and the same voluntary act of
consenting to eat in Adam is referred to, 1. Directly to the Law, thou shall
not eat, Genesis 2. 17. and it is formaly a sinful act contrary to the commandment.

2. Adam in this sinful act of consenting to eat did also interpretatively and
virtually, and indirectly, not in an other formal and distinct act, will and
desire to want the influence of God, now no precept or law is laid upon Adam,
or upon any man, to have or to want the influence of God, whether it be
predeterminative or collateral; only in acts of obedience, which cannot be
performed without that influence; in sinful acts we are to want the influence
of God requisite to the entitative act.

2. No necessity is or can be inferred from Gods determining, either in his
decree or in his actual bowing and praedetermining of the will to one of the
opposites, but such whereby the holy praedetermination of God insinuates it
self sweetly and connaturally in the bosom of the elective power, without any
straining or forcing of the light of the mind, and its indifferency, or
compelling the will to be carried to any other of the opposites then the will
it self does connaturally embrace.

3. The way of Adversaries destroys all eternal decrees in God, under pretense
of eschewing a necessity; for by this from eternity the will of God was loose,
lubrick, potential, disjunctive, and fixed neither upon the breaking or not
breaking the legs of Christ, that was left to the free will and decree of the
Soldiers. So God from eternity neither decreed nor determined the selling of
Joseph, or the not selling of him; nor the crucifying of Christ, or the not
crucifying of him; nor the believing of Jews and Gentiles, or the free not
believing, for had he put a necessity of a decree on one of the opposites, on
believing rather then on none-believing, he should (say the Adversaries) have
fixed all free action, under a fatal and Adamantine Law of eternal and
inexorable necessity, and so destroyed free will; but so God should determine
and order nothing in free and contingent events, but commit all to free will,
and to contingently working causes. 2. All Gods wise decrees of free and
contingent events in every page almost of the Scripture, must be utterly
destroyed. 3. He could foretell nothing by free agents; prophesies and
predictions must perish, for God could not say from eternity, I shall afflict
my people Judah by the Babylonians; I shall impoverish Job, and spoil him by
the Sabeans; I will deliver to death my Son, to the death of the Cros^ by
Herod, Pilate and the Jews: for that necessity should destroy all contingency
of second causes, for God cannot (says Strangius) deny his influence to one of
the opposites and give it to the other but he must destroy freedom, then must
he decree to give his influences to both opposites, and so should nothing be
determined from eternity which comes to pass in time, ah, providence, or
fortune rather. 4. God should will and decree one of the opposites in time de
novo, and every day, and he should will and do in time many things which he
decreed not to do from eternity, because (say they) his will and decree was
from eternity fixed upon no contingent acts. 5. No wise man governs so his
family, no General his Army, no Prince his Subjects, if he be wise, and knowing
(as the holy Lord is alknowing) he takes no counsel in Arena, but he
forecasteth and decrees things within the compass of power to do, before he
does things, for to will all of hand and of new, without eternal fore-fixing of
the will, casts all the contingent acts of men and Angels upon loose
uncertainties. 2. Make the only wise God rash and dubious. 3. Puts him to learn
by experience new things to day, and to will and decree them fixedly in time,
concerning which yesterday and before the world was, he was not fixed in his
will to do determinatly any thing, for fear of fatal necessity. For 4. God had
either fixed a decree concerning all things, as written in a book, before they
were, as it is Psalm. 139. 16. and of certain persons loved to salvation and
healed, Romans 9. 11. 12. and written in the book of life, Ex. 32. 32. Psalm. 69.
28. Rev. 3. 5. Rev. 13. 8. Rev. 17. 8. Rev. 20. 15. Luke 10. 20. and by head
and name predestinate to glory, or then the will and decree of God was
tottering, dubious and indifferent toward things and persons; Strangius de
voluntate and actio. dei circa peccata, l. 2. c. 9. p. 214. 2, 2. cedit tertia
(necessitas) ex eorum sententia, qui dicunt, prius ratione nam Deus decreverit
condere, ante and citra peccati eorum praevisione^ aut considerationem, Deum ad
manifestandam gloriam justitiae and misericordiae craedestinasse ex angelis and
hominibus, alios ad faelicitatem aeternam alios autem improbasse aeternis
poenis adjudicandos; non potuit fieri ut hoc decretum ex equeretur; ex equitur
enim Deus, quicquid decrevit. Non Potuit autem exequi, si nullum fuisset
peccatum hominum aut Angelorum omnio enim decreta dei sam^ libera, sed ex
hypothesi unius decreti fit ut aliud necessario ponendum sit ex vi ergo hujus
decreti necesse erat ut homo and angeli aliqui peccarent.
if the former be said, the Lord wrote and ordained fixedly all single
contingent things and actions to their ends, and he must have foreordained
persons to glory, and to free acts of faith and holiness, and to the habit of
free actions, for if God fixedly ordained persons to free acts, he must have
fixedly ordained these free acts, and so there must be chains of necessity laid
on free will and free acts as the Adversaries argue; if the latter be said, the
decrees of election and reprobation must be fast and loose, as the free will of
men best pleases: and indeed this Author makes this a third necessity that
overturns freedom, for if reprobation (says he) and the decree of declaring
the Lords justice be before sin, then is there a strong and unwarrantable
necessity of sinning laid on men and Angels. But Protestant Divines, the
soundest of Papists, Augustine, Prosper, Hilarious, Fulgentius, and the soundest
Fathers, maintain a decree of passing by of non-election, a purpose of denying
such grace to multitudes; as if it had been granted Esau, Ismael, Pharaoh,
Cain, should have believed and been saved as well as David and Peter; but this
grace the Lord decreed to deny, because the Potter does and may dispose of the
clay as pleases him; Because it is not in him that wills and runs, but in God
that shows mercy. 2. Because he has mercy on whom he will, and hardens whom he
will, and yet he is just, and justly is angry at sin; and that stands as the
objection of the carnal Pelagian in Paul's time, Romans 9. 19. Thou will say, why
does he yet find fault? who has resisted his will? this is the very objection
of this Author; if the Lord decreed to deny effectually renewing grace to the
masses of reprobates clay, before they did good or ill, and before they could
run and will, that is, ante and citra peccati provisione, before any
consideration of sin in them, and decreed to give it to others because he will:
why should God complain? for who has, who can resist his will? for his will
and decree must be necessarily fulfilled and executed, and without the sin of
men and Angels there could be no execution nor fulfi^ling of such a decree. Our
Divines with the Fathers say, 1. The judgment and dispensation is hid and
deep, but not ^njust. 2. Paul and they say none have resisted his will, and the
counsel of the Lord shall stand. 3. The decree of God compels no man to sin,
nor lays on men any necessity destructive to liberty of sinning or obeying
freely. 4. Gods decree is the cause of no man's falling or sinning. 5. The
eternal ruin and final sinning of Angels and men fell out by order of nature
and time, before the decree and will of God, how could he then help it? here is
a strong and a fatal necessity that God could not break, but since a sparrow
falls not to the earth, and is snared without the will of the Father of Christ,
how can men and Angels fall eternally without his will? O there is an absolute
will of God, and a conditional will, without which sin fell not out (say they)
but the conditional will is a name no more, for God so should have decreed such
things good and evil should be, after they were and had being, not to say that
it must be as unjust that God should will sins existence after it falls out as
before it falls out, as to the Lords loving or any commanding or approving
thereof, or as to the point of straining of the will to act sin; yea, the holy
Lord no more strains by decree and actual influence the will in acts of holy
and supernatural obedience, then in acts of sin; and there is a door opened to
fatal necessity in neither, for the Lord trails violently no children to glory,
and compels by decree or praedetermination none to the entitative acts in sin,
nor violently drives he either devils or reprobate men to everlasting fire; it
is safer to believe holy providence for the want of the faith of an
all-governing Lord must bring perpetual trepidation and anxity of conscience,
trembling and fainting of heart, and destroy and sulvert all solid consolation,
lively hope, conquering patience. O that we could pray and believe more, and
curiously dispute less, and sinfully fret not at all; but say, O the depth! and
pray, thy Kingdom come: even so come Lord Jesus.

OF INFLUENCES OF DIVINE GRACE.
CANTIC. 1. 4. Draw me; we will run.
Chapter 1.
Man's dubious and tottering estate under the first, his safer estate under the
second Adam. 2 True liberty. 3 Grace loves to be restrained from doing of evil.
Adam was not to believe or pray for perseverance.

THere being in the Covenant of works no influences, by which we may will and
do to the end, promised to Adam; and no predeterminating influences, and no
Gospel-fear of God, by which we shall persevere, and not depart from the Lord,
being promised in the new and everlasting covenant, Jer. 32. 39. 4. This
principal difference between the covenants remains to be discussed.

There must be in this point, considerable differences between the Covenants;
God intended that no man should be saved by the law.
as 1. God intended that no man should be saved by the Law: for grace, mercy,
forbearance, and the patience of God toward sinners sold for eternity, have
been hid from sinful man, if righteousness and life had been by the Law. But
God intended that all men to be saved, should be saved by the Covenant of
grace, 1 Cor. 1. 21. Romans 3. 21, 22. as Romans 10. 5, 6, 7. compared with Romans 3.
9, 10, and 20. Gal. 3. 8, 9, 10. as both the Scripture and the issue of two
dispensations, of Law and Gospel, do evidence. 2. Man in the covenant of works
was under no tutor but Adams free will; but now man as an interdicted heir, for
former wasteries, is disinherited, so that he has not the mastery of his own
estate, is put under another Lord, even Jesus Christ, as his tutor; and since
it is so, the less our own, the better; the more we are under the law, the less
we are under grace, as Romans 7. the less freedom (or rather physical license)
to sin, the more true liberty, Psalm. 119. 45. I will walk at liberty, for I
seek thy precepts. Christ by his covenant lays the aw of grace upon us;
whether grace be taken physically, for an inward principle of grace; or
morally, for a gracious fear to sin, True liberty. Grace loves to be restrained
from doing evil.
its all one; the more under Christ any is, the less is he free to sin; as the
better and stronger the keeper is, who is put upon a broken man and a prisoner,
who is a bankrupt, the less can he take on new debt, Romans 6. 20, 22. the less
can he make a sinful escape; ungracious are they, who say, Ah if I had my
will, I would do otherwise; grace loves to be restrained from doing evil, 1.
Sam. 22. 23. Satan seeks leave, or rather cursed license, if it were but to
destroy the Gadarens swine, and he reputes it his torment not to dwell with his
Legions, in the distracted man to torment him, Matthew. 8. Such cannot complain,
Would God breath on me with his influences of grace, I would be as holy as
David; nay, there is in the man a tormenting sorrow, that he cannot have more
power, and stronger influences of hell to do more evil; and so he hates these
influences of grace of which he speaks.

It may be doubted (ere we speak of other differences) whether perseverance was
promised to Adam in a law-state, or not; for if prayer was a worship enjoined
to Adam before the fall, no less then public worship of praising for the
workmanship of creation, Genesis 2. 2, 3. it may be said, if Adam was to suit any
thing in prayer to God, then especially was he to pray that he might not sin,
and might not be led into temptation, but might stand in obedience, and so
might have influences to determine his will to stand and continue therein, and
this the law of nature seems to say. 2. If he was to trust in God for acts of
providence, for his standing in obedience, then especially, for acts of the
Lords free predetermination to cause him to stand; and so both praying and
believing must relate to a promise; and if so, then must the Lord have promised
in the first covenant of works, perseverance and influences to persevere.

Ans. That the first Adam was to pray for perseverance, is not clear.
It may be probably said, Adam was to pray, but the particulars he was to suit
in prayer are as unknown to us as any thing; he was to sanctify a Sabbath, and
to praise, and to exalt God in his works of creation; but for praying for
perseverance and predeterminating influences by which he might persevere, while
Scripture speaks, we must doubt; he was to desire, to intend and purpose to
persevere, as he was obliged by the law of God to persevere; but for instituted
praying or believing that God should give to Adam perseverance, either
absolutely or upon condition, that he should pray for perseverance; and so upon
condition that he should persevere in praying for, or in believing of
influences to persevere, the Scripture is silent; and we can say nothing, where
Scripture Light does not lead the way: its like that the only means moral of
persevering must be here a law without, the image of God within, and Adams free
will in obeying; but God having a purpose that the covenant of works should not
be the fixed standing way of justification and life; Adam was to rely on God
for perseverance, but as promised by the covenant of works.
and that the elect Angels should be confirmed, that they should not fall, nor
be able to fall; yet have we no warrant to say, that they came to that State
either by praying or meriting, or law obedience, but of free grace: or that
Adam's first sin was neglect of praying for perseverance. As to the other,
there is no doubt but the first command did engage Adam to rely upon God for
strength and divine influence, as promised by any covenant; of works or grace,
is another thing. Yea its unwritten that either Law or Gospel (which then was
not) promised any such thing.

What a blessed condition are we in, Our grace in the second Adam choicer then
that in the first.
above that of Adam! grace was given to Adam immediately from God, but in a
separated way from God, the stream being as it were cut off from the fountain,
and was in Adam as a Winter well that in Summer may go dry; but grace is now
given first to the second Adam as the head and fountain, and to the Elect in a
way of unseparable union of the stream with the fountain, as he partakes of
grace in Christ, and mediately. And the nearer the streams run to the fountain,
the stronger and the more unfailing is the emanation, as may appear in the man
Jesus united personally to God, in the Angels now confirmed in Christ their
head, Col. 2. 10. in the glorified who act by an immediate influence from God
in Christ immediately, and at the well head enjoyed; any distance from God may
be near some fall.

CHAP. II.
Gods acting influences. 2 His influences are in all creatures. 3 The sweet
safety of believers in possible calamities. 4 Our atheism in reading the Book
of providence, etc.

1. THat there are strong influences upon all causes from the Lord, may be
evinced. 1 From the holy tongue; the Hebrews use the verb in hiphil noting a
double action; when one causes another to act, to note influences, Deuteronomy. 32.
39. I cause to die, and I cause to live. Hannah so sings, 1 Samuel 2. 6. Jehovah
causes to die, and causes to live; he causes to go down to the grave, and
to come up again; the Lord makes poor, The Lords influences in all.
and he makes rich; he makes low, and he makes high; so the passive verb is
used. Which perfection, in short, is in that language above others, and when
such actions are ascribed to God, they show that God has an influence and
impulsion, as the first cause in all actions; the Scripture herein abounds. The
Greek language comes short of this, Joh. 5. 17. My Father, (...) works
hitherto, and I work. And though he work all works in all creatures, yet in
believers this is made true in Paul's sense, Philipp. 2. Work out your salvation
in fear and trembling. How? but we may miscarry and fail. True, says he, if
you, you alone, without the influence of grace did the work; work out, verse.
13. For its God who is the worker in you to will and work; alluding to the
Hebrew word, he says, (...). how the connection is between our working and the
effectual praedeterminating influences of God, is to us dark, but this argument
of Paul says they well agree, and he infers this thesis, they both physically
and morally are to work out their salvation, in whom God both by the habit and
actual influence of grace works to will and to do, then must influences of
grace so be at hand when the believers are to act, as they are no less under a
precept, and a command to act, believe, pray, then the husbandman is under a
command to plow in Summer, and to sow, lest he be poor; But the question is de
modo, how they are at hand, whither so as the free will of man may command, and
have in its power the influences of God's grace, or the Lord by the dominion of
his strong influence, sweetly and connaturally commands and has in his power
our free will, according to his good pleasure; Sure its safer that nature be
under grace and the dominion thereof, then grace be under nature, as it must be
better Divinity that God reign, then man reign; more of this after; And that
Jehovah be Lord of man's actings, then man be lord of Jehovah's soveraignity.

2. Beside that, every being must be from the being of beings, and so every
action natural or supernatural must be attended with suitable influences from
God; so the Scripture is clear,

That 1. God can serve a sort of law-inhibition upon all creatures, that they
act not; and what he takes from them, except the withdrawing of his own
influences, we know not; Job 9. 7. He commands the Sun and it rises not, and
seals up the Stars. Psalm. 106. 9. He rebuked the red Sea also, and it was
dried up. God, by the interposition of the faith of his own, will not have
strong walls to stand, Heb. 11. 30. but they must fall; nor Lions to eat the
prey, Verse 33. nor a violent fire to burn, nor the sword to devour, 34.

As 2. They act at his command, Psalm. 78. 26. He caused the East wind to blow
in the Heavens, and by his power he brought in the South wind; whether this be
by a strong terminating influence, Diverse write, and assert, there is not such
a thing imaginable as the Lord's invincible predetermination of second causes;
but its but a simple denial of the conclusion. Let any man show me how the
Lord's sovereign dominion in procuring all the actings of Angels, and Men, and
of natural causes to be, or not to be as pleases the Sovereign Lord, who does
what he will in Heaven and Earth, can stand unhurt, (and stand it must) if ye
remove the Lords insuperable predeterminating thereof, or some act like this by
which all must come to pass or not come to pass, as holy Soveraignity will,
and I shall be silent; the arguments for his Dominion being answered according
to Scripture and sound reason disp. Scholas. de providentia. Exercit. apolo.
pro gratai divian. Christ's dying and drawing.
which displeases adversaries of grace and providence, or some other way, we
contend not for words; but if the Scripture hold forth, as it does, that the
Lord by his strong and invincible dominion does indeclinably, and without any
possible failing bring forth his decreed effect, some impulsion of God
immanent, transient, or mixed, which is terminate upon all second causes there
must be; for as he can and does hinder natural causes to work, as the Sun to
move toward his downgoing, Josh. 12. 13. Isa. 38. 8. the Lion to eat the man,
whereas he did fear the ass, 1 Kings 13. 28. so he is the father and cause of
all things that fall out, Job 38. 28. Has the rain a father, or who has
begotten the drops of dew? 29. Out of whose womb came the ice? and the
hoary-frost of Heaven, who has gendered it? 31. Can thou bind the sweet
influences of the Pleiades? or loose the bands of Orion? This teaches that Job
cannot, nor can any creature at his nod; but the Lord can, and he only binds
up or lets out the influences of Pleiades, the stars which rise in the
Spring, and bring forth flowers and herbs; and orders the course of Orion
which brings Winter; and order the stars that rise in the South, and in the
North. 34. Can thou lift up thy voice to the clouds, that abundance of waters
may cover thee? See his actings.

3. His influences are in things small, as in the falling of a Sparrow to the
earth; not one hair of the head but it is numbered by him, Luke 21. 18. Matthew.
10. 29, 30, 31. Not a gourd grows, nor a worm eats it, but at his command.
Jonah. 4. 6, 7. Amos 4. 7, 8, 9. Joel 1. 1, 2, 3, 4. Psalm. 105. 29, 30, 31, 32,
33. etc. he has an hand in the bird-nests building. Psalm. 104. 17, 18. And

4. The actings of the Lord are in great things, as the translation of
Kingdoms, Dominions, and Thrones, Dan. 4. 32. Jer. 27. 5, 6, 7. In all the
rises and fallings of Princes, the Stars of whatever magnitude, Isa. 40. 21.
1 Samuel 2. 7, 8. Psalm. 76. 12.

5. His actings are in matter of lots that seem to be ruled by fortune and
chance. Prove. 16. 33. Genes. 49. Deuteronomy. 33. compared with Josh. 14. 1, 2, 3.

6. Especially in bowing the free will, and determining all the actions of evil
angels. 1 Kings 22. 21, 22, 23. Job 1. 6, 7, 8. Job 2. 1, 2, 3. Genesis 3. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5. Matthew. 8. 29, 30, 31. and good, Luke 2. 9, 13. Matthew. 28. 1, 2, 3.
Acts 1. 20. 2 These. 1. 7. leading and determining the free will of all men, the
King, Prove. 21. 1. the Prince, Genesis 43. 13. Esther 4. 16, 17. compared with
Chap. 5. and 2. c. 7. 2, 3. he graciously enclines the will and hearts of men,
Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Jer. 32. 39, 40. Ezekiel. 36. 27. as the Saints pray, Psalm. 119. 33,
34, 36, 88. Psalm. 86. 11. Cant. 1. and 4.

He hardneth the heart, and blinds the mind, as in his judgment he pleases,
Job 12. 16. Ezekiel. 14. 9. Exodus 14. 8. Deuteronomy. Infinite almost influences of God.
2. 30. 2 Samuel 12. 11, 12. Esaias 6. 9, 10. Matthew. 13. 14, 15. John 12. 37, 38,
39, 40. Romans 1. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Romans 11. 8. And many such things are with
him, the more spiritually minded any is, the more bent is the heart to follow
and eye God in all his actings; and he shall see how wise in heart the
steeresman is, who watches at the helm; and it shall appear what precious
thoughts take up the believer, who sees such millions and numberless numbers of
influences with all the drops of rain, hail, dew falling between the creation
and the dissolving of the world: all which he binds in his garment, Prove. 30.
2. and what numbers of influences he joins to all the blasts of winds and
storms which he gathers in is fists, ibid. what influences of the Almighty must
there be at all the actings, stirrings, and motions of Angels in Heaven, of
damned spirits, of men, elect and reprobate, of birds, beasts, creeping things,
fishes, in the wise connection of all these with the Lords intended end?

And if this be observed, suppose the body of the Heavens, which in its wide
bosom contains all, were broken and fell down in many thousand pieces, Faith
in the infinite wisdom, goodness and power of God will bid the believer be
silent, and sleep and hope within his own garment. God excellently rules all;
the best of created things next to that precious thing Christ man, is the
Church, and the Lord will specially care for that, and for me among the rest.

3. No doubt we are brutish and look to all the stirrings with much Atheism
and little faith, as if all stirrings in Nature, We look not spiritually on
influences.
Societies and Kingdoms, were set on work by the sway of Nature, and blind
Fortune, without God, as a wheel rolling about with the mighty violence of a
strong arm, moves a long time, after the arm of the mover is removed: Or
suppose a pair of Charet-wheels were letten loose in the top of a huge
Mountain, and should move down some hundred thousands of Millions of miles for
hundreds of years after the man who set them first a work, were dead; So we
fools believe that God gave a mighty strong shake or some Omnipotent impulsion
to all causes natural, free and contingent, to Heaven and Earth, Sea and Land,
to all Creatures in them, Angels and Men, and did bid them be a going; for he
must sleep, and could not actually stir them any more. Nor can we see God in
all, and that he contrived this, that one should rise early and eat the bread
of sorrow, and yet be poor: another should be wise admirably, and want bread;
another fight valiantly and be foiled, and a man run swiftly, and lose the
race. Psalm. 127. 1, 2, 3. Eccles. 9. 11. and that much sowing, has little
reaping, Hag. 1. 6. for Hab. 2. 13. Behold is it not of the Lord of hosts that
the people should labor in the very fire, and the people shall weary
themselves for very vanity? Chaldaea does sweat and pine her self for the very
wind and nothing: We see not that nature miscarries and parts with child, when
his good providence who rules all is not Midwife; and a barren-womb brings
forth many births, and she that is no Mother has a rich issue, when
soveraignity pleases; this is my faith and comfort.

CHAP. III.
Hence to descend more particularly to enquire 1. What influences are. 2.
Whenc^ they come. 3. The necessity of influences. 4. How they are above us, and
of the Sovereignty of him who best ows them. 5. What we may do to fetch them.

INfluences are acts of God concurring with created causes under him, What
influences are.
and a sort of continued Creation; as God of nothing makes all things, so in
his providence he gives a day to all borrowed beings, in their being preserved
by him, and they are the Lords debtors, in being acted by him, or then they
could not stir nor move.

2. The same free goodness (which is a sort of grace) which moved God to
create the Sun and give it being, so also ^^ts him to give influences to the
motions and actings of the Sun; the end that moves the Man to make the Plough
and the Cart, moves him to draw the Plough and driv^ the Cart by Beasts; so
that in reference to the end, there is deb^tum quoddam connaturale, some
connatural dueness of influences: all Creatures are dead Ciphers which sig^ifie
nothing, Influences of God are suitable to Gods end.
except the influence of God add a figure to them; and they lie dead, if he
stir them not; Some Cows let not down their Milk but to their own Calves; and
the Creatures are as Pictures and Idols who let out no Efficacy, no Virtue,
except the Lord act upon them; Sometimes the Sea ebbs not, the Wind blows not,
the Sun shines not, the Fire burns not, because this influence is (as it were)
the Charm that is a wanting, and he has a sort of a checklock upon all second
causes.

3. Though God move and must act in all, in causes natural and free, so as, in
some sense, he must concur in willing and nilling; Influences of God for
nilling and willing most rare and excellent.
yet he out of Sovereignty of grace, stands more aloof in bestowing influences
to gracious and supernatural nilling and willing, (for Predestination and free
Election to glory here has place;) for that he prepared in his eternal decree;
so many outlettings and emanations of free acts of grace to carry to glory so
many selected Angels and Men, and denied these outgoings of free love to
others, he intending they should be to Angels and Men, both their grace and
song of praise; he has not given out such refined influences of free love to
other Creatures, to the motions of Sun and Moon to the Seas ebbing and flowing.

4. Q. What then is the fountain cause of gracious influences and breathings of
the Spirit?

Ans. How Christ and the promised Spirit must be the causes of gracious
influences.
Sure, Jesus Christ must be the meritorious and fountain cause of such
influences;

For 1. We suppose that Christ is the head of the elect Angels: God having
purposed to save man of grace, he gave this mighty separating influence
distinguishing the Standing and Elect Angels from the falling and reprobate
Angels, else it cannot be said they are Elect Angels, as 1 Timothy 5. 21. nor can
their standing be of free grace (for they could not stand, except the Lord had
chosen them to stand as the means; as he chose them to glory as to the end)
except the Lord had joined his predeterminating acting to cause them to stand,
and reconciled them Colos. 1. 20. to himself, giving to them medicinal
confirming grace that they never should be sick. Now the Elect Angels are the
special Messengers, and New Covenant Officers, mini^tring Spirits sent forth to
minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation, Heb. 1. 14. And the Angels
Ezekiel. 1. are acted in all their motions by that Jehovah, whose glory Isaiah
saw, Isa. 6. 1, 2, 3. John 12. 37. of which Jehovah also Ezekiel 1. v. 28. as
v. 12. And the four living creatures went, every one straight forward: whither
the Spirit was to go they went, and they turned not when they went. And also
verse 20. They are then rightly called the Angels of the Lord Jesus, 2 These. 1.
7. for they cover their faces (it is no^ blushing for sin) and their feet with
wings, Isa. 6. while they stand before and see the face of their Sovereign and
high Master; and so its clear that the actings of special and supernatural
providence toward and about the redeemed Church come from Christ, as head of
Angels, and as the heir of all things, who makes all things new, Heb. 1. 2, 3.
Rev. 21. 5. and who works with the father, Joh. 5. 17. in a newcovenant
providence to make new Heavens and new Earth, and to act all for the elects
sake, Colos. 1. 16. 17. yea and this Spirit at whose direction, the living
creatures move and rest, come and go, Zech. 1. 12, 20. is the same spirit
promised and sent by Christ, John 16. 7, 13, 14. of which Christ, he shall
receive of mine and give it to you: by the influences of this Spirit sent by
Christ, are the Redeemed led, Romans 8. 14. directed Acts 16. 6, 9, 10, 14.
sealed and confirmed Ephesians. 4. 30. having received the earnest of the Spirit, 2
Cor. 1. 22. taught, guided, and the Word made effectual, John 16. 13. convinced
of sin, and thoroughly rebuked, verse. 7, 8, 9. comforted, Joh. 14. 16. and the
memory sanctified and quickened to remember necessary truths, Joh. 14. 26. and
the whole man made able by the anointing for all things, 1 John 2. 20, 27.
Hence these influences of grace are from the spirit, not as from the third
person of the blessed Trinity simply; for so the spirit is the power of God,
sometimes as Judge sitting, and by a Judicial power, making tormenting
convictions dreadfully effectual upon the consciences of Devils, Matthew. 8. 29.
Luke 4. 34, 35. of which the chains of darkness may be a part, 2 Pet. 2. 4.
Jude v. 6. as also neither from the spirit, as the power of God Creator, Job
26. 13. Job 32. 8. in making and governing all, Psalm. 104. 30. but from the
Spirit, as the fruit and purchase of Christ's death and merits; and as saving
grace is from Christ the fountain, so also the saving influences of Christ as
Mediator, and of stirring us up to will and do, Phil. 2. 13. and to stand and
persevere in the state of grace, must be dispensed covenant ways, Jerem. 32. 3,
37, 38, 39, 40. Isa. 59. 20, 21. Isa. 54. 10, 11, 12. by his blood. So Christ
speaks to the spirit, Cant. 4. 16. Stir up thou North wind, come forth thou
South, blow upon my garden, that the spice thereof may flow out. Where Christ
commands influences of the spirit of the North and South wind, though of
contrary qualities, of cold and heat, moist and dry; both in sharp rebukes, and
sweet consolations, to fall upon his Church and garden; and it is his desire,
as Spouse and Mediator, that the Spirit breath upon, and make efficacious the
word, otherwise there is but deadness, Ezech. 37. 9. Come from the four winds,
O wind, How upon these slain, that they may live. John 3. 8. And the flowing of
the spices, is the souls being quickened, revived, comforted, and the graces
increased by the breathings of the spirit.

Hence 1. the fear that Christ shall be wanting in bestowing influences, We are
to believe that he who purchased by his merit the habit of grace, shall give
suitable influences, and to fear also our propension to fall.
(so do many weak ones) is a broken half faith, looking upon Christ as half a
Savior; what? he that died to purchase the spirit, shall he not carry on the
work of redemption, by applying it, and carrying on of what he has begun?
Indeed among men, he who made the Ship by art, has neither art nor power to
command wind and tide for sailing, for they are done by diverse powers, the one
by a created, the other by an uncreated power; but here the same merit of blood
which purchased grace habitual, did also make due and connatural (in its own
kind) actual influences of saving grace to carry on the work; hence a case of
Christian and supernatural prudence, it is so to fear our own sinful weakness,
and to be humbled and cast down for our propension to fall away, as to believe
that constant and everlasting love shall work to will and to do to the end:
Then 1. tormenting Popish fear, Ah I shall, I may fall away. (2.) And the weak
practical doubting of this, it may be, I shall perish, I cannot stand out. And
3. the law, spirit of bondage, I cannot be saved, who am so sinfully weak and
wicked, have all three this, in commune; an undervaluing of the power of the
free love, and an overvaluing of the strength of corruption; as if wickedness,
and he that in the world, were greater then he that is in these who are born of
God, 1 John 4. 4. and stronger then grace; for its natural to be of that
opinion, that grace works not irresistibly, prevailingly, and with all might,
according to his glorious power. Collos. 1. 11. and according to that (...)
exceeding great power, by which he raised Christ from the dead, Ephesians. 1: 18,
19. and so while legally we distrust and fear our own weakness, we do
unbelievingly doubt of the mighty power of grace, though we see it not; for to
see unbelief, (it is so spiritual a sin) is almost to overcome it; among all
sins it is most invisible, and best seen with the light of the Spirit; faith
sees well unbelief, but unbelief can neither see faith nor it self. 2. There is
required of believers the exercise of faith, in laying hold on the promises of
actual influences from Christ the Mediator. The promise of influences in Christ.
John 15. 2. Every branch that leareth fruit (in me, for that must be repeated)
the Father purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit. He that abides in
me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit. Ephesians. 1. 3. Blessed be
God, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places, in
Christ; but to cause us will, and do, is a spiritual blessing. Ephesians. 2. 13.
But now in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were far off, are made near (not by
Redemption only, but actual believing) in the blood of Christ.

2. Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the
spirit. By the influences of that spirit, whom Christ sent in his own name,
John 14. 26.

3. If the spirit glorify Christ by receiving of Christ, and showing it to
Christ's own Disciples, John 16. 14. then all the influences of the spirit in
acts gracious, when the spirit teaches, and brings to remembrance all
things, John 14. 26. convinces of sin, John 16. 8. guides and leads, John
16. 13. Romans 8. 14. mortifieth, Romans 8. 13. quickneth, Romans 8. 10, 11.
comfort, and seals, and confirms. John 14. 16. Ephesians. 4. 30. 2 Cor. 1.
22. must be done by influences of the spirit, received from Christ. For (says
Christ) He shall receive of mine. Heb. 13. 13. By Christ therefore let us offer
to God the sacrifice of praise continually.

4. Also what we suit from God in the name of Christ, that we suit from Christ's
merits and death. But we ask all which we ask in Christ's name, John 14. 14.
John 15. 17. And therefore do obtain from God, for Christ's sake and the merits
of his death, the inclining of the heart to his testimonies, to be led in his
way, not to be led into temptations; to persevere to the end, to be taught his
way, and if there were any grace, such as all gracious influences are, which
comes not from Christ, in whom it is, and from whose fullness it is, it must be
referred to another cause then to Christ.

5. All the promises are yea and amen in Christ, 2 Cor. 1. and so must the
promise of perseverance be, Jer. 31. 39, 40. Isa. 54. 10. Isa. 59. 21. and so
the promise of influences of grace to persevere.

6. Christ's undertaking as High Priest, Advocate, and Intercessor, is to carry
on, and perfect as Mediator, all that are given to him of the Father, and to
lose none, but to raise them up at the last day, and to give them life eternal,
John 17. 1, 2. and 11. 12. John 6. 37, 38, 39, 40. 1 Cor. 1. 7, 8. 1 John 2. 1,
2. Heb. 7. 22, 23, 24, 25. Heb. 9. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Heb.
10. 10. John 14. 16. Luke 22. 31, 32. Rev. 8. 3, 4, 5.

7. Christ as head by the influence of life and saving grace, acts upon all the
members, by quickening them to will and to do, Ephesians. 4. 16. Ephesians. 2. 21, 22.
Ephesians. 1. 21. and 22. Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

8. Christ as King gives repentance and remission, Acts 5. 31, 32. Then must he
by that power royal give influences to acts of repentance and of faith.

9. As Prophet he opens the heart to understand the Scriptures, Luke 24. 45.
Act. 9. 17. and so must give influences for that effect.

Hence are we to look for the watering of the garden of red wine every moment,
from Christ the fountain of life, and to know that we should wither from the
root, if Christ, withdraw his influence; and so grace puts us under a necessity
of grace, to carry on the work of salvation. 2. Yea it is to believe Christ is
but an imperfect and half a Savior, and wanting in his Office, if we doubt he
shall give influences to perfect to the end what he has begun; then branches
out of Christ, and cut off from him, must wither. 1. Make sure union with the
Vine-tree, if you would be sure of growing to the end. 2. Know the way to the
well of life, be much with Christ, and lie, and be near to the well, if you
would have influences every moment. 3. The most glorious and shining Professors
that are not in Christ, shall turn Apostates; a plant above the earth, with
borrowed earth on the top of an house, may grow for a short space, but shall
wither. 4. Heathen influences from a Creator without Christ shall not bear you
out; the virtues of Tully, of Seneca, Regulus, are of that nature that they may
dry up. 5. Yea, weak Believers, doubting that Christ shall give influences to
work in you to will and to do, is 1. To question whether Christ shall
faithfully acquit himself in the duty of his Office; for by office he conferrs
influences. 2. Its to question his nature, whether the Head shall inlive its
members.

CHAP. IV.
The necessity of influences of Grace. Of the Sovereignty of God in dispensing
influences.

IT is easy to determine that there is a sort of necessity of the Lords
bestowing influences upon all natural causes, of this before.

In so far as willing and nilling are acts of second causes in the same sphere
with natural causes; there seems to be no more reason for denying influences to
nilling and willing simply, Necessity of influences.
yea or for literal hearing and praying, then for plowing and sowing, except
that here God acts in a dreadful way of Justice, toward Pharaoh and other
reprobates, in leaving them to the actings of their own heart; only it may be
said, that God finding his child under deadness, and acting in a dead and
literal way, as he has bowels of compassion toward his chosen, under the evil
of sin, that are ready to be drowned, he joins his help of influences, seeing
his own go about duties with wrestling and pain, since he knows some one way
or other they must be over the water, and helped, otherwise they cannot stir.

2. As there are some saving graces from the Mediator, so must there be some
mediatory influences bestowed covenant ways upon the chosen of God. But 1.
Free goodness, and not natural necessity, made the world; and that same
freedom intervenes, in continuing, being and acting in creatures, which act by
nature. Fire casts heat, the Sun light and influences, the Sea ebeth and
flows by nature; yet there must also be a free new commission sealed from
eternity, to every acting of nature; he commands the Sun, and it rises not;
forbideth the fire to cast out heat, and it obeys, Job 9. 7. Heb. 11. 34.
Dan. 3. 27. and it is an obliging and an indearing of the heart to God, Reasons
of renewed influences.
to come daily under new debt, and multiplied free gifts, and it renews acts of
love in us, as fresh actings of salvation flow: whether it be new deliverances,
Psalm. 18. 1, 2, 6, 7. Psalm. 116. 1, 2, 3, 4. or new acts of keeping faith from
drying up in the fire, 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4. so as you being tried as gold, verse 8.
y^ love having not seen him. 2. It extracts acts of praying, sense of spiritual
slownesse seems to pray, Cant. 1. 4. Draw me, we will run; and sense of
spiritual dullness, Psalm. 119. 33. Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes.
3. Hence comes humble relying upon God, when faith is put to believe that at
every stirring of the members, and at every lifting of the foot, for a new
step, the head must stir in heaven, and let down new influences of life; and
the bottles of Heaven, and well of life, must let down new flowings of rain,
every moment, upon the withered garden; if as much rain fell in one day, as
would suffice the earth for seven years, and a man might eat so much at one
meal, as he should neither be hungry nor thirsty for five years, there should
not be such daily dependence upon new influences for rain and dew daily, and
for our daily bread this day. We can but (4.) hence, but believe the infinite
wisdom of the Lord, who well knows how to husband and steward his showers;
for in the man Christ they are continual. John 8. 29. He that sent me is with
me, the Father has not left me alone, (...) nor dismissed me, for I do always
(...) the thing that please him: When ever we do what is displeasing to God,
the Father of Christ leaves us, out of the depth of his sovereignty of
dispensing influences. Christ was never so morally deserted. The first Adam
might want influences, the second cannot.


1. As the Lord would have a falling law- Adam, to whom he denied influences,
that nature might be nature; so he also would have a standing and never
sinning-Adam, that grace might appear to be grace. 2. Upon supposition that the
second Adam is God man, it was impossible but the man Christ, in all his
actions moral should want influences, or ever sin, or be left alone of the
Father, but he must always do the thing that pleases the Father; nor is there
any murmuring to be against the dispensation of deepest wisdom, why we have not
at our pleasure influences of grace, that we should never sin, as the man
Christ never sinned. 3. Say we could see no reason, the thing is notire; the
Lord acts in the (first) elect Angels, that they never sin; he denied in the
first fall influences to the reprobate Angels; and since the Lord has
condemned them, and tied them with chains of darkness, that their whole
actions, except the acts of intellectual being and living, and the acts of
knowing, believing, desiring, fearing, etc. in the substance of the act, should
be only moral, and only sin in all the substantial circumstances, Satan's
actions always destitute of influences.
John 8. 44. Satan was a manslayer (...) and stood not in the truth, being
created in the first truth, adhering to God, 1 John 3. 8. the Devil sinned from
the beginning: hence he is called 1 Peter 5. (...) the contrary party in law;
and (...) goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may drink over. So
that though there be in men actions of the fancy, as to claw the head, rub
the beard, actions of the vegetative life, to grow to age, to decline in old
age; senescere, pubescere, adolescere, that are under no Law, and so no sins;
yet all Satan's actions are moral, these excepted of which we spoke, and
influences to moral actions, granted to reprobate men, as to gives alms, to go
and hear the word, visit the sick, and imprisoned, are denied to Satan. Some
men are also 2. Reprobate to good works, Tit. 1. 16. and cannot believe: and
here is sovereignty that God works in some vessels of mercy to will and to do,
not in others. 3. As touching the measure of grace, and the degrees of saving
influences, the Lord walks in a latitude of freedom, all men have not alike
measure of saving grace and faith. 4. His freedom shines in the work of
conversion: John Baptist is filled with the holy Ghost from the womb, Luke 1.
15. but (2.) the woman of Samaria, Matthew, Zachaeus, Magdalen, Abraham, Saul,
go on in a wretched state of nature, for some considerable tract of years, and
then are visited with influences of life; and (3.) the Thief that was crucified
with Christ upon the Cross, in his outgoing is converted, and not till then;
How God withdraws inf^uences in particular acts hic and nunc, and yet has
promised to bestow influences on the regenerate by promise.
except the sovereign liberty of God silence us, no other reason can occur of
these things to man's understanding. (4.) In the Saints this liberty is clear;
fewer falls in Joseph then in David; and so he must be nearer to daily
influences to the one, then the other. So the Lord left Hezekiah to try him,
that he might know all that was in his heart, 2 Chronicles. 32. 31. Thus much Noah
his drunkenness, Lot his incest, David his adultery and murdering of Vriah,
Peter his denying of Christ and his Judaizing, Gal. 2. proclaim to us, that
though Saints are to believe perseverance, and so that in Christ, there shall
be furnished to them outlettings of life from the fountain to bring them to
glory, as touching the habitual tract of their journey to Heaven; yet has the
Lord reserved a liberty hic and nunc, to let out and withdraw influences; and
the faith of believers is to rest upon the promise upon this condition, that
they fret not at his dispensation, who by sad falls on Ice and slidery way must
correct our sinful rashness, and teach children godly wariness; nor is there
any thing in our folly to be seen but his wisdom. (5.) And sinful slips in us,
and freedom of withdrawing in the Lord, bring us to be the engaged debtors of
grace; The Lord acts on us by his influences, but we act not on him.
and this sets the higher price upon our Advocate's intercession; when we sin 1 John 2. 1, 2. his withdrawings usher the way to his own outlettings of grace;
he knows how to dry us up, that we may, being withered, come under the debt of
new watering; more of this hereafter.

There is here no creating of clouds or rain, by King or Husbandman, or Hosts
of men; the Husbandmans faith and prayer in extreme drought may fetch rain: but
we have, in these actings in which God must join his gracious influence, no
real influence upon the Lord's influences; the Rose acts not upon the Sun by
influences, but the Sun acts upon the Rose, though we may pray for influences
of grace.

Nor can tears and wrestling extort influences, when the Lord is upon a^ act of
declaring his sovereignty in trying us, How we cannot pray away desertion and
the trying withdrawings, and yet are we to pray submissively for the removal of
desertion, and are to pray against withdrawings.
there is praying, and yet heaviness and dropping away of soul, bids on, and
the Petitioner remains like a bottle on the smoke; the Glass set must run out
so many hours; ere the Sea flow again, the Seaman weeps and prays, but the
storm continues and the wind hears him not, and he that creates the wind
suspends his acting. God has not said that the husbandman may pray away
Winter, while the season be over; nor that the Traveller, when the Sun is set
and darkness come, should pray away the night, while the hours be over; So here
God has fixed a time for a winter season of heaviness and trying deadness. The
Lord's mind is to pray for the right melting of the metal, and not for the
quenching and removing of the fire, he must do his work; its wisdom to know who
orders our prayers, and to pray for something about his withdrawing, and not
for the removal of the withdrawing it self; Paul three times prays 2 Cor. 12.
for the removal of the Messenger of Satan: But prayer stirs not right then in
all points; he should have prayed for sufficiency of grace: our gracious Lord
laying aside the dross of our prayer, hears us not in granting what we suit,
but what we ought to suit in prayer, and in granting what we suit not formally,
but what the Spirit suits internally in us; The man in a Fever cries for a
Drink, the Physician forbids to give him drink, and yet gives to quench the
thirst some other thing then drink; so the sick man's suit is profitably heard.
Yet my meaning is not, that the Lord cannot, or will not at all take off an
arrestment of disertion, at the praying of his children, the Lord cannot repeal
that, Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee,
and thou shall glorify me; therefore he repeals it not under withdrawings,
which are amongst the greatest of such troubles as put us to call upon God.

2. Christ under the Lord's withdrawings, in point of comfort and enjoyment of
the felt favor of God prayed and was heard, Heb. 5. 7. Matthew. 26. 38, 39. Luke
22. 42, 43. therefore by the like he does hear us in such a case; I fetch the
Argument a proportion; for Christ in whom Satan finds nothing, is not capable
of the withdrawings of God in point of duty. If any say it was Christ's duty
always to rejoice in God,

I answer, It was an affirmative Precept which did not oblige the man Christ
actually in every moment of time; and in radice it did, habitu it did,
habitually it did oblige him; for that rejoice evermore, obliges not ever to
actual rejoicing, but to a savory habit of rejoicing; nor did that ( pray
continually) oblige the man Christ to pray actually and to speak to God, when
he was preaching and speaking to men, at one time; nor was actually rejoicing
in God physically consistent with actual sorrow in suffering.

3. The praying to be led of God in his way, not to be led into temptation must
include a suit that God would send influences, and not forsake us in the way of
his obedience under our defections: therefore there is need of a special
submission and a reserve of time to sail when his flowings set the soul a
float. Hence may a child of God submit to his deep sovereignty in withdrawings,
and stoop humbly to the Lord's holy decree, (his holy will be done upon clay)
and yet also desire presently the removal of sinful deadness, and pray against
our sinful omission which necessarily follows upon the Lord's withdrawing, and
we are to nill and hate sinning, which results from the withdrawing; therefore
both pray and forget that ye have prayed, and adore sovereignty. Pray under
withdrawing for influences, yet trust not on the act of praying; and though he
still withdraw, pray, but without fainting under, and fretting against
sovereignty.

The habit being of the nature of a power cannot actuate itself, nor can we
actuate and make use of the power of grace; now as the God of nature is he in
whom we live, and move, and so we are acted by him in our natural stirrings; so
in Christ Redeemer Emanuel in whom is the fullness and fountain of grace we live
spiritually. Neither have we the use and exercise of our grace in our own hand,
nor can we believe when we will, as a Musician can sing when he will.

CHAP. V.
Whether or not the Lord's withdrawing of his influences and impressions of
grace does acquit and free us of guiltiness? objections removed.

WE are not a little slandered by Jesuits and Arminians, as such who by the
device of forbowing and predeterminating influences of grace, do destroy the
nature of Free Will and voluntary obedience to God in this Argument.

He who withdraws such an influence and impression of grace, without which the
act of obedience is physically impossible, he is the cause of disobedience, and
he renders the nonobeyer guiltless and excusable.

But God according to the way of Calvin and his, withdraws such an influence
and impression of grace, because without his impression of grace, its
impossible physically that the Will can be bowed to obey, it being essentially
requisite in the act of obedience. Therefore God must be the cause of
disobedience by this, and render the non-obeyer guiltless and excusable.

Ans. The Lord's withdrawing makes not the holy one the author of sin nor
destroys liberty.
Though my dimness could not lose this Argument, the validity and power of the
grace of God, should be no less, and the guiltiness of man as much as it is.

But 1. He who withdraws such an influence and impression of grace, from the
reasonable creature, constrained, compelled, and unwilling to want such an
influence; he is the cause of the disobedience, and renders the non-obeyer
guiltless and excusable. The Proposition in that sense is true; But now the
assumption is most false; For if the man should seek and desire the influence
of God in that very act, and the Lord deny it and withdraw it violently from
the Will, as if the Child a drowning should cry to the Father being obliged to
help, that he would reach help, and the Father shall refuse, then is the Father
the cause of the Child's drowning; and so should the holy Lord be the cause of
our disobedience, and render us guiltless and excusable if he were obliged not
to withdraw.

But he who withdraws his influence from the creature, who in the same act of
wanting, is most willing to want it, and gives in the same act of disobedience,
his virtual consent to the same withdrawing, he is the cause of the
disobedience of the act, and renders the non-obeyer guiltless and excusable.
The Proposition in this sense is false; and the Assumption true. God so
withdraws his influence that in the same act, the man is unexcusably willing to
want it. He is deservedly cold, who joyfully and willingly yields to the
pulling away of his coat; Here that is true, an injury is not done to a man who
receives it as a favor: Volenti non fit injuria; as is clear in the Lord's
active hardening of Pharaoh's heart, Exodus 7. 3. and Pharaoh's hardening of his
own heart, Exodus 8. 15. both in a material act.

2. He who withdraws his influence, in the same moment of time (though first by
order of nature) from the creature, who (2.) The cause why God is not
chargeable with the act of disobedience, and man is chargeable.
is willing to want that influence; and (3.) is a withdrawer of his influence
by no obligation at all to give it; he is the cause of disobedience. The
Proposition so taken, is false; Only it follows, that the withdrawing of the
influence is the physical cause of non-obedience, not the moral cause of
disobedience.

For 1. The withdrawer of the influence is under no obligation by any binding
law to bestow it.

2. The man that wants the influence is willing to want it.

3. The man is obliged, who so wants the influence by an expressly binding law
of God to perform the act commanded, and to abstain from the contrary act
forbidden; and these three are the grounds why the Lord is not chargeable with
the act of disobedience; and man is guilty and chargeable therewith. Hence man
is the culpable cause of disobedience; and he never wants the influence of God,
but his own sin interpretatively is the cause. The withdrawing of Dew and Rain
is the cause of barrenness or non-fertility; the Lord's withdrawing is the
physical cause of non-obedience; but the will of man is the only formal, vital,
subjective, moral, and (as it were) the material cause of sin; yea the only
formal and efficient cause of sin.

Obj. He that casts away his coat, is deservedly cold; for he does it against
deliberate reason, How we interpretatively yield to the want of influences of
grace and sin formally in the same act.
except he be mad, or in an extreme distemper of body; But no man refuses
divine influences with deliberate reason and the law of nature. 2. The law of
nature lays bands upon men not to cast away their clothes; but to have, or to
want the influences of God, falls under no command of God laid upon man. 3.
No man, by your way, has the influences of grace in his own power to receive
or reject them, as he that casts away his garments in a cold day, has
undeniably such a power.

Ans. Every comparison in some thing halteth; he who casts away his coat, is
deservedly cold, true, and with deliberate reason and foolishly so does; and
that is false, that no man with deliberate reason refuses divine influences;
For willing or deliberate yielding to the sin, either of omission, or of
commission, which is conjoined with the Lord's withdrawing of his influences,
is both our formal sinning against the obligation of a command, and a yielding
virtual (which is enough to make up guiltiness) to the want of divine
influences.

2. True it is, to have or to want the influence of God, falls under no
command of God laid upon man, as a man is by the law of nature forbidden to
cast away his coat in a cold season; but in virtual yielding to have influences
of God, conjoined with doing evil, and in virtual yielding to want influences
conjoined with other sins of omission or commission, we sin, and so are under a
command; as he who refuses a Staff, or a stronger man to lean upon in going
through a water, is guilty of drowning himself.

3. Thus far we are deliberately to desire influences that we are to pray for
them; Draw me, Cant. 1. 4. Lord teach me, Psalm. 119. 33. Open mine eyes, that I
may behold the wonders of thy Law, ver. 18. Incline mine heart to thy
testimonies, and not to covetousness, v. 36. As we are obliged to have a new
heart, and to have the image of God, which we willingly lost in Adam, and to be
renewed in the spirit of our mind, and to make to our selves a new heart, and
are commanded so to do, Ezech. 18: 31. Ephesians. 4. 23. and yet the Lord's
omnipotent creating of a new heart in us cannot fall under a Commandment
formally obliging us to create in our selves a new heart, and so are we
cammanded consequently to have the breathings and influences of grace. 1. In
the same act in the which we are commanded to obey. 2. In that we are to pray
for, and to desire the breathings of God. 3. In that there is a promise, to him
that has it shall be given, Matthew. 25. 29. Matthew. 13. 12. but how far the
promise extends is after to be discussed. (3.) As touching influences natural,
they seem to be common to free and voluntary Agents, and also to natural
causes; so the Lord commands the Sun to rise, and it rises, Psalm. 104. 19.
and he commands the Sun, and it rises not, Job 9. 7. it rains, because the
Lord lifts up his voice unto the clouds, Our interpretative wanting of
influences and our formal sinning in the same act, further cleared.
that abundance of rain may come; he sends out lightnings, Jerem. 14. 22.
Psalm. 107. 33, 34. God hunteth the prey for the Lion, and gives food to the
Raven. Job 38. 35. 36. v. 41. In all these the natural cause acts, and yet has
not in its power the influences of God; and when God withdraws his influences
so as natural causes act not, they find no positive violence offered to
restrain them, or by-way of any positive impediment to hinder them, only there
is a negative withdrawing of influences upon the Lord's part which they want
with a sort of natural yielding to the want thereof; and yet they have and keep
still their natural power to act, actu primo, as the first cause shall set them
on work: And the very like may be said of moral Agents; God withdraws his
influence, they sin, but find no positive violence coming from the Lord's
withdrawing, to restrain them or impose upon them, and they connaturally and
with a virtual willingness yield to such withdrawings, and keep an inferior
dominion over their own actings.

Hence 1. Moral Agents are to set to work to do duties, and not to wait upon
God's acts of influences; but they are to act, as if the influences of God were
in their power; for the influence from Heaven to the duty belongs to God, (he
does not lay formal commands upon us to have, or to want his influences) and
the duty is ours; but we love more to look to God, and judge anxiously his
providence of withdrawing of influences, then upon our own duty. Its strange: I
judge his holy withdrawings, and not my own sinful omissions.

2. No man is to complain of the Lord's withdrawing of influences; You are
joyful and well content to want them. Men put out their own eyes and yet
complain God has made them blind: Of this, more hereafter.

But this Argument may be retorted, The sovereignty of God is destroyed by
Pelagians to the end they may exa't man's Free Will.
and unpossible it is to defend the Dominion and Sovereignty of God by these
Principles; so if it be not in the dominion and sovereignty of God to procure
or hinder the acts of final obedience or disobedience, he cannot be Master of
salvation, and of the certain number of the saved; but the free will of man
must be absolute ever here, and the salvation of any must be physically
impossible to the sovereign Lord.

But by the Adversaries way; its not in the dominion and sovereignty of God to
procure, or to hinder the acts of final obedience or disobedience of any; but
it must be absolutely in the power of created free will, all things needful to
be done, both upon the part of the Lord's Decree, and of the Lord's Influences,
being done, to nill or will, obey or disobey. And 2. its in the power of
created free will to do, or obey, and to refuse, or disobey. And 3. to have
the strongest influences of God in its dominion and created power, or to want
them. 4. Created freewill first stirs and concurs, by order of nature, before
the sovereign Lord join his influence; all these be the Principles of
Pelagians, Jesuits, Arminians; so shall created free will have the dominion
above and before the sovereign Lord of all the acts of obedience, of all the
chosen of God, as to their number, who shall be saved, who not, how many, how
few.

CHAP. VI.
Q. Whether or no are we to believe, pray, praise, read, confer only then when
the Spirit actually moves us to believe, pray, praise, etc. and not otherwise?
1. Duties are to be done under spiritual withdrawings. 2. The precept and the
influence differ. 3. We are and may pray at fixed hours.

THe Question is the same of elicite acts, Of our acts and spiritual duties
under the spiritual withdrawings of God. Something of the state of the question.
of love, fear, hope, faith, and of imperate acts of praying, hearing,
praising; only the difference is, hardly can we set a time to believing; the
object sometime wakens us, Psalm. 56. 3. What time I am afraid, I Will trust in
thee; otherwise that binds ever, which is, Psalm. 62. 8. Trust in him at all
times. The Lord has more fixed a time for praying continually, and for
praising the Lord always, 1 These. 5. Psalm. 146. 1.

2. The question is alike in all actions, and in spiritual and supernatural
actions; as whether the Husbandman may Plow and Sow at fit seasons, or only
when the Lord the cause of causes joins his influence; for these and the like
are no less impossible without the connatural influences of God, then the acts
of praying, believing without the supernatural influences of grace. Now we
would think it ridiculous, should the Husbandman never plow but only when he is
disposed to plow; suppose he sleep longer in the morning then he should.

3. The actual Influence cannot be a Rule; for we cannot know or feel the
actual influence of God, Creator, or of Grace, but only when we are aworking.

4. Our inability to do duties, when the Spirit withdraws, loses us not from
a moral obligation to perform the duties.
The question of the obligation is one thing, and the question of ability to
pray is another; for Magus yet in the Gall of bitterness, is under the
obligation of a Commandment, Acts 8. 22. Repent therefore of this thy
wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thoughts of thine heart may be
forgiven thee; And in a state of nature, he is most unable and so far more
indisposed to pray and repent; And the believing Thessalonians are under a
command to pray continually, 1 These. 5. 17. to praise, to rejoice, ver. 16. 18.
what ever their indisposition be. Now though the man fallen in Adam be unable to
keep and do the Law, and natural men living in the visible Church, be unable
and indisposed to believe in Christ and to pray, yet except we say that such
are under neither Law nor Gospel, we cannot say that men, because of their
wretched estate, are not obliged to pray, believe, love Christ, walk with God.
Libertines say its unlawful and a taking of the Name of God in vain, to aim at
praying, when the Spirit withdraws. Suppose we could not reconcile our
inability and our indisposition to pray, nor the acting of strong grace and of
weak will; yet when God has undeniably commanded duties and promised in the
new Covenant grace, and gives the new heart, and the habit of grace, no man
has warrant upon the account of the Lord's denying influence to abstain from
duties; for upon the same account one might cast himself in the Fire, and
another in the Water; why, it may be the Lord shall deny his influence to the
fire and water, to burn or consume us, and so the water shall not overwhelme
me, nor the fire consume me, though I wickedly cast my self in fire and water.

Now what Familists and Libertines may object on the contrary should be heard.

Obj. 1. We are never to take the Name of God in vain, but to pray without the
acting of the Spirit is to take the Name of God in vain.

Ans. The Antecedent is true; we are never to take the Name of God in vain, nor
obliged to any sin: but the Consequence is naught; therefore we are not to
pray, nor obliged to pray, except the Spirit either by disposition facilitate
us, or actually move us; For the disposition or actual mo^ion of the Spirit, is
neither our Rule, nor a part of our rule. For 1. The command to pray is the
common obligi^g Rule to both Elect and Reprobate, and obliges all equally; but
neither the spiritual disposition, nor the saving acting of the Spirit so equal
to all is our Rule. 2. The command is exposed to every one to make use of it as
he pleases; Aug. Epist. 89. Jubet Deus continentiam and dat continentia: Jubet
per Legem, dat per Gratiam; jubet per Literam, dat per Spiritum. Differences
betwixt the command and the influences of the spirit clear that it is not
formally sin to pray under withdrawings of influences of grace.
but the saving acting of the Spirit is not in every man's power. 3. The command
is a Rule and Object of our Faith, and gives me not strength to obey; but the
heavenly disposition and saving acting are not the object, but the efficient
cause which adds strength to obey: the command craves the debt; its true, its
impossible to pray in faith without the acting of the Spirit; it follows only
that its so impossible that we are also guilty and unexcusable in our virtual
desiring that it may be so. We are wounded but we love to shed our own blood.
As also in the Regenerate there is never an utter withdrawing; the habit of
grace keeps the heart warm, and loves to be blown upon and stirred, even under
actual ceasing of breathings.

Obj. 2. When there is an utter ceasing of the spirit, it would appear that the
spirit forbids us to lift at his work, until the Spirit the only Master of work
be there himself.

Ans. One of the three is ever a work, either the Father is waiting till the
Son pray, John 14. or the Son is commanding the breathings of the Spirit. Under
the ceasing of actual breathing we are to stir the remainders of the Seed of
God.
It is some casual work that the sinner is the passive object of the Spirit;
there is never an utter ceasing of the Spirit. There are some habitual
stirrings of the Seed of God under the ceasing of actual influence, as the ripe
Apple enclines to fall off the Tree when there is no shaking of it; the Ship is
a mending in the Shore when she sails not: and if it were no more, but one of
the three is a working about a Child of God; its not to be despised; For who
knows the thoughts of Christ and his pleading in Heaven for such as suffer the
evil of affliction for Christ? And if a believer wrestle under deadness,
Christ much more is a work to help a more spiritual sufferer, to wit, one that
is as it were a patient under sin and flesh, and the withdrawing of God.

Obj. 3. There is no Commandment in the New Testament for the doing of half a
Duty, to wit, to pray and not to pray in Faith, and Fervor; therefore we
cannot be commanded to pray, when the Spirit withdraws his influence, without
which, the Duty, of necessity, must be lame and broken.

Ans. It follows not, for there is less of the Gospel in the command as a
command; for, in either Law-command or in Gospel-precept, We are to do our
part in duties under withdrawings.
the Lord commands whole and unbroken obedience; and in it God seeks somewhat,
which he lost in Adam, which we are obliged to do, and he is under no Law to
give us grace to obey; And as is said, we are willing to want his help, where
the command should put us to a humble missing and mourning for our wants, and a
distrusting of our own strength, and a weeping over our broken condition, and a
high prizing of our surety and his strength. 2. Its a part of command that we
go about the bulk or body of the duty, and gather together the dry bones and
wait humbly until he command the Wind and Spirit to blow on them, and we sin in
omitting of half a command.

Obj. 4. His yoke is easy, and his Commandments are not grievous; but if it be
not in our power to pray, when he withdraws, Grace sweetens duties.
his Commandments shall be unpossible and his yoke heavy.

Ans. His command is easy by the grace of God and love of Christ; the Wheels
move sweetly, when Grace and Love oils the Soul; and yet it no more hinders
that we cannot pray, when he withdraws, then the burning of the Fire, and the
rising of the Sun, which are works of Nature most easy and sweet, are
possible; when the Lord forbids the Fire to burn, and the Sun to rise, his
Gospel commands actu primo, of themselves are sweet, but under withdrawings
hard and legal.

Obj. 5. Praying and seeking of God at set and fixed hours were not lawful; For
if we cannot pray, but when the Spirit moves us, we cannot say, we shall pray
at any hour: for we cannot tie the Spirit's joining to our hours; and again, if
we are to pray at any hour we please, we use the habit of grace and
supplication, when, and as we will; as a Musician may sing when he will, or not
sing.

Ans. 1. We have not any question now about religious set hours, such as the
morning and evening Sacrifice, or the three hours of prayer used by David,
Morning, Evening, and at Noon, Psalm. 55. 17. and Daniel chap. 6. 10, 11. Acts
3. 1. Acts 10. 3, 9, 10. and the godly Jews; for by no divine Precept are we
tied to such hours. Papists abuse the Scripture to Canonick hours; But in
Christian prudence we may fix a time to reading, praying, conferring on the
Word, and to other sacred duties; yet do we not tie the Spirit's joining to our
hour; the man Christ set a night apart for praying; and so did Jacob for
wrestling by tears with the great Angel, Genes* 32. 24. Hos. 12. 3, 4. without
limitting the Spirit in his influences to any time; nor yet will it follow that
we use the habit or spirit of grace and supplication, when we will; for
sanctified will is to set the time, and to actuate it self by the habit of
grace; And the same Argument shall conclude, that the Husbandman who sets a
time for plowing and sowing, must limit the Lord to join his influences: For
except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain, who build it; though they
set days to the hired Masons. Except the Lord keep the City, the Watchman
watches but in vain; though times be set to the hired Watchers. Its in vain to
rise up early, Psalm. 127. 1, 2. and its as impossible to plow, build, watch,
rise early, without the common influence of God the first cause, as it is to
pray in Faith without the special breathing of the Spirit of grace. Yet
Libertines and Antinomians will not say that they sin in setting a time for
building, plowing, watching; these seem considerable about hours of praying.

1. Though we fix an hour, it becomes Faith to await the Angels moving of the
water, and when the Lord adds his influences to step in and join our strength
cheerfully and with humble praises to him who draws.

2. When there is a bentness of heart such a day or such a fixed hour to pray,
build not too much upon the appointment and promises of our own heart, to say
to morrow, I Will do wonders by prayer, and remove mountains. 1. Its good here, as
in a purpose of going to a City to continue there a year, and buy and sell and
get gain, to say in a trembling subordination to God, as James counsels
chap. 4. 13, 15. If the Lord will, we shall live; so, to say if the holy
sovereignty of grace breath fairly and strongly, I Will do well in praying; yet
not I, but his grace; and if the wind of the Lord blow not, ah I cannot sail.
2. As in the case of James his Merchant, and of Peter's undertaking, I Will die
with thee, rather or I deny thee. So here 1. The man sows broad hopes upon his
own praying, and the harvest is thin and nothing. 2. Such a Preacher shall set
the Ship a float, and all shall be well, if such an Instrument act, and then
the Lord is away, and the Reed is broken, and the Sea flows not. 3. At the
Death of such an Eminent Christian, O there must be strange manifestations; and
the poor man is taken away under a cloud, and in a huge deal of darkness. The
faith of our reposing upon our selves and the creature, and our not reposing on
the Lord's acting in us to will and to do, in these set times does disappoint
us. A godly jealousy and despair of our selves, and a relying wholly upon the
Lords actings is good; and seldom can we difference between presumptuous
confidence on our selves, with a godly trembling, and a pure and spiritual
relying upon God in his breathings of grace. (3.) We stumble, that when the
impetuous faird of resolving is on, and possibly the Lord effectually acting
us; yet when it comes to the time of praying, the whole spirit is a lump of
deadness, and the Comforter is away; and the flesh says, I covenanted a
meeting with Christ, and he covenanted with me; but I kept the appointed time,
and he failed and came not according to his promise; And we do not remember,
that there is a promise that he will work in us to will and to do; but for a
Covenant that the Spirit shall keep your fixed hour, where is that? for the
Spirit, even the hour before blows sweetly and the hour after; but he is absent
at your fixed hour. In a word, we may limit a time for your Duty; for the
obligation (to pray continally) is perpetual; but we cannot limit a time or an
hour to his breathing. Its ever true, John 3. 8. The Wind blows where it
lists. (4.) The more Angel-like and the more spiritual pride is, such as is
Angel-haughtiness in the damned spirits who were not content with their own
station, and in Evah, the more sinful guiltiness is in it; Pride resulting from
acts common to men, as that of the King of Assyria, Isa. 37. and that of the
King of Babylon, Hab. 2. Isa. 14. 13, 14. is nothing so damnable as the proud
fathering of holiness and grace upon our vain nature; and here we think we can
command the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, and have the breathings of the
Spirit at our will; and if we be humble, it should especially be in stooping to
the most poor and holy actings of the Sovereign Lord, and presumptuous relying
on self; here is the first samplar pride.

Neither do we consider that most of the Arguments, if we may act when, and
where, we will, Salvation and Damnation, and all the high actings of gracious
Sovereignty must be under our power; if we may, or can act without the habit
and influence of grace, and must be here, as when one great higher Wheel moves
and turns about many Wheels, and the first moves the second, and second the
third, and the third the fourth, and so forth; so must the habits of Grace, and
the influences of the Spirit, and all the outgoings of God be subject to man's
Free Will as the first mover; if we can pray and praise under the withdrawings
of God.

Hence the 6. Argument may be removed, that though we cannot pray, but when,
and as the Spirit moves us; it follows, both that we are not loosed from our
obligation to pray, nor can we pray more or less fervently, but as the grace of
Christ, in whom is all fullness, qualifies us in the habit and actings, because
the gracious acts depend not upon our Free Will simply, but upon our Free Will
as instructed with the supernatural habit infused; nor do the more intense and
stronger actings of love, of faith, of prayer, depend upon our Free Will, but
as instructed with the stronger habit and actual influences of God; But more
hereafter of this.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Sovereignty of God in his actings, and especially in influences. And 2.
what Sovereignty is.

BEcause the influence of the Lord's grace depends most upon the Sovereignty of
God, so far above us, as is spoken in the fourth Article; its needful we speak
of these.

1. What Sovereignty is. 2. In how many particulars the sovereignty of God does
appear. 3. What submission we owe, and how we are to stoop thereunto. 4. Such
as are most active in doing God's will, are most submissively patient in
suffering his will, and contra. 5. We are to give submission of pain to God. 6.
Providence of the Gospel is above Law-providence. 7. The righteousness of God
is incomparably above our righteousness. 8. Our Justification is not negative
only. 9. The Law requires sinless suffering. 10. Inherent righteousness is not
the adequate end of the Gospel.
1. What Sovereignty is, and how it differs from omnipotency.
To know what Sovereignty is. 1. Let us see what it is not. 1. Omnipotency and
Sovereignty thus differ; Omnipotency looks simply to effects physically, what
the Lord can do: he can of stones make sons to Abraham; he can create millions
of Worlds; his Sovereignty is not only his holy Nature what he can do and so
supposes his Omnipoteucy, but also what he does freely, or does not freely,
and does by no natural necessity, and so it includes his holy supreme Liberty,
and also what the Lord may do, as it were Jure he may do all things, and (as
Elihu says) gives not an account of his matters to any, Job 33. 13. by his
holy sovereign Will as above all Laws that bind the rational Creatures, he does
as he pleases, and what he pleases: and none can say What do thou? Hence 1.
Its graciousness of holy Sovereignty, that because he is Sovereign, he does not
crush us; the flesh speaks that in Job 10. 3. to the Lord; Is it good to thee
that thou should oppress? and because he is sovereign upon the account of
his sovereignty, he crusheth not under his feet all the prisoners of the earth:
to turn aside the right of a man before the face of the most High, Lam. 3. 33,
34. whereas, to sinful sovereigns, power is a Law many take by violence, fields
and houses, because its in the power of their hands to do it, Micah 2. the Law
of the Lion and the great Fish, to devour the Lamb and swallow the lesser Fish,
is only power and strength. Satan and his never stays in this side of their
power, but does all the evil they can; Jerem. 3. 5. Behold, thou have spoken,
and done evil as thou could; the sovereignty of God says he may withdraw
influences of grace from Angels and Men as pleases him best; he may let this
Ground wither and dry up as a Rock, and make the other Plot of Ground near by,
like a fruitful Paradise; and why may not Sovereignty dispose of hearts to
harden them? but his outgoings of sovereignty are not always to destroy.

2. Our great ones are so far above the blood, the cries and sufferings of the
needy; let the poor die in the pit, they have an higher employment then to lend
their heart to lodge thoughts of compassion toward the afflicted, Amos 6. 1, 2,
3, 4. greatness dispises the desolation of the poor; but Job 36. 5. Behold, God
is mighty and dispiseth not any; says Elihu, Psalm. 69. 33. The Lord despises
not his prisoners; why? and is he not above their tears? yea, 34. let Heaven
and Earth praise him; then must he be great and high above the mourners, yet he
owns their tears, Psalm. 102. 19, 20.

3. And the Lord's Sovereignty hinders him not to give a sort of reckoning of
his doings, Isa. 5. Judge between me and my vineyard, Mich. 6. 3. O my people,
what have I done to thee? often pride hinders sinful sovereigns to ease the
heart of the oppressed with a reason of their deeds.

2. Sovereignty is to be adored in the hardest conditions.
What is Sovereignty? its his superexcellent Highness by which his holy Will
essentially wise and just, is a Law and Rule to himself to do what he
pleases, holily, wisely, most freely. But why does the Lord drive Cart-wheels
over the bones of his people? let alone: he will not do it always, and say it
were so, This comes forth from the Lord of hosts, which is wonderful in
counsel and excellent in working, Isa. 28. 29. a godly heart is smitten with
the wisdom and authority of holy sovereignty; why is Jerusalem spoiled? and
why are the Nations at ease? holy Sovereignty should meeken and silence all
men, Zech. 2. 13. Be silent, O all flesh before the Lord: supreme Sovereignty
cannot err; and the faith of this quiets the heart under all sufferings;
Hezekiah, Isa. 38. 15. What shall I say? he has spoken to me, and himself has
done it. Devils and Men are to be looked on as passive rods (there is no
principle of life in the Rod, in the Sword to lift up themselves against us)
they are Wheels rolled about by holy Sovereignty. Ah the Physician slew my
child, the wicked enemy slew the father and the son, the malicious rail against
me; but not any of these dumb Rods did move themselves: the Lord bids Shimei
curse David; the Lord sends the Assyrians against the Nation of his fury.
Consider the Copy, holy Jesus, Matthew. 26. puts three Seals, three Subscriptions
to one blanck and sad bill of Wrath; Nevertheless not my will, but thy will be
done. How was he the foremost in the journey to Jerusalem? to suffer, as willing
that his Blood be Ink, and his Soul and Body sheets of Paper; on which might be
written (as it were) to be read by Men and Angels, for all Eternity, the Glory
and Justice of spotless Sovereignty; and he who said Amen to the Curse,
teaches us, if God should say, I have no delight in thee, to consent, 2 Samuel
15. 26. and say, here am I, let him do to me as seems good to him. The
wishes of Moses and Paul, who desire their parts in the Book of Life, and of
Christ to be laid in pawn for the shining of the glory of the Lord in saving of
many; and that expression of David says, that a gracious submission to
Sovereignty will bring the man to this, Let him do to me what seems good in
his eyes; if he say, he has no delight in me: well, let Angels and Men Read
and Sing the Glory of the Lord, in the flamings of the holy Sovereignty and
spotless Justice of God in my torment; and it becomes me consentingly to lay my
soul as a threshing floor under his eternal smitings, and to judge I owe a
spirit to be eternal oil and firewood, to eternally revenging wrath. The
Children of God know how hardly Faith can command Sense to come up to the
obligation of receiving in the bosom, with kissing and adoring the fiery
indignation of the Lord. Yet are we to drink with Christ, the Cup of sad
absence, and his holy withdrawings. Heman has come near this, and David and
Jonah; all thy waves have gone over me, thy wrath lies hard upon me; and yet
hear savoury prayers speaking the rejoicing, and kissing of sovereignty, and
prayers coming out of the furnace of Hell, Ps. 88. 1. O Lord God of my
salvation, I cry day and night before thee: What? cries of Faith out of the
bowels of a Sea of wrath! Jonah 2. 2. Out of the belly of Hell I cried, says
Jonah; and waves of wrath, all the waves, all the waves of thy wrath are gone
over me, says David, Psalm. 45. 8. Yet the Lord will command his loving
kindness in the day time, and in the night his song shall be with me, and my
prayer unto the God of my life. O how sweet are these; tormenting pain and
godly patience; pining pain and sweet praises and psalms of Saveraignty; The
tormented man sings his own Hell in a Psalm sounding up to Heaven; Psalm. 6.
Psalm. 42. Psalm. 38. God smites me, and I love God, Psalm. 42. 7. All thy waves
and thy billows are gone over me; yet this Sea and all the waves of this Hell
cannot quench heavenly love and the fire of thirsting after God, v. 1. As the
Heart pants after the water brooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God. When
fiery wrath is in its outgoing, the Lord sends out wrath and Arrows that stick
fast in the soul; but David prays to an angry God, he roars and burns in wrath;
I pray, Psalm. 38. he casts on me waves of Hell; I send up tears and cries to
him, Psalm. 6, 1, 6. he breaks me with breach upon breach, and sore vexes my
soul; I believe and trust in his salvation, Psalm. 18. 4, 5, 6. Thus its
possible, for a Saint to love his own fiery hell, and receive the coals of
flaming wrath in his arms, for his holy Sovereign and glorious Name, who is
pleased so to deal with him, and upon the Consideration that so it seem good to
the only wise and sovereign Lord. But oh how unlike are we to a people in the
furnace adoring the Lord in the outgoings of sovereign Justice! when the Lord
smites, some murmr, others swear, lie, whore, oppress, many mock godliness
and hate it, all go on to break the marriage-faith of a Land once betrothed to
God; and ah! if the watchmen had not been guides to these who highly wronged
Jesus Christ.

From the former, We storm more at permissive providence then at our own
permitted sins.
follows patient silence, and an use of our submission to his Sovereignty who
withdraws his influences from us, so as sinning follows thereupon: Hence there
is a great abuse of repentance, which is bastard-repentance. We grieve at the
fair work of the Lord's holy permissive providence, and are not humbled at our
foul sinning, resulting by our own fault, from such a providence. See a Copy of
a Law-sorrow (repentance I call it not) in Adam, before any Gospel was heard
of, Genesis 3. 12. that, or, the woman whom thou gave (to be) with me, she (...)
she gave me of the tree: There is an Emphasis in the Woman; The, or that Woman.
2. An Emphasis in the Lord's liberality; Thou gave her, by way of goodness and
liberality; but I wish the Lord never had been good nor liberal in that kind.
(...)
3. To be with me (as an helper, who now is a tempter.) 4. She (as the chief
cause) gave me of the fruit, and I did eat. I repent (says he in sense) that
thou was that graciously Good as to give me a tempter, but I am not grieved for
my own sin in eating. So the common excuse; woe to the Providence that God sent
such an unhappy counselor to me; oh what had I to do there? So does Job repent
in some respect in his weakness, not that he came in the world an heir of
wrath, and a sinner, but ah the fatal and wrathful Decree of God, that ever I
was born to such misery, Job 3. 3. Let the day perish, wherein I was born,
Jerem. 20. 14. But the Lord wills the Crucifiers of Christ to mourn that they
(...) with wicked hands crucified and slew Christ: and yet Peter counsels them,
Acts 2. 23. to submit humbly to the determinate Counsel and Foreknowledge of
God. Our deceitful hearts are readier to repent for the holy Events and Facts
of divine Providence, then for our own sins, as if the holy Lord did err in
his permissive providence, and we do not amiss in transgressing of an holy
Law; They are most graciously active to do the will of God, who are most
graciously passive to suffer his will, and on the contrary.
But such as are most active to do the will of God, and esteem it their meat
and drink to obey his will, as Jesus Christ, Jo^. 4. 34. and go about doing
good, Acts 10. 38, 39. are most passively savoury and graciously submissive to
suffer the will of God, as he was, Matthew. 26. Nevertheless not my will, but thy
will be done; Isa. 53. 7. He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened
not his mouth; he as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a Sheep before her
shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth. 1 Pet. 2. 23. Who when he was
reviled, reviled not again: when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed
himself to him that judges rightously. And Jeremiah who mourned so, for sin as
he desired his head were waters, and his eyes a fountain of tears, that he
might both be humbled for the judgments and the sins of the people, Jer. 9. 1,
2. has said much in the book of the Lamentations for justifying God, Lam. 1.
18. Lam. 3. 38, 40, 41, 42. Lam. 4. 10, 11, 12, 13. Lam. 5. 19, 20. and was
willing himself to be carried captive; So was Daniel who mourns and confesses
and fasteth three full weeks, Dan. 4. Dan. 10. 2, 3. and ascribes
righteousness to God; The more submission there is in Job, there is the more
spiritual frame of a gracious spirit in him, Job. 1. 21, 22. 2 Samuel 16. 10. and
they who fret most at suffering; as Cain, Genesis 4. 13. and Jehoram, 2 Kings 6.
23. Shall I wait any longer upon the Lord? are most froward and unwilling to
do or act the will of God. And on the contrary, such are most impatient and
blasphemous in suffering as damned reprobates, who are less active in doing
God's will and denying it. 2. The Lord requires unto holy Sovereignty a
submission to that permissive providence of his; The unsearchableness of the
Lord's dispensation into the eternal standing and falling of Angels and Men.
he suspends his gracious influences, and what can we do but sin? Say a
millstone were tied with Chains in the Air, if the Chain break, the stone must
fall. Remove the Sun and it must be dark night. The Lord knowingly and of
purpose withdraws his influences, and Angles or Men in their strength cannot
stand. Convene and summon the wittiest thoughts of Men and Angels, who
acknowledge a providence, and answer to this; suppose a master of a house,
excellent in goodness and of a deep reach of wisdom to let fall, out of his
hand two precious stones of incomparable worth, Jewels of the price of the half
of the Earth, and he only can keep them safe, yet he suffers them knowingly and
purposely to fall and be broken: The Lord who hangs the Earth upon nothing,
and its not moved, might and could have kept Men and Angels in their integrity,
but of purpose he suffers them to fall and be broken upon a mighty rock.

2. A husbandman has a huge broad and vast plat of ground most fertile for
wheat, olive trees, the most delicious and excellent vines in great abundance,
its a wide land of honey, of Milk, of many gardens of incomparably fragrant
herbs, with meadows and grass for millions of flocks, he sees a great River
shall overflow all this land, this husbandman only can fence off the river with
a strong bank, yet he knowingly suffers the Flood to overflow and drown all,
that nothing can more grow in it, then the bottom of the Sea.

3. A Governor of Ten rich and populous Cities, knows of a train of fire,
which by degrees shall at length consume, in one flame, men, women, sucking
children, gold, silver, houses, gardens, he can quench the train, if he please,
yet he suffers a strong wind to blow upon it, withdraws not water from it, Its
vain to determine that the providence of never sinning is choicer, then the
providence of the inbringing of Christ God-man to die for sinners.
which is a sort of fomenting thereof, until all be consumed. What can here be
said to him who gives not account of any of his matters? this is the free
dispensation of the only wise God to standing and to falling Angels and Men,
and who can judge God or find him out in this? It may seem needless curiosity
to determine, which of the two Providence, and which of the two Wills in the
holy Lord must be first or choicest; Whether that by which Adam should have
stood happy in perfect obedience without fall or sin given to the Covenant of
works, or that Providence and Will by which the Lord designed, to bring in the
wonder of mercy and grace, Emanuel, God manifest in the flesh, the delight of
Men and Angels? it seems to say that the Lord's will is more set upon Adam's
final duty, which never had being, and which the Lord immutably from Eternity,
decreed should never be, then his holy Will is fixed upon that wonder of the
World, of Heaven and Earth; the riches of the glory of his grace and other
attributed in that precious and incomparable mystery, God manifested in the
flesh. Its true, God wills us rather to obey, and not to wound our selves by
sin, As Mr. Baxter.
then put him to pardon our disobedience, or to seek a Mediator or remedy for
sin. But the Lord by his commanding will, in his Law charge us under the pain
of condemnation to obey; but the Lord by no commanding will in his Law charge
himself to provide and seek a Satisfier and Mediator: he provides a Redeemer by
his will of purpose and holy decree, nor willed he ever fallen Adam to solicit
his author commanding or decreeing will to provide a Physician for sick sinners.

But except we seek a knot in a Rush. 1. Its Adam's duty and all mankinds in
him to stand, obey and never sin: and God wills this obligation to lie upon man
as an eternally obliging duty; The rightousness of God through faith is
incomparably above our inherent righteousness.
And this is true even now and eternally [ Adam ought never to have sinned.]

2. God never willed Adam, nor commanded him in Law or Gospel, either
absolutely or comparatively to put the Lord to seek a remedy or a Savior to
satisfy for us, or to pardon sin; we read of no such will.

3. Nor is it fit to say, that the Lord had rather David committed adultery and
murder, by God's permission, and be pardoned for it, then not to commit it;
for if this be meant of the commanding will of God, no man can justly charge us
with putting such contradictory wills upon God; as also its unpossible that God
can will the adultery of David to be, by any other will, then his will of
purpose and hloy decree.

And then 4. The righteous Lord loves righteousness, yet the Lord absolutely
and simply willed rather the holy, free submissive obedience of the second Adam
to be, then he wills the final obedience of the first Adam; and he wills more
the manifestation of the glory of his free grace, pardoning mercy, revenging
justice in that excellent of the most excellent our Emanuel, then the
legislative glory of Adam and all his possible final obedience; Isa. 42. 1, 2.
Isa. 53. 11. Matthew. 3. 17. Matthew. 17. 5.
and the Lord wills no end rather then his own glory; but the Lord never
commands us to will but what he approves, and its needless to enquire whether
a more eminent declarative glory could be, John 3. 16. John 15. 13. Tit. 3. 45.
Isa. 62. 2, 3. Ephesians. 3. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 12.
then that which is the delight of the Lord's soul, the pleasure of the Lord,
love greater then any man has, the rejoicing of the Lord, loved and desired to
be read, looked unto with wondering and adoring by the holy Angels; nor can any
inherent righteousness of man please the Lord, in any imaginable measure and
manner, as the obedience of Christ in offering himself to God through the
eternal Spirit, Heb. 4. 14. And if it be true, that lost man gains more in the
second Adam, Its a more ^minently declarative glory which is brought forth in
the second Adam, nor possibly could have been in the full and final obedience
of the first Adam.
Christ Jesus, then he lost in the first Adam, clear it is that there is no
comparison between the declarative glory of the Gospel, to wit, the glory of
the humble, willing, and eminently and admirably excellent obedience of Christ
God-man in dying tali modo and the declarative glory of the Law, 2 Cor. 3. or
between the glory of the righteousness of God through says, and the glory of
the inherent righteousness through the grace of God; for the righteousness of
God through faith, must be more excellent then the righteousness of man, or
then all the acts of man by grace, believing, hoping, lovering, repenting,
praying, praising eternally in Heaven, suffering of martyrdom; and therefore
it cannot be said that God would rather in an antecedent, and principal
intention have us to forbear sin and Adam to stand in Lawobedience, then to put
him to remedy sin, and out of the greatest love of God to man to send his Son
in the World to save sinners, as if the intention and heart-purpose of God had
been principally that the first Adam should stand, and all in him and the Court
of the Law of Works should be for ever; and that the Lord in a second intention
and (as if it were) compelled by a cross wind must sail into a next best and
second harbor, which yet undoubtedly is the excellentest and highest
declarative glory of the Lord which the conceptions of Angels or Men can reach,
and was (if I may so speak) the eternal delight of the Lord, while as yet, he
had not made the earth, or the fields, Pro. 8. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30,
31. though I am far from thinking that any thing without God, does conclude his
holy Sovereignty; yet the Lord's soul delighting in the holy obedience of
Christ and the eternal declarative glory thereof, shall be highest to me, and
in the hearts (I conceive) of the godly, the most eminent revealed end, and to
Scripture.

4. Neither is it better pleasing to God, not to sin, then when the man has
sinned, to seek pardon for sin in the blood of Christ. Not to sin by no
Scripture is choicer then to seek pardon in Christ's blood.
I know not what Scripture so speaks or so teaches both the one and the other
is the approving and commanding will of God; and if the Gospel be more glorious
and excellent then the Law, 2 Cor. 3. as it must be; the seeking of a pardon is
a duty commanded in the Gospel and Covenant of grace, and not sinning, is as
such an act commanded in the poor and simple Covenant of works given to Adam. I
shall heartily yield to sin upon hope of pardon (if any intelligent pure and
only Antinomians so teach) is utterly unlawful; but upon supposition that the
person is a sinner, it is a more gracious act of obedience (yea more glorious
if I may so speak) to fly to our Sanctuary and City of refuge Jesus Christ
upon Gospel-principles, then upon Law-principles not to sin; And thus must the
comparison of betterness and excellency be made. But the arguing seems to
infer, that it is our mind, that God wills us to desire and practically to
will rather that Christ the Physician should appear in the declarative glory of
grace, mercy, pardoning, punishing, justice, then that we should practically
will our own Law-odedience; but this is forced on us and is not our mind, but a
wicked Principle of Libertines; for we ought rather to obey the Law and
practically to will final obedience to the Law of works and eschew sinning as
Hell, rather then desire and with a more intense and a stronger practical will
seek the incarnation of God; for that practical will can never be in us without
sinning.

Yea 4. It is a shame to compare together the righteousness of God (and we are
in Christ made this righteousness of God, 2 Cor. 5. 21.) and the inherent,
mixed, imperfect righteousness of a renewed man; for the one needs no pardon,
and the other is sinful, and as menstruous clothes without a pardon, Isa. 64.
6. I mean not that the believing, praying, etc. of the regenerate are formally
and in the substance of the act sins, but by accident they are sinful and
polluted; but even in the substance of the act, they are nothing comparable to
the acts of obedience in Christ, which are every way complete and perfect
according to the strictest rule of the Law of works.

Yea 5. By justification we are not only negatively freed from guilt and wrath
but also positively righteous.
Its a false ground to say that by justification or remission of sins (as some
say, but they are not every way the same) only the guilt of sin is removed, or
only deliverance from eternal punishment; for Christ's dying and satisfying is
ours, he dying in our stead and place, and we dying in him legally (not
physically) and so are we not only by his satisfaction which is made ours, and
by faith applied to us, negatively freed from Hell, but positively righteous;
(I say not inherently or personally) for Christ's satisfaction is not a mere
dying, nor mere suffering; for beasts may die and suffer much. But such a dying
and such a suffering, for 1. Christ's dying and satisfying has an excellency
from the subject God-man who dyed, Act. 20. 28. 2. It has an excellent
qualification from the patience, submission, willingness of God-man, the like
whereof could be in no simple Man, in no Angel, in no Creature; for the personal
influence of God was in him and his obedience. As for the damned in Hell, their
satisfaction is of another nature different from Christ's, and is only
satispassion and pure torment, not holy, willing, suffering as the Law requires
sinless sufferings as contradistinguished from active obedience. How be it the
Law moral does require patient and submissive suffering without dispairing or
blaspheming, in any reasonable Creature; for the holy Law cannot but condemn
sin and blasphemy, adhering either to our acting or suffering.

Nor 6. Let it be said to the undervaluing of the righteousness of God through
faith, that inherent righteousness is the full end of Christ's blood; when in
the state of glory, there shall be no more pardoning of sin, but perfect
inherent holiness.

For 1. that inherent holiness in the estate of glory is not perfect legal
holiness, nor the formal cause of our justification in glory; because all the
glorified once sinned, and so for eternity are such as have violated the Law.

2. Our righteousness from the time forward shall not only be inherent; for the
righteousness of God is an everlasting righteousness, Inherent righteousness in
glory is not the complete and adequate end of Gospel justification; or of the
Lord's Gospel Dispensation in commanding us to believe and be holy.
Dan. 9. 24. and how that robe of Christ's surety-righteousness shall in the
state of glory, be laid by as an old useless garment, and the robe of inherent
righteousness in lieu of it put on for ever. The Scripture does not speak; What
men without Scripture, speak, we care not.

3. Nor is our inherent righteousness only either the adequate end of Christ's
blood, or of faith and labors, as if God intended as his only end to make us
eternally Law-righteous; whereas he shall eternally delight in us, and lead us
in glory as those that are freely redeemed in the blood of the Lamb; for the
Lamb shall be the everlasting righteousness of all crowned with glory, Rev. 4.
8, 9, 10. Rev. 5. 11, 12, 13. Rev. 7. 14, 15, 16.

3. Sovereignty challenges submission to the will of God in doing and in
suffering, because it is his obliging will; we fail not a little in the former*
when we pray, because the Mast of the Ship is broken, and death is at the
bedside; and we hear the Word, because it is the fashion, and abstain from
fornication, and from other works of darkness, and put on a sort of holiness,
not because it is the will of God, even our sanctification; How spiritual
service to do all because of the holy will of the Lord.
as for eating, drinking, sleeping, waking, they are spiritually minded who do
not these things for nature and lust, but as wel-pleasing to the Lord, and find
a convincing and persuading reason in the holy commanding will of the Sovereign
Lord why they ought to be done upon a spiritual account; and the other is no
less spiritual; for many are sick and die, many are poor, and persecuted for
weldoing, because they cannot choose, but so it must be, not because as Peter
says, 1 Pet. 3* 17. So is the well of God in a spiritual account to them; for
when holy Sovereignty has laid on the necessity of dying, of sickness and
pain, and a gracious spirit shall close with that; this is spiritual patience.

4. Because the Lord has a dominion over second causes, and as it were, a
strong lock upon all Creatures to open and s^ut at his pleasure, and he puts a
seal upon Sun and Stars, Job 9. 7, 8, 9. that they cease and shine, or shine
not, or go down; we are to put our Amen and Seal to Soveraignties decrees. I
rise early, and there is no bread; ah Lord: I lay in a soft bed, and there is
no sleep in the night, but pain. Say, Amen, Lord: the Fig Tree blossoms not
this year, yet I will rejoice in the Lord, Hab. 3. 16, 17. Sovereignty has so
appointed, there is nothing but rolling of garments in blood, and captivity and
spoils; yet pray, thy will be done in the Earth, as it is done in the Heaven.

CHAP. VIII.
Diverse Particulars in which Sovereignty appears.

1. Sovereignty and the glorious liberty of God appears in 1. His Decrees. 2.
The Works of God, especially 1. Of Creation. 2. Of common Providence. 3. Works
of more special Providence. 1. Works of Justice. 2. Works of Free Grace.
The Sovereignty of his Decrees, is 1. In these two solemn and celebrious
Decrees of Election and Reprobation. He loved Jacob and hated Esau before ever
the children had done good or evil, Romans 9. this is a humbling thought to clay
graciously disposed which dare not contradict the Sovereign potter. The Lord
might have appointed my chair before the Throne, and my eternal crown to Judas
and to Pharaoh; and the same Lord might so have ordered as the furnace of the
traitor Judas in Hell should have been my furnace in Hell. We are not to
struggle with permissive providence, its not our Rule, but to be low, because
of the deep results of that providence, our own permitted sins.
2. O what depth of love, did the King choose me, or did he once name my name,
and write me for life eternal?

This is a hardening thought in the fallen Angels and reprobate men, that they
strive against and hate the providence permitting their fall and sin; but do
neither strive against, nor hate their permitted fall and sin (...) why does he
yet, (notwithstanding of his irresistible Decree, find fault with our sin? why
does he not blame his own Decree?) who has resisted his will? a graceless soul
will flee upon eternal Decrees and Events that belong to God, but is never
humbled for sin and remission of duties; The soul-humbling thoughts that should
flow from holy Sovereignty.
The gracious soul is much upon these thoughts, O the freedom of the eternal
emanations of free grace, and the depth of the outgoings of Sovereign justice,
and does mournfully complain of its own sinful actings, Psalm. 51. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5. we are to say Amen to his way. Sovereignty is not our Rule, clay is not to
watch over the Lord's acts of holy Sovereignty, but in point of submitting to
the opened and revealed Decrees, but is to eye the rule, watch over the heart
in point of duties.

2. All things to be, and never to be, are written in his book, Psalm. 139. 16.
the number of David's members; all the hairs of the head are numbered, The
number of things possible, and impossible, that are to fall out, or exist, is
under holy Sovereignty.
Matthew. 10. 30. all the piles of dust and sand, all the drops of dew, rain,
hail, snow, all the drops of the sea, rivers, lakes, fountains of the Earth,
Isa. 40. 12. Pro. 30. 4. all the ounces and dram weights of the hills and
mountains are exactly weighed as in balances, and numbered by holy Sovereignty,
all the blasts of wind gathered in his fists, Prove. 30. 4. he knows how many
inches and spans are in the Earth from East to West, and in the compass and
circle of the body of the World or great All and the highest Heaven round
about, Isa. 40. 12, 17. the number of Angels good and evil, of men, of beasts,
birds, fishes, creeping things, he tells the number of the Stars (whether odd
or even) and calls them by their names, Psalm. 147. 4. and Sovereignty could
have made their number greater by seventy seven Millions; so he knows the
number of trees, herbs, flowers, leaves of trees, piles or threads of grass, the
number of actions, motions, intentions, purposes of Men and Angels, actual and
only possible and impossible, but never to fall out; all the stirrings in
Heaven and Earth, Great is our Lord, and of great power: his understanding is
infinite, Psalm. 147. 5.

2. He decreed twelve thousand of every Tribe to be sealed, a certain number
for an uncertain; he wrote so many, not one more nor fewer; Why are many called
and few chosen? the blessed number of Persons, by Country, House, Head, Name to
be bought by the ransom of Christ's blood is agreed upon between the Father
and the Son not one more paid for and ransomed, not one fewer, the number of
the Citizens were agreed upon; they are not moveable Tenants, the Lord loves
not to put out, or to put in, none can take your chair and Crown in Heaven; its
a deep to consider how millions of millions of influences and stirrings the
Sovereign Lord laid up beside himself from eternity to let out upon his hosts
of Creatures, and especially Men and Angels, and a treasure of influences of
grace are with him; would we bring our witherednesse under these eternal
dewings, we should have more of the anointing.

3. The Lord's Sovereignty decreed not things only, The connection of things of
which the extremes never shall come to pass, as also the existence and
co-existence of things must be under the holy Sovereignty of God.
but the connection of things, as between Bread and Wine used according to the
Lord's Institution, and the broken Body and shed blood of Christ: they suit not
together of their own Nature and Essentially; therefore by the intervening will
of God.

2. In things of remote nature, this is seen, 2 Kings 13. 19. If thou had
smitten the ground five or six times, then had thou smitten Syria, till thou
had consumed it: whereas now thou shall smite Syria but thrice. The connection
of the Kings smiting of the ground and of smiting of the Syrians, is not from
the nature of the things themselves, but from the free appointment of God: if
Christ talk with the woman of Samaria and ask of her a Drink of water, he shall
convert her, and the Samaritans before he leave her. If Job be spoiled, he
shall humbly submit himself to God, and bless him. There may be more or less
convenience between the things, but all the connection of things in this kind
might in their contraries have been as true, if so holy Sovereignty had
appointed.

3. He who decrees the existence of things in time and place, he decrees the
co-existence of the same things. Now that Joseph should be the subject matter
of killing or selling when the Ishmalites came by, and that Ahasuerus cannot
sleep in the night, when that very passage of the Persian Chronicle must be
read in the which is the story of Mordecai's loyal revealing the treason was
from him, and they were tied together by no nature of things, by no influences
of Planets and Stars, but by the Sovereign will of God: now the co-existence of
things is a real event of providence as is clear. Its from the Lord that Peter
and Paul lived together in the same age and time, and Abraham and David lived
not together, and from the holy decree of God that Jezebels body be cast out,
when there is none willing to bury her; and from the holy decree of God, that
the Soldiers came with Spears to break the Legs of Christ, and that they find
him dead and so break not one bone of him: yea the existence and living and
acting of all things, and the co-existence, living and working together of them
are from the same providence of God, or then from nature, or from the blind
fortune, neither of which we can say; and who appoints the meeting of two Seas,
or the meeting of two Rivers, or of two Men at the same place? or that the new
Star should be in Cassiopeia rather then in another part of the Firmament? does
not David bless the Lord who sent Abigail to meet him with a counsel of peace?
then must these confluences and co-existences of things be written in the
Lord's book, and so decreed, Psalm. 139. 16. and from the Creator God, as the
efficient, and for God and his glory, as the end, Romans 11. 36. Rev. 4. 11.
Prove. 16. 4.

5. The wisdom of God so appoints, as means for his end, that black and white
should be in the same body, for beauty, the poor and the rich, the full and the
hungry to try the charity of the rich and patience of the poor; that some
should weep, some sing and rejoice at the laying of the foundation of the
second Temple, Ezra 3, 6. Some of these are acts of mercy, Sovereignty shines
in means and end, things of rare providence and justice, in administration of
means of salvation to some, not to others.
Jesus comes by the way and two blind men sit by the way; Matthew, Zacheus are
in such places and Christ comes by and saves both the one, and the other.

7. Some are acts of justice, as the falling of a piece of a millstone by a
woman's hand, and Abimelech's near approaching to the Tower, that a woman might
kill him, who might, twenty other ways have died, if the Lord did not rule all
the going of Achab to the war.

2. The arrow at a venture shot at Achab and passing by hundreds.

3. The arrow directed to the one only naked part of his body.

4 The washing of the wounds in such a Pool in the field of Jezreel.

5. The Dogs licking of the blood of Achab are all so linked together, by the
Lord's holy and just Decree, as this is clear, if Achab go to the War against
the Syrians, the Dogs shall lick his blood, and he shall die in the battle.

8. The administration of the means of salvation to Capernaum, not to Tyrus and
Sidon which would rather have repented then Capernaum, does prove this is from
the Lord; if Peter hear, the Lord shall effectually persuade him to believe; if
Cain, Pharaoh, Judas, hear, the Lord shall not effectually persuade them to
believe. The Lord commands reprobates to repent and believe, if they would be
saved; yet did he never decree the belief, repentance or salvation of any of
them: does not Sovereignty here shine? who decrees the non-salvation of Judas,
and the non-effectual drawing of Judas to Christ? which says there be no
property so called, and bands of conditions lying upon the Lord; if Judas
repent he shall be saved, as if a father promise to his son an hundredth Acres
of land upon condition that the son pay him one hundredth shillings; if the
father only can and must furnish to the son the hundredth shillings, and in the
mean time deny the purpose in his heart, to deny to furnish the hundredth
shillings; it cannot be so strictly said that there is the tie and band of a
proper condition lying upon the father, though it does lie upon the son. And
however the ways of the holy Lord be equal, yet are they far above our ways,
and we are to be silenced at the bottomless depth of holy Sovereignty; he lays
obligations to duties upon us, and is free from the debt of paying or bestowing
the sum of gracious influences (without which we willingly cannot perform these
duties) upon us: and he may justly crave what we cannot pay, when our impotency
to pay is both our own, and also goes along with our elective, free choosing and
hearty willingness, and rejoicing not to pay, and to want the sum, which only
the Lord can of free grace give us: O the depth of the riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his judgments, and his
ways past finding out, Romans 11. 33. To this head also I refer.

4. That Sovereignty which has place in choosing and calling Nations, as Israel
because he freely loves, Deuteronomy 7. 7. Israel, and their seed, not other Nations,
Deuteronomy. 10. 7. he says, preach to Macedonia, not to Bithynia, and though
afterward the Gospel came to Bithynia, many deservedly perished, old and young,
ere it came.

5. Sovereignty is eminent in holding of possible evils, and in determining the
measure of sufferings.
It is admirable Sovereignty, how many thousand possible plagues and evils he
holds off, such as millions of pests, and diseases of Egypt and evil beasts,
Deuteronomy. 7. 15. Lev. 26. 6. why the Bones of Christ are not broken; why a Dog
stirs not a tongue against Israel; why one only World, not athousand worlds
were created: he appoints how long, what number of minutes, hours, or years, his
own shall be in the Furnace; the Lord stands beside as Master of the work, and
eyes the melting, what quantity of Honey, or of Gall shall be in the Cup, how
many hours ye shall weep, how many days or hours the Candle of the Almighty
shall shine on your Tabernacle. Then be humble, when he shines, and submissive
at the time and measure of sufferings; the evils that are holden off us before
in their causes they be prepared, when we know not, should teach us to adore
Sovereignty. A friend that takes our defense when we are absent, and an
Advocate who answers for the sick and far distant client, and not knowing that
his cause is called and debated; yea for an heir sucking the Breasts, does call
for much love and esteem. Christ's care shines for Peter and the winnowed
believers, when he prays and intercedes that their faith fail not, when they
know not any such thing; for a hid love moves much. The Lord fences us, we not
knowing any such thing, from drowning and our children in floods, deep wells,
from burning quick, from a Hell of torment in every tooth, finger, bone, sinew,
artery, lith, member of the body, of our selves, of father, mother, son,
daughter; and from spoiling, captivity, imprisonment, gravels, guts, botches,
convulsions palsies, possessions by Devils, madness, terror, and agony of mind,
as many children drowned, be not quick, killed in the womb, and perished in the
first world, and hundreds and millions of the like possible destructions, are
decreed to pass by me and you, and do fall upon others by holy Soveraignties
appointment.

6. The due timing of the worlds Creation, The due timeing of things is from
Sovereignty.
and of all things of time is from admirable Sovereignty, why the world had not
being, ten thousand millions of imaginary ages sooner, or so many ages later;
and from whence came this, In the beginning God created the Heaven and the
Earth, is a depth of Sovereignty; its wonderful, Angels and souls of Men are
created eternal, time cannot wast them: the body of man, though a creature
drawn out of the same nothing, is not so. There is a Plant that grows a year
only, there is a Flower that smiles a month, another three months, some Roses
are green in March, some in May, some in June only, and there is a Tree that
grows an hundred years; The like disparity there is of the life of Beasts and
Birds; He has appointed a time for every purpose under Heaven, a time to be
born, a time to die; and accordingly are there several outgoings and influences
of the Lord.

As 1. He will not have all the four Monarchies flourish at once in there rose
and bloom, but one to be greater, another lesser, as all Rivers are not alike,
nor can all Conquerors be victors at one time.

2. The Lord lands some children after three months, sucking, laughing,
weeping; others live some days in the Womb, and the Womb is their grave; yet
often eternity is a recompense for want of time, and that is Gold for Iron and
Copper; others sail fourscore and a hundred years, and never find a gracious
harbor: We fret, because the wicked live long and prosper; because we forget
that Sovereignty has determined how many hours wicked men shall laugh, how
many talents or stone weights of the Earth they shall have; and because the
Bride weeps, when shall the night be gone? and the day dawn? and the King come?
there is a sort of account rendered of this by John, who had been prophesying of
all the Vials of wrath to be poured on the Earth, especially under the
Antichrists reign, Behold he comes quickly, Rev. 1. 7. (...).

3. We complain of circumstances which are well timed by infinite wisedone:
should sickness and botches come upon Job, when poverty had gone before? Does
the Lord give an account of the substance, or of the circumstances of his
actions? Job 33. 11. this ounce of Gall must be in, or nothing, the Child must
be drowned in a Fountain and River, when there are none to help. Job was absent
when God laid the corner stone of the Earth.

4. The Lord times his actions of deliverance well, when our strength is gone,
Deuteronomy. 32. 36. Gal. 4. 4. Exodus 12. 42. Jer. 29. 10. but we do badly time our
sins. They tempted him, and provoked him; but, when? at the red Sea, and in the
Wilderness, Psalm. 78. 17. Exodus 14. Psalm. 106. 7. It was untimous sinning in
such straits, when their very month was come, so as they could not fly from
his hand.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Sovereignty of God in the works of Creation and Providence, in other
considerations.

1. IN regard of the Lord's manner of working. 2. And of his end of working. 3.
And of his omnipotent arm. 4. Of his holiness, he could not in greater wisdom
have created things (for nothing can be added to infinite wisdom and goodness)
so infiniteness was at the creating of a worm, Q. Whether, and in what sense
God can create things in better or worse case.
as at the creating of the Angel Gabriel: but in regard of things created, he
could have made a more perfect world, then this and the Angel-nature, man's
nature, the Sun, Birds, Beasts of more excellency, as touching perfection both
of nature and accidents, then these that now are; But here Sovereignty has
place.

2. The foot should not complain, why made he not me the head? and the least
of. Stars, why made he me not the Sun? nor the Earth say out of the lump of
poor Nothing out of the which I came, he might have made me the Globe of the
Heaven of Heavens, or an Angel, but he would not.

3. Why made not God the first Adam as perfect as the second Adam? a house that
can stand alone, is better then an old house that needs aprop. O quarrel not,
the Vine tree is a more noble plant then the thorn, and the one must be propped
else it grows not. 2. The man Christ needs influences of graces as well, as
another man. 3. The Angels and glorified Spirits need the like; Man a house of
clay needs a pillar of excellent matter of the gold of free grace to hold him
up in his actings.

4. Why made he me not as holy as the man Christ? why was this man born blind?
O cease, he who gives not an account of any of his matters, when he made you a
man might have made you a snake or a stone; he is debtor, of two eyes, or of
half an eye, of the lowest gift or grace imaginable to no man; close with all
he does. That is an evil wit that disputes with God; Submission, silent
submission to the hardest dispensation makes the child of God victorious; we
are above all things in conquering, when we are below all things, in submitting
for the Lord.

2. Job or any answer, Job 38. 8. Who shut up the Sea with doors, as if it had
issued out of the womb? Ver. 9. When I made the cloud the garments thereof, and
thick darkness a swaddling band for it. Job 26. 7. He stretches out the North
over the empty place, and hangs the Earth upon nothing; give a reason of East
and West.

3. The Lord puts forth Sovereignty on Jeroboam's arm to dry it up, on
Mephibosheth's feet, upon the man's eye-holes, Joh. 9. that they should be empty
of eyes, on Judas his bowels, on Job's body smitten with boyls, his outgoings
of Sovereignty appear on the Fig Tree which he curses, on the Gourd of Jonah,
for he blasts it, on the Fig Tree and Vine-tree, 1 Samuel 2. 7. Psalm. 75. 6.
for he marrs them, Joel 1. 4. As it pleases him he sets one piece of clay
on the Throne, to glister, another bit of clay behind the mill, where he sweats
and is hungry; Zeph. 3. 12. I will leave in the midst thereof an afflicted and
a poor people, or sick; yea dried up, as Fish Ponds and Brooks use to be when
the rest are swept away. Joseph is rich and all the Corn of Egypt is his, and
his brethren want bread, and are low like Carriers, driving horses with loads
on them.

5. Job gets no leave to swallow his spittle, Job 7. 19. Precious Israel is
plowed, Psalm. 129. 1. and her back made a field of blood; like two legs and a
piece of an ear of a devoured sheep, plucked out of the mouth of a Lion, Amos
3. 12. the man Christ a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief, a worm and
not a man; and all the Earth sits still and is at rest, Zech. 1. 11. the
wicked shine, are fat, their breasts are full of milk; and you stumble at this,
Shall any teach the Almighty knowledge, Job 21. 22, 23, 24. Amos 6. 1, 2, 3.
Psalm. 73. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.

6. Except Sovereignty, what can silence the mind of one who stumbles and
doubts, and weeps, because so many Infants are burnt in Sodom with fire, so
many in the old World are drowned with waters in the mothers womb and the
cradle, the young sucking children of the Amalekites, and of Babylon, who never
drew a sword against the people of God, could never bow their knee to the Idol
God Pel, nor stretch out their hands to him, perish by the sword, and their
heads dashed against stones? O they were guilty of sin original, yea and so were
Moses, David, Samuel, Noah, Job, and Daniel when they were in the womb and
weeping on the breasts.

7. Sovereignty determines what is just; righteous Abel dies in blood, godly
Josiah in war, many bloody men smile out their soul in peace; I took Sodom away
(says the Lord, Ezech. 16. 50.) as I saw good; a wall falls upon twenty seven
thousand and kills them, 1 Kings 20. the Lord shoots an arrow of the Pestilence
at the camp of the Assyrians, and without a miss takes away, in one night, an
hundred and fourscore and five thousand chosen men, Isa. 37. 36. 2 Chro. 13,
18. there fell of Israel at once five hundred thousand; how many graves must
be there? Pharaoh and his Princes are drowned in the Sea, Herod killed with
worms; then simple judgments as divided from sin, prove nothing; but how are
we to stoop and tremble at holy Sovereignty?

8. As touching gifts and graces much is to be seen of Sovereignty. Elihu
says, Job 32. 9. Great men are not always wise, neither do the aged understand
judgment. Beauty is a debt that God ows not to pay to Absalom; nor wisdom to
Achitophel more then to a stark fool, or to any man who is born as a wild Ass
colt. This Sovereignty gives faith to Abraham, to Moses meekness, to David
sincerity, to Josiah zeal, to Job patience, to the man Christ the fullness of
the Spirit above measure; there is more grace of godly painfulness given to
Paul then to the daily eyewitnesses of Christ; I labored more abundantly then
they all, 1 Cor. 15. you might have had wisdom and used it, as Achitophel; and
yet says one, God has given me no more grace, therefore let God blame God
that I do as I do; if he had given me more grace, I would have done better:
and if I had a heart according to the heart of God, I would have been as holy,
sincere, and zealous as David; but he denied it to me, out of his absolute
Sovereignty, which is far above my will and my strength, influences of grace
both for the obtaining of the habits and the acts of Sovereign grace.

Ans. These practical Propositions are to be considered, The shift of
complaining of want of influences is refuted.
1. Prop. 1. It is proud nature which says, God is to be blamed; for whether
the Lord give, or withhold more grace; holiness and spotlesness does
essentially convey his Sovereignty. Matthew. 20. 15. Is it not lawful for me to
do, what I will, with mine own, says he who is Almighty; For he who is in an
unsearchable way, above all law that binds the Creature, can be subject to no
blame. Suppose the evil servant say, Matthew. 25. 24. Lord, I knew thee, that
thou art an hard man, reaping where thou have not sown, and gathering where
thou have not strowed; That is, thou seek much obedience, and a large
harvest, and sowest upon my heart little grace, and gave me but one talent; if
thou had given me five talents, or two talents, I should have done as well as
the servant who received five or two: but thou did not any such thing,
therefore blame thy self: and so it is the very complaint of the very malignant
servant; as also the rich Gluttons divinity reflects upon the gracious
dispensation of God, Luke 16. 30. Nay father Abraham, but if one went unto them
from the dead, they will repent; Which is, as much, as God is to be blamed,
that his five brethren repent not; for he bestows not sufficient helps of
salvation on them.

Q. 1. What is the book of Moses and the Prophets but a paper roll of letters
and syllables; would he send a Preacher from Hell, and a Messenger from Heaven
to give them sufficient warning and instruction of a Heaven and a Hell, it were
good, but that he does not, he then is to be blamed; not my five brethren. 2.
He who shows mercy on whom he will, and hardneth whom he will, and that by a
strong mighty will which no man can resist, he can find fault with no man,
though he sin and harden his own heart; For his absolute Sovereign will is far
above me and my strength; but so does the Lord, says the carnal man, Romans 4.
18. 19. and the holy Ghost says, such an Objection is unworthy to be moved or
answered; nor becomes it base clay and the clay pot so to argue with the great
potter and former of all things.

2. Influences for getting of the habits or performing the acts of saving
grace, are the Lord's own; therefore Sovereignty is his Law, he may bestow
them, or withhold them, as he pleases; especially if the Creature be willing
to want these influences, and if the Sun rejoice with all his heart at the
influences and concurring providence of God to the contrary sinful actings, as
he does; Exodus 5. 2, 8, 16, 17, 18. Psalm. 14. 4. Psalm. 10. 6, 7, 8. 4. 10, 11.
Psalm. 36. 3, 4. Psalm. 84. 5, 6, 7, 8. Prove. 1. 11, 12. Prove. 2. 14. Prove. 4.
16. 17. Prove. 10. 23. Prove. 14. 9. Prove. 7. 18. Prove. 9. 17. Psalm. 49. 11. Luke
11. 39. Psalm. 5. 9. Psalm. 64. 6.

3. Though we could not conceal the Lord's concluding of all under unbelief,
and their guiltiness, who are so concluded, and the mystery of the Lord's
rejecting the Jews and calling the Gentiles, with the free obedience of the one
and free disobedience of the other, and the Lord's having mercy on whom he
will, and hardening whom he will, with their willing running in ways of
disobedience and rebellion, and say as Paul, Romans 11. 33. O the depth, etc. yet
adversaries have no cause of objecting this to us more then to the Scriptures
of God.

4. Prop. Gracelesness is satisfied with gracelesness, and is no more desirous
and thirsty for grace nor darkness after the Sun light, Who ever flatteringly
complain of the want of influences of grace, hate these influences.
or coldness desires the fires heat; yea as Satan cannot destroy Satan, the
body of sin cannot love to be subdued by grace; and the man hating both Christ
and his Father, John 15. 24. and pleasing himself in that way, who yet
complains that God does withdraw his grace, and so cannot command us, or exhort
us to repentance, is like to him who lies still in the furnace, and loves to be
burnt, and complains that he is scorched and tormented, and the Lord will not
lift him out of the furnace.

5. What a proud Pelagian nature is this, for any to say had he the habit of
grace which was in David, he could act as David, and could secure himself from
adultery and murder; but how did David, who had David's heart, fall in these
horrid crimes? can any interpose himself surety, and put grace which he has
not, or nature which he cannot command, to undertake to obey God in all things;
were it not safer to be pained with the bondage of sin, and be sick for Christ
and his grace, and never to interpose self to be surety for self, but to be
strong in free grace only, Ephesians. 6. 10.

CHAP. X.
1. Sovereignty in actings of grace, 2. We are not to seek influences, but such
as are suitable to the Word. 3. Of diverse influences. 4. How we complain of
want of influences, and how we may suit them. 5. We are to act under
indispositions. 6. How we are to pray continualy. 7. Not to act duties while we
feel breathings of the Spirit is an unsafe Rule. 8. Preparations before Duties.
9. To wait on breathings before we act Duties, how lawful, how not.

LEt it be futher considered in these Particulars, how unjust we are, and how
free the Lord is.

1. Who ever complains of the want of grace and yet remains in the state of
nature, does close with his want of grace.

For 1. The renewed man's complaining of the want of grace, is neither in sense
or godly feeling, nor in faith and humble believing. Nature can no more
complain of the want of grace with any spiritual and godly sense, then a
sucking child can weep, because he is not an understanding man of thirty years
old; Nature cannot complain of the want of gracious influences.
for darkness cannot seek after the Sun light, for so it should desire its own
destruction; nor can cold desire heat, nor Satan be divided against Satan, and
therefore these are but feigned and counterfeit bemonings; For the actings of
sinful nature with delight say, that the man hates grace, which he professes,
he so much desires; for only grace can thirst after, and long for grace. Joh.
15. 24. If I had not done among them the works which no other man did, they had
not had sin: but now they have both seen and hated both me and my Father. Such
a hatred of the fullness of grace, Jesus Christ, cannot consist with a lively
desire of grace.

Prop. 2. It is a right Rule, not to separate Sovereignty from the Word, or the
Omnipotency of grace from the Promise, otherwise we make a sort of Idol of
Omnipotency; seek we them and pray for influences of grace not peremptorily hic
and nunc to every single acting, We are not to seek Influences of life
separated from the word.
Psalm. 119. 2. My soul cleaves to the dust: quicken thou me according to thy
word. Ver. 28. My soul melts for heaviness: strengthen thou me according to
thy word. Ver. 107. I am afficted very much, quicken thou me according to thy
word, v. 154.

For 1. A gracious heart seeks no other out-lettings of grace to this or that
duty, but according to the promise; Now the promise is not contrary to the
Sovereign dispensation; and there is no such Sovereignty, but that there are
many withdrawings of God, whence follows deadness and the souls melting for
heaviness; Nor is there either promise or dispensation, that the belever shall,
in every moment of time, be lively and vigorous, and have the heart lifted up
in the ways of God; except we would say, Earth is Heaven, and we are not for a
time in heaviness, if need be.

2. There is a bastard literal heat and vigor of going about duties that comes
not from the Word; no bastardheat comes from the Word, but by accident; for the
Spirit that speaks in the Word, speaks his own spiritual and lively comforts
and actings; not that which may flow from a letter, which is common to Seneca
and other humane Writers, and the Prophets, though even the style, liveliness,
majesty and divinity that may be seen in the letter of the Scripture are
eminently above the like in other Writers; The Spirit immediately inspiring,
and the Spirit quickening in the Word, are both the same Spirit that Christ
promised to send, John 16. of which Christ, ver. 14. He shall glorify me, he
shall receive of mine (a word most mysterious) and shall show it unto you; and
believers are afraid that their hearts receive some other quickening between the
sound of the Word, and the actings of the Lord upon their hearts, which causes
them to pray for no quickening, but according to the Word.

The like may 3. be said of the salvation of the Lord, Psalm. 91. 16. I will
show him my salvation. Isa. 12. 2. For the Lord Jehovah is my strength and my
song, he also is become my salvation. Psalm. 119. 170. Let my supplication come
before thee, deliver me according to thy word; for we are apt to seek strange
and whorish influences; the like whereof the Lord bestows not upon his people,
Psalm. 119. 132. Look thou upon me and be merciful unto me, as thou uses to do
to those that love thy name. Psalm. 106. 4. Remember me, O Lord, with the favor
that thou bear to thy people: O visit me with thy salvation: V. Calvin Com.
119. v. 28. absque verbo nobis fuget dei potentia.
5. That I may see the good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the gladness
of thy Nation: that I may glory with thine inheritance. Its cold comfort we
reap without the word; its true, his omnipotency was eternal before there was a
Word or Promise made to us, but now the Lord will have the Word or Promise to
be the officina the workhouse of his Spirit and of the quickening influences
thereof.

5. As also there is a salvation and escape out of prison by keys of our own
making, and by putting out the hand to iniquity, Psalm. 125. and the heart is
much for the bulk of a deliverance from Hell: and for the body and lump of a
mercy, Omnipotency joined with the Word saves.
were it Heaven, and Baalam's paradise, or the end of the righteous, whether it
be purchased by the ransom of Christ's blood, or no, and faith laying hold
thereon, or no.

6. And we love to have the remission and the righteousness of Christ in his
blood, the separated from holiness and sanctification: Influences of God as
Creator only cannot save us.
but the Scripture conjoyneth them: 1 Cor. 1. 30. Gal. 1. 4. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Heb.
10. 10. Heb. 13. 12, 13. 1 Pet. 2. 24. yea is a holy justification (to speak
so) is the cleanly, kindly, sure absolution of the sinner; for Christ loves no^
and washes not in his blood, but such as he makes Kings and Priests unto God,
Rev. 1. 5. in so saying, I honor good works more then Mr. Baxter does, who
makes them as good as Christ's blood, even the price of pardon, Ephesians. 1. 7.
Col. 1. 14.

Yea and 7. We could be satisfied with dumb and scrupulous influences and
inspirations contrary unto, and separated from the Word, as Evah, Genesis 3. 4, 5,
6. 1 Kings 13. 18. Matthew. 4. 3, 6, 8, 9.

8. What could the powerful influences of God Creator separated from Christ the
treasure-house of love and mercy do to us? and if Omnipotency were separated
from the promises of the Gospel, could it save us, in the Lord's way? through
the blood of Christ; for power in God cannot (to speak so) save men, but by the
Name of Jesus Christ, the only saving Name under Heaven, Acts 4. 12. nor can
Omnipotency work a redemption now in this Gospel Dispensation, but that which
is by blood, Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 13. And that which is to declare the
righteousness of God for the remission of sins. Power acts by way of complete
satisfaction, as the exceeding greatness of God's power to usward who believe,
is of the same size with the mighty power which raised Christ from the dead,
and set him on the right hand of God in heavenly places, Ephesians. 1. 14, 20. The
power of translating a sinner from Satan's Kingdom to the Kingdom of the Son of
his love works as acted (as it were) and set on work to act righteously to
translate no man, but the person for whom a ransom of blood is given to
justice, as the Princes right power is only for the good of free and legal
subjects, Col. 1. 11, 12, 13. and that all power in Heaven and Earth to save,
Matthew. 28. 18. John 17. 2. Matthew. 11. 27. and that Kingly and Royal power to
give repetance to Israel and forgiveness of sins, Acts 5. 31. to forgive sins,
Matthew. 9. 6. to raise and quicken the dead, John 5. 26, 28, 29. is a power (in
a way) purchased by the blood of atonement, Romans 14. 9. For to this end Christ
both dyed and rose, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living. And by
the way, its a righteous power over all flesh and in Heaven and Earth, though
he died not for all flesh, and for all the Angels in Heaven, and all the men on
Earth; it were strange to say Christ died for the reprobate, and not for their
sins and final unbelief and rejecting of Christ, to obtain a power to pardon
some of their sins, and not all, and to give them repentance from some dead
works, and not from all dead works; and to purge them from some, but not from
all their sins.

3. Its most unjust to lay the blame of our sinful omissions, upon holy
Sovereignty, because he withdraws influences: For 1. That is to reproach God,
this is like the malecontentedness of Satan and of Hell: for the damned
complain that ever they were born, and that they cannot be annihilated, and
that hills and mountains cover them not quick in soul and body; yea they storm
and rage because God gives them a being capable of eternal woe. 2. The wakened
consciences of men out of Christ often fall upon this recrimination; the
gnawing of conscience of Judas, is, I have sinned; and of the young man, Prove.
5. 12. How have I hated instruction? and my heart despised reproof? Yet it is a
more commendable complaining and more hopeful to complain of sinful neglect of
means, then of divine permissive providence of sin upon the Lord's withdrawing
of gracious influences, but conscience in its kindly acting is the tormenting
worm that eats self. No Devil alleges this; its true, Satan bites at
providence; God hedges about a hypocrite, Job. and God commends him (says he)
Christ torments us before the time: Satan trembles and frets at the existence
of God, and that God is above him, Joh 1. 9, 10. Matthew. 8. 29. Jam. 2. 19. and
so all his words to Christ speak a barking at providence, Matthew. 4. its wrong
that the Son of God should want bread; it is an useless providence that the man
Christ go down stairs; for God (says he) should save him though he throw
himself down headlong. Satan is a better Master, who gives all the Kingdoms of
the World to his Worshippers, then God, who denies Bread to his own wel-beloved
Son; thus does Satan, but in another kind, fret. So Genesis 3. its a bad
providence that Adam and Evah are not as knowing as God, and Luke 5. 34. What
have we to do with Christ? But may not conscience accuse providence in the
Lord's withdrawing of grace, especially being wakened?

Ans. The Conscience of Devils and the Damned is awakned either penally or
sinfully; these may be distinguished here; the Conscience as penally wakned by
the Judge, primarily gnaws and torments it self for sin as punished; I have
sinned says Judas, and he casts down the seven pieces, feeling the worm; but
as the Conscience is sinfully wakned by it self in blaspheming the God of
Heaven, Rev. 16. 9, 11. because of pain, it also frets against providence, but
is is not pained for the want of saving grace and holy influences which might
have prevented sin; yea their blasphemings of God eternally, is a seal and a
closeing with the state of unrenewed nature which is never moved for sin, but
wrestles against the providence which sometime did permit sin, How we may
lawfully complain of withdrawing of Influences of grace; and how we may
lawfully desire Influences.
which now has such tormenting consequences though the conscience in the mean
time being taken with the Iustre and apparent good in sin, did also close with
the opportunity of sin, and with providence opening the way to tentations,
Prove. 7. 15. and seek such a providence, Genesis 39. 11, 12. and embrace it, Mark
14. 10, 11. yet is there saving good in a regulated spiritual complaining of
the want of saving influences;

So as 1. They be not looked on as misdeeds of providence, and we say not the
Lord might have lent me the influence to such a self-denying death as Abraham's
journey in aiming to sacrifice his only son for God, but he would not.

2. Its good if there be a holy submissive complaining of the want of gracious
influences, as terminated upon duties, Isa. 63. 17. O Lord, why have thou made
us to err from thy ways? and hardened our hearts from thy fear? and not looked
on, as withdrawings of mere providence. Though there be a holy claimbring to
God, ver. 19. we are thine; yet we are so thine, as thy grace is Sovereign;
Thou never bear rule over them, they were not called by thy name, and yet no
praise or thanks to Israel that they were called by his Name rather then the
Heathen.

3. We may pray for, and so earnestly suit and desire influences, as Draw me;
quicken me, incline my heart, unto thy testimonies; Therefore we may pray
against withdrawings of influences, as sad privations of dreadful consequents;
and so much is held forth in that Petition lead us not unto temptation.

4. Yet so, as there is no deserving in us of having eyes to see, and spiritual
influences to see, to hear, to perceive with a new heart, Deuteronomy. 29. 2, 3. as
its not the merit of one part of the Earth, the South, that it lie nearer the
Sun then another Northern part; nor the good deserving of one Horse that he
wear a golden Saddle and a silken Bridle, rather than another: this would be
minded; What am I Lord? as it was Christ's mind to cry down works in point of
salvation, yet not to cry down all actings by way of duty in the New Covenant
way. Therefore 5. since grace may be desired (and all gracious influences are
grace;) so is there a conformity betwixt the believers will suiting influences,
and the revealed and approving will of God (I say not his high decree and
ordaining will;) for sure New Testament or New Covenant prayers, new oil, and
new supply of grace, do import a fresh supply and watering of influences, to be
furnished to believers; and especially since we may pray, Hallowed be thy Name
in me, thy Kingdom come to me; thy will be done (by me) in the Earth, is it is
in Heaven.

5. We may and ought to suit of God what the Lord promises in the Covenant of
grace; but the Lord promises to bestow predeterminating grace in this
Covenant, The faultiness in not praying is not because the holy Spirit moves us
not to pray, but because we stir not up our selves to pray.
as after shall be cleared. Now the faultiness of this, I will not pray, until
the Spirit act upon me, and move me to pray, is seen in that it imports that
the moral ground of praying is not, the command of God, pray continually, and
that command ( call upon me in the day of trouble) which is most false; for
another warrant for all moral obedience, then precept, promise or practice, can
no man give; yea it supposes that the warrant of prayer is the influence of
grace; Now the influence of grace is the efficient helping cause, not the rule,
not the objective cause of either our praying or any acts of our obedience. Yea
it is the way of Enthysiasts to make divine impulsions, and not the word of
precept the Rule of our obedience.

2. This (I will not pray until the Lord first breath on me by his Spirit) is
a wide mistake.
This ( I will not pray until the Spirit first act upon me) must have either
this sense, I will not pray until the Lord first give a praying disposition,
or, until the Lord first actually breath upon me. This latter says indeed, I
will not pray until I pray; for the Lord's actual influence includes praying.
The former cannot be said; For there is no warrant to disobey the command (
pray continually) until I get a new disposition from Heaven; for then might
all praying of the renewed be shifted, and the three Disciples in the garden
might have said to Christ, our Master bids us pray, but we are heavy with sleep
and indisposed, and cannot pray, and so must we be excused.

2. Upon the same account, Magus, Acts 8. 21. and other unrenewed men should
shift the command of praying; for while we be translated, out of nature to the
Kingdom of grace, we want the habit of grace and spirit of adoption by which
only we can pray acceptably.

3. How unsavory shall this be? a man falls over a Bridge and is a drowning,
another is going to the place of Execution to die, another is sick to death,
all of them may by this shift say, we must not pray lest we take the Name of
God in vain, until the Spirit breath upon us heavenly impressions, of speaking
in the Spirit to God.

4. This shift cannot stand to suspend praying, until the Spirit breath from on
high; for we are to pray for the spirit's breathing, and for teaching,
quickening, enlarging of heart that we may pray and praise, Psalm. 51. 15. Psalm.
119. 36, 37, 40, 48. Wind fetches wind here, and fire begets fire, as cold
flint creates hot fire: so the Atheists, let them pray that can pray; I Am no
Minister; But it has this, I am ready to pray, but the blame of my not
praying, is to be laid on the Spirit, for the wind blows not; but this is but
witty laziness, as when the Seaman will sleep and attempt no Sea-voyage, and
lay the blame, which is his fall, upon the wind which blows not after his mind;
it appears he is but a sleeper; not a Husbandman who for bears plowing and
sowing upon the account only that he finds not a season so desirable as he
craves, and that he is indisposed to plow spiritually as a Christian; He who
observes the wind shall not sow: and he that regards the clouds shall not
reap, Eccl. 11. 4. So are we to refer to his holy Sovereignty the flowings of
the Spirit, and to set about holy duties, as if these flowings were in our
power; The precept charge us to obey as rational creatures not as disposed or
indisposed.
We are to know that the command and precept of spiritual duties is laid on us,
as we are reasonable creatures as hearers of the Gospel, not under the
reduplication as spiritually or not spiritually disposed; as the Creditor and
the Law charge men to pay their just debts, not as they are poor, or rich, but
as they are debtors: yea precepts from the Lord bind the creature as the
creature, and moral precepts bind Men and Angels as capable to obey, though not
fit and disposed. Therefore must we here distinguish betwixt nature capable or
having at any time power to obey; and the real, or (as it were) the physical
aptitude and idoneous disposition to obey. The latter takes not away the
obligation to pray or believe. David's being overclouded with a temptation is
not an excuse of adultery and murder; nor is he thereby freed from praying;
Lord, lead me not into temptation.

As 1. Under indispositions moral we rejoice, that sinful indispositions do
befriend us, and smile upon us to promote sin; as some love them well who
counsel them, and join with them in drunkenness, and are their brethren in
iniquity: so do we foment indispositions, and welcome and fatten them, and do
not violence to our corruption, and deadness, and heardness; and some expone
false light, to be God's secret and virtual approving Will they should commit
the sin; as Evah saw the fruit that it was good for food, and that it was
pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise. Genesis 3. 6.
Here Evah substitutes the tentation in place of the precept, and false light
fosters and cherishes a sinful lust and a wicked disposition to sin. It is a
sort of tempting of the tempting disposition, whereas is were good to complain
under a sinful disposition as under the bondage of a part of the body of sin,
as Paul does, Romans 7. for a sinful disposition is but a branch and bud of the
body of sin which we are to wrestle against, as a most dangerous opposite to
spiritual obedience. Indeed sometime a spiritual disposition to pray or praise,
or hope, goes along with the command. Now the obligation of the command to
praise is ever one, and its good when the man can say, My heart is fixed, I
will praise, Psalm. 5^. and the command to wait on the Lord lies ever on; it is
a rich mercy when the disposition goes along with the command; as Psalm. 25. 15.
Mine eyes are ever (in the habit and holy disposition) toward the Lord; and
Psalm. 130. 6. My soul waits for the Lord, more then they that watch for the
morning. Farther not to pray till the Spirit move us, and simply to abstain
from praying or any other spiritual duty upon simple ignorance that we are not
obliged to pray except the spirit move us, is weakness in some godly, who may
be overtaken with that error, but in knowing and judicious men who are
Libertines, What a delusion there is in not praying till the Lord breath on us.
it is wickedness, and somewhat more then weakness; for it is to abstain from
spiritual duties though not considering or without religious weighing the
Commandment, pray continually: and is a making of the Spirit's acting our
Bible, and to confound the Scripture and the Spirit, as Libertines did; so
Calvin says of them, and so do others.

2. The sense of this, pray continually, cannot be pray assiduously at all
occasions, except the Spirit withdraw his influences; for here three things are
considerable.

If 1. The providential call of God to pray, suppose that sickness, incursions
of Devils, or extreme suffering be on.

If 2. A more special supernatural providence of a heavenly fervor and stirring
of the Spirit be on.

If 3. Only the obligation of a command be on to pray upon all occasions,
Christian prudence directing to obey affirmative Precepts.

Now as to the First.

Ass. 1. Suppose there be some seeming contradiction betwixt extreme pain and
absence or withdrawings; yet a seeming contradiction only and not real it is,
There is no contradiction betwixt our physical indisposition to pray, or to
other duties and our moral obligation to perform these duties.
and the man is called to an habitual praying disposition, because what
commands obliges us to be renewed in the spirit of our mind, Ephesians. 4. 23.
lays a tie on us to do it without delay, Isa. 55. 6. Psalm. 55. 7, 8. Joel 2.
12. and consequenter ever to be in a savoury disposition and to savor of the
things of the Spirit, whether the spirit actually heat the soul with such
savoriness; for otherwise our Savior rebukes the disciples on no just ground
when they were sleepy, for want of an actual heavenly disposition to pray;
Could ye not watch with me one hour. The physical indisposition to pray does
not take away the moral obligation to pray then. 2. Though pain and extreme
soul-heaviness that the man cannot speak, Psalm. 77. 4. and Hezekiah can but
chatter as a crane or a swallow, Isa. 38. 14. and the Church can scarce breath
out a word of prayer, Lam. 3. 36. yet does not the Lord in sending on a
physical or judicial indisposition, contradict his own moral tie, which he has
laid on, by his command to pray at all times.

Ass. 2. Both a spiritual disposition may be on, and a conscience of obedience
to pray at one time.
If a more spiritual heat of Spirit, enclining to pray, or prophecy, or preach,
or praise be on David, Psalm. 39. 1, 2, 3. on Ezekiel, chap. 3. 14. on Paul,
Acts 17. 16, 17, 22, etc. on the same Royal Prophet, Psalm. 57. 7, 8, 9, 10.
Psalm. 45. 1, 2. then two fires being stirred should flame more vehemently, when
to this fire there is a command added; now though Oars be laid aside as
useless, when the wind is fair, and favorable on the Sayls, and it be not
possible that a man can both ride on a spirited nimble horse, and also walk the
same time on foot; yet here by no means, must the word or conscience of the
command of God be laid aside; For as the physical facility comes from the
spirit's holy impulsion, and spiritual warmness that is on; so the savoury and
gracious morality flows from the considered and believed precept, and the
sanctified heart would close sweetly both with the one and the other; for
specially the moral or obediential part is from the command, and the most
genuine and kindly obedience comes from the Word. It is the real and physical
part that comes from the Spirit, and that is only so far good and morally
lawful, as the Spirit and Word go along together.

Ass. 3. It must be holden that duty as duty is a moral motive we are to be led
withal, and we to look with fear and trembling to the command, what ever
withdrawing of the Spirit or of his influences there be; We are to act duties
before we feel the actings of the Spirit.
its true, what promises of a richer dispensation of grace are made in the
Messiah, Zech. 12. 10. Ezech. 11. 19, 20. Isa. 55. 11, 12. Isa. 44. 1, 2, 3, 4,
etc. are to be considered by us; but yet so, no Scripture says, Stand still
and act no duties until the Spirit of grace first strongly breath upon the
heart; that is, to say no obeying of God is to be gone about, until feeling of
the breathings of the Spirit go before faith, and praying, and all duties: and
what is this but a tying of the spirit to our spiritual senses? men then cannot
be accused nor condemned for not calling upon God, and not believing, because
natural men truly can say, we could not walk before on^ Guide, nor sail without
our Steers-man the Spirit. Now the Spirit's drawings we never felt, and this
were to render the Word of God useless; its enough to us, the command cries to
the conscience, the voice of the Lord sounds in the Word, and none can allege
any contrary actings of the Spirit; As also how shall the feelings of the
Spirit be known but by the Word? and the Spirit not simply, but the spirit with
the word is the only Guide, since we are bidden, try the spirits whether they
are of God, or not, 1 John 4. 1. and as hard it were to put converted ones to
such a method; it were to render Duties suspicious and dangerous, and to
condemn Scripture Light, as guilty of darkness.

2. We are now after Scripture is closed, and the complete Canon given to us,
to follow no duty but what is warranted by the Word, and that the Spirit alone
works not by the Word, it must then be wild-corn, and no part of the Lord's
husbandry, and so not from the Lord: that we are not to pray, while first we
feel the actings of the Spirit, for that position is both beside, and contrary
to the Word. Something might be said for this, we are not to eat while we feel
hunger, nor to sleep while we feel drouziness, though if eating and sleeping be
looked on as duties, it cannot bear the weight of Scriptural truth; yet to look
to feelings, as a Rule before we obey a Command of God, and to make the
feelings of breathings our Rule has no color of truth.

Ass. 4. It may be looked on as another extremity to look to no actings,
Preparation before prayer.
nor dispositions of the heart before we pray; for though the disposition of
the heart be no rule morally obliging us, yet to fall upon duties looking only
to the Rule, knowing the duty is a duty and suitable to the Rule, and no more
but to fly to acting in our own strength is not good.

For 1. It is required, that beside it be an uncontroverted duty, other
Spiritual and Evangelick circumstances would be considered, as whether Jehu
intend the honor of God in killing the Priests of Baal; whether the intended
honor of God breath upon Pharisees, in praying, and in almes-giving, or if
only a thirst to be seen of men, do blow the trumpet and encourage men to the
work.

2. The frame of the heart in doing would be looked to, as we suppose Elisha
did right in that he would not prophecy, while as a passion of Anger was upon
him, and therefore called for a Ministrel to sing a Psalm, and then the Spirit
of the Lord acted upon him; and whether, while wrath is on, pure hands can be
lifted up to God, see 1 Timothy 2. 8. possible out of eager opposition to
Enthysiasts and Libertines we run on another extreme, that we rush on duties
upon no other account, but only the Scripture is clear, Do this in remembrance
of me; and that warranted us to eat at the Lord's Supper prepared or not
prepared, but to rush on the duty while some preparation or self-examination
go before is clear against another command of God, Let a man try and examine
himself and so let him eat; some duties are of that nature, that ex natura rei
of themselves they require fixed preparations, as the Priests sanctifying of
themselves, and these who offered before they came to the Altar, Psalm. 26. 6.
Exodus 40. 31 but whether this may warrant none to pray, while they first
prepare themselves to pray, before they pray, by praying, and so that prayer
which is preparatory must be prepared by another preparatory prayer; and so,
without end, spiritual preparations must in infinitum go on before spiritual
preparations is another question. A fixed and set preparation before every duty
is not requisite; but sure a preparing of the heart to seek the Lord, should go
before solemn actions. 1 Samuel 7. 3. Job 11. 13. 1 Chronicles. 29. 18. 2 Chronicles. 12.
13. and beyond all controversy, we sin against God, and stumble many in
headlong rushing upon duties, not looking to a spiritual frame of heart, in
coming to the house of God, and not taking heed to the feet, and in yoaking
the Cart before the Horse. When we first sacrifice, and then hear, Eccles. 5.
1. godly prudence which dwells with wisdom says both a fools bolt is soon
shot, and a fools sacrifice is soon offered. Some receive the word (...)
suddenly, Mark 4. 16. 1. Sailing is more safely delayed in the time of an
extreme storm, and sowing when the wind is mighty, then attempted; and if the
affections be raveiled, and the heart smoking with some fiery disorders, that
distemper would be mourned for and prayed against; headlong and precipitate
duties done in have argue great profanness and irreverence to the holy Lord
whom we serve and worship. 2. They speak an irreverent not eying of God. 3.
Want of bendedness of heart in holy duties. I speak not this, as if praying
either set, or instructed, or ejaculatory suits, were to be delayed.

Ass. 5. To wait upon the breathings of the Spirit, how it is lawful, how not.
To wait upon the flowings of the Spirit, has not one single meaning.
Libertines waiting on the actings of the spirit, and there professed feriation
and abstinence from praying, hearing, is a sad delusion.

1. Its a hardening of the heart, while it is to day, and then the foolish
Virgins had good reason to be foolish, and to neglect the market, and buy no
Oil while the market of Mercy was gone and over, why? the spirit blew never
fair for their spiritual trading; and therefore they are to be excused in that
they sleeped all their life.

2. Its a confounding of the Rule, the Word of God, and of the Spirit which
quickens the Word, and makes it effectual.

3. Its to excuse all wicked men, and to loose them from the law of God; We can
do no better, blame the Spirit, (say they) which blows not; and many other
absurdities hence follow.

2. To wait on the Spirit's flowings, that is with a less measure of the
spirit to fetch more, and by two talents to gain four, is so lawful a waiting
for the breathings of the spirit, as to plow and wait patiently for the
harvest, to sail and wait till the Jewels and Gold come home, and the Ship
land, is commendable; this is to bring forth fruit with patience, (...).

3. To wait upon the flowings of the Spirit, which out of holy Sovereignty
comes in a larger measure, then is ordinary, as an high spring-tyde; as my
heart is confirmed or prepared, my heart is confirmed or prepared. Is 1. To
welcome and adore the Lord in these high manifestations, and wisdom requires
that the soul which is taken into the Kings chamber, and finds many
outlettings, and sweet and rich access in praying, should multiply bills, and
being heard for his own pardon as David was, Psalm. 51. should put in a bill for
building of the walls of Zion, and so should the soul being in a higher strain,
and admitted to a more then ordinary feast of fat things, eat and drink more
abundantly, Cant. 5. 1. as Esther finding the King on a strain of graciousness
to her; Esther, what is thy Petition? follows her suit, and lays hold on the
opportunity, and her suit is not for the safety of one single man, but for the
lives of the whole Church of God, even all the Jews. 2. To leave off wrestling
too soon is a sort of violence done, and a damming up of the mighty flowings of
the Spirit; No doubt a lazy pursuing of the victory, when we prevail with God,
is a mighty neglect.

4. So to wait for the Spirit's high manifestation, as to set bounds to him,
and to look, this shall be a great feast, and the instruments are eminent, is a
limitting of God; hope of that kind would be humble and submissive: there being
no word of promise, as concerning the quantity and measure of the emanations
and outlettings of the Spirit; for that is his own Sovereignty to do with his
own as he thinks good; we would be more careful, to receive, and believe, and
praise, then to widen hope, in order to instruments, to wit, such a shining
Prophet, beyond what is revealed; sure believing his word is better then
censuring Sovereignty. Idolatry is here crafty and subtle.

Ass. 6. If we speak of preparations, going before the real and physical
stirrings of saving grace, there are not any upon our part, except we say with
Pelagians, that we begin and the Spirit follows.

CHAP. XI.
1. Our impotency to duties being reproved, cannot excuse us in the omitting of
them. 2. The wicked habit in sleeping men is faulty. 3. Therefore the
withdrawing of influences excuses not. 4. The Creatures sin is not from the
Lord's withdrawing of influences of grace formally, but from our withdrawing of
our hearts from his moral Commandment. 5. The Objection of many, (if God would
give me influences of grace as he did to Moses and David I would be as holy as
any) discussed, the Objector and the Objection both answered. 6. The nonsense
of the Objection opened. 7. A natural man hates influences both physical, and
moral, though he wish physical influences. 8. The Objection exalts nature,
abuses grace, and many ways reproacheth God, his Grace, Sovereignty, Wisdom,
etc.

Q. WHether or no does our impotency to pray and believe clear and justify us,
(...)
in that we believe not and pray not?

Ans. Not at all: for one and the same cannot be a just excuse, and a due
rebuke: There is a wicked weakness and a sinful Cannot as contradistinguished
from sinful actings, which the holy Ghost reproves, and then must the
indisposition to receive influences to pray, be no excuse to shift the duty.
but the holy Ghost rebukes our cannot as a sinful cannot, and so our impotency
cannot be a just excuse. So, Joshua chap. 24. 19. Ye cannot serve the Lord.
Isa. 29. 11. I cannot read the book, that is, I am sinfully ignorant of
prophecy. Isa. 44. 18. They cannot understand, no more then blind men. Jer. 6.
Their ear is uncircumcised, they cannot hearken. The Lord grievously
challenges the people, ver. 11. I am full of the anger of the Lord, and
denounce wrath against this rebellious cannot; for not only is the tree
rejected as bearing evil fruit, but also because the sap is sour, and the bulk
rotten. Christ speaks rebukingly of some impotent cannot of the world; Joh. 14.
17. I will send you the Spirit of truth, (...), which the world cannot receive,
Romans 8. 7. The wisdom of the flesh is not subject to the law of God, (...)
neither indeed can be. Ver. 8. They that are in the flesh (...) cannot please
God. 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man cannot know the things of God; (...), it is
a condemning of the natural man, as he is opposed to the spiritual man, who is
praised as one who knows the secrets of God.

2. And he is condemned as one who judges the things of the Gospel
foolishness. John 6. 44. No man can come to me, except the father draw him; And
that is a most wicked shift of him who married a wife, Luke 14. 20. therefore I
cannot come; we excuse such wicked weakness with this, God help us, we cannot
without his grace do better.

3. The very sinful habit and power is reproved in the Word, even the power as
it is contra-distinguished from the sinful act; Psalm. 14. 1. The habitual fool
has said in his heart there is not a God.

The habitual blindness and hardness of heart that may be in sleeping men, the
state of non-regeneration, and the state of death and of uncircumcision of
heart, is condemned, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. 3. Col. 1. 13. 14. Psalm. 14. 3. their poison
of nature, Psalm 58. 4. the uncircumcision of heart, Jer. 9. 26. the sinful
frame of the heart, Genesis 6. 5. Genesis 8. 21. Hence, of force it must follow, that
this is no good consequence, the sleeping man or swooning man, acting and
committing no actual guiltiness, and making no use of free will, is guilty and
rebukable before God, as the sleeping Wolf is bloody, The Lord's withdrawing of
influences is conjoined with our guiltiness, and cannot found an honest excuse
for not praying.
the sleeping Lion is cruel, because of the bloody and cruel nature, that is
inherently in both, when neither of them do actually devour; so though
influences to the material acts of sin, be not in our power, yet, since we
lodge that sinful power, and virtually (as is said) consent to want the
breathings of God, and consent that the sinful acts have hous-room, in the
sleeping man, we are thence guilty upon that account, though we sleep and are
patient in carrying sinful powers, and sinful acts now inherent in us, and the
withdrawing of influences of grace upon the same account, cannot be an honest
excuse; why, I pray not? yea the wicked impotency, and indisposition, and the
three Disciples drouziness, and sleepiness the same way physical, being on them
in the night, Matthew. 26. is a new guiltiness moral, (for Christ commanded
watching in vigorousnesse then) and their actual not praying, is another
guiltiness.

3. Under withdrawings of influences of grace we are guilty. The Lord's not
giving a new heart is not our sin, and yet our not having a new heart is our
guiltiness.
1. In not considering the temptation, signs and wonders we see and hear, Deuteronomy.
29. 3. yea though the Lord's not giving a new heart, be not our sin formally;
yet our not having, nor receiving of a new heart, is our sin. The sowrness and
naughtiness of the Earth in bringing forth poysonable weeds, is the Earth's own
indispotion; the Sun and Clouds extract these poysonable herbs; the natural
dryness of some rocky Earth and the not raining of the clouds meet both in one,
to wit, the barrenness of the earth; and this takes not away the faultiness of
this earth so rocky. 2. Our guiltiness that appears is evident, in our eik
which we make to original and natural malice; for acquired pravity meets with
natural and original corruption, like two floods to make a Sea or a great
River; or as when a man forces a wound to bleed, which of it self would bleed:
And again, what ever may be said of the result of the Lord's withdrawing of
influences, we add an impulsion to his withdrawing, as the adding of the heat
of an Oven near the root of a fruit tree, to cause it to ripen, adds something
to the heat of the Sun, and the Influences of the Heavens, and when the heart
walks after the heart of our detestable things, as it is Ezech. 11. 21. and
with the intended bensil of the free will, we put our seal and consent to the
Lord's withdrawing; there is no ground to complain of his withdrawing.

Q. But does not the Lord's withdrawing of his influences, since without his
concurrence of that kind our actings are impossible, do violence to free will,
which must be indifferent to act or not to act, to do or not to do?

Ans. This is a weak reason; for to our willing the influence of God is
natural, and so is it to our nilling; the Lord ^akes his influences, and the
withdrawing thereof connatural to all our actions to both willing and to
nilling: dryness and barrenness is as connatural to the tree as budding and
fruit-bearing, if God add his influences either to the one or to the other; The
Lord's influences are connatural to all our actings, and how.
yea, since the Lord's concurrence is suitable to the nature of second causes,
the fire leaves not off to be fire, nor is its nature destroyed, if the Lord
withdraw his influence, so that the fire burns not the three children: nor is
violence done to nature, by the Lord's joining of his influence to the fire to
burn in acts of righteousness or of sin; there is still nilling and willing.
And suppose that the Martyr chose to die a violent death, for the confirming of
the truth, there is no violence done to free will; nay, there is no miracle in
the Lord's concurring to the material acts of sin.

2. To have dominion over the Sovereignty of God is no part of the creatures
liberty, Our actings have no dominion over the Lord's Sovereignty, but
contrarily.
but only it is free in order to its own actings; nor is it essential to the
free will of Men or Angels, or any creature to have the influences of God in
its power or at hand; As it is no part of the Sun's power of yielding light, or
of the fires quality of casting heat to have dominion and command over the
influences of God the supreme and first cause: but the Lord has so a dominion
over second causes, both in acts natural and supernatural, that his influence
as Midwife ever attends (saving his holy Sovereignty) the bringing forth of all
births, and effects of second causes. So as in the free-wills moral actings the
not acting of free will, or the marring of the birth of new obedience to a law
of God is never from the Lord's physical withdrawing of his influence, as from
a culpable cause; but the sinfulness of the action is ever from our own sinful
withdrawing of our will from under the moral sway of the holy command of God:
The sin of the creature is not from the Lords withdrawing of his physical
influences, but from our withdrawing from his moral command.
and let it be a mystery how the Lord withdraws his concurrence, as being above
a law, and he is holy and spotless in so doing, and how we are under a law and
sinfully guilty in that we love to want his holy influence, and its our sin,
and he loves to withdraw his influence; and it is his holy Sovereignty. Both
which are clear in Scripture, if we confess that we are debtors to the Lord,
and to his just Law, and his holy Sovereignty, in that he yields his
influences, and in his having mercy on whom he will, and in hardening whom he
will, in the Lord's drawing of men or his not drawing of them to Christ; in
revealing the Gospel mystery savingly to whom he will, Romans 9. 18. John 6. 44,
63. Matthew, 11. 26, 27. nor can the Lord be a debtor to the Creature in these.
And this mystery is a clear revealed truth, Magnus D. Twissus contra Arnold.
Corvinum. c. 13. sect. 1^ p. 437. n. 2. col. 1.
if we yield that the Lord's active drawing, calling, inviting of sinners to
come to Christ is his holy and sinless work; and our passive not being drawn,
and not being effectually called and invited to come to Christ is our sin of
unbelief and our refusing and rebellious rejecting of his call, Quare licet
hominum malitiae tribuatur in solidum quod non credant, tamen etiam defectui
gratiae nihilominus tribuendum est, quod non curetur mentis caecitas, cordis
insidelitas. Nam si affirmatio sit causa affirmationis, etiam negatio erit
causa negationis. Sic Servator ipse, Qui ex Deo est, Vocem audit Dei; vos autem
propterea non auditis quia ex Deo non estis, Joan. 8. 37.
Isa. 65. 1, 2. Prove. 1. 24, 25, 26. John 5. 40. and that he so calls and
has mercy on whom he will, because he will, as it is the flesh and carnal
wisdom that objecteth. But God so calling some, as they must come, because so
he wills; and so calling other some, as they must be hardened, because he
wills, gives a seeming ground to two great Objections.

1. Why then does God find fault and rebuke and eternally refuse the so called?
for if they were called with that drawing power that others are called with,
sure they would believe and come: but they are not so called; therefore God
cannot blame us, and find the fault in unbelievers, Romans 18. 19.

2. If God so call some as they obey, and others as they obey not, because he
will, who can resist his will? his will is as himself: then do we reject God's
calling, and eternally perish, because God so does will? Now not any ever
breathing, moved any such Objections, but the carnal Jew in Paul's time, and
the Socinians, Jesuits, and Arminians in the age we now live in, and stumblers
at the word; for all such enemies to grace, turn the Objection into an argument
against the absolute will, and invincible grace of God, and answer not with the
holy Ghost, who Romans 9. calls it a bold fleshly replying unto God. v. 20. for
the holy Ghost asserts the Sovereignty of God, as the potter over the clay, and
the guiltiness of vessels of wrath, Romans 9. 22. and their disobedience in
refusing the call of God, v. 29. and their following like Pharisees
Law-righteousness by works, and stumbling at Christ the stumbling stone laid in
Sion, Romans 9. 31, 32, 33. whereas the Gentiles were called of free grace, v. 24.
25, 26. therefore they must be of the same stamp with the fleshly Jews, who
thus object against us, and such are the Patrons of universal grace and
free will. Hence let that be discussed.

1. Would God give me grace I would be a man according to God's heart, as well
as David.

But 2. I was born in sin and I cannot have more grace then God has given me.

3. Would God give me a new power, I would run; now this power he denies to me,
and gives to many.

That this special practical doubt may be fully removed.

1. A word to the Objector. 2. To the Objection.

To the Objector 1. If the Lord had given me the same grace that he gave David,
The objection of many, if God would give me influences of grace as he did to
David, Moses, etc. I would be as holy as any, discussed.
I should run as David. 1. It is of much concernment, who moves the Objection,
whether a Convert, or a non-convert: it is commendable in neither; but in an
unhumbled non-convert, it is senseless. If the sense be, had the Lord bestowed
on me the grace habitual and actual, such as he bestowed on David, I should be
a man according to the Lord's heart, as well as David. No thanks, no praise or
glory to David, that he is a man according to God's heart; True; and therefore
no guilt is upon the Objector, nor is any punishment due to him that he remains
in cursed nature; this follows not.

2. The sense is; The nonsense of this had I more grace, I should be more
gracious.
had I grace I should be a gracious man: what is this but I would have been a
convert, if God had made me a convert.

But 1. The Objector says no more, then the fallen Angels, had the Lord made us
Devils to be elect Angels, and confirmed us in grace, then should we have been
elect Angels; So might Judas have said, had grace made me the beloved Disciple
that leaned on Christ's bosom, I should have been a sound believer; this is a
mere speculation, no preaching of heart-love, to the man Christ; all the
Reprobate may say, had the Lord made us all holy and sinless men in a personal
union with Christ, we should all have been Christ's; Cursed Libertines and
Quakers so call themselves; have they any more of the outlettings and flowings
of free grace for that? not a whit.

2. If God would give me the grace which he bestowed on David, If the ^b^ecto,
of this (had I more grace I would (...) gracious) were a humble ^^vert, the
objection should be more savoury, yet not sounder.
I should be a man according to God's heart; True; but what is this to one who
still dwells in nature; should the sleeper say, had I labored more, and
slumbred and lain in my bed less, I should have been richer; but that
supposition, will neither be bread to feed him, nor a web to cloth him; there
is nothing here, but only idle wishing. O, if I had bread, and such empty
desires cannot feed an hungry man, who is both idle and hungry. Were the
Objector a Seeker, and did he search for wisdom as silver, and dig for her as
for hid treasures, it were real or rational hunger; but there is not a right
esteem of bread, there is no wise life-hunger, such as is in living men.

3. It were good that the Objector were humbled, and did lie at the water side,
and complain, oh if his Ship would fetch me over, and his wind would blow: Who
shall deliver me? what shall I do? were he loathing his own ways, and highly
in love with such ways of godliness, as David and the Saints walked in, it were
good; join despairing in self, and feeling of a wretched condition, with some
desires of David's grace, that should be liker a laying hold of the skirt of
him that is a Jew, saying, we will go with you. But the Objector is full and
rich, and self-righteous and whole, and needs not the Physician, and his own
civil hell torments him not; A Heaven of work-holiness, and law-righteousness
is the lie that is in his right hand, he feeds upon such ashes.

4. The Objector would be convinced of his backward desires: O if I had more
grace I would labor and run more, is a contradictory speech in the sluggard.
O, if I had grace I would then labor and run. Is it not 1. A contradiction;
he loves to be watered with the streams and dewings of Christ, and hates and
loathes the fountain. But now have they both seen and hated me and my father,
John 15. 24. The world cannot receive the Spirit, John 19. 17. and so must hate
the Spirit and all his influences; One spece desires not to be turned into
another, nor does a natural man desire to be a convert, Luke 14. 16, 17, 18, 19.
Fools hate wisdom. And 2. Every spece and kind of being is delighted with its
own being; the Serpent has not a desire or a real love to be turned into a
man, nor would a Lion be turned into a Lamb, nor a Devil into an elect Angel;
that desire is contrary to the malice he has to the image of God in the elect
Angels; the withered Earth loves rain and dew, it would be perfected in its
kind; but a body of sin fights to keep its own being, and would not be
destroyed by an habit of grace; nor does an heir of wrath and a limb of Satan,
seriously desire to be a child of God; nor one tormented in Hell really will to
be a holy Saint in Heaven; he only would be an eased and painless man, and
seeks not to be free of blaspheming God. See Balaam's, and the rich man's
desire, Numb. 23. 10. Luke 16. 24. Rev. 6. 15, 16, 17.

3. True it is, Natural men wish physical influences of God, but they hate
moral holiness.
we love not moral influences; and to be actors in holiness, that spoils and
robs the man of his sweet lusts: we would be content to be passive and have the
breathings of the Spirit come upon us sleeping and without toil, that we might
feel the only sweetness, and delight of duties, not the duty and the gracious
acting it self; as a man loves to have been made holy, not to be holy, nor to
be made holy by acting and toyling; for the man who hates the Spirit and hates
Christ, as the unrenewed Objector does, how can he love unfainedly either the
gracious habit of holiness, or the gracious influences of Christ? and therefore
we may have a desire, of the Lord's real and physical influences, and hate holy
moral influences; for the damned only deprecate torment, but they make no
prayers to God to be made holy, Mark 5. 7. Matthew. 8. 29. Rev. 6. 16.

4. He who so objects, being a non-convert, yea all converts in this life in so
far as there are in us the remainders of a body of sin, close not a little with
that divinity of Satan, Genesis 3. 5. Ye shall be as Gods, Natural men love
independency and hate to be under the Lord's governing influences.
knowing good and evil; and therefore love to be independent and to be from
under God, as is the unhappy word of Spira in point of suffering, O if I were
above God. So speak the enemies of our Lord, who love not gracious influences,
(as Christ is a wel-governing, a sweetly awing Lord in all his influences)
Psalm. 2. 3. Let us break their bands and cast away their cords; though they be
silken cords. So the Citizens of Christ, Luke 19. 14. hate him and set man's
will on Jesus Christ's throne, (...), We will not have this man to reign over
us; the World hates a ruling and reigning Christ; and so we hate his holy
actings, and the wishing to have grace and gracious influences ruling in us, is
a dream; we really desire no such thing, but love an independency of our own,
as was the unlucky prayer of the son who loved not to be under his heavenly
Father, Luke 15. 12. The younger son said to his father, Father, give me the
portion of goods that falls to me. And so hate men the Lord in his influences
of the word, rebuking them, Isa. 30. 11. Cause the holy One of Israel to cease
from before us. And so this Objector; O that he would give me the double of
David's grace, is an empty wish, as if hot fire would say, O that I were
quenched with cold water; a lover of grace must be a gracious man.

As to the Objection it self,

1. It is false; He that uses not a less power or gift of two degrees for God,
would not use a power of ten degrees for God; as is cleared in instances of 1.
Wisdom. 2. Power of Magistracy. 3. Of old age. 4. Riches. 5. Habit of grace,
etc.
If I had grace, I should improve it to gracious actings: For you improve not
nature, and the endowments and parts of nature, to natural actings; and upon
the same account, he who improves not grace of three degrees, would not better
improve grace of six degrees. Natural wisdom is not used for Christ, but
against him, and the Gospel, and is mispended in plotting, laying of snares for
the godly, in taking crafty counsel against the Israel of God, in gathering and
heaping together riches, in painting and busking lies against the truth, and a
thousand ways of that kind; whereas that wisdom might have been profitable,
for building of the house of God, and in edifying a man's own soul, and the
souls of others.

2. In relations; of a Master, a Head of a family, a Parent, the power has
been used against God, not for him. Would God I were Judge of the Land, I would
do justice to every man. And when Absalom was made a piece of a King, he did
no justice, in lying with, and defiling his own father's wives; then Absalom if
he had had triple more power, he would not have used it better.

3. In the matter of age; Were I old and grave, I would use the power of grace
I have, to repent, walk softly, and be holy. Who told you that grace or parts
not improved for God shall grow? and suppose they grow, who can promise, except
he give free will surety, that he shall improve grace, except by the help of
grace? and though grace help grace, yet cannot free will engage for the time to
come, to set a diet and term-day for turning to God the next year, and when you
are old; when as ye are obliged while it is to day not to harden your heart,
and presently to repent: this is to make repentance a tree which bears not
fruit, while some scores of years after its planting; a holy heart does fear
and tremble under the present hardness and deadness.

4. In the point of instruments of doing good; If I had much riches, I would
build Churches, Bridges, Hospitals, entertain many Poor, erect Schools and
Colleges; Now, have the loins of the poor and naked blessed you for any you
have clothed, even according to what you have. God seeks of no man above that
he has, or according to what he has not: and if you fail in what you have,
what can you say for what you have not; the formal cause of the charity, is the
pouring or drawing out of the soul to the hungry, Riches cannot add
merciful^ess to men.
Isa. 58. 10. in faith, in lending to God, and casting your bread on the
waters, Eccles. 11. 1, 2. Prove. 19. 17. Psalm. 37. 26. Now a house full of Gold,
cannot add a dram-weight to your mercifulness, and your trusting in God: but
you are so much the richer that you have a stock in Heaven, then if thou had
a great venture at Sea, and so much Gold and so many Jewels coming home to you
from West India; nor can plenty of gold give you more grace.

5. Had I more grace, I would not deny Christ for fear of men, nor sell Christ
for money, as did Peter and Judas. Now just so spoke the Scribes and Pharisees,
Matthew. 23. 30. If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have
been partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets; and yet they slew the
Apostles, and beat the Prophets, and killed the precious heir Christ, Matthew.
21. 33, 38, 33. Would ye have washed Christ's feet with tears, and wiped them
with the hair of your head? would ye have kissed his feet? would ye have
forsaken all, and followed him? your own heart must be dear and precious to
you, when you undertake so much in its name; and yet many that so speak in our
age, persecute godliness, and hate Christ in his members; and many go off that
way many miles on the North side, and the South side of the Cross, when the
holy Ghost says, there is not a Bridge over this River, but we mnst wade and
swim through, at the nearest; and the road-way is, that through much
tribulation, we must enter into the Kingdom of God, Acts 14. 22.

6. Yet if I had the grace of David, The Objection opened, If I had had the
grace of David, I would not have acted the wickedness which David acted.
I would not do as many do: what is that? ye would not have committed adultery
and bloodshed; could you have commanded the influences of God, and warded off
an evil hour of a sad desertion? so vain men have their own middle science, the
new scientia media, that Jesuits have put upon God: the man foresees he could
make a world of his own; for they say as the men, Jam. 4. 13, 14, 15. who eye
not God in all their ways say, if we go to such a City and buy and sell, we
shall get gain, and say not if God will, if we live; so many, had I a stronger
habit of grace, I would not use self, and ( I) and free will as Adam did; but
know, it is a badder self, and a more wicked ( I) then was in Adam; for the
self so speaking, is the flesh and the unrenewed part, and there was no
unrenewed self, no such flesh in Adam, while he was yet endued with the image
of God. So is this the ordinary discourse and language of this woulder, and
wisher; by God's grace I should walk more closely with God then Noah, sure,
more sincerely then he, I would not have been drunken with wine as he; but
believe you that God who gave the habit of grace, to Noah, to Moses, to David,
to Hezekiah, would have given you all the actual influences to eschew the slips
of infirmities, which these men committed; and except you suppose this, you
must lean upon the habit of grace, which is but a creature, and so must not
have the room of God. Now if you have not any such habit, your hope must be a
broken Tree, and you leaning on a Cipher, and upon nothing.

7. The affections of desire, The Objection had I more grace, I would be more
gracious, may be retorted.
love, joy, sorrow, fear, faith, hope, anger, which remain in unrenewed men,
lustered over with some remainders of the image of God, are wasted profusely in
the service of sin; and these affections might serve much in a way of honoring
God: And its a pity that woulding and wishing is the All of many men's religion;
had I more grace, I would more honor God. Which is retorted, 1. Had I more
habitual grace, and a richer talent, I would more dishonor God; Some have a
great stock, and sin more terribly against the received mercy of habitual
grace. 2. Its retorted, Had I more of nature and of natural parts, I should do
more for God; but more of nature you have, and what do you? Is it not thus?
had I the wings of an Eagle, I would fly. But these wings you have, and you
lie, and you creep; you do but slumber and sleep in the ways of God, you fly
not. 3. Why is not this said, Had I more corruption (as it is easy to gain
here, and do evil, and wax worse and worse) I should run with Devils and
Reprobate men, from evil to worse; for this is a truth, had I the acquired
blinded mind of Pharaoh, and traiterous heart of Judas, I should be worse then
they. If it be said there is not the like reason between nature, and grace; for
one habit of saving grace helps to make the will stronger, and more bent to
gracious actings, then gifts or common parts or natural parts.

Ans. It is true; the habit of saving grace makes the soul readier to act
savingly for God. Saving grace does more strongly effect the will in an
habitual way, Faith and Grace do not depend upon extraordinary means, and
teachers sent from hell; and we are much deceived, thinking, Had we more grace,
we should be more gracious.
for gracious acts; But no habit either of grace or nature can actuate it self;
and therefore it is presumption in a way of relying on the habit of grace to
promise much to our selves.

8. Had I extraordinary helps of a teacher sent from Hell, I would believe.

Ans. 1. We believe not the word spoken by Angels, the Law, nor the word spoken
by the Lord, Heb. 2. 3. and Heb. 12. 25. For if they escaped not, who refused
him who spoke on Earth; much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him
who speaks from Heaven. Christ came from Heaven and out of the bosom of the
Father, and has preached Heaven and Hell to us; for he had experience of
wrath, answerable to the pain of Hell.

2. This is no other shift, then that of the rich man in the Parable, Luke 16.
30. Nay, father Abraham, if one went to them from the dead, they will repent.
Now repentance flows not from the Preachers experience, though he had seen and
felt the pains of Hell, or the joys of Heaven; nor does the experience of
Heaven's joy or Hell's torment, heal the broken and wounded will; and the rich
man's divinity has been the same with Pelagians way, that if the word be
feelingly and dexterously proposed, it can waken up the sleeping free will; and
repentance is a work of nature, if the fire be dexterously blown upon, it will
certainly flame, and all depends upon the running and willing of his five
brethren.

Now common grace, free will, and natural ability, at best is but a potency;
the actual stirring of saving grace must extract, and (to speak so) milk out of
the very saving habit, acts of sound believing, and repenting, or then the will
and the habit must lie dead: far more is this true in natural powers and common
graces.

Now in all this our Savior answers well the whole doubt; If free will be weak
in the improving a natural power it will be so in the improving of supernatural
grace.
he that is not faithful in little, can he be faithful in much? Luke 16. 11. If
therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, who will commit
to your trust the true riches? Verse 12. And if ye have not been faithful in
that which is another man's, who shall give you that which is your own? Our
Savior reasons most strongly, Joh. 3. 12. If I have told you earthly things
and ye believe not, how shall ye believe, if I tell you of heavenly things? He
that is not able to bear a burden of the weight of one pound, would he bear a
burden of a thousand talents? So he, If the Lord had given me ten talents, I
should have equalled David or Paul, or the beloved disciple John, in grace and
holiness. Now ye have not improved two talents, but dug them in the Earth:
For it is not here as in earthly things; mow a Meadow twelve times in one year,
and after thrice mowing ye shall have but little: take continually away from a
deep fountain, and draw water from it night and day, at length it shall be ebb
or dry; but act and improve the habit of grace, and the more it shall grow, and
increase: And its certain, grace can waken up sleeping free will, but free will
cannot stir up grace; death cannot make use of life, but life can work upon
deadness.

The next answer to this; had I grace, or more grace, I should be as holy as
David: its a blowing up of nature, and a dethroning of Christ. For this (I)
when you say, I should be holy as David, is not that gracious (I) of which
Paul, Gal. 2. 20. I live not, but Christ lives in me; but its ( I) and ( self)
divided from self and grace: but woe to the will separated from Christ; Mr.
Fenner's Wilful impenitency, page 80.
woe to the branch cut off from the green and flourishing tree, its good for
nothing but the fire; woe to the arm sawen off the living body; and by this, as
one says well, If God would give the power, you would of your self, There is
an extolling of nature in this (had I more grace, I would be more holy) for (I)
and (self) is separated from Christ.
add the will, this is the Pelagian heresy. Let God but make a stirring and a
blowing, and give a sort of will, I could do wonders: as if it were not the
Lord, who works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure. Phil. 2.
13. yea it lays little upon God's calling: (for he calls Cain and Judas) and
much, yea the All of our salvation on our Answering. Christ knocks by word of
mouth, and (I) and (self) free will opens the heart of Lydia which debaseth
Christ and powerful grace. In all which consider, had you the influences of
grace at your disposing; 1. Then, might free will bar the Iron door, against
sin; that sin of Angels and men, without free wills good leave should never
enter the world. And the Creature should be more Master and Lord Governor over
providence, then the Sovereign Lord himself: then could the Lord erect no
theater, nor set a Chair of free grace to the Mediator and Lord of grace, Jesus
Christ, while first he took Counsel with created free will, and say, O creature
may I have thy good leave to send my Son to the world, and the disease must be
consulted, shall there be such a precious one, as the Physician, the healer of
sinners? Its true, no sinner, no Savior; no lost one, no Redeemer, such as our
Emanuel; but its known, if influences of grace be, (as Pelagianizing
universalists say) at the disposing of nature, with that absolute indifferency,
the free creature may stand, or may fall, let the Algoverning Lord do his best
to the contrary: there is here a created Sovereign dominion; If God create the
creature free, it involves a contradiction, that God should be free to hold out
or bring in sin, and hell, and misery, and God is indifferent (except man must
irrevocably perish) to send his Son in the flesh, to save finners: and such a
providence might have been, if man's free will had so been pleased to dispose of
its own free acts, and of the influences of God, there should for ever have
been no Savior, no Emanuel, no declared free grace, no gracious design in God
to open experimentally to Men and Angels the wonder of Christ and free grace;
but that must come upon the Sovereign Lord, by some bide-by design of nature
and created free will.

3. Were influences at our disposal, we might make our prayers only to our own
free will, who only can by this way hear and help; but we pray to God only for
quickening, determining, leading, and stirring up influences, and for effectual
teaching; and influences are in a good hand, when the matter is so.

4. The unregenerate, as in Shepherd's select Cases, page 96. page 102. are not
within the compass of any conditional promise, though in Baxter's Append. to
Aphor. to Obj. 10. 11. p. 28. he puts a note of censure on it: for if the new
heart were in the power of Cain and Judas, and this were holden forth to all
and every one of mankind; run well and win the crown of conversion, and of the
life of grace and of glory. For 1. You have sufficient grace to win it. 2. You
have the influences of grace at your own disposal and power, be you Brasilian,
Indian, or what else. Then were all men made independent Lords of salvation and
damnation, and of the holy and deep decrees of Election and Reprobation. And if
so, there were not such a thing as a decree of Reprobation, but as a sort of
over-birth, and a decree of some after-wit, in the holy Majesty of God (after
he were disappointed of his former Gospel-decree of choosing all to glory) who
wisely, yea out of his manifold wisdom willed and decreed all to be saved, so
they would use the universal power, and the influences of grace well, as they
might and could; but unto what God should such make their prayers? whether to
God the Father of our Lord Jesus, or to themselves, I cannot divine.

5. If so be influences be at man's disposal, could he kiss the Mediator, stoop
to free grace, and adore it, praise and sing his glory, who sits upon the
Throne, and commend the Lamb who redeemed sinners out from among lost sinners?

6. In reason we can no more time, and dispose of the measure, manner and kind,
of our own comforts, and of the kind and measure of the Lord's influences, then
the Earth can dispose of the quantity of rain, and dew; and herbs, corn, or
growing trees, can determine of the influences of the Sun, Moon, and Heavens.

The third Class of Answers to the Lord's restrained way of giving of grace,
and to him who says, ( Had I more grace, I should be more holy) must be taken
from the holy attributes of God; for this quarrel, why would not the Lord make
me holier and let out richer influences of grace? is a reproaching of his
Sovereignty. He makes not all the lumps of the great mass of clay, vessels of
honor; that is true: The carnal Objection, If God gave stronger influences, I
should be more holy, is a sinful complaining against Sovereignty.
Nor have they all alike nearness to the Throne of glory or the like measure of
glory that are in Heaven; nor alike measure of gifts, all are not Apostles; nor
alike measure of grace and holiness; nor are they all equally poor or equally
rich, or equally wise and learned, or equally believing in the same measure of
assurance, the same measure of joy; For when Paul disputes thus, he has mercy
on whom he will, and hardens whom he will, it comes to this; Why does he then
find fault? it is not in him that runs and wills; if the Lord would effectually
call us Jews, we should run and will, and obey as vigorously as the Gentiles
do. But the Lord does not so call us; therefore he cannot rebuke us, or find
fault with us, that we believe not, and receive not the Messiah, and the
righteousness of God through faith, which is the very Objection in hand.

2. 2. Against infinite wisdom, what a depth is here?
As the Objection is against the Sovereignty of God, so it is against the
infinite wisdom of God: Why should the infinitely wise Lord, knowing, if
Judas, and all the disobedient refusers of Christ, had the same grace, and
influences of grace bestowed upon them, which he freely bestowed on his own,
they would have obeyed; deny that grace, and these influences, he knowingly
denies them? After the Apostle in three Chapters has discussed this, Romans 11.
33. he acknowledges there is a deep in it; O the depth of the riches, both of
the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his
ways past finding out! No wonder it be a depth to me; but there is no more deep
in it, if all have universal sufficient grace, and if all have the influences
of grace in their power, then this is no depth: He that believes shall be
saved; he that believes not shall be condemned, and God rewards those who seek
him: I deny not there is a depth in all God's ways, in the industry of a
Pismire, of a Coney, of a Locust; yea how the bones grow in the womb of her
that is with child: But because the Apostle having discoursed of Election and
Reprobation, and of the Righteousness of Faith, and of the Law, Romans cap. 9. c.
10. and of the casting off the Jews for a time, and the incomming of the
Gentiles, Romans 11. and then concludes, ver. 33. O the depth, both of the riches
and knowledge of God, etc. there must be another sort of profundity in the
words, to humane reason, then that wisdom of God shining in the works of
Creation and providence, Romans 1. 19, 20. Psalm. 92. 5, 6, 7. Psalm. 107. 43.
Psalm. 58. 10, 11, etc. Now the Doctors of universal grace, and such as submit
election and reprobation, obedience to the call of God, and disobedience, and
all the influences of grace to the determination of free will, arise no higher
then the depths of man's willing, and nilling. As also the Objector in this
says, God might have more honor and service of me, if so it had pleased him;
and what is this? but God would be wiser, should he bestow grace and the
influences of grace on me, and all mankind; for even such Arminians who cannot
deny but God foresees, what motions and influences shall prevail with free
will, what not, are burdened with this doubt; as we are, if man's carnal
wisdom be judge.

3. 3. The Objection is against the freedom of grace.
This is a complaining against the free grace of God; there is a sort of grace
of Creation, and a Comet or a Star is here left to complain, why made not the
Lord me a shining Sun? and the Thistle must challenge God, why made he not me a
Fig Tree, or a Vine-tree? are not here beggars at the Lord's door boasting the
Lord, because they get not an Alms of begged and borrowed being after their
own carnal will? So here, what ebness of grace was this, that the Lord would
not bestow the same influences of grace on Beelzebub the prince of devils,
before he fell, as upon the Angel Gabriel, and the Seraphims, who fly with
wings to do his will, and cover their faces with wings, as blushing before
infinite holiness? why bestows he not as much saving influences on me, as on
David, Moses, Noah, Job, and Daniel? why not as much grace, and of the fullness
of the anointing, as upon the man Christ, that holy thing, Jesus?

4. The Objection charge the holy Lord with envy.
And is not free goodness here complained of? God knowingly and wittingly
(says the lying Devil) envying you should be gods, forbids you to eat of the
tree of knowledge of good and evil. Envy is contrary to communicative goodness:
free goodness gives freely in measure, in weight and number, as best pleases
him; now God gives not grace enough.

5. The objection charge the holy Lord with unrighteousness.
His holiness and righteousness is arraigned. 1. He did not from eternity show
mercy, nor provide a new heart for me; then, that I serve not, as he deserves,
let him blame himself, not me. 2. He created me a slippery clay vessel, which
he saw should fall upon stones, and be broken; he might have made me brass and
iron, that could not be broken. And 3. that I sin, wanting the fullness of the
anointing, and influences in a personal union, as in the man Christ, is a
defect in God, not in man; and all the sins I commit, he could have prevented
them, and either would not, or could not.

6. It charge God with male-government.
Its repugnant to the Lord's holy charge, in governing the world; I would be
holy and run, but he withdraws influences. What is this? but I do my part, but
the Lord is wanting in his part; I am willing to run, but he draws not; I
follow, but he refuses to lead me; I answer, but he calls not: a holy meekned
soul sees all the blame in it self, and mercy and inviting kindness in God.

7. I would do otherwise, but ah my sinful nature! I was born in sin; It
strives with holy providence in the point of original sin.
this is a blaming of providence. 1. God denies influences, and the fullness of
the holy Ghost from the womb to me, and all mankind, which he gave to the man
Christ.

But 1. The flowing of sin original is a work of holy justice, who so punished
the first fall; and you carp not at the indwelling of sin original, by which
the poison of the sinful nature, is hateful to God, Genesis 6. 5. Genesis 8. 21. but
at the Lord's righteous smiting of our nature. Shall the clay say to him that
fashioneth it, what make thou? Isa. 45. 9. and as if he were a patient under
sin original; Ah, I would be from under a body of sin, How we wish to be from
under sin original, and how not.
but I am captive, sold under sin; This is a lie; every man is in this sense a
captive under sin original, in that, nill he, will he, he is born in sin: and
the flux of justice so determined, ere the man was born, but the unrenewed
Objector is not so a captive: he that was never humbled for sin original, as
David confesses it his plagne and sore, Psalm. 51. 5. and Job 14. 4. is not a
captive, but a consenter to sin original.

2. He that willingly lends lodging and a furnace, and a warm hearth-stone to
sin original, and remains willingly in the state of unrenewed nature, is not a
patient under sin original, the man is not a captive and a prisoner against his
will, to him who has the power of life and death, and to him who sends a writ
of grace, and bids him come out, and casts open the prison doors, yet he remains
there, eats, drinks, sleeps, sports. Christ the Lord of life has sent the
Gospel, which is a bill of free grace, he bids you come out of cursed nature,
be renewed in the spirit of your mind, come to me, and I will ease you; yet ye
will not change your life, this 20, 30, 40 years, since the Gospel of grace
came to you; you eat, drink, sleep, wake, laugh, rejoice in a state of distance
from Christ, and refuse to come out of that prison.

3. I would I were without original sin, (ye say) and yet when you willingly
lie, swear, whore, you put seal, subscription, and consent to Adam's first sin;
He that delights in the streams and drinks with delight, does he not love the
water of the fountain? then to say, I would be without sin original, is as
much, as I would be without sin, and I would not be without sin; does not this
man allow Adam's deed, and serve himself heir to Adam his father's sin, twenty
times in one day? and in such a man sin original is not diminished, and brought
down to a sin of infirmity; as in Paul, Romans 7. 15. For that which I do, I
allow not; for what I would, that I do not; but what I hate, that I do. That
is a sanctified would, a renewed hatred of one entering a protestation against
sin; but original sin lives in its vigor and reign of the Law, in this man;
and where this sin has the full consent and bensil of the will, the Law, in
its condemning power, is on its side. Hence that excuse the man brings, as in
Fenner's Wilful impenitency, page 95. 96. which proves that he is not humbled;
thou excusest thy self for thy original sin too; Lord I would be without
original sin, but I cannot; if I could, I would. Belike then if it had been thy
case, as it was Adam 's, thou would not have eaten of the forbidden fruit;
and therefore it was his fault, and not thine, and thou would not have
sinned, if thou could have otherwise chused. David confesses this sin as his
personal, as well as his natural sin, Psalm, 51. 5. Behold, in iniquity (that is
the highest of sin) I was formed, and in sin did my mother warm me, or
conceive me, He names the person twice; and the holy Ghost blacks all faces
with this sin, Romans 5. 12. All, (...) have sinned, and yet this Objector is
more innocent then Adam. Verse 18. By the offense of one, judgment came upon
all men unto condemnation; (...). Verse 19. By one man's disobedience, many were
made sinners; that is, all, except the man Christ; and this man must be free of
sin and condemnation, as the second Adam.

4. He would have original sin removed in an extraordinary way, and not in the
Lord's own way, and so tempts God, as Satan tempted Christ to work miracles for
bread, and to cast himself down over the pinnacle of the Temple.

1. Now this, Lord, I would be without sin original, but I cannot, thou have so
ordained my nature to be; but it is against my will and my heart, for my heart
hates it, its double dealing, and an untruth; for then the will must be clean,
then the Objector must be cleaner and holier, then God says in Scripture the
unrenewed man is.

2. Then must the will be, by nature, free of sin original, whereas the frame
of the heart is only evil from the womb, and deceitful and desperately wicked,
Genesis 6. 5. Genesis 8. 21. Jer. 17. 9.

3. Then must the holy Lord be in the fault, who might give influences of
grace, and a whole nature; yea, and the holy Ghost from the womb, as he did to
John the Baptist, but denies it.

But 1. God ties us to his own way of removing of sin, not to our empty wishing
that it were removed.
God has appointed no extraordinary way of healing our nature. The Baptist was
from the womb cured of the dominion of sin original, it entered not with his
life, in its full reign, as a King, as in others, and sin original was in the
Baptist as in others, as to the demerit, if God should have entered in
judgment with him. Now the Objector would be free of original sin in his own
way, not in God's way.

1. He condemns God in that ever he permitted such a sin to be; what warrant is
there in Scripture for striving with any providence or physical influences of
God? none at all.

2. What warrant to complain that all from the womb have not the same
influences of grace which the Lord graciously bestowed on John Baptist?

3. What warrant to desire the extraordinary removal of sin original by
annihilation? for God has appointed the Lamb of God to take away sin, and to
dissolve the work of the Devil. The Lord's way is by praying, Wash me, and I
shall be white as snow: and the Lord will tie us, not to the Socinian absolute
taking away of sin, without Christ's satisfaction, but to an ordinance of the
Law, Psalm. 51. 7. Purge me with hysope. Hence this deceit or sinful conceits in
many; If God would add stronger influences of grace, I should be holy as an
Angel. But this he does not; and so comes in a lazy dispairing, if God will
not give stronger influences physical, I cannot help it: I do all that a man
can do, I pray night and day, tide and time; therefore if I perish, I must
perish: if God will not save me, I cannot be against his will; I can do no
more then I do, but must refer my self to his will; So we would consider well,
this sinful case of conscience, When 1. the man wishes to be free of the
inherency of sin, because something that is penal in lust torments, and hinders
sleep; some bodily pain goes along with night drinking, but yet he sticks
strongly to the sinful acting thereof. 2. When the man should repent and mourn
for his sinful delighting in sin, he murmurs that God would not counter-work
the being of it, and that he so permitted it to be, and so disposed of the
place, and strength of temptation, since he could have made it never to have
been. And 3. The man wishes he might be a patient in the removing of it, and
frets that God will not take it away, while he sleeps, but withal he refuses
to be an actor; 1. In sorrowing according to God, and in loathing it. 2. In
challenging himself, Prove. 5. How have I hated instruction. 3. In a godly
improving of Jesus Christ, as the ransome-payer, and believing in him, for the
Lord's way of moral removing of sin, by pardoning thereof, Jer. 50. 20.

But this is also a tempting of God. 1. We are not to pray for influences
physical simply, and absolutely for all uses, and ends to work miracles, to
remove mountains, but especially we are to pray for more influences, What sort
of influences we are to seek from God.
and such as are suitable to our ordinary duties; Psalm. 119. 36. Incline my
heart (but he suits not of God every bowing of the heart, abstracted from the
word) incline my heart unto thy testimonies and not to covetousness. Ver. 133.
Order my heart in thy s^eps, let not any iniquity have dominion over me. 2.
David seeks not every sort of quickening influences; but Psalm. 119. 25. Quicken
thou me according to thy word. Verse 40. Quicken me in thy righteousness.
Verse 88. Quicken me after thy loving kindness. Ver. 149. O Lord, quicken me
according to thy judgment. Ver. 156, and 116. Uphold me according to thy word,
that I may live. Quakers and Familists seek after the furious wildfire of
hell, skaddings and flammings of a spirit abstracted from the word; Hence the
brothers killing of the brother has been fathered on the Spirit, and railing,
bitter speaking, blaspheming have been laid upon such a spirit.

2. A spirit that suggests neglect of ordinances and means of salvation is not
the Spirit of God. Would God put forth more power, and stronger influences, I
should be holy indeed; in the mean time the man sleeps. So would the Lord put
forth stronger influences, corn, and wheat, and vine-trees should grow without
husbandry, and sowing; shall the husbandman plow not, and pray for such an
harvest? so may the man say, I Will eat not, God can nourish me without bread.
Influences in the fixed and ordinary providence of God, are neither promised,
nor to be expected, but in God's way of using means; the hand of the diligent
makes rich. Should one step out of the Ship and attempt to walk on the Sea,
having no warrant, but a spirit divided from the use of means, and from
hearing, reading, meditating, praying? were not this a proud tempting of God?

3. Do not all the wretched and profane, practically contradict God? the
drunkard will draw, and pull by head and hair, influences to his drunken
prayers; the swearer, the oppressor, and the loos-liver will force influences
to his empty faith, I believe and am saved; and there must be influences at
these golden words, Jam. 2. 16. spoken to the naked and hungry, Depart in
peace, be thou warmed and filled. There is some carnal fire and heat in their
formalities, and they look upon these influences of God and thank God for them,
Luke 18. 11, 12. when as these influences are rather wrathful plagues of God,
joining with our sinful acting of hypocrisy, then favors and gracious
concurrences of God. But as to the lazy dispairing,

1. It was the peoples way, when they are exhorted to repent, Jer. 18. 12.
There is no hope, but we will walk after our own devices; and they were far
from doing all, that men can do, and praying night and day; they were
stealing, murdering, whoring, following false gods night and day, Jer. 7. 9.
and yet they said they came to the Temple to pray and sacrifice night and day,
ver. 10.

2. Is it not dreadful, that when God refuses to rain down influences on
sleepers, and the Spirit breaths not upon dreamers, and men are resolved to do
no more, not to add a farthing more* for the field and the precious pearl
Christ, if they perish, they must submit themselves to the will of God, they
cannot force the Lord, nill he, will he, to save them? true, all the Reprobates
that cry to hills and mountains to cover them, whether they will or no, they
must refer themselves to the will of God; and this is a wicked chiding with
God: if God will not save me by such actings, as may stand with mine ease and
pleasure, let him destroy me; for I Will do no more then I do.

3. This is a murmuring, at the very marrow and flower of the Gospel, John 6.
43. Murmr not among your selves. Ver. 44. No man can come to me, except the
Father that sent me draw him. Then are we inclined to make war with God,
because he will not give us drawing influences, and bestows them upon some.
Hence these Disciples gave over all use of means, ver. 66. Went back and walked
no more with Jesus. What then shall they do? they cannot force God to draw
them: if the Lord will save us, its good; if not, we cannot mend it; we will
follow Christ and his new-Gospel no more.

4. Is it to you, fools, so approved a course to give over means, so blessed of
God. If it can be made out, that the influences of God do so serve (in a
manner) the instustry of men, then are ordinances and means not to be
neglected. 1. Means used are the Lord's way of coming to us, and our way of
coming to him, The using of means is an approved way of God.
whether in the word preached, Acts 2. 36, 37. Acts 4. 4. Acts 10. 44. Acts 16.
14. John 4. 9, 10, -- 29, 30, 39, 40, 41, John 4. 50, 51. or in miracles or any
other lawful way, 2. Because to some certain using of means in faith, there is
a promise of an effectual blessing made, Pro. 2. My son, if thou will receive
my words, and hide my Commandments with thee. Ver. 2. So that thou incline
thine ear unto wisdom. Ver. 5. Then shall thou understand the fear of the
Lord, and find the knowledge of God. Prove. 8. 17. I love them that love me, and
they that seek me early, shall find me; John 3. 18. 36. John 5. 24. John 11.
25, 26, 27. Prove. 3. 1, 2. Prove. 4. 20, 21, 22. 3. Neglect of means is
dreadfully punished of God, Prove, 1. 24, 25, 26, 27. Prove. 5. 12. Prove. 6. 9,
10, 11. Luke 14. 16, 17, 18, 19. 10. 24. Hence the killing of the Prophets, and
of the heir, is plagued with being cast out of the Vineyard, and the removal of
the word of the Kingdom. 4. The assiduous using of means, and Jacob's wrestling
in prayer all the night until daylight, receives the influence of a blessing,
and of the hearing of the prayer in faith and feeling, Genesis 32. 26. 29. and it
puts the soul in a nearest capacity to receive influences from God;
love-sickness near the throne is near to influences of grace and glory, as
sweet smelled herbs are near to such influences, so as presently they yield
honey. Some refined earth curiously hardened by the influences of the Sun, is
near to be turned unto fine gold, or choice silver; when we go about earthly
business with half a heart or godly indifferency, and with a distance from the
Creature, we grow more heavenly and more disposed to receive the influences of
God. But such a promise as this made to an unrenewed man yet in nature, this
do, and ye shall be converted, I read not; or let nature do and grace follow;
or let common grace begin, and the special grace of conversion shall follow.
How reformation of life goes not before remission as Mr. Baxter says.
It cannot be proved by the word which Mr. Baxter says, Appendix to his
Aphorisms, answer to Obj. 10 11. page 260. That men would not accept Christ,
and so believe for remission before their lives be reformed; and that
Reformation of life must go before the belief or knowledge of pardon, though
not before justifying faith.

For 1. This is to bid men keep a distance from holy Jesus, and not come at
him, or touch him by faith, though the soul be humbly trembling before him; as
the woman, Luke 8. 47, 48. Mark 5. 33, 34. until they be holy and righteous. It
is very like to this, come not within sight of the Physician, by faith, until
first you be healed and reformed, or come not to buy the fine linen and the
righteousness of the Saints, until first you be well clothed with your own
inherent righteousness: But who shall heal the sick, and cloth the naked
sinner, if it be not Christ? Now Christ not believed in for pardon, is he at so
huge a distance from a sinner that he cannot heal, if never seen, and never
touched by faith?

2. This is to bring in an inherent physical pardoning and justification by
works; the Scripture knows not of any justification but one, and that is
through the Redemption which is in Christ Jesus.

3. What is meant by Reformation, whether half or whole, whether begun or
complete reformation of life? whole and complete reformation there is none,
while the end and departure out of this life; and so no man is to believe
remission of sins, until they be going out of the body. This is the comfortless
doctrine of Papists, never to know and be assured of the graces freely given us
of God, as in 1 Cor. 2. 12. and that Christ is in us except we be reprobates, 2
Cor. 13. 5. and never to know that we have life eternal, and never to know that
God hears us, and that we are of God, contrary to 1 John 5. 13, 14, 15, 19.
until we be going out of the world: as if Paul and John, did write only to
comfort dying Corinthians, and believers; and none could be of good cheer, and
love Christ much, knowing their sins were forgiven; none could have hope, joy
unspeakable and full of glory, and know they know God, and are translated from
death to life, because they love the Brethren, until they be expiring, contrary
to Mark 5. 24. Matthew. 9. 1, 2. Luke 7. 47, 48, 50. Romans 5. 2. Romans 8. 18, 24.
Col. 1. 5, 27. 1 Pet. 1. 5, 6. Matthew. 5. 11, 12. 1 John 2. 3. 1 John 3. 14. as
if the holy Ghost should comfort us, and bid us rejoice at fancies and at Moon
shines, which we have to day, and may loose to morrow. If he mean half and
begun Reformation; it must be begun justification, begun regeneration, begun
conversion, and believing savingly begun, but not complete: Now men cannot
reform their life, until they please God, Heb. 11. 5, 6. nor can Enoch reform
his life and walk with God till he believe: and believing necessarily is a
laying hold of Christ for pardon, Acts 10. 43. Luke 7. 50. Matthew. 9. 1.

4. Nor can there be a continued tract of repentance, and begun reformation of
life which is a work of the Gospel and New Covenant, not of the Law, except
there be a hopeful mourning for sin, and a looking to him by faith, whom we
have pierced, Zech. 12. 10. nor is it godly sorrow working repentance to
salvation never to be repented of, as 2 Cor. 7. 10, 11. which wants faith of
salvation, and faith of salvation in Christ without faith of pardon, yea or
begun justification without faith of pardon, is unpossible. Nor can there be a
bringing forth fruit in Christ as implanted in the Vine-tree (which is only
reformation of life acceptable to God) while men be first, by faith, engrafted
in Christ as branches, growing in him, John 15. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. nor walking in
God's Commandments, while first the heart of stone be removed, and a new heart
and a new spirit given, as Ezech. 36. 26, 27. Isa. 44. 1, 2, 3, 4. nor can we
believe with justifying and saving faith, while we be born again, 1 John 5. 1,
4, 5. for if so, it were as much as the tree blossoms, grows, and brings forth
fruit, ere it be planted, and the birth moves and stirs and receives seed and
nourishment in the womb, before it receive life in the womb. 3. Nor does the
Scripture tell us of a premeriting of the faith of pardon and remission by a
reformation of life, so as conversion, the Gospel, and accepting of Christ as
Lord, and a tract of obedience was required of the Jailer, of Lydia, and of the
Thief upon the Cross, before they believe. For accepting of Christ as Lord, is
obeying of Christ, and faith in Christ, as says Mr Baxter; and so Faith must
be required before Faith, and Reformation of life, before Reformation of life;
and so Mr. Baxter forbids us to believe and accept Christ, for our Lord and
King, pardoning treason, while first we have reformed our lives. Now to reform
our lives Evangelically, (for of this he must mean) is to accept Christ as our
Lord; that is, to do Evangelically and live, to obey the new Law, and to
perform new obedience to Christ. Hence he says, ibid. page 28. I desire him to
tell me, whether he can prove, that any man's sins are pardoned, before they
have accepted Christ for their Lord? that is, before faith. If not, whether
this be not the Subjection of the soul to Christ to be governed by him, and so
a heart-reformation. Now it may be told Mr. Baxter, that accepting of Christ as
our Lord, page 285. That is to take him both as our Savior and to obey him,
page 286. to be subject to him and obey him, and to square our actions
according to his will. Now the actions are not one or two, but all our actions
to our death; and so no man completely takes Christ for his Lord, and so no man
completely believes, until death; and so the consolations of Christ must be as
morally cold as the consolations of Solon, who said, no man can be happy while
he die; and the comforts of Aristotle, no man is happy who may fall in the
calamities of Priamus. Christ must make us glad of a painted nothing; Rejoice
and be glad, there is a great reward laid up for you in Heaven; rejoice with
joy unspeakable and glorious, nothing can separate you from the love of God;
mountains and hills may be removed, but my love is more stable. But 1. Ye
cannot be sure; therefore doubt and tremble. 2. Suppose you stand to day, and
know that you know him, you may be, and thousands as happy as you are, to
morrow limbs of Satan and eternally damned. Now if no man completely take
Christ until he have consummated and perfected his obedience to the death,
Christ's word to any, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven, is but
comfortless; for they are neither forgiven, nor half forgiven, until he has
taken Christ for his Lord, and wrought his days work to the end; and then, and
never till then, can he have comfort in his wages and in his work. 2. It may be
answered the woman diseased of the bloody issue, Mar. 5. 34. the woman who did
wash Christ's feet with her tears, Luke 7. 47, 48. so the man sick of the
palsy, Matthew. 9. 2. the justified by faith who have peace with God, David,
Psalm. 103. 3. the repenting man upon the Cross, Luke 23. 42, 43. had their sins
forgiven upon the testimony of believing, without any testimony of their good
works; and Scripture tells us not, that a Master bids his servant rejoice with
joy unspeakable and glorious, at the beginning and morning of his day, for at
night, he shall have a rich reward, if such a servant, and millions of servants
in his case, may fall and loose whole wage, for they do but half work.

CHAP. XII.
1. The Soveraingty of God is wonderful in the various tempers of renewed ones.
2. In various influences. 3. In the desertions of the Saints under the Old and
under the New Testament. 4. In variety of desertions of elect and reprobate,
and God's various dispensations to them. 5. Q. What we may do to wrestle out
from under desertions? 6. Variety of temptations. 7. Rules for our behavior
under them, in order to Influences.

THe Sovereignty of God is much to be observed, in the Lord's manner of
dispensing of grace; Some violently b^ought in to know Christ, some more mildly.
James and John are called being at their Nets, and (...) immediately they
l'ave their father and follow him, Matthew. 4. 21, 22. Matthew hears but one
word, follow me, Matthew. 9. 9. and he follows Christ. A gentle throw of the key
opens Lydia's heart: the hearers of Peter, who had crucified the Lord of glory,
are more violently rent and torn, as if the sharpest points, or the stings of
many impoysoned Dragons and Scorpions, had been at once fastened in their
hearts, Acts 2. 37. (...).
the way of Readiness coming with trembling and astonishment, and blindness, and
fasting, and praying three days, and the Jaylors down casting may witness, that
the lock being more rusted and the iron blunted, Acts 9. 6. 7, etc. more
strength is required for the opening of the door, then the Lord otherwise
employed; as some Devils are cast out with a word, and go out with some sort of
humble prayers not to be tormented before the time, Matthew. 8. others throw the
possessed in the midst, and almost kill the child, so as beholders say, he is
dead, Mark 9. there is a certain kind, which is not cast out but by fasting and
praying. So some are filled with the holy Ghost from the womb; and hardly can
John Baptist, give an account of his conversion, as to the degrees of pangs of
the new birth, the way and manner, the place, the Mathematical hour, of the
holy Ghost's sliding in, on the heart; Nor must we think none are in John
Baptist's case; for beside that God imploys some to, and for rare advantages,
and gaining of souls to the Kingdom of Christ, shall there be nothing of the
holy Ghost in multitudes of infants in Covenant with God, of which many die, as
ripe, as if they were, an hundred years old? only beware we take not a sweet
tractable nature, to be the very holy Ghost, and a work of Infantconversion,
such as was in John Baptist: and let not others cast themselves away, as not
belonging to Christ, who yet are his, because they know not, such pangs and
throwings of the new birth, as Saul, the Jailer, the converts who killed
Christ, Acts 2. where the skin of the boil is doubly thick, some more violence
is required, and a sharper lance is made use of, to open the wound.

2. Some require milder influences as beng led all their time, with sweetness
of peace. The Arches grieved Joseph sore, no man more moved from vessel to
vessel; then he, and meek Moses was much tossed; and both for any thing we
read, far from cursing the day, wherein they were born. There is a temper of
solid walkers by faith, enjoying much peace, yet not acquainted with great
Spring-tydes, nor with extreme low ebbs, of the outlettings of the holy Ghost.
I speak not of Moses as a Prophet, who saw God, and whom the Lord knew face to
face, Deuteronomy 34. 10.

3. John not under the same dispensation with Peter.
Some are led through fewer slips and falls, as John the disciple who leaned on
Jesus bosom; excepting his fall of Angel-worship, and some other few, he seems
not to be so high bended as Peter, who in Satan's place, dissuaded Christ from
the working of our Redemption, denied the Lord with cursing, did foully Judaize,
Gal. 2.

4. Jonah strong in his passions.
And it were hard to make all the Prophets of Jonah's mould, whose fear to
preach to great Niniveh was extreme, and yet his courage of faith, and patience
to be cast in the Sea with his own advise and consent, was as great, and his
cruel selfishness to desire that all Niniveh old and young, should be
destroyed, rather then his prophetical honor should be darkened in the least,
shows what a piece of man he was, and his justifying his anger against God, for
a blast of wind on his head, and the withering of a poor herb, a gourd, do all
hold forth that God leads some, in a way of influences beside the rest. O how
is our meek Lord troubled, and (to speak so) cumbred to bear all our manners,
sinful tempers, and humors.

5. Eliah's temper.
Nor are all Saints of the altitude of Elias his zeal; a man much and wholly
for God, and fervent in prayer, yet he seems to challenge more zeal to himself
for the slain Prophets, dug down Altars, broken Covenant, then was in the
holy Lord himself; and so prays that God would take away his life, as if he
were the last man of the true Church of God living on Earth; and yet we read in
all his sufferings, no apprehension of the anger and indignation of God, such
as was in others.

6. None are so trailed through Hell and fiery indignation, as Job, David,
Jeremiah, Heman; there appear in them some habitual mistakes of the love of
God, or rather (because sinful acquired habits, are scarcely to be found in the
renewed) more fixed inclinations, to apprehend wrathfulness, and
Law-dispensation in God, and few are led this way; and the outlettings of
influences of grace must be various here.

7. Neither should it be strange, if we might place, Isaiah, Ezekiel, Daniel,
and others in a seventh class, who had their own complainings; One saying, my
leanness, my leanness; another fasting and walking in sackcloth for the
sanctuaries desolation, and yet most submissive to the holy dispensations of
God. In all which, another man's compass is not our rule of sailing, nor is the
Lord's various dispensation to his children, which is ordered by his decree and
will of pleasure, not by his commanding and approving will, the Scripture rule
that we are to follow, in looking after Influences; Every one would submit to
be ordered of God; he has almost a various way of leading his own: if the same
complete ransom, the same Promises, the same Guide, and Steersman to Heaven be
mine, and the same hope of glory; yet the manifestations of God, the love
visits, the influences of grace are hardly the same. Its then a faulty ground
of some, never one was like me, none of my condition in the world, since the
Creation. Every one thinks their own hell on earth, the only hell. 2. Nor
should Christians be unwilling, to know the spiritual condition one of another;
you may fall upon some, in your very course and kind. Its like David, Psalm. 71.
7. Heman, Psalm. 88. 15. the suffering Church, Lam. 1. 12. Psalm. 102. 6, 7.
Elias, 1 King. 19. 10. Isaiah and Christ, and the children of Christ, who were
wonders and signs, Isa. 8. 18. Heb. 2. 13. who were there alone as worlds
wonders, might judge themselves like no other (though the man Christ could not
mistake his own spiritual estate) as to their case spiritual, and God's
dispensation toward them.

8. The Sovereignty of God's dealing with consciences in the Old and in the New
Testament is to be observed. It is not, The Old Testament dispensations and the
New are compared together, and their differences.
1. To be denied, but the desertions under the Law in some respect, were more
fiery and legal; the typical dimness and darkness made them to see less love,
and more Law, and less of Christ the seat of mercy, and more of the curse and
of wrath, as the night darkness renders spirits and dreadful things more
terrible. 2. It was the purpose of God to awe generally that people more with
Law-fear, and bondage, then his people under the New Testament. But it is a
wicked doctrine of some Anabaptists, and others, that all desertions are, under
the N. Testament cried down and gone; and it is our legal mistake, say they,
that works trouble of conscience, under the N. Testament, and an exercise of
such as are under the Covenant of works; though it may be said law-sorrow
pursued these of the Old Testament; but the Saints now are less passive and
more active, in pursuing sorrow according to God, yet in another respect,
because of greatness of light, and Gospel experiences, and a higher measure of
illuminations, and spiritual presence in more abundance is promised and
prophesied; As, that all shall be taught of God; the Earth shall be filled with
the knowledge of the Lord; the light of the Moon, shall be as the light of the
Sun, and the light of the Sun as the light of seven days, Jer. 31. 31, 32, 33.
Isa. 54. 11, 12, 13. Isa. 11. 6, 9. Ezec. 36. 26, 27. Isa. 44. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Joel. 2. 28. Zech. 12. 10. under the New Testament; therefore the desertion is
the sadder. Thirst near to the fountain is more intolerable; so we read not in
the N. Testament of one like unto Job. chap. 3. c. 6. c. 16. c. 19, nor of such
as David, Psalm. 6. Psalm. 38. nor of Heman, Psalm. 88. nor of the Church, Psalm.
77. Psalm. 102. yet is there nothing harder then that of Paul, 2 Cor. 1. we
cannot say, whether it was his persecution at Ephesus, or some great sickness;
yet it is a most sad trial, ver, 8. 9. 1. We was pressed, out of measure. 2.
(...).
Above strength. 3. In so much that we dispaired, even of life. 4. But we had
the sentence of death in our selves, and what ever be the kind; for even Christ
had so much the more sorrow, at the withdrawing influences of the comforts that
immediately flowed from the Godhead personally united, and this was Christ's
hell in part; therefore we are to look upon desertions in the song of Solomon
as prophetical, and relating to the desertions in the New Testament, in the
which the rise of the grief is not so much from the apprehension of sin legally
tormenting, as from the sense of the want of the sweet comforting presence of
God, and of the wel-beloved Christ; yet there is as much in that of pain, as in
any we read, Cant. 5. 6. I rose up to open to my beloved, my beloved had
withdrawn himself, and had passed away; my soul went forth, because of his
speech: Ainsworth, My soul was gone, and departed, that is, failed, fainted, I
was even a dead woman through fear and grief; for death is the departing of the
soul from the body, Genesis 33. 18. This though an Evangelical desertion, is as
much as David says, my moisture is turned into the drought of Summer, and as
the waves of the Lord's wrath coming over Heman; yea, and it is more painful
to be thrust out of Heaven, and to be deprived of an high measure of enjoyed
and felt love, and is a sadder torment then all the law-burnings, though they
have in David and others some such love-sickness, which was ordinary to the Old
Testament-dispensation; and these and the like the soul is more able to bear:
that the habit and stock is rich, as Christ, from the personally indwelling
Godhead, was strong in his desertions peculiar to him; and the richer the
habit of grace be, the more able is the soul to stand out: the strong ship is
more able to endure the storm, then the crazy and rotten vessel; a Giant is
fitter for a battle with a Giant, then a Child is.

9. Some are kept in perfect peace whose minds are staid on the Lord, and being
justified by faith have peace with God, Isa. 26. 2. Romans 5. 1. There are two
sorts of dispensations, one fundamental, another not fundamental; the former is
the Lord's carrying on his begun work, which is to will and do to the end in
his ordinary course; the dispensation which is not fundamental, respects the
Lord's way of doing, hic and nunc, in such circumstances, and the degrees of
grace given or infused, which do not vary the spece, and nature of the work. We
read not of Daniel's cursing the day he was born in, as Jeremy and Job do; nor
is there any shadow of it in Joseph; yet nothing hinders but Job and Jeremy
may and did at other times, enjoy sweet presence, and nearness to God.

But 1. We would not take extraordinary feasts to be daily food; nor should we
much wonder when a change comes: but how do we chide, quarrel, complain,
because it is not always so? Nor 2. Should we be rough, but compassionate to
sick ones: its the Lord's way that all in the house should not be sick at once;
but some are sick and some whole to wait on the sick, and all to bear one
another burdens; all the diseases of the house are not the same in kind and
degree.

2. Some do all their life dwell in the borders of hell, and never have fair
sailing, nor fullness of assurance, until they be upon the shore; such have only
Starlight, and are called to pure living by faith, Isa. 50. 10.

3. Some, once in all their life have one only remarkable night of wrestling
with God, and prevail, as Jacob did; and some love so their prison that they
take a sentence, a non judice, a non habente potestatem: the Law severed from
Christ, is no judge at all to believers; the Law speaks to its own that are
under the Law, Romans 3. 19. the Jailer can command none but his own prisoners.

4. Some are frequently taken into the house of Wine, and to the Kings Chamber.
And what changes there be, Cant. 2. cap. 3. c. 4, 5, 9. 1. v. 6. may be seen
its clear, and he that runs may read; felt love is not heritage to any. There
is a huge difference between Cant. 2. 6. His left hand is under mine head, and
his right hand does embrace me; And that, I sought him, but I found him not,
chap. 3. And that is a joyful feast, Cant. 5. 1. I am come unto my garden, my
sister, my spouse, I have gathered my myrrh with my spice: eat O friends,
drink, yea drink abundantly, O beloved! And that again is a sad song, ver. 6.
My beloved had withdrawn himself; I sought him, but I found him not; I called
him, but he answered me not.

5. Some are all their life creeping children, yet saved: a sincere affection
in Nicodemus consists with much ignorance, yet is not the faith rotten.

6. It belongs to sovereignty that the little vessels of small quantity hang
upon Christ, as well as the great, Isa. 22. 24. and that the lambs, as well as
the stronger of the flock, are cared for by him, Isa. 40. 11. and that the
bruised reeds have their dependence on him.

7. To this head of sovereignty belong the various kinds of desertions; Various
kinds of desertions.
As 1. None are so deserted as the fallen Angels; they have done for ever and
ever with all influences of grace, and are eternally outlaws from the Court of
the King, who is head of principalities and powers, Jude ver. 6. reserved (...)
in everlasting chains, etc. 2 Pet. 2. 4. O but the chains of Devils are fiery
and hellish.

2. Next to them are reprobate men, who cast off Christ, and turn into Satan's
camp. No saving influences are due to such as are reprobate to good works. Ah,
beware of habitual hating of Christ, and his house, dependers and seed: yet are
there here degrees; for none are in that measure deserted or blasphemers of the
holy Ghost.

3. Christ's desertion was extremely penal and brought out tears and strong
cries, mixed with a curse; and only influences were suspended as touching vision
and enjoyment or fruition, and the actual comforts of God; the crown in a
manner was laid aside out of the eye and sight of the man Christ, yet wanted he
never influences. 1. For acts of love; Father remove. 2. For acts of faith; O
my father remove. 3. For acts of praying more earnestly, Luke 23. 44. O my
father remove this cup. 4. For acts of witnessing a good confession before
Pontius Pilate. 5. For acts of preaching the confessing man to Paradise with
him; none are eternally and cursedly deserted who can pray and hope, and
believe in the furnace as Christ.

4. The redeemed of God are not all one and the same way deserted. 1. Some are
extremely at under as Job, who apprehended that God did pursue him as an enemy,
Job 13. 20. though Job and every believer be the friend of God, Jam. 2. 23. 2.
The Spouses desertions are less, being conveyed with love-sickness; Various
kinds of desertions on the Lord's redeemed.
Magdalen has no wakenings of conscience for sin, nor any positive agony or
law-challenges, but only love desertion, she says with tears; They have taken
away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him. 3. Some are mere
desertions as to the act of sin. God is angry at David, when God withdraws, so
as he numbers the people, and commits adultery and murder: and Christ is angry
at Peter's pride when he suffers him to deny his Master; but neither David and
Peter feels any anger from the Lord in such withdrawings of gracious
influences; but its so much the worse, the man is wounded in his sleep, and
many months and days after the wounds bleed. O what trembling at holy
sovereignty, why deadness to duties should come on David, not on Asa. On David
at this time, not at another time: Hence a case may be, Whether absence of the
Lord in his influences may be mere and only love sickness for him whom the soul
loves, or also absence with conscience of sin?

Ans. The predominant may be sickness only for the want of Christ; as in the
Spouse, Cant. 2. and in Magdalen, Joh. 20. I say the predominant, because we
cannot say, that God withdraws in his outlettings of grace, but there is
guiltiness in the Spouse so made sick because of his absence, and with
Magdalen's sickness for Christ there appears a doting too much on the man
Christ, Joh. 20. 13. I know not where they have laid him. Ver. 15. I will take
him away. Ver. 17. Touch me not. When we are too bent upon Christ as a
Comforter, not as Christ, its just with God we be pained and sick with the want
of him; and that we seek him and find him not, so spiritual ought we to be
under the pain of absence.

2. But its clear in the man Christ, there is paining, with drawing, and
forsaking on the Lord's part; Why have thou forsaken me? and neither sin nor
conscience of sin, nor any hazard of love-sickness after God's near embracings,
but upon the due account; for Christ could not idolize God as comforting.

Q. What may we do to wrestle out from under desertions? Ans. Whether by
prayer, or any other way we may wrestle out from under God's desertions.
Distinguish these three. 1. Gracious withdrawing from whence comes sin and
unlelief.

2. The frowning of God, and hiding of his face.

3. The penal sorrow and smarting under his absence.

As to the First; Its lawful to plead and pray against withdrawings as they
necessarily bring in sin; the more gracious the temper is, we shall pray more
earnestly against the least sin then against the most fiery hell.

As to the Second which is the frowning of God; 1. The nature of a child says,
its lawful to weep when the Father is angry. 2. Inherent grace and the sparkles
of the image of God cannot endure well that eternal favor should be hid. 3.
The nature of faith and of love to God will say, that the man should be
saddened when the love of God is either hid or provoked. 4. The practice of the
Saints says so much, Job 13. 24. Wherefore hidest thou thy face? Psalm. 13. 1.
How long will thou hide thy face from me? 5. His shining is desirable; O send
day light. Psalm. 31. 16. Make thy face to shine upon thy servant. Psalm. 80. 3,
7, 19. 6. Its lawful to deprecate the anger of God. Psalm. 79. 5. How long Lord,
will thou be angry, for ever? and especially a gracious heart is sadned most at
the outgoings of wrath against prayer, Psalm. 80. 4. in which the Mediator, and
the precious name of God, in a manner, seem to suffer, Psalm. 42. 3, 10. Psalm.
83. 1, 2, 3. Isa. 52. 5. Exodus 32. 11, 12. Josh. 7, 8, 9. 7. Hardly can a
natural spirit lay to heart, yea or know that God is angry, To deprecate the
anger of God, how laudable, how not.
as a child of God can do; as its all one to a man in a dark pit under the
earth whether it be daylight or midnight; the one does not comfort him, nor
the other sadden him.

As to the Third; Its a great deceit that we more penally smart at the absence
of the Paradise of comforting presence, then at the want of real communion with
God; this should calm the heart notwithstanding the pain of the absence of God
as a comforter, that we believe his unfelt love and care, as a God in Covenant.
Mic. 7. 7. I will look unto the Lord; I will wait for the God of my salvation,
my God shall hear me. Ver. 8. When I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light
unto me.

2. The Lord, as is elsewhere said, in a course of sovereignty deserting, will
not come until his own time come; as some Fevers must have their own course of
natural motion, so that the man shall sweat out of the tertian Ague by length
of time: if you should use all the medicine of the Earth, yet this forbids not
art and industry altogether, to help nature. So Christ under the stroke of
sovereign justice prays and was heard in that which he feared, Heb. 5. 7.
believed, hoped, and so overcame, Rev. 3. 21.

And because Sovereignty has a special hand in temptations, Influences are
given of God to various temptations.
we are to take heed to temptations to weaken us in duties; as Master, pity thy
self. 2. Sometime Satan tempts to duties, to pray when we should hear. 3.
Sometime to gross carnal sins, fall down and worship me; and sometimes to
spiritual fins, If thou be the Son of God, command these stones to be made
bread. 4. Sometimes to duties in the excess; as for Timothy to drink water, the
incestuous man to mourn until he be swallowed up of grief, 2 Cor. 2. 5.
Sometimes Satan tempts himself to go out that he may more tempt, and return
with seven devils worse then himself. 6. Sometimes he tempts by a boisterous
imperious usurpation. Job is mine, he serves God for hire. All hypocrites are
Satan's, Job. 1. 7. Sometime he tempts to lawful liberties, to ear, setting the
Law of nature in opposition to the divine positive-law, Genesis 3. The tree is
good for meat; then God and Nature ordained it for food. In all which, holy
Sovereignty gives influences natural to the tempter; nor will he have us to
question his Sovereignty. 2. Nor would he have us to make either his giving or
his withdrawing of influences our rule. And 3. In all our actings he would have
us to tremble; What if providence put a cross bensil or byas on the heart, what
can influences not do to hasten a Judas to his place, though the holy Lord
remains spotless and free? 4. There is much need of that, lead us not into
temptation. 5. Had the Gold will and reason, it owes thanks to the Goldsmith,
though he burn and melt it, because he removes the dross. Its true, the
Physician lames and wounds particular nature, when he opens a vein; but he
saves the whole body thereby, and the sick person ows him thanks. Were there no
more but these excellent influences that act in temptations, as to their
precious fruits, to wit, the humbling of the tempted sinner, the discovery of
latent corruption, of the wiles of Satan, the praise and glory of his grace who
knows how to counter-work (in a manner) his own influences, and does invisibly
uphold his own children, under these temptations; the Lord is here to be loved
and adored, as wonderful in counsel and excellent in working.

CHAP. XIII.
1. Of striving against Sovereignty. 2. Some striving is lawful. 3. A gracious
behavior it is to be woe at God's forsaking. 4. To repine at Sovereignty in
hearing or not hearing of prayer. 5. Contradicting. 6. Murmuring. 7.
Counter-working of Sovereignty is dreadful. 8. Opposing the operations of the
Spirit. 9. Dispairing. 10. Reproaching proud disputing. 11. Submission to want
of influences. 12. What way the Lord recompenseth desertions. 13. Closing with
influences of the Law-rebukes.

ELihu most gravely speaks, Job 33. 13. Why do thou strive with him, for he
gives not an account of any of his matters? The word (...) is to strive and
contend in words only, as Mercerus and Pagnin, either in judgment or out of
judgment, jurgare. And its strange that any dare chide or scold with the
sovereign Lord.

But 1. Jacob's striving and wrestling in a holy willful peremptoriness in
praying, the Lord being on Jacob the wrestlers side really to bear him up by
his grace, is a lawful striving.

2. There is a difference betwixt a mere temptation and a threatening. The woman
of Canaan strives not against Christ's not answering her one word, Matthew. 15.
what? he is master of his own Answers. When Christ says, I came not but for the
lost sheep of the house of Israel, she strives not; he is Master of his own
journey from Heaven to Earth; yet that Answer weakens her not in the duty of
praying, and worshipping. But when she is reproached as to her interest in
Christ, Its not meet to take the childrens bread and to give it to dogs, she
mildly, yet in the boldness of faith contradicts Christ: suppose Christ out of
his own mouth should deny a child of God to be a child of God, there is place
for a holy striving and contradicting of him.

3. It is a gracious behavior in the man Christ, It is a gracious temper to
weep when the Lord is absent or angry.
that he is affected with grief for the Lord's forsaking, and expresses it
with tears and strong cries, Heb. 5. Should not the child weep, when the father
is angry? 2. The privation of the greatest good, such as the overclouding of
the Lord's favor, is a due cause of sadness; Woman, why weepest thou, says
the Angel to Magdalen? why weep I? they have taken away my Lord. 3. It wants
not reason I weep, for my father is dead; there is my mothers grave, she is
very new buried, therefore I weep; all my goods are taken away, and therefore I
weep; yet the Lord has forsaken me, and I weep not; that is dreadful. So Job,
Jeremiah, David, Hezekiah, are sadly afflicted, when the Lord seems angry.

4. There is a sovereignty in hearing or not hearing of prayer, A sovereignty
in the Lord's hearing, or not hearing.
against which we must not strive. 1. Sometime the unwritten bill is answered,
Isa. 65. 24. and the Lord yields to our blank papers, and subscribes them. 2.
Some times he hears the dumb man's signs, and his breathing, instead of his
praying, Isa. 38. 14, 20. Lam. 3. 56. Psalm. 6. 8. Psalm. 102. 19, 20. 3.
Sometimes the Lord hears, and sends the message of deliverance, but we hear
not, nor do we know or feel that he hears, Psalm. 18. 4, 5, 6. compared with
ver. 16. Dan. 10. 12. one crying for comfort may be heard and not comforted.
Isa. 66. 13, 14. As one whom his mother comforts, so will I comfort you, and ye
shall be comforted. And when ye see this, your heart shall rejoice, and your
bones shall flourish like a green herb.

5. The clays (no) and the great Potters (ay) and vain man's (I will) and the
Almighties (I will not) are most unsuitable. Strive not with sovereignty.
Isa. 29. 16. Shall the work say of him that made it, He made me not? or shall
the thing framed, say of hint that framed it, He has no understanding? Romans 9.
20. Who art thou, O man, that replyest against God? Isa. 45. 9. Woe to him that
striveth with his Maker: Let the potsheard strive with the potsheards of the
earth: shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What make thou? or thy
work, He has no hands? Jer. 18. 6. O house of Israel, cannot I do with you as
the potter, says the Lord? behold, as the clay is in the potters hand, so are
ye in my hand, O house of Israel. Humble speaking to God does well become us.
Abraham excuses his contrary pleading with God, Genesis 18. 27. Behold, now I have
taken upon me to speak, who am but dust and ashes. Ver. 30. Oh, let not my Lord
be angry, and I will speak, v. 32. Job 42. 3. Therefore have I uttered that I
understood not, things too wonderful for me, that I knew not.

3. Beware of murmuring and angry and fretting words against God; Diverse kinds
of striving with sovereignty.
Exodus 14. 11. Were there no graves in Egypt? Exodus 15. 24. Exodus 16. 2. Numb.
14. 2, 27. and much more. Its dreadful to contend with the Almighty; and for so
small a thing as a drink of water, and for a piece of flesh, should we fall a
pleading with the sovereign Lord?

4. Especially we should not counter-work the uncontrollable providence of God;
for that is to give the Lord battle, and to lead an army against him: as Isa.
9. 10. The bricks are fallen down, but we will build them with hewn stones;
the Sycamores are cut down, but we will change them unto Cedars.

5. There be diverse kinds of striving with the Almighty; such are they who
blasphemously oppose the shining and convincing power of the Spirit in Christ
casting out devils, Matthew. 12. such are they who gnash with the teeth and spit
upon the shining beauty of godliness in Steven, Acts 7. and kick against pricks
as persecutors do, Acts 9. who if they had the Father and Spirit incarnate, as
the Son was, would crucify both, and would, were it in there blasphemous
power, crucify the Godhead; whereas meek yielding to the actings and flowings
of the Spirit in others, says there must be much of the Spirit there; for the
Spirit cannot but love the Spirit.

6. Despairing stoutly of mercy and the power of grace is of this sort; when
Cain, Judas, and others defy Omnipotency and infinite mercy to save them, and
spitefully hate the influences of saving grace, and say, mercy cannot save me;
the complete ransom of the blood of God cannot buy me from the second death:
To this we may reduce a lazy despairing; what if I be never saved, I can, I
will do no more? The people are bidden return; nay, there is no hope (say
they,) Jer. 18. 12. but we will walk after our own devices.

7. There is here, the fainter reproaching of Omnipotency, as if God were weary
and not able to bring back the captive people, Isa. 40. 27, 28. Hence the Lord
must prove his Omnipotency by that rare piece the curtain of Heaven stretched
out, and a measuring line drawn over the Earth, Isa. 51. 14, 15. Isa. 50. 2, 2.

8. There is a proud disputing with God when we dare give in a bill against
God. 1. Ah, he takes me for his enemy. 2. He has left off to be gracious; An
ungracious God is no God. O the pride of a tempted mind that dare oppose the
very existence of God.

3. Some say, God has need to be instructed to govern the world better,
otherwise what needed that be said by Isa. 40. 13. Who has directed the Spirit
of the Lord, or being his counselor, has taught him? Ver. 14. With whom took
he counsel, who instructed him, and taught him in the path of judgment, and
taught him knowledge, and showed him the way of understanding? Or what needs
that Job 21. 22. Shall any teach God knowledge? seeing he judges things that
are high. What a God is an unknowing God, who needs a lesson from the creature,
or from some higher God? and then who taught that other God who is supposed to
be higher then the most high? what a carnal mind is this that chaseth the
Almighty God out of the world?

4. What do they who curse the day, the stars, the twilight, the birth? as Job
chap. 3. A gracious heart says, let the Lord be the Lord, and closes with all
the attributes of God, and with all the influences of Omnipotency, wisdom,
goodness, and justice on men, and of love, mercy, grace, bounty, forbearance to
the Saints, and to their own soul; this is to sing mercy, and to sing
judgment: whereas its a note of Atheism to wish and vote out of the world
God, his attributes, and all the acting and influences of mercy, justice,
truth, grace, sovereignty, and to say, Its not the Lord, the Lord can neither
do good, neither can be do evil, Zeph. 1.

8. So would we beware to fight with the Lord's dispensations of grace; he is
Lord and Sovereign disposer of his own comforts: whether we look upon comforts
as duties commanded, 2 These. 5. 17. Jer. 31. 15. or as a reward of duties from
the Lord, Romans 15. 4. Psalm. 27. 14. 2 These. 2. 16. Isa. 66. 13, 14. he is the
Lord of all influences to work in us to will and to do, and Master of his own
rewards. The Lord is Master of his own love-visits, and is neither debtor to
the man Christ, nor to the elect Angels; yea, the Lord's saving influences go
along with his free decree of Election; and look as the Lord of nature
preserves the speces of Roses, Deadness and desertion may be on one way, and
much of God in other actings.
of Vine-trees, though this or that individual rose or vine-tree may wither and
be blasted; so he holds on the work of believing, praying, of hoping, and
persevering to the end; though there may be a miscarrying in this or that
particular act of faith, and some deadness in praying, hic and nunc. And as in
a great work of a water-mill, some one of the wheels may be broken, and yet the
Mill is kept a going, and the Ship still under sail, though some instrument, or
other be wanting and laid aside for a while: So when there is a withdrawing of
feeling of a presence in praying, as Cantic. 5. 6. I called him, but he
answered me not; yet influences flow in another duty of praising, ver. 10. My
Beloved is white and ruddy, and the chief among ten thousand; And when there
are withdraw-drawings of God, as touching vigourousness of believing, Why art
thou disquieted, O my soul? etc. yet are there very large outlettings of God in
love-sickness and strong desires after the Lord, Psalm. 42. 2. My soul thirsts
for God, for the living God. So is it that some River which flows a far other
way, in a new cutted out Channel, the former being dried up. So the blood runs
in another vein, and still furnishes strength to the body: nor is there cause
to complain, as if all strength were gone; for when the afflicted man eats
ashes for bread, and drinks tears, and the heart is withered as grass, and the
man's bones are burnt as an hearth, Psalm. 102. the flood breaks out in another
corner. Ver. 12. But thou, O Lord, shall endure for ever; and thy remembrance
unto all generations. V. 19. He looks down from Heaven. 20. To hear the
groaning of the Prisoner: to loose them that are appointed for death. There is
some spiritual compensation in the Lord's forbidding the wind to blow in one
earth, when it strongly blows in another. Some deadned deserted ones are much
meekned and made to speak out of the dust, and fed and fatned also with hunger;
yea, if it were but lying at the gate of Christ and knocking, though no answer
at all be returned, it has much of Christ in it, in other considerations;
deadness may be on, and want of holy vigorous acting of faith, and yet
spiritual complainings; yea and with the complainings fervent praying, Psalm.
119. 25. My soul cleaves unto the dust: quicken thou me according to thy word.
Ver. 28. My soul melts for heaviness, strengthen me according to thy word. Ye
would judge righteously of the Lord, and see whether or no ye complain without
cause; for though there be fainting, yet there is hoping, Psalm. 119. 81. My
soul faints for thy salvation, but I hope in thy word. Some children are
always malecontent and still weeping, nothing in the house can please them: its
the fault of some greedy wretches, who have abundance, and yet still complain
of want. It were good to turn our censuring of the Lord's providence into
complaining of our own evil hearts, it follows humble and diligent obedience,
that has sweetness of submission, Psalm. 119. 165. Great peace have they that
keep thy Law and nothing shall offend; (...) impegit offendit pede.
or (as the word is) stumble their feet There is a heart-covenanting with God,
when the man says, God shall do nothing that shall stumble me; his killing of
me, his casting me out of his presence, into hell shall not offend me, Job 1.
22. 2 Samuel 16. 10. The man Christ could be broken or offended at nothing,
whether the traitor sell him, or the disciples forsake him, or the Jews
apprehend him, or the soldiers spit on his face, or Pilate condemn him, or the
people nod the head, shoot out the lip, and mock him; there is nothing can
break Christ, but the Scriptures must be fulfilled in Christ's sufferings. If
the Lord slay Aaron's sons, Aaron holds his peace. Let me be rained upon with
showers of influences from Heaven, or let my fleece be dry, and let me be a
bottle in the smoke, yet there is no unrighteousness with God, and in him is no
darkness. Ah, I am dead, but the Lord guides well; ah he is a Lion to me, and a
Leopard; but the Lord is good to the soul that waits for him. The man that
stumbles least at the sins of others and their falls, is the man nearest to
God's heart. Psalm. 18. 18. They prevented me in the day of my calamity. They
wronged me, ver. 25. But I kept my self from my iniquity: and what can ye say
against his withdrawings, will ye make it a quarrel that he hides his face?
there is a deep of sovereignty between the Lord's withdrawing from Hezekiah,
and Hezekiah's pride. God hardens Pharaoh's heart, and Pharaoh hardens his own
heart, Joshua 11. 19, 20. Isaiah 57. 17. Psalm 81. 11, 12.

Qu. But what shall be done under deadness?

Ans. 1. If there be any life, life helps life; the one part of the worm acts
upon the other to bring forth a motion of life.

2. Ye have no more reason to chide him for blasting your heart with withering,
then that the Lord sends a wind upon the Rose, and dries it up, and the grace
of it is gone.

3. Meddle not with his part but complain of your part; let his sovereignty
alone and confess your own guiltiness; Isa. 64. 6, 8. there is a confession of
our sin. But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as
filthy rags; and withal an acknowledgment of his Sovereignty, we are the clay
and thou our potter.

4. When the Lord withdraws, seek again and again, be sick after him, Cant. 3.
1, 2, 3. Cant. 7. 6, 7, 8. Joh. 20. 1, 2, 3, 13. and know that Christ is never
so absent, but there may be also much cause of praising and humble blessing
God, if there be love-sickness for him, hunger after him, and a spiritual
missing of him, as there is reason to complain of the withdrawing of his
influences; For Cant. 3. when Christ is absent, he is not absent; the soul is
shined upon when the soul is overclouded, Christ's absence is sometimes as good
as his presence.
for it is noonday at midnight; he is absent as to feeling, as to finding,
and quiet enjoying. I sought him, but I found him not; and again, I sought,
him, but I found him not: but he is strongly present and shining, as to
influences of grace. 1. In painful seeking in the bed by night, Cantic. chap.
3. ver. 1. 2. In and about the broad streets and ways, v. 2. 3. In using
public means; watchmen, saw ye him? v. 3. 4. In using other means in private.
I went a little further. 5. In holy missing. I found him not, v. 1. I found him
not, v. 2. In holy finding, v. 4. I found him. 6. And all the while his
presence is mighty in the soul-love to him. I sought him whom my soul loved,
four times expressed, v. 1. v. 2. v. 3. v. 4. so that the gleaning is better
then the full harvest, the midnight absence has as many sweet privileges as
the noon days presence. A sinners seeking, loving, and longing and languishing
after lost Christ is Heaven upon Earth; his pawns he leaves behind him are rich
and sweet; nor can one be out of Heaven in a better desertion then missing and
seeking the face of Jacob's God, Psalm. 24. 6. Psalm. 27. 8. Jer. 50. 4. so
groundless often is our complaining that we want Christ, that Christ guides and
tutors us badly, that he mis-guides rather. Ah, how sinfully querulous are we?
he does all things well, his absence is presence, his frownings sweet and
profitable. Yet is not this spoken to cool our fervor of seeking when we miss
him, and find him not, but rather we are to go on; not to say any thing of
Law-smiting and of Law-firings of the soul under apprehended wrath, especially
that which has Gospel-hope, and Gospel-sickness after Christ conjoined with
them; We are not to strive with the Law.
Romans 7. The Law slew me. The Law kills no man who is under Christ out of hand,
yea to such as are under grace somewhat of the Gospel-heaven cleaves to the
Law-hell. Its a miracle how some are burnt with the Law, slain with the terrors
of God, wounded with the arrows of the Almighty, and yet are green in the
surnace; as Job c. 6. c. 7. 20. I have sinned, what shall I do to thee, O thou
preserver of men? Ver. 21. Why do thou not pardon my transgression, and take
away my iniquity? To strive with the Law were to strive with God; so do Devils
and reprobates for eternity wrestle with the Law-justice and the Law-curse:
grace teaches meek assenting to the Law as good and spiritual; neither Christ
nor any of his live at ods and variance with the Law. Indeed to the Saints the
Law is, as they say of Elements, They exist not in their purity but with some
mixture; For the Law to believers is managed by Christ, and in his hands made
use of for saving ends, even when the believer is in the Law-furnace; nor is
there any who could guide and make so good use of the Law as Jesus Christ. Some
there are, that one nights waking under the terrors of the Law would make an
end of them, if invisible Gospel strength were not furnished to them; and here
there must be a mixture of Law-influences, and of Gospel impressions of Christ
upon the spirit. It speaks much grace in Josiah, 2 Kings 22. 19. to feel and
suffer, with softness and tenderness of a meekned and a tamed heart, the smart
and pain of the influences of the threatening Law. And its prevalency of grace
for Hezekiah, Isa. 39. to stoop to the like and to say, good is the word of the
Lord, even the word of a curse, Deuteronomy. 28. of threatening the saddest evils: as
to kick like a fatted horse and to spurn at such impressions of wrath born in
upon the conscience in Pharaoh, Exodus 10. 28. in Achab, 1 Kings 22. 26. in the
Priests, Prophets, and People, Jer. 26. 8. of the chief Priests and Pharisees,
Matthew. 21. 45, 46. does proclaim much gracelesness of an undanted and unplowed
heart: where there is any ingredient of Gospel Grace, there is a coming down
and a stooping to the influences of God, of what kind soever, Sometime we may
pray against the decree of God, but its never lawful to resist his commanding
will.
yea and generally a gracious spirit dare no more resist and pray against the
Lord's will of pleasure or purpose in its event, then against any part of the
revealed will of God or the will of precept, either Law or Gospel. The
disciples were to watch and pray against the decreed and prophesied scattering
of the flock, and their fleeing and forsaking of Christ, Matthew. 26. 31, 32, 38,
41. but there can no case be given, in which we may resist the approving will
of God in his word; that then must be a sweet conformity with God, when the
heart sweetly closes with impressions of rebukes, threatenings, convictions, and
influences of Evangelick commands. Its good earth that easily yields and cedes
to the breakings and tillings made by the Plough; Its good to answer every
impression of his word.
let the word act as the Lord will, in all its kinds, and the soul says amen:
but the ground that breaks the Irons of the tilling Plough is convinced to be
rocky and barren: every string of the harp beaten on by the hand of the
Musician, gives a resound like it self; a Bell of silver has an other sort of
excellent sound then a Bell of Brass or Iron: the gracious heart answers to
every letter and impression of the word, to the promise with faith, to the
precept with pliableness of obedience, to the threatening with softness and
godly trembling; for all the Word and Law and the several parts thereof are
written and engraven in the heart; and the gracious heart is a double or a
second copy of the Old and New Testament. So Achab on the contrary meets every
word from Micaiah with hatred, and there is a resound and an echo of hatred and
persecution which in the Pharisees meets the words of rebuke in Christ's mouth,
and bitterness in Herod resounds when John Baptist does rebuke his incest, and
adultery. Take it for a sad condition when there is a practical contrariety and
hatred betwixt the heart and the word of the Lord; a heart loathing of the word
and a rejecting thereof is dreadful; whereas the esteeming of the word sweeter
then the honey or the honey comb, more then thousands of silver and gold, the
man's treasure, his heritage, his souls delight and love night and day, his
work, meditation, study, wisdom, do proclaim much of the new creation; the
word being the seed of the new birth, 1 Pet. 1. 23. The new birth.
and new creations must love the mother seed, its own native beginning, as the
streams are of the same nature and likeness with the fountain: the Word tries
all men's hearts, see Joh. 7. 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46. Luke 4. 21, 22, 23,
24, 25, 28, 29. Acts 2. 12, 13, 37, 38, 39. Acts 7. 54, 55, etc. Acts 13. 38,
42, 43, 44, 45, 46. Acts 14. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. Acts 17. 34, 35, 36. Some
believe, some mock, the natural man cannot close with the word. We may weep
over our own dry hearts, when we want influences, but we cannot weep against
the Lord because he gives not these influences.


Now Christ is given as a Leader and Commander to the people, Isa. 55. 4.
charge him not as a misleading and a rash guide because he carries you through
a wilderness where there is neither flood nor fountain on the Earth, nor dew
or rain from Heaven; you are withered and no influences come from him, let
faith complain of the barrenness of the Earth but justify the dryness of the
clouds: its the wisdom of God that teaches the believer to weep because he
wants rain and moistness and is sinfully dry; and yet to submit to him who
denies rain, and dew; for he gives not, here upon just grounds and holily; I
want, deservedly for my just demerit.

Part. II
CHAP. I.
1. God acts upon the creature first, and not the creature first upon God. 2.
The Lord's dominion of influences on free will. 3. Nor are we to be idle and
sleep, because the Lord is Master of his own influences. 4. The Lord commands
not us to have, or want influences. 5. Influences are not our warrant to act,
but the efficient cause thereof.

HItherto much has been said of the Sovereignty of the Lord in divine
influences. Now are we to speak of the way of getting these influences, and of
the necessity of them, and how we may fetch the wind.

1. By natural actings.

2. By supernatural actings; by the word and promise.

3. By the efficient causes of influences, especially by the Spirit. Hence the
division of influences.

1. By the infused habit of grace.

2. By spiritual dispositions.

In all which our faith, praying, using of grace, have their several influences.

What we may do to fetch heavenly influences from God, is above my reach to
determine: only let these Propositions be considered.

Prop. 1. God by order of nature first acts upon the creature, and gives his
stirring up influence to it. We cannot, in genere causae physicae, first breath
upon God; he prevenes the Sun, and the Sun rises or rises not, as the Lord
pleases to act upon it; but no second causes do prevene the first or universal
cause: the Sun and Heaven do act first upon the Rose, but the Rose does not
first act upon the Sun and Heaven; Job 37. 7. He seals up the hand of every
man that all men may know his works, etc. By the breath of God frost is given;
this shows that the host of creatures in Heaven and in Earth, and the Sea are
all dead passive sleepy ciphers and can do nothing, if the Lord do not stir
them. God must be Father, Lord, and Author of all created actings, and faith
would without carefulness or unbelief commit all to so wise a Steersman; though
( Phil. 4. 6.) the Sea shall drown me, the Fire consume me, the Air suffocate
me; yet I desire to hear and obey that, Be careful in nothing, but pray, Matthew.
6. I shall perish for want, ver. 25. We are to meet all conditions of life with
closing with his holy dispensation.
Take no thought. They will kill me, if I confess Christ; Fear not, Matthew. 10.
28, 29. your Father cares for two sparrows and for every hair of your head. O
but the Ship I am in is a sinking. Matthew. 8. 26. Why are ye fearful? waken
Christ by praying; ah, my little daughter is dead, Fear not, only believe, Mark
5. 36. ah they shall deliver us to synagogues and prisons, and bring us before
Kings, and all men shall hate us for Christ's sake. True: But there shall not
one hair of your head perish; Luke 21. 12, 17.
its but our unbelief which sees God suffering all to roll and reel as Fortune,
Nature, and Devils will, which makes us sinfully care; For the Lord and Father
of Christ cannot vace, and Christ's not working is contrary to John 5. 17. but
all are in a good hand.

Obj. But Heman says, Psalm. 88. 13. In the morning shall my prayer prevent
thee, So the word (...) in piel, antecessit, antevert it, praeoccupavit,
anticipavit; its to go before in time, in earliness, Psalm. 119. 148. Mine eyes
prevent the night watch. Deuteronomy. 23. 4. The Amalekites prevented you not with
bread; its to go before in place, Psalm. 68. 26. The singers went before; its
strange that any prayer could prevent God.

Ans. Not properly, he says himself, JOb 41. 11. Who has prevented me (the
same word) that I should repay him? then our preventing of God should lay some
debt upon God, which is unpossible; and as Paul observes, Romans 11. 35. (...);
who gave him first? Therefore 1. He speaks Psalm. 88. of God after the manner of
men, as if Heman, in a manner, were more early up in the morning to pray then
the Lord were ready to hear; the contrary whereof is true; as if Heman's early
praying wakened God, Psalm. 44. 23. Awake, why sleep thou? 2. There is a
preventing of God as a Deliverer and a Comforter; Now we cannot prevent God.
God's order is, that our praying makes an impulsion and stirring on the Lord
first, and then he delivers and comforts, Psalm. 24. 6. Psalm. 18. 6, 7, and 16.
and so in order to comfort and deliverance in genere mediorum moralium prayer
wakens Heaven and puts the Lord a working; but as touching the order of real
and physical actings, the Lord prevents us: the string of the Harp or Viol is
not said to touch the hand of the Musician, but the Musician's hand touches
the string, hence is Music. Nor does the Axe stir and lift up the arm of the
Carpenter, but the Carpenter's arm lifts up the Axe: therefore they who teach
that our prayer and the actings of our free will can, and may prevent grace, in
place of preventing grace, give us nature and the creature preventing God: we
read of the Father drawing us, and the Son with the odor of his ointments
drawing sinners; but to teach that nature prevents grace is to say we are
before and above God: whereas the Rose warms not the Sun, but the Sun warms and
nourishes the Rose; and the corn and herbs do not refresh the Heaven and the
Clouds, but Heaven and Clouds nourish and refresh the corn and grass; and it
must be untoward and froward divinity that the sick man heals the Physician. It
is the grace (to speak so) of the Lord's free grace that the Lord prevents us,
not we him; its impossible that nature can prevent grace.

Prop. 2. Though the Lord's promise and his free decree has tied himself (in a
manner) to be prevented by a moral cause; The Lord strongly bows free will.
yet that moral cause even the praying man stirs not until God first prevent
him to pray. Hence the Lord moves and wheels about the heart and will of the
man, who is most free and most absolute among all the sons of men, even the
King, Prove. 21. 1. and that not if the King will and say amen with his prior or
former or collateral consent, but whithersoever Jehovah will. Hence our prayers
that God would incline our hearts to his testimonies, Psalm. 119. 36. Not
incline the heart to any evil thing, Psalm. 141. 4. Unite the heart to fear his
name, Psalm. 86. 11. So Jacob prays the Lord would give his sons favor in the
eyes of the Governor of Egypt a Heathen man as to him: ( Esther and her maids
pray for grace in the eyes of Ahasuerus,) see Genesis 43. 14. The Lord Almighty
give you mercy before the man. If God could not indecliuably bow the will to
his own way, side, or end, (be it by antecedent predetermination or what way
else you shall call it, so the Lord be the more Master of willing and nilling
then the creature) but in so doing he should destroy free will; we should in
all such petitions pray for the destroying of free will, where sure, we pray
for perfecting and the sanctified bowing of free will to obey God. 2. If the
dominion of free acts remain strongly in the creatures power, we must in these
suits ( incline my heart unto thy testimonies) (lead us not into temptation)
pray the Lord for that which is not in his power to give. 3. If God do carry
free will whithersoever he pleases, then we must not defer the only praise of
our obedience, and of our victory over temptations, to the grace of God, but to
free will which made the discriminating difference. 1. Hence we are to commit
our free will to the Lord's dominion of grace, and not to believe that such a
tottering Goddess as free will which has lost and destroyed Angels and the
first man Adam, can guide well enough; Yea, 2. we are to bless the Lord for
that impotency (if so it may be called) that the sovereign Lord's heavenly
influences are not in the creatures coffers, to be husbanded by the creature;
how false is it that Christ has bought free will to himself. 3. How sweet is
it that our head Christ, and we in him are more masters of men's hatred and
favor, then they are themselves, Prove. 3. 1, 4. Psalm. 106. 46. for would
enemies and haters show us favor and love, if they were absolute Masters and
Lords of their own hatred and love? not at all; we must thank and bless an
higher hand then such men. 4. Should we pray more, we should be more rained
upon in our withered condition, by showrs of influences of grace.

Object. By your way we cannot pray for influences, except the Lord bestow on
us other foregoing influences.

Answ. What follows but that we are to pray that we may pray, We are to pray
for our own prayers.
and that we are to pray for our own prayers that they may be steeled with
faith and strength of grace; And David prays for his own prayers, Psalm. 5. 2.
Psalm. 28. 2. Psalm. 88. 2. Psalm. 141. 2. 2. Would the Objector relish prayers
without influences of grace? can nature pray in the holy Ghost? can Christ
intercede for the accepting of natures work?

Prop. 3. Because God only is Lord and Master of freewill and of the actings of
all creatures, There is no warrant for us not to act, because God is Lord of
our actings.
we are not to be idle, and upon that account to act nothing; for then should
not the husbandman plow, sow, and labor; for God only is Lord and Master of
the actings of the husbandman; and without the influences and blessing from on
high, the husband-mans labors from the beginning of the year to the end, were
no better then to plant Vine-trees in the bottom of the river Euphrates, or to
sow Barley or Wheat in the Ocean sea. And so should the Seaman never sail; for
God only can create winds and tide, and God only is Master of the ebbing and
flowing of the Sea, and of sailing, and of right steering of the Vessel; for
since the Lord declares not his mind on the contrary, by forbidding men to
pray, How we are to do, though God only work in us to do.
and others to plow and sail. 2. Since the Lord offers no positive violence to
hinder these actings; And 3. because he commands us to do them, it becomes
us to set to work, and to act with and under him, and to commit the event and
blessing to him. Indeed, if the Lord were so Lord of our actings, as he did all
and whole the work, and we did act nothing at all in praying, yea and in
plowing, but were mere dead and useless patients, as Libertines dream,
something might follow to justify our idleness; but our corruption following
Satan teaches us either to sacrifice to our own net, and say vainly, either we
do all, and God does nothing, and so we darken his glory who works all our
works in us, and for us, or then we say on the other extreme we do nothing,
and God does all; and therefore must we say let God pray, labor the earth,
trade and sail, and put our hand in our bosom and sleep? but the former is
sacrilege and idolatry, and robs the Lord of his glory, and the latter is
proclaimed disobedience; Yea, and whether the influence of God antecedently
master the creatures actings, or we jointly and collaterally be mastered and
determined by the creature, we are in both cases to act and do what is good,
and are not to make God's influence our rule of doing, or not doing.

Prop. 4. Hence to have, or not to have the influence of God, is not commanded
in the Word nor have we any physical power over the Lord's acts of Omnipotency;
for we do not formally love God and keep his Commandments, in a way commendable
(if we speak of the moral cause of obedience) because he works in us both to
will and to do, but because he has commanded us to love him, and to keep his
Commandments, John 14. 15. Psalm. 119. 4, 5, 6.

Hence 1. The Libertine is blasphemously wide, the creature can do (says he)
nothing good or evil, God works all sin, all obedience immediately in us; its
in vain to read, pray, hear the word, meditate, confer, or go about works of
reforming abuses in religion, because all these are to no purpose, without the
spirit. 2. We are not to do any thing, because God in his word has commanded
us to do it, The Word is the rule of doing, the Spirit the real efficient
cause.
but because the Spirit immediately acts in us to do, and immediate impulsion
of the Spirit is now instead of the Law and of the word of God, either written
or preached; but this is a wicked confounding of the efficient real cause and
the strength of which we obey, with the objective cause and morally directing,
commanding and persuading rule according to which we are to regulate and order
our obedience; yea, and children can contradict this who know that the Mason
who imploys his strength to build, must be differenced from the Masons Rule and
the Art, plummet and line according to which he works: for otherwise its all
one as to say the power or faculty visive of seeing were light were colors
that are seen, and the soldiers force and strength of apprehending a man, and
Law and justice according to which they do it, were all one: a gracious soul
does all acts of obedience upon the account of a command of God, and fetches
his moral and godly delight from the command of God: the facility and strength
of doing is indeed from the Spirit, for whose help he desires to be thankful
and to whom he desires to give all the praise and glory.

2. Its a false Spirit which is so contrary to the word of precept and command.

3. Its fit to subscribe to that, Psalm. 127. 1. Except the Lord build the
house, they build in vain that build; except the Lord watch the City, the
watchman waketh but in vain. 1 Cor. 3. 7. So then neither is he that planteth,
nor he that waters any thing but God that gives increase. But the holy Ghost
never dreamed of such an inference, therefore let builders, watchmen and
Ministers of the Gospel go to bed and sleep, for God, he alone shall build
Cities and Houses, and watch over men and all societies, and bring all souls to
Christ; yea, he has commanded us to act and to help the Lord (so he speaks,
Judges 5. 23. 1 Cor. 3. 9. 1 Cor. 4. 1. and it has a real truth, though he
needs no help from the creature) and we are for his holy commands sake to act,
and to eye and trust in him who in all the acts of nature, and economy and art
leads the way, and in all the acts of grace; yea, we are to rejoice that the
Lord Jesus is Master of work and only Steersman.

CHAP. II.
1. What the natural man can do to get influences; the natural man can do
more then he does, and can exercise the natural powers to come within the
bosom of the net, though he cannot hale himself to land. 2. How the Lord can
command the naturally blind to see and believe. 3. How sin original deserves
eternal wrath. 4. Its such a sin in infants. 5. The want of original
righteousness and a power of believing is a sin in us. 5. How the Lord
commands impotent men.

THe greater doubt is how the Lord can command supernatural acts to a man
drowned in nature: How the Lord can lay by a command, supernatural duties on
men impotent and dead in sin.
but its not here as when a Tyrant commands a child to wheel about the first
heaven, else he shall kill him: for the so moving of the heaven is neither a
moral duty, nor was it ever a duty compassible by the physical power of the arm
of a child or a strong man. But the main intent of our Lord in laying on
supernatural commands upon man unable to believe, is that men may know what
they can pay, and what they owe and can never pay, but not of their own pay the
debt of faith: the precept is not unrational where the end is rational. 2. Not
that the natural man may satisfy, but that he may come and compone, and
acquiesce to a friendly Gospel treaty; for nothing heightneth the price and
worth of Christ more in the shining of free grace, nothing kills and renders
self-condemned the man more then a seen necessity of forgiving love; yea, the
reading of the writ of the Law-debt with tears, when this is holden out to us
(the Lord gave a bill of grace to those who had nothing to pay and he forgave
them frankly) is a strongly convincing dispensation.

2. Something which is really little or nothing, a natural man may do to fetch
the wind when he cannot command it, and cannot sail, he may and often does
exercise the natural faculty of moving from place to place, and comes as a mere
natural man, upon a mere natural motive, sinful curiosity, We may use the
loco-motive faculty in hearing and God convert men beyond their intention.
and a purpose violently to apprehend Christ, as the soldiers do, John 7. 45,
46, 47. yea, with bloody hearts and a purpose to persecute as the hearers of
Peter do, Acts 2. and yet beside and contrary to the will and intent, the man
is wrought upon, and converted before he go away; as some go to Sea and sail to
India poor with no intention to be enriched with gold, but only to get bread,
and yet they come again from India rich with Indian gold, and many precious
stones far beside their intention. A man rude and ignorant goes to Athens upon
no purpose to become learned, yet providence so disposes that he falls in love
with learning, and studying many years, he returns from Athens a most learned
man. Now no man can say that either the Indian gold, or the learning of Athens
did contribute any real or physical strength to his loco-motive and natural
faculty of journeying to India or Athens: so neither can it be said the Spirit
of grace or the Gospel of grace did add any new real and physical strength to
Peter's hearers to cause them to come in under the stroke of the preached
Gospel. Now the Gospel is the power of God to salvation; the Apostle uses such
spiritual weapons of warefare to cast down strong holds; its the arm of the
Lord, Romans 1. 16. 2 Cor. 10. 56. Isa. 53. 1. and the preached Gospel is the
triumphing chariot of Christ conquering, Christ's office-house of free grace.
Now a man on his own feet, and by his own strength, though sick, may come to
the Physicians office-house where all his medicine boxes and helps and remedies
of health are, and be cured ere he go a way, and may go away with perfect
strength and health; yet he came to the Physicians house in no strength nor
health, which he received from his art and medicine. The Word is the net, the
Fish may come in its own natural motion within the bosom of the net; but its
the strength of the arms of the Fisher, that hales the Fish to land; the Fish
catches not it self. The word of God is a sharp two-edged sword, and does the
work by the Spiri^^ Heb. 4. 12. The mouth of Christ is like a sharp sword, Isa.
49. 2. His arrows are sharp in the heart of the Kings enemies, whereby the
people fall under him, Isa. 45. 5. A man may in his own natural strength come
in within the shoot of Christ's arrow, and under the smiting and stroke of the
drawn sword of the Gospel; for Christ puts forth his power in his Ministers,
and renewed and unrenewed may come and hear.

3. The difference betwixt the Law and Gospel is, that the Law neither promises
nor gives strength, but presupposes that the man has strength: but the Gospel
promises a new heart, and the Law engraven in the heart; therefore Christ does
reign in the New Testament in the actual Omnipotency of grace, and men by a
mere local motion of nature or some superadded morality good or bad, come in to
wisedoms house of wine, and bring themselves in under the scattered fire coals
of Gospel-administration, with no intention spiritual to believe and be saved;
and so the coming in to hear, and the applying of the natural organ of hearing,
the setting on work the unrenewed mind, judgment, conscience, heart and
affections to the literal considering and weighing of the strong reasons that
are in the Gospel casts the man and his soul by a good and inevitable
consequent under such heavenly flamings of quickening influences as convey the
preached Gospel by an Ordinance of God, in due order, to cause such as are
chosen of God believe: its in a man's free will to draw near to the fire, or not
to draw near, but when he is come to the fire side, the fire can make him hot,
whether he will or no. By a free election a man casts timber in the fire; but
without any election, a strong fire cannot choose but burn dry fuel. Its true,
the seaman cannot create winds, nor change the blowing of the wind from East
to West; yet he can prepare his vessel, hoise the sayls, and fit the ship for
receiving the winds. The husbandman has no command of winds, of rain, of
clouds, of summer Sun; yet may he dress, labor, and sit and prepare his rigs
and garden to lie under the seasonable influences of such Summer air, rain, dew
and impressions of the heaven and the clouds, as the Lord of nature shall
afford. Now as all the Kings and Powers on earth cannot command wind and rain;
so is there no industry required of the husbandman to procure summer or calm
seasons: nor can the Plough act upon the Sun and clouds; nor is the blame to be
laid upon the Seamans sleepiness, that the wind is not fair for sailing, and
that the Sea flows not so high; yet has the Lord of purpose left to all
unrenewed men born where the Gospel is preached, the gates and ports of
wisedoms house open, that they may come and hear, and pass their judgment what
they think of Emanuel's land, that runs with wine and milk; yea and the entry
to this house is feazable and accessible, by natural strength, to fools and
idiots, to learned and unlearned; so that they need not say, Who shall ascend
up to heaven? That is, to bring Christ again from above: Or, who shall descend
into the deep? That is, to bring up Christ again from the dead. But the word is
now near even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that is, the word of faith which
we preach, Romans 10. 7, 8, 9, 10. Deuteronomy. 13. 14. The preached Law leading
pedagogically to Christ in Moses time, and the plainly preached Gospel offered
to all in Paul's time, is an open door to all, who love to come near to Christ
and to be warmed by him; in which consideration there is a key put in every
man's hand. 1. The unrenewed man turns away his ear from the Law, and will not
let the news of the Gospel lodge in his ear, or the outer room of his soul; ye
set not a work the literal actings and cogitations of the heart, to think
whether Christ, and Heaven and Hell conconcerns you, or no. So 2. The believer
under deadness and saddest desertion, when he is at this, All is but
counterfeit work I had before, Psalm. 31. 22. Jer. 2. 4. Job 13. 24. God reputes
me as an enemy; He may read the word, hear the Gospel preached, and cast
himself in Christ's way, and come in under the cast of his saving influences,
and so the fire may be kindled of new: the sin is that the natural man uses
wit, judgment, memory, for a worldly bargain of gain, but not for salvation. 3.
Christ is in his own ordinance: never man before he be converted, can savingly
intend his own conversion; Peter and John, and Matthew, when Christ spoke to
them, minded no saving work on their spirits; nor did the three thousand, Acts
2. nor the Jailer, Acts 16. mind so much as they met with. Many came to Christ
for bodily health, and to be freed of Satan in a bodily possession; yet when
they see and hear Christ lying at wait, in ambush, in the preached Gospel, they
are beyond their intentions taken captives. There is a great difference betwixt
the doing of the bulk and body of an action, and the action commanded by the
highest authority of God; even though the man perform not the action upon the
account of a divine command. Suppose Naaman had seven times and seventy seven
times washed himself in Jordan, some days before the Prophet of the Lord
commanded him to wash, it had been to no purpose, he had not been cleansed from
his Leprosy. It were good we prize more that which men call the foolishness of
preaching: the Spirit breaths in, and through his own ordinance, when we know
not.

Quest. How can it stand with justice to command us, to make our selves a new
heart and a new Spirit, since we are unable to make to our selves a new heart?
Ezech. 18. 51. for says Pelagius, inability to obey cannot be both a sin and a
punishment of sin.

Ans. Gospel-commands stand well with divine justice. Pelagius to heighten
this, said, if our inability to obey be a punishment, its not a sin, and if a
sin, its no punishment; for punishment cures sin. Augustine. de natura and
gratia, cap. 29. Quid amplius dicam (inquit Pelagius, non ipse Augustinus, ut
pessime Jesuitae) nisi quia potest credi, quod ignes ignibus extinquuntur, si
credi potest, quod peccata peccatis curentur? Now we may believe (said the
Pelagians) that fire may be extinguished by fire, if sin be cured by sin; and
if God command both obedience and our impotency to obey be both a sin and a
punishment? so Julianus a disciple grosser then the master. August. lib. 5.
contra Julian. c. 4.
1. The commands of circumcising our selves to the Lord, and of making a new
heart, which are laid upon us, are materially Evangelick; but as they are
charged upon unrenewed men they are formally legal, upon the Lord's intention
also Evangelick to the chosen to fit them for Christ: Nor can these commands
have this sense; I command and enjoin to you the omnipotent infusion of a new
heart. 1. God lays no acts of the infinite and omnipotent God upon the finite
creature. 2. It is not his intention, nay nor his will, that reprobates create
in themselves, new vital principles of life, since no such supernatural
principles of the life of Christ, was merited to them by the death of Christ.
3. Its not physically possible to the Elect or to any to create a new heart to
themselves from the very same principles in number, which they lost in Adam:
for its a contradiction, that what is done, should not be done, and what is
lost, should not be lost. Nor can the Lord command the glorified in Heaven, in
whom the habit of holiness is perfected, to be now in glory justified by
works; for as its a contradiction, that such as once broke the Law, can be said
never to have broken the Law, so is it a contradiction, that such as have once
sinned and fallen from Lawrighteousness, should ever after, So Pelagians taught
that the godly before Moses Law were saved by the law of nature. Epist. ad
Demetrium. Hac lege naturae (verba Pelagii sunt) usi sunt omnes quos inter
Adamum atque Mosem sancte vixisse, atque placuisse Deo Scriptura commemorat.
August. l. 2. imperfect. operis cont. Julianum. Quid timetis magnum populum and
Christi Judicium magnum non timetis? aperte dicite, justificari natura,
justificari lege possumus? gratis mortuus est Christus. lib. 2. cont. Juli c.
8. Epistol. 95. Sermon. 36. de verbis Domini. Non solum ad facienda, verumetiam
ad perficienda mandata divina per liberum arbitrium humana sufficit natura. Tu
nos fecisti homines, justos autem ipsi nos fecimus. Aug. l. de Gestis, Pelag.
c. 14. Lib. 4. ad Bonefac. c. 11. l. 2. imperf. operis, l. de spiritu and
litera, c. 1. Pelagius l. 2. de lib. arb. apud August. l. de great. Christi, c.
4. Nos sic tria ista distinguimus, and certum velut in ordinem digesta
partimur, pri^o loco posse ( Cornel. Jansen. tom. 1. de haeresi Pelag. l. 4. c.
13. p. 87.) esse sine peccato statuimus, secundo, velle; tertio esse; primum
illud, id est posse, ad Deum proprie pertinet, qui illud creaturae suae
contulit, Duo vero reliqua, hoc est velle and esse ad hominem referenda sunt,
quia de arbitrii font descendunt.
even for eternity be justified by that Law-righteousness which once they lost,
or that they should be justified both by grace, or by the redemption that is in
Jesus without works, Romans 3. 15. Romans 4. 1, 2, 3. and also should be justified
by debt and hire and by works, as Paul opposes the one to the other, Romans 4.
and no doubt all the glorified were once justified by grace without works; even
Abraham, David, and all like them* how then can they be justified by works for
ever and ever in Heaven? see Romans 11. 6.

Qu. What then requires the Lord in these ( believe ye in Christ) [make you a
new heart] except we say we have strength natural to obey, and that by natures
law many were saved?

Ans. 1. He requires the free act of believing, but withal he requires what is
our duty and moral obligation, but not what is our physical strength to perform.

2. He shows our impotency to wrestle out of the pit of misery, except he give
us Evangelick strength to escape: nor is it the Lord's intention or decree that
such as have fallen in the first Adam should rise again by the first Adam, or
their own strength; or should pay of their own, the money that they wasted in
Adam.

Or 3. That they should have, or get again the same individual sanctified
power, which they lost in Adam.

Or 4. That they should have these influences of God they once lost.

Object. They are either condemned, because they believe not by their own
strength, or because they believe not by a supernatural grace, but both are
physically impossible. Now we can all keep the Law whole our selves, justify
our selves, live without sin.

Ans. 1. They are condemned, because they believe not through a supernatural
power, which power all are obliged to have; for it was once a concreated and
gifted power: and the want of the power of believing is a culpable and sinful
want of that image of God, which man is obliged to have, Romans 3. 23.

2. Whatever principle and power of believing be the ground of Gospel-unbelief
which condemns men, the sons of Adam love that want, and such as are within the
visible Church are condemned for their voluntary unbelief, John 5. 24. and John
5. 40. Ye will not come to me, that ye may be saved, (...); As for the want of
the power of believing, it is common to all mankind, to such as hear the
Gospel, and to all the Heathen, and therefore cannot be the nearest formal
principle of that Gospel-unbelief, for which they are condemned, who being
within the visible Church, do not believe. And upon the same ground the
culpable want of the power of believing, as of the rest of the parts of the
image of God, must be a sin against the covenant of works, common to all
mankind: now such as never heard the Gospel cannot be guilty of a sin proper to
the covenant of grace.

Qu. What then? is that a just command that the Lord should charge, under the
highest pain, even of the second death, the blind to see; that is, that the
natural man believe, and in the mean time, Q What power of believing we want.
In what sense the Lord may charge men to believe who now in Adam have losed
power of believing.
God judicially puts out his eyes, and out of his absolute freedom refuses to
restore to him the faculty of seeing.

Ans. Suppose 1. That the want of soul power to see is both a sin, (the
contrary of it being moral goodness a part of original righteousness and of
the concreated image of God, to wit, of righteousness and holiness, Ephesians. 4.
23, 24. Colos. 3. 10. which makes a man lovely to God;) as also a punishment
inflicted, as Pharaoh's obstinate hardness is both a heinous sin, and also
judicially afflicted for former sins: And then the holy Law may as well charge
men to be holy and able to believe, though they be judicially blind: As God may
charge Pharaoh's heart to be soft, and moved with rods, and to yield to the
command, ( Let my people go) when God judicially hardens the heart.

2. Suppose that man loves willingly to be blind, as all love their native
blindness.

3. Suppose the blind man to be under the moral debt of having his seeing
faculty, even the complete image of God, and of loving, and not hating his
Physician Christ (when revealed and preached) who only can restore his faculty
of seeing. Now man remaining after the Fall a reasonable creature, is obliged
by the first command to believe God in all he says, and to love Christ, God
incarnate or not incarnate. He from whom the eyes are plucked, cannot be under
a moral obligation to see, because the eye sees not by freedom, that is,
inherent in the eye: But a man within the visible Church is obliged to perform
all free obedience of believing in Christ revealed, whether habitual or actual,
which his Creator commands; so the comparison halts widely.

4. Suppose the man does first with his own hand put out his own eyes, as we
did in Adam; and that the relation of penalty follows this blindness, by the
will of the just Creator, as its here.

5. Suppose the blind man gave virtual consent to the voluntarily loved want of
the lovely and gracious art of the only Physician, who can restore his sight,
as the case is here.

6. Suppose that the Creator of eyes has once given the faculty of seeing,
and that he is not obliged to restore it ever when the man casts it away; and
that the man a thousand times winks, Original sin is sin properly so called.
and shuts his eyes, and hates to be anointed; and you shall see there is no
ground to quarrel with the just and holy Lord.

Q. Whereas the contrary opinion that denies original fin to be sin, as
Pelagians, Arminians, Socinians, 1. Contradicts Scripture, which calls it both
sin and iniquity, Psalm. Author Imperf. operis l. 1. cont. Julianum, nihil esse
peccati in homine, si nihil est propriae voluntais, vel assensionis, hoc mihi
hominum genus quod vel leviter sapit sine dubitatatione consentit. Lib.
Imperfec. operis. 2. Quod admoneri non potest ut caveatur, imputari non potest
ut puniatur: nunquam autem Legislator ad hanc venit amentiam, ut praeceperit
cuiquam, noli ita, vel ita nasci. Lib. de peccato merit. and remis. c. 9. etc.
26. si peccator genuit peccatorem justum quoque justum gignere debuisse. Item
Deum qui propria peccata remittit aliena non imputare, item parvulis melius
esse ex parentibus non nasci. Vt jure damnabiles esse imo comparari parricidis,
in quibus sit causa ut filii nascantur ad damnationem. Vide l. 3. cont. Julian
c. ultimo. Item lib. 5. cont. Julian. c. 11. and lib. 5. 1. and oper. imperfec.
lib. 1. and cae. Mr. Baxter 's Preface to his Confession God will judge none on
the mere terms of the law of nature, nor condemn them only for original sin.
They that say otherwise, do too injuriously extenuate both the grace of God,
and the sin of man. Are not Infants condemned to death, and condemned heirs of
wrath? Romans 5. Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. 3. 2. Where has the grace of God made original
sin to be no sin, or pardoned sin? Has Christ washed all Infants in his
blood? Is that a supposed wrath? Ephesians. 2. Insants are not washed in Christ's
blood according to Pelagians and Arminians, but must be saved by some other
name then by the name of Jesus.
51. 5. Uncleanness, Job 14. 4. The frame of the heart evil. 2. Only evil. 3.
Continually. 4. From the womb, Genesis 6. 5. Genesis 8. 21. Offense, Romans 5. 15, 17,
18. Disobedience by which many are made sinners, 19. Indwelling sin, even when
Paul is justified. A body of sin, Romans 7. 17. 23, 24. The sin that does so
easily beset us, Heb. 12. 1. Shall we teach the Lord to speak?

2. The Lord says it is an offense by which many be dead, Romans 5. 15. By which
the judgment is, by one, unto condemnation (...). It is the condemnation to the
first and second death, from which we are delivered in Jesus Christ, Romans 5.
16. Romans 8. 1. It Is an offense by which death reigned as a King. Now if this
death be but a temporary death, how is it opposed to the reigning in life by
one Jesus Christ, Romans 5. 17? And as sin reigned unto death, even so grace
reigns through righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Romans 5. 21. Now except the Scripture had taught us that there is one sort of
sin that deserves temporal death, another that deserves eternal death, we
cannot believe Mr. Baxter.

3. It makes us children of wrath ( Ephesians. 2. 3.) by nature, as others are. If it
be temporary wrath only, and Infants be free of sin that condemns to the
second death; Christ bare in his body the sin of no Infants; Christ died for
sinners only, the just for the unjust, 1 Pet. 3. 18. Romans 4. 25. Isa. 53. 6,
10. Infants are not sinners, nor are sucking Infants laved and washed in his
blood, as others, Rev. 1. 5. Nor are they sinners whom Christ came to save, 1 Timothy 1. 15. Infants are not washed in Christ's blood according to Pelagians and
Arminians, but must be saved by some other name then by the name of Jesus.
Nor are Infants any of the many, or of the all, for whom Christ gave himself a
ransom, Mat. 20. 28. 1 Timothy 2. 6. And since the Kingdom of Heaven belongs to
Infants, and they are to be baptized, Act. 2. 38, 39. there must be some other
name by which Infants must be saved, then by the name of Jesus Christ, contrary
to Act. 4. 12. For what need is there of Christ's righteousness, and of
remission of sins, and redemption in Christ's blood, Romans 3. 25. Ephesians. 1. 7.
Col. 1. 13, 14. to Infants, if sin original be no sin.

4. Heathens, ignorant of sin original, are still left by such masters to
accuse Justice. If Infants be free of sin, why is nature called by them a
step-dame, which has brought forth men in such misery when they enter in the
world? Why do Infants suffer death, burning, drowning, ripping up, and wounding
in the womb? Why suffer they such wrath of pining sickness, incursions of
Devils, if all these be free of sin? Some say these are temporary evils, but it
proves not any sin deserving eternal burning to be in Infants. The Lord needs
not my lie; but let any man answer me in point of holy spotless justice, how a
punishment of ten degrees can more be inflicted for that which is no sin, nor
any transgression of a Law, then a punishment of a thousand degrees? See how
Mr. Baxter, with Arminians and Pelagians, can from Scripture teach us of whole
sins and half sins, whole wrath and hell, and half wrath and half condemnation,
or half hell.

Q. But what Law is there that we should have the power of believing, or the
image of God? The covenant of works does presuppose that image to be in man;
otherwise he is not in a capacity to be in covenant with God, therefore it
could not be enjoined and commanded in the covenant of works that Adam should
have this Image of God. And if so, the want of it must be a mere punishment,
not a sin.

Ans. God in creating man is both a creator and also a lawgiver.
The Lord in creating Adam must necessarily have a twofold Consideration. One
1. of a Creator. 2. Another of a Lawgiver. In the first the Lord creates
Being; but in the latter he is such a special Creator, to wit, a Law-giving
Creator, who, while he creates Being, does concreate these noble Principles,
and write and by nature ingrave the Law of the Image of God, the natural
knowledge of God, his holiness, justice, mercy, etc. and of right and wrong,
and a natural holiness and innate conformity of the heart to the eternal Law
of God in man's soul. A Painter draws the portraict of a living beautiful
heroic King, according to the living man; the Painter both gives being to the
painted image, and such a being, according to the law and art of painting; he
follows exactly and accurately his copy and living samplar, and so gives a
law to his own acts of painting. And therefore God, in one and the same act,
both creates man, and gives him a being, even holiness, his image, and holy
being; and in creating of man, gives, and concreates, and ingraves the image of
GOD, sound knowledge, right inclinations; and while the Lord creates, he gives
and ingraves a Law; and while he gives and ingraves a Law, he creates man. And
therefore it follows not that the covenant of works does not presuppose the
image of God in man; and it does not follow but the very act of God in stamping
and ingraving his image in Adam, is also a giving of him a Law. Yea, God in
creating any creature of nothing, does also concreate, as a sort of Lawgiver,
such a natural Law. Every creature, Sun, Moon, Heaven, Earth, Sea, Man, Angel,
ought to be subject as a creature to God Creator in being and operation. Here
is both the act of a Creator, and also the act of a Lawgiver.

Now the eternal Law of God requires that man's soul should be, by creation,
endued with the image of God; and Adam and Evah by that image said Amen to that
Law for a time, Eat not, lest ye die. They knew the Law was just, and they knew
it was their natural obligation to obey; and how can it be denied but this
knowledge was a part of the man's natural goodness and holiness, and so
agreeable to the eternal Law of God; and that the contrary of this, to doubt of
the truth of this, as Satan induced them to do, Genesis 3. was a blacking of that
fair image, and contrary to the law of nature?

2. The more of this image that is left in the souls of men by nature, as the
more knowledge, natural justice, and virtue remain in Aristides, Regulus,
Seneca, Tullius, etc. the more lovely they are, and so must their [souls have a
more natural conformity with the law of nature then other Heathens, who killed
their aged Fathers, sacrificed their sons to Devils, We are to be humbled for
sin original.
used wives promiscuously. Then, what God condemns in us, that we should
condemn in our selves, and therefore are to be humbled for our state we are in
by nature. For we are dead in sins and trespasses, by nature the children of
wrath, as well as others, Ephesians. 2. 1, 4, We our selves were sometimes foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and
envy, hateful, and hating one another. Psalm. 51. 5. Behold I was shapen in
iniquity, and in sin did my mother warm me. Upon this account the Lord suffers
his own to fall and lie in the dust, and to know what beasts they are, as the
godly confess, Psalm. 73. 23. Prove. 30. 2. themselves to be. Nothing men are
more ashamed of then that they are descended of a traitorous and bloody Family,
that sucked the paps of the bear or the wolf, that the father and mother were
dogs and swine, and they born of leprous parents: the house of sinful Adam,
that we lay claim unto, is a botch-house, and leper-house, and worse: And this
is more vile then if there were none of the world that we could claim kindred
unto but serpents, dogs, swine and wolves.

2. How proud and shameless are we to deny this running botch of sin original,
and say it is no sin? would it cure a man of a raging pest-boile, to say it was
no pest, to give it another name? It Is a part of original sin in our Atheism to
belie the Lord, and say it is soul-sicknesse, but it is not sin; it deserves
not the second death. Infants then, dying Infants, are no debtors to the
complete ransom of blood that Christ gave to deliver them from the wrath: And
when our Savior blessed Infants, and said, Of such is the kingdom of heaven,
his sense must be, that infants departing this life in infancy, hold heaven by
no Charter of Christ, the heir of all; are not washed from sin, are not
delivered from wrath to come, nor obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, as
it is in 1 Thessal. 5. 9.

3. What debt is this; who of Angels or men can pay the hire of free love to
Christ? ye were born beasts, Tigers, Lions, Dogs, and broods of Satan and the
Serpents seed, and Christ has made you sons of God, Kings and Priests to God,
heirs of life, coheirs with Christ, partakers of the divine nature, the
firstborn of God written in heaven.

4. No man can bring himself in a spiritual capacity to receive grace.
Never dream that your own strength, or good parts of nature can fit and
spiritually capacitate you for receiving influences for spiritual duties;
nature cannot more prepare it self for grace, and a gracious state, then a
Thistle can change it self into a Vine-tree: Christ is good at all
indispositions of deadness, of a natural state; whom he quickens that man and
he only shall live; who can help a dead heart, but he that is the resurrection
and the life, and he who raises the dead only can quicken such dead ones.

5. Its a bold and proud Pen that would plead and advocate for such a hellish
nature, and except Satan and his sons Pelagians; what do they but depose Christ
from his office of the Physician of sinners, and bid him go back to Heaven with
his Medicaments of free grace? There be here no sick folks, free will is strong
enough, new habits of grace are useless, the letter and moral acting of the
word can raise dead souls? shall we thus requite Christ for his free grace.

6. Though there be no merit in diligent seeking and hearing the preached
Gospel, its good to lie near the fountain for all that; as motion begets and
augments vital heat and activity to move, frequent seeking brings home
influences; so we are here in using means, compare Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3. with v. 4.
and Psalm. 22. 2. with Psalm. 18. 6. Genesis 32. 26, 27, 28. But of this hereafter.

CHAP. III.
The second particular of fetching influences is by supernatural actings by the
word and spirit. 1. Its a question whether justified ones perform any moral
actions without any influence of the habit of grace. 1. Some heat and warmness
may arise materially from actings in duties though customary, formal, dead. 3.
The exercises of spiritual actions are the best preparations for spiritual
actions. 4. Influences of grace oil the wheels of the soul for more spiritual
acting. 5. Natural and literal actings, though void of grace, because they are
some way under the institution of a divine command are nearer to saving actings
of grace, then the contraries of these actions are. 6. A practice of free grace
in the Lord, is to be differenced from a promise of grace. 7. How the Lord is
under a necessity of giving influences.

THere be some actings even in renewed men, How to fetch influences.
partly from the Spirit, partly from nature, custom or formality. The question
is thus framed, because it is a disputable question; Whether justified ones do
any actions morally good from an only principle natural, without any influence
of the indwelling spirit at all, since their sins, after their being in Christ,
are not committed with the full bensil of the will; for the Spirit in some
measure retards and weakens the motion of the flesh, Romans 7. and the habit of
sin original is weakened and remitted or slacked in its strength in the
regenerate; and therefore it would seem, if the spirit do weaken, retard and
blunt the actions of the flesh, that far more there is in all moral actions
that are good morally, some influence of the Spirit less or more. So the
Question is, whether or no the children of God may safely set to work, though
their actions proceed from conscience, natural power, custom or a mere office,
with little influence of habitual grace, to works of grace that they may fetch
influences of grace.

1. The Spirit of grace has his own influence in actions which the regenerate
perform out of custom and formality at least in the progress of these actions.
Its not unlike it may be so for the godly who went to the morning and evening
prayers and sacrifices, as is clear, Psalm. 141. 2. Acts 3. 1. Luke 1. 8, 9.
might go about these duties sometime upon mere custom (and the children of God
who know their own backdrawing hearts shall not deny this) and they may pray
from a natural conscience, and not so much as is required, and otherwise they
do mind the duty as an Ordinance of God, and yet be inflamed with spiritual
duties ere they end; this is confirmed by family praying at set times; so may a
Pastor by necessity of his office, preach and pray at the beginning with much
deadness and coldness, and more then an ordinary straitning of spirit, and yet
a fire flaught of a heavenly kindling falls upon the spirit before the work be
ended. Any who believes that the wind blows where it lists, and that the
influences of the spirit are various as touching their degrees may see the
truth of this.

2. The children of God appear dead, cold, and unbelievingly to complain in the
beginning of praying, and of a Psalm, as is clear in David, Psalm. 22. 2.
exponing that of him (as some verity it has in some points of him, v. 2.) and
in Ezekiah in his song, Isa. 39. 10. in Jonah 2. 1, 2, 3. and in the same
David, Psalm. 6. Psalm. 38. in the Church, Psalm. 77. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. in
the afflicted soul, Psalm. 102. 1, 2, 3, 4. and yet there is confidence of
believing, triumphing, rejoicing in God and praising, ere the Prayer and Psalm
be ended.

3. The prayers of the children of God, Psalm. 22. Ps. 6. Ps. 38. Psalm. 116.
Habak. 1. 12. of Heman, Psalm. 88. of Ezekiah, Isa. 38. of Jonah. c. 2. of
Moses, Psalm. etc. of the Church, Psalm. 102. Psalm. 89. hold forth to us
admirable variety of up-lifting and down-casting, of joy, of believing, of
sinking and doubting, of hoping, and legal fretting, strong ebbing and flowing
of faith, and fainting, of light and darkness; as Psalm. 22. 2. O my God, I cry
by day, and thou hear not; and in the night season, I am not silent; yet
arising, ver. 3. But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of
Israel! Ver. 4. Our fathers trusted in thee; they trusted and thou did
deliver them, etc. And again, some fainting is in that, v. 6. But I am a worm,
and no man; a reproach of men and despised of the people. Ver. 7. All they that
see me, laugh me to scorn, etc. At least this might brangle the faith of a
sinful man, such as David; And again, there is a rising, v. 9, 10. But thou art
he that took me out of the womb: thou did make me hope when I was on my
mothers breast, etc. So is there Psalm. 102. fainting, ver. 3. My bones are
consumed like smoke: and my bones are burnt as an hearth. Ver. 4. My heart is
smitten and withered like grass. And ver. 12. there is a rising of faith; But
thou, O Lord, shall endure for ever; and thy remembrance to all generations.
Ver. 13. Thou shall arise and have mercy upon Sion. Psalm. 77. 4. Thou hold
mine eyes waking; I am so troubled that I cannot speak. Ver. 7. Will the Lord
cast off for ever? Its low enough now, and yet how does the Church lift up her
head? Ver. 13. Thy way, O God, is in the sanctuary; who is so great a Lord, as
our God? So Lam. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 7, 8, etc. compared with ver. 2, 22, 23. in
which actings under unbelief and customary formality with some glimmering of
fainting faith eying the command of God, in the darkness, when there is no
light, Isa. 60. 10, 11, etc. there go along some farther actings of the spirit:
not that we think there is any truth of that of the Schoolmen; To him who does
what he can, by the strength of nature, God denies not helps and influences of
grace. Yet in these we see God comes along with his influences.

But if we say 4. That there are in the renewed child of God, some stirrings of
the spirit in all these acts, we go about under deadness, then one act of
praying, and the influence of grace makes way physically to another, and that
to a third; for to say nothing of the promise, To him that has it shall be
given, (of which hereafter) I do but provoke to the experience of the Saints,
if here the second pull of prayer be not stronger then the first, and the third
then the second, and the fourth above the third; for when the wheels are a
going, the Organs of the spirit do not weary: And there is a reserve of fresh
strength and a stronger recruit, and supply in Jacobs wrestling until the
dawning reserved, and more strength of heavenly violence to prevail with God,
then in his wrestling all the night, Genesis 32. 26. Let me go (says the Angel of
the Covenant, Christ) for the day breaks: And he said, I will not let thee
go, except thou bless me. 28. As a Prince thou have power with God, says the
Lord to him. And we see one throwing about of the key when the lock of the door
is rusted, makes the second throwing obout more easy, and the third throw
does yet more, and the seventh or the tenth throw makes the passage of the iron
bolt yet most easy, and the door at length, with little violence, is opened,
when now the rust and straitness is removed: And a flaming of the fire
prevailing over a dry tree, makes easy way to a second flaming, and that to a
third, and so to all the rest, till the timber be consumed, and the fire be
fully victorious. Believing adds to believing; praying begets more praying; and
we see motion breeds warmness, and that stronger motion, and cold hearts that
are dead, and almost frozen, by one smiting of influences grow hotter, and by
two or three or seven actings of the spirit, grow yet hotter, and yet more ^ot.
And there is something in that Cant. 6. 11. I went down to the garden of nuts.
12. Or ever I was aware, my soul made me like the chariot of Aminadab, or of my
wil^ing people. There is some stiffnesse upon the living man when he first
begins to move, but a little motion makes him more agile. Dr. Preston may aim
at the like truth. 2. Sermon on Pray continually, page 35.
If a man (says he) were to run a race, if he were to do any bodily exercise,
there must be strength of body, he must be fed well, that he may have ability;
but the use of the very exercise it self, the very particular act, which is of
the same kind with the exercise, is the best thing to fit him for it. So in
this duty of prayer; it is true, to be strong in the inner man, to have much
knowledge, to have much grace, makes a man fit and able for the duty: But if
you speak of the immediate preparation for it, I say, the best way to prepare
us for it, is the very duty it self, as all actions of the same kind increase
the habits, so prayer makes us fit for prayer: and that is a rule. The way to
godliness is the compass of godliness it self; that is, the way to grow in
grace, is the exercise of that grace. I wish this man of God, and others more
experienced then I, had said more of this unknown subject; and that the Lord
would sit builders in both Kingdoms to draw up a body of Theologia practica,
that Divinity were more in our hearts, its too much in the heads of many; only
I speak here of preparation to receive influences, D. Preston of the
preparation to duties, to praying under indisposition. But I would not be
understood so, as if I thought acts of influences, which are acts of
Omnipotency, might be sharpened and facilitated by our actings; Only my meaning
is that the passive capacity of the soul may be widened and enlarged to receive
showers of quickening influences from the Lord by frequent acts. Experience, in
my weak apprehension, may speak influence of grace oils the wheels of the soul.
Prove. 1. 5. A wise man will hear, and increase learning: and a man of
understanding, shall attain unto wise counsels. We grow hot, like hot iron
redded in the fire, by praying, and are softened and macerated like dry and
parched ground, by frequent showers; and though the heart be frozen and cold,
when we begin to duties of praying, praising, meditating, conferring of the
word, hearing, yet incalescimus, we grow warm by acting: the rising of the Sun
causes the Ice to drop off the houses. Its a naughty heart that is in the same
case after frequent prayer, that it was in before; It says that the man has
been sweating at the letter and bark of the duty; little of the bark or letter
of the duty takes glewing with the heart, but hardly can the grace of the duty
go along with the heart, but there is much that cleaves to the heart; so that
influences thaw the heart. Luke 24. 32. Did not (say the Disciples) our hearts
burn within us while he talked with us by the way, and while the opened to us
the Scriptures? Cant. 1. 4. When the King brought me into his chambers: we will
be glad and rejoice in thee, and remember thy love more then wine. Sure when
the influences of Christ are fiery and live coals, it is no wonder they leave
lively warmings upon the heart. Cant. 4. 16. Awake, O North wind, and come thou
South, and blow upon my garden that the spices thereof may flow out. It must be
a speech to the Spirit to breath upon the Saints that they may smell and flow
more in the actings of the spirit. Psalm. 119. 32. I shall run the ways of thy
Commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart. Running speaks more of a
spiritual capacity to receive drawing influences either actual or habitual; and
the enlarging notes straitning, and that influences find us dead and bring
vigourousness with them.

Though in this or that act of breathing there shine absolute liberty; for who
hired the Lord to moisten the withered tree? yet there is place for that
Question, Whether the Lord has not brought himself under a holy necessity of
giving influences? to which its answered in these.

1. As there is a necessity of a Decree relating to means and end, How the Lord
brings himself under a sort of necessity of conferring gracious influences.
so is there a necessity of a promise, as to the former. The Lord created the
first Vine-tree, and the first Rose, and they seeded and brought forth other
Roses and Vine-trees; the Lord first prevenes savingly the dead sinner and by
an infused habit (as we shall hear) puts the sinner under an obligation to
duties, and puts himself, because of his intended end, to save lost sinners (as
it were) under an obligation of bestowing influences of grace, (though in
another consideration they be given through sovereignty of grace) because his
holy decree carries him not to be wanting to his own seed, nor to forsake the
work of his hands. Nature giving hunger, and the holy and supreme Lord of
nature giving appetite to eat and drink, gives us also a power of concoction.
The Bird by an intended end lays one straw and one feather in the nest, and so
it must lay another and a third and a fourth; for the Lord of nature intends a
complete house for the Eggs and the young birds: and in like manner the Lord of
grace has a design of grace in his heart to bring many sons to glory. And he
must upon the like intention proceed, to make the seed a tree; but first he
must make it a plant, and ripen the grape and boil it more with the heat of the
Sun, until he make it ripe for the wine press and the fat: So must he add
influences daily of free grace for the perfecting of the work he has begun, in
his holy decree as well as in the execution, until he perfect it unto the day
of the Lord Jesus.

But 2. A practice of grace, and a promise of grace in God.
There is need to distinguish betwixt a practice of free grace in the Lord,
(some call it half a promise) and a promise of free grace: And these must be
cleared. As to the former; the Lord does many things of mere grace relating to
his free goodness. 2. To his free decree of grace. 3. To his holy order of
working, which he has not promised to do: As of his free goodness, he creates
the world, he feeds the Ravens, he preserves wicked Sodom from the sword, and
cursed Cham from being drowned, when the whole world in godly Noah's time
perished in the waters; yet has he engaged himself by promise to none of his
creatures, Angels or Men that he shall create the World, that he shall feed the
Ravens, that he shall preserve Sodom.

2. According to his free decree of grace he intends from eternity to save
Jacob; For he loved him, before he had done good or evil; and he ordains all
the chosen to life eternal. But because he decrees to bring Jacob and such to
glory, it follows not that he engaged by promise because of his eternal decree,
to bring Jacob to glory, except we should say what ever God decrees to do,
that also he promises to do; which were not good divinity.

3. As to his order of working; the Lord ordinarily from much laboring and
painful sowing brings a rich harvest; from careful watching he makes a safe
City; Yet there is not any promise in the word that from the simply careful use
of means, the desired end shall follow; for the City is often well watched, and
yet surprised: some sow much, and reap little, Psalm. 127. 1, 2. Hag. 1. 6, 9.

Yet is there a practice of free grace in this order; A Considerable difference
betwixt the Lord's promise of grace and his practice o^ grace.
that the blind men cry, Son of David, have mercy on us; (yet they possiby
intend only by the way side to beg) and Christ of free grace gives them seeing
eyes. There is no promise of grace that Christ shall heal all blind men begging
by the way, who shall pray to the Son of David for seeing eyes, or that the
Lord Jesus who is as mighty now as ever, shall send out influences to heal all
the blind so crying: for seeing eyes the Eunuch reads Acts 8. the Lord falls on
him, with influences of grace to reveal Christ in a saving manner, to him; not
because he reads, or because there is a promise made to save all who read the
word. Upon sinful ends, the multitude, Acts 2. come to hear the word; their
intention of hearing, being mocking enemies, was naught; Yet by a practice of
grace, not by any promise of grace they are converted. Now in this it may be
said, that the natural yea and faithless use of means has some influence ex
natura rei upon the effect, not by promise, yet by the decree of God; and so by
no merit, because by no promise (for another merit, then what is founded upon
free promise, and not upon the worth and condignity of work and wages, I hope
never to acknowledge, by his grace, whom I desire to be my inward teacher) and
to me reading, hearing, use of means, have a material influence as to the
practice, not to the promise of grace; For according to the Philosophy I
learned; six is materially a number nearer of blood and kindred to eight, then
four is; yet six and eight are numbers in spece and nature no less different
then eight and four, or then eight and two which are materially farther
different then six and eight, which are different only by two. So the Embrio
before life, and the birth now quickened by life differ in nature and spece, as
living and not living differ: Yet the Embrio the shaped organized body void of
life is materially nearer to a living birth, then the seed is to a living
birth. So I shall never teach that hearing, reading, literal considering of the
weight of reasons in the Gospel from Heaven, from the beauty and preciousness
of Christ, Civil professors are nearer to conversion and to Christ then the
openly profane and flagitious, and how they are also farther distant.
the excellency of free grace, the happy condition of a communion with the
Father and the Son Jesus Christ, the sweetness of the love of Christ, the
torment of Hell, though there be no acting of grace mixed therewith, are
unprofitable and hinder us from closing with Christ, and that they confer not
some influence ( materially) of help in promoving toward Christ; What these
trusted in may do as in another thing. Hence though there be no promise, no
moral connection betwixt simple using of means and influences of Christ, for
saving grace and the incoming of the new creation into the soul; yet
comparatively a connection there is, in this sense.

1. As painful tilling, sowing and laboring is nearer to a plentiful harvest
then lazy sleeping in Summer; so discretion and moral walking in the
Commandments of God, by which the man is not far from the Kingdom of Heaven,
and nearer to it, is nearer to conversion then the godless and slagitious
conversation of a dissolute wretch; as he, who is at a distance from a City, by
twenty miles only, is nearer to the City, then he who is distant a hundred
miles from it; though both be distant from it, and the one formally is out of
the City as well as the other; this is a wily comparison. I assert no
preparatory dispositions to conversion, as Papists and Arminians teach.

2. The man yet unplowed and never broken by the Law, standing in a whole
condition, not caring for, nor either needing, or valuing Jesus Christ is
farther from showers of saving influences, then the law-humbled and law-broken
sinner, who, though he be but half sick, like the woman with child, who is
under raw and far-off showers of childbirth pain, not yet, by some weeks, near
her time, needs not yet the help of the midwife, yet looks a far off to
childbirth pain.

3. Out of all question the proud gallant that fears neither God nor
reverenceth man, and has laid Atheistically his count and fixed his thoughts
concerning Heaven and Hell, has something more to do, before Christ rain
salvation on him, then he who prays, hears, gives alms, whores not, roars not,
blasphemes not; for he has fewer miles between him and Christ's influences.

4. Therefore though the natural man cannot pray in faith, and the renewed man
under a sad and deep deadness, can do little or nothing, yet literal and
natural acting at praying is not only better then nothing, but is by way of
command in genere mandati divini, External use of means is to be gone about, as
nearer to conversion then no use of means, or extreme profaneness.
more near to praying in faith and fervor then either blaspheming, or no
praying at all; even as literal and natural heat is nearer to spiritual and
supernatural heat, then extreme coldness; and as fire-heat is nearer to
life-heat or vital warmness (for it may and does often cherish and nourish
vital heat) then Ice-coldnesse; though as touching the nature and kind,
fire-heat and vital heat may well be thought to differ in spece and nature, and
all the fire-heat on Earth cannot restore vital heat to a dead man; and all the
sweet moral qualifications, discretion, natural zeal, civil virtues in their
summer greenness cannot put a man in a spiritual capacity to receive divine
and supernatural influences; yea, many carry such bewitching lusters to hell
with them, and never promove a whit farther then to the state of a civil
convert, a saint of Satan, and die so; and by accident civil saints are a huge
way farther from Christ, then robbers. Its true, some of our Divines have said
natural preparations are hurtful, destructive and noxious to conversion. I wish
they speak not so; their meaning is as they are trusted in, and men are by
assed by them, praying in the streets and giving of alms with sound of Trumpet
so circumstantiated in regard of, 1. The subject, proud Pharisees. 2. In regard
of the end, to be seen of men, not to glorify the Lord. 3. In regard of the
manner, as self-righteousness trusted in, to the loathing of Christ, are
destructive to sincere praying in faith and humble feeling, and to true and
sincere acts of charity. But we speak of the acts commanded as to their
substance; God highly is provoked at disobedience, when men will not put their
finger to a duty: and no doubt hypocrisy, in the manner of doing duties,
deadens the heart, and makes the soul unfit to receive influences; But this
hinders not but the unrenewed man, and the deadned convert, are to blow the
fire, and to go about duties, and to fetch the wind in their kind, and to cast
aboard and turn about, that they may sail and fetch the harbor; Yea, and if
there be not fire in the ship, without doubt the striking of steel and flint
may make fire. If a dead child of God cannot pray, cannot preach, cannot
believe, he is to say and take with him words, Lord, I cannot pray, I cannot
preach, I cannot believe: Nor in all these is any thing said against these two,
1. The rebukings of such as are in a dead state. 2. The promises of more grace
to such as use well what they have: of both these in the following Chapter. And
all these some way ripen us for gracious influences.

CHAP. IIII.
It Is required of the dead that they live, and that we must not cease from
running when the Lord ceases from drawing. 2. Commands put on obligations to
duties to such as are indisposed and unable. 3. We are to pray under deadness.
4. Deadness renders not men lawless. 5. The wicked shift of such as pray not
for the present, because they are indisposed; but promise they shall pray,
praise, etc. when a spiritual disposition comes on.

IF the meaning of some be by requiring a moral command to fit us for duties,
that such a command is enough, because it is a Gospel-command. Then is it false
that a moral command, as such, can fit or ripen us for duties: For Ephesians. 5. 14.
Wherefore he says, Awake thou that sleep (and it^s more then sleeping,
there being life in a sleeping man) and arise from the dead and Christ shall
give thee light. Here is both precept and promise given to the dead, who of
themselves cannot live: Yet it is morally required that they live; and John 5.
25. The dead in the graves are to hear the voice of the Son of man. And the
Lord binds the command on these that were as the men of Sodom, All, even the
most indisposed, are under a command.
Isa. 1. 5. A s^nful nation, a people laden with iniquity, the seed of evil
doers, children that are corrupters. v. 10. Wash you. v. 16. Make you clean,
put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes. Isa. 42. 18. Hear ye
deaf, and look ye blind, that ye may see. So the Apostle Peter charge Simon
Magus, Acts 8. 22. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if
perhaps the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee. And Jeremiah speaking
to a hardened Prince, speaks as to the earth that has no ears, Jer. 22. 29. O
earth, earth, earth, hear the Word of the Lord. And it is a vain thing to think
that these are to be confounded, the obligation to obey, and the impotencie and
indisposition to obey. For man's wicked weakness cannot remove the obligation
which the Lord in his holy Law lays on us: For wasting that brings on
inability to pay, makes neither the debt to be unjust, nor does it loose the
creditor from his right to crave and pursue the broken man, except we say that
poverty may pay all the debts in the world.

2. The Lord lays on rebukes, where he knows Cain cannot answer, Genesis 4. 6.
Why art thou wroth? if thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? So the Lord
speaks to Pharaoh, Exodus 9. 17. As yet exaltest thou thy self against my
people, that thou will not let them go? Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Do ye thus requite the
Lord, O foolish people and unwise? Psalm. 95. 10. Forty years long have I been
grieved with this generation; it is a people that do err in heart, they have
not known my ways. So says Elias to Ahab, 1 King. 21. 20. Thou have sold thy
self to work evil in the sight of the Lord. Psalm. 4. 2. O ye sons of men, how
long will ye turn my glory into shame? how long will ye follow vanity and seek
leasing? Psalm. 58. 4. They are like the deaf adder, which stops her ear. 5.
which will not hearken to the voice of the charmer. And because we are ready to
excuse our selves from our impotencie, the holy Ghost bears this upon them as
a charge, Jerem. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his
spots? then may ye do good that are accustomed to do evil. 2 Pet. 2. 14. Having
eyes full of adultery, that cannot cease to sin, Deuteronomy. 29. 2, 3.

3. Threatenings and curses are charged upon every one who abides not in all
that is written in the book of the Law to do it, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. And yet it is
beyond controversy that no flesh can keep the Law so as it requires, else
Jesus Christ died in vain, Gal. 3. See Deuteronomy. 28. 4. We are not freed from an
obligation to obey and run, even we who are renewed in the spirit of our mind,
because the Lord draws not. For charges and commands are laid upon us under
indispositions; yea the Lord speaks to such as lived in suffering times, who
could not choose but they must be in much heaviness. Phil. 4. 4. Rejoice in
the Lord always, again, I say rejoice. So speaks he to weak ones, Ephesians. 6. 10.
My brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. So speaks
Christ to fainting John, when in a swoon he could not command himself, Rev. 1.
17. Fear not, I am the first and the last. And to the perishing disciples, Mat.
8. 26. Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? And the mourner is most
indisposed to believe, Isa. 50. 10. He that walks in darkness, and has no
light, let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay on his God. We are
bidden be upon the wing and ready, though we be dumpish and indisposed, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. To obey that, pray without ceasing, in all things give thanks.
Yea under all contrary dispositions and habits of unbelief we are to act, Isa.
41. 14. Fear not, worm Jacob.

2. Our very graves owe living to God, and our sinful deadness ought to yield
to Christ living in us; our heaviness ows rejoicing to him, as the night is to
remove at the dawning of the day, and the cloud is to dis-appear and vanish at
the out-breaking of the Sun-light.

3. We are to pray under deadness, as David does, Psalm. 119. Quicken me in thy
way; quicken me in thy righteousness; quicken me according to thy word, Its a
sinful shift to put away duties because of indisposition.
etc. v. 37, 40, 88, 107, 156, 159. Deadness, when David had much of the
fullness of God, has been creeping on seven times, and he seven times prays
for quickening, like one that is every hour in a swoon; out of one swoon he
falls in another, he makes signs to such as are near by to be comforted with
wine and apples, as the Spouse, Cant. 2. 5. And therefore this is but a
childish shift, I am dead and indisposed, and therefore will not pray, nor
believe, nor hear, nor go about any such duties. Because you are dead and
indisposed, are you therefore lawless, and freed of all debt of duties which
are imposed by either the Law of God? or 2. the constraining love of Christ? or
3. bonds and ties laid on you by the free grace of Christ, and the state you
are in, being now translated from death to life?

Object. I Will go about duties when I am free and spiritually disposed.

Answ. 1. What warrant from the Word to delay duties, that by present
obligation of the Law of God are to be done while it is to day, lest hardness
of heart come on?

2. What assurance can any man have tomorrow, or the next hour, more then the
present hour, when deadness is on, that he shall be master of the Spirits
breathing on him, to fetch spiritual dispositions? Now omission of praying, and
of other duties, is a heinous sin. Can sin be a hire to purchase or buy the
breathings of the Holy Ghost? Did ever man get sweet access to God through the
Mediator Christ in prayer, who delays praying because he wants a praying
disposition? And can the Lord welcome in the Mediator Christ the man who
fathers the sinful omission of prayer, and other duties, upon the holy Spirit
of God? Loose Professors delay their repentance upon this, when they are old
and a dying they shall be more fit for repentance.

3. We are to pray away indispositions as a great affliction.
An indisposition to pray is a great affliction to a godly soul; and the so
afflicted is to pray to remove that indisposition, and to seek in prayer a
spiritual disposition to pray; and that pray continually, is not, pray only
when a spiritual disposition to pray is on; for that should be far from praying
continually; and that Psalm. 50. Call upon me in the day of trouble, suffers
no such exception, Pray to me in trouble, but not except ye be spiritually
disposed: For it has this good sense, call and pray in the day of trouble, and
in the hour when the spirit is under the soul-trouble of desertion and
indisposition, and when the Lord hides his face and shines not. So the want of
a spiritual disposition is the frowning of God upon the soul; and it is an
ungracious heart which will not pray when the Spirit in his shining influences
withdraws. And therefore

4. It Is not the Spirit of the Lord, but the spirit of Satan, which suggests
any such carnal arguing. I have no heavenly disposition for the present,
therefore I will not pray; for the Spirit of the Lord quickens men to duties,
and that is known to be a spirit from hell that weakens men in praying, or in
any duties.

CHAP. V.
Influences of grace are due to the Saints by promise. 2. Some are plagued with
plenty of means. 3. The scope of the place, Deuteronomy. 29. 3. The great temptations
which thine eyes have seen, etc. opened. 4. The nature of the Lord's promise of
influences. 5. The efficient causes of influences from the Father and from the
Son: influences on the Man Christ. 6. Influences from the Father, how they are
ours. 7. Influences from the Son Christ which are promised to us, how they are
ours.

THere is another way of fetching influences of grace, when we carefully use
former grace: as our Savior says, to him that has, shall be given. And so
grace shall bring more grace: The Lord has given influences by necessity of a
promise.
Sown wheat brings forth more wheat. Psalm. 119. 1. Blessed are they that walk
in the law of the Lord, they shall do no iniquity; then upon the account of a
holy walk, the Lord must bestow influences of grace to preserve men from doing
acts of iniquity. And there must be a promise of influences, that such as walk
in the Law of the Lord, shall walk more in that Law; Prove. 1. 5. A wise man
will hear and increase more in learning: then to spiritual wisdom there must
be a promise of influences to increase spiritual wisdom. Isa. 40. They that
wait on the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings as
Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, and walk and not faint. Then waiting
on the Lord shall fetch the wind of new quickening influences to wait more upon
the Lord, and to run; and they that run, shall run more, and which falls not
out in physical running when they are running. Now fresh swiftness and recent
vigor of speed shall be given to the runner, and larger breath and spiritnesse
then he had before. None are thriving and growing men as the godly are. Mal. 4.
2. But unto you that fear my Name shall the Sun of righteousness arise with
healing in his wings; and ye shall go forth, and grow as calves in the stall.
Prove. 4. 18. But the path of the just is as the shining light, that shines
more and more, unto the perfect day.

In which dispensation, 1. Such as are more proud with plenty of means and
plague themselves with abundance, occasion the truth of this; that Christ sends
the rich empty away, and throws the mighty down from their seats, and their
golden and silken chairs, Luke 52. 53. And the rich and the full (says Hannah,
1 Samuel 2. 5.) have hired out themselves for bread. And since men will be
plagued and poisoned with plenty, let it be so; and that lie upon them as a
word of chiding, A clearing of the place Deu. 29. 3. the great temptations, etc.
Deuteronomy. 29. 3. The great temptations which thine eyes have seen, the signs and
these great miracles. Ver. 4. Yet the Lord has not given you a heart to
perceive, nor eyes to see, nor ears to hear unto this day. And is the Lord
complaining of himself in this place? No; he will not have them to search into
the depth of sovereignty, ver. 29. because God gave them not an heart. Nay, but
his scope is to complain of the peoples abusing of the plenty of means. I gave
you the grace of outward means, but ye misgraced (to speak so) your own heart;
therefore it is just that ye be blind and deaf, since ye wickedly wink and stop
your ears; though it cannot be denied that God would have them humbled by
reflecting on their own wilful winking and blindness, yet so as they should
tremble and stoop at him, who can give a new heart and eyes and ears, but of
sovereignty denies it to the reprobates; of whom he complains, that the chosen
may tremble.

2. We are hence led to consider the nature of God's promises, that they are
much unlike to the promises and covenants between man and man: For it comes to
this; such as have influences from the Lord to run, through his free grace, the
Lord of the same free grace gives new influences to them to run more. The
Lord, because he makes some rich in grace, he makes them of rich in grace, yet
more rich in grace; and whom he loves freely, he yet more freely loves. And the
truth is, the Lord makes himself debtor to his own grace not to our industry.
As Augustine, August. lib. 1. con. 6. Nec matter mea nec nutrices meae sibi
ubera implebant, sed tu mihi, Domine, per eas dabas mihi alimentum infantiae
secundum institutionem tuam and divitias usque ad fundum rerum dispositas; tu
etiam dabas nolle amplius, quam dabas and nutrientibus me dare, mihi velle quod
eis dabas dare enim mihi per ordinatum effectum volebant, quo ex te abundabant.
the Lord gave being and milk to my Nurse to feed me, thou gave me nilling
and willing; where is my merit then?

3. Free grace infused the first habit; so by infusion of grace he adds parcels
to the first habit; so that the increase of the habit of grace, is as free
grace as the first habit; and there is no earning nor hiring of grace, or
engaging of the Lord, else grace should not be grace, and works should not be
works.

4. By some heinous, old and over years guiltiness, we give place to the Devil,
and rotten talking and malice and wrath stealing in; Paul is put to that
necessary word, Ephesians. 4. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. Grieve not the Spirit of God,
by which ye are sealed to the day of redemption. For such sins bring on
withdrawing of influences. Christ knocks and ye put a little stone in the
Keyhole, and the sprent is broken, and the door will neither open nor shut:
when the wheels of the Horologue are broke, there is no sound of hours heard;
when the bones are crushed, the man cannot walk; the spiritual organs,
dispositions and powers of David's soul were blunted and out of frame, by his
adultery and bloud-guiltinesse: No wonder then the Spirit was unwilling to
dwell and act in his wonted lodging, Psalm. 51. 11. Cast me not away from thy
presence: and take not (says he) thy holy Spirit from me. 12. Restore unto me
the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit. Its good to keep
the wheels whole.

But sin cannot so interdict or lay an arrestment upon influences as to
conclude and restrain the free grace of God: Ripening of guiltiness, makes way
to ripening of free grace.
nor does the Lord by the Saints falls, fall from his sovereignty and princedom
of grace; yea, rather from the heightning and abounding of sin does the reign
and Kingly power of grace shine the more; the more tumid the boil is, and the
more the flesh about it burns and flames with the swelling of the humor, the
more it is ripened for breaking and healing. A Fever at the height begins to
decline, as the Sea full at the outmost point of the shore does reflow and ebb
again. See death and sin's reign, and grace and Christ's reign, Romans 5. 15, 17,
21. See Ezech. 20. 23. Ezech. 16. 59, 60. Ezech. 26. 21, 22, 23. 1 Timothy 1. 13,
14, 15, 16, 17. make some ripeness for fullness of grace. Though Christ's reign
cannot ebb or fall; But no thanks to the sinner, but great praise to him who
makes medicine of the rotten and attry blood of our wounds.

5. Its considerable that gracious actings fetch influences for other gracious
actings; for grace is nearer of kin to grace then nature can be to grace.

Now as touching the Author of influences (that we may come more particularly
to the supernaturalness of influences) we know the Father, The three persons,
the Father, Son, and Spirit give influences.
the Son, the holy Spirit are all in Scripture said to act upon the soul, in a
gracious way. It shall not be needful to speak much of the Father's influences
upon the man Christ in sending and bestowing the Spirit and the anointing above
his fellows upon him: In the influences of the Godhead, in a personal union
upon the Man Christ in filling him with the holy Ghost from the womb: and
especially the Lord was mighty in him in preaching with authority; so that the
hearers were astonished, and all wondered at the gracious words that proceeded
out of his mouth, The fullness of influences on the man Christ.
in praying while his countenance shined.

And 2. The Lord's influences were evident in disputing with the Doctors in the
Temple, when he was but twelve years of age, in silencing the learned enemies
in strongly convincing parables.

3. God was mighty in miracles of all sorts, in casting out Devils, healing all
manner of diseases instantly without medicine, in raising the dead, in rebuking
the sea and the winds, multiplying the loaves, blasting the fig trees, Acts 16.
39. Isa. 61. 1. John 3. 34. Isa. 11. 1, 2, 3.

4. Influences more then ordinary were seen in his strength against the Devils,
and justice and wrath of God for our sins, in praying, strong believing, in
tears and cries, in preaching and exhorting his Disciples, converting the Thief
that suffered with him.

5. He must have had strong and mighty influences in the course of a holy and
sinlesse conversation, in a mortified walk, refusing a Kingdom when it was
offered to him, John 6. though he could have born it out; in being poor for us;
in having no hole nor lodging to hide his head; in meek and patient forgiving
of his enemies; in being much in prayer, spending whole nights in praying; in
praying and fasting forty days; in obeying all laws, fulfilling all
righteousness, ceremonial, moral, natural; in all works of mercy, obedience
to Caesar, to Parents, Brethren, to souls of men; in his virtues of faith,
lowliness, meekness, patience, love, zeal, hope, delighting in God.

Now though none can be so near to God as the man Christ, who in one person was
not near to God only, but was God-man and Emanuel; yet learn we hence, the
nearer we are to God, the more are we under the showers of influences of grace.
It Is good to be holy, and keep close communion with God, and dwell hard by the
Fountain, and we shall be watered. The tree planted by the rivers side has
most influences; and the man that lies in a bed of roses, and is near to
spikenard, to mirrhe, aloes, and Cassia, and is daily among the he^bs, and
haunts in the garden of all fragrant smells, will carry some sweet savor away.
The Lord Jesus his out-lettings of free love and grace, must run much upon
these who are daily near to him. Keep a distance from God, and be much at cups,
at chambering and wantonness, in the company of the whore, of the profane, of
the swearer, what hope of showers and waterings of influences of grace upon
such a cursed soil?

But 2. The Fathers drawing sinners to Christ, John 6. 44. the Fathers teaching
men, and causing them to hear the learning of the Father, John 6. 45. holds
forth the influences of the Father upon sinners. Christ's word is remarkable,
John 15. Influences of the Father upon his own
1. My Father is the husbandman. When Christ's Father ploughs the sinner, and
breaks up the fallow ground of the heart, there must be influences there: for
then is the Father fitting the soil for Christ, Col. 1. 12. Giving thanks unto
the Father, The Lord's beginning of a good work in us brings the Lord under a
necessity of conferring influences to the end.
who has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in
light. 13. Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has
translated us to the kingdom of the Son of his love. That must be a mighty
strong influence of the Father that works the man's translation; and the daily
work of the care of the Father is much in promoving his work, John 15. 2. Every
branch that bears fruit he purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit.
Let then the question be, what talk ye to us of predeterminating influences
that are above us in the hand of a Sovereign God? How shall our short arm reach
these influences.
How shall our short arm reach these influences? We must have influences of
the Father that are at our hand, and under the power of our free will.

Answ. 1. The Adversaries here deny the freedom and sovereignty of grace in
bestowing influences, and submit the actings of grace to the industry of a
sovereign man. Bradwardin desired to worship no God who was under man's
free will: I commend him for it.

2. Christ has the dispensing of predeterminating influences, by office and
covenant.
The question is soon answered: The Father of Christ condescends to take on the
person, and, as it were, the office of a painful husbandman, who intends to
make some noble generous Vine-trees to be planted in the higher garden; and
shall an earthly husbandman plow, delve, ditch, plant, purge, and do all that
becomes his office? so that it the Vine-tree had wit and reason, it could not
make a question, will the husbandman care for me? will he delve, and dress,
and purge me, that I may bring forth more fruit? Far more may the believer say,
Christ's Father and my Father is the good husbandman, and both have begun the
good work in me. Faith would say, he will not be wanting in his office of
husbandry; he will send showers of blessings and influences upon his mount
Sion, and upon me a withered and dry twig.

3. Christ says, John 15. I am the Vine-tree, ye are the branches. Now look
what influences of sap and life the Vine-tree sends to the branches, and the
head to the members, so will the Lord for ever make that good, John 14. 19.
Because I live, ye shall live also.

1. As King and Prince. Christ must put out his influences for repentance and
pardon, Acts 5. 31.

2. He is Prophet of the Church: Then opening the heart to understand the
Scriptures is his office, and to warm the heart by the word, Luke 24. 32, 45.

3. As High Priest he ascended on high, and contributes his influences for
sending down the Spirit, Luke 24. 49. John 14. 16, 17. John 16. 7.

Yea, and predeterminating influences to circumcise the heart to the Lord, are
promised by him, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Ezekiel. 18. 19. Isa. 44. 1, 2, 3, 4.

2. When a dominion from sea to sea, and from the river to the ends of the
earth is promised to him, Psalm. 72. 8. and that all nations shall serve him, v.
11. and that the heathen shall be his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of
the earth his possession, Psalm. 2. 8. and when the incoming of the Gentiles in
their fullness, is promised to him, Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Isa. 42. 8, 9.
Isa. 11. 10, 11. there must be promised a power of bowing their hearts, to make
them a willing people to follow Christ, Psalm. 110. 1, 2, 3. Call this bowing of
the heart predeterminating grace, or give it another name, I contend not, or
call it an impression of strong delectation on the will, so it be invincible,
insuperable, and above the power of free will to resist and oppose the call and
drawing power of Christ, no matter though it be not irresistible; which
includes the wills free consent.

3. The promises of a seed given to Christ, and that he should see of the
travels of his soul; and that the pleasure of the Lord should prosper in his
hand, Isa. 53. prove that influences of grace must be promised, by which people
should be made the seed of Christ, and willing followers of him, which is
Christ's soul-travel, and the good will and pleasure of God prospering in his
hand, Isa. 59. 20, 21, 22. Isa. 49. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Psalm. 89. 27, 28, 29, 30,
31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37.

4. The promises of the covenant between the Father and the Son prove the same;
for if God give many children to Christ, and if Christ undertake for these many
children, to bring them to glory, to cast none of them forth, but to raise them
up at the last day, and to lose none of them; Then must Christ be Master of
their free will, and he must have a bar of strong influences on their heart,
that it shall not be in the power of Satan, the world or sinful flesh to pluck
them out of his hand. Hence against all trepidation of mind, this is removed;
what warrant have we, that we can make use of the influences of grace that are
in the hands of the Son? these are a fowl flying in the wood, which we cannot
command; take these answers.

1. The influences in the Son are all for our use and good.
What ever Mediatory grace is in the Son they are gracious influences laid by
for our good; as what sums of money a rich man is to give out for the profit of
Minors, he mixes it not with his own, but looks on it as none of his, but to be
expended for the good of others; and the Minors having assurance of the
faithfulness and care of their Tutors, look upon it as their own: we are by
faith to look upon the treasury of Christ that is begun to be bestowed on us;
and that Christ shall not withdraw, (being a most faithful Tutor) what is
necessary for our best life.

2. Christ being the best of Kings, the most faithful of Priests, and above all
the Prophets, Moses, and who ever they were, by office is to give out
influences. If we believe that Christ shall acquit himself as a King, then
shall his subjects find the outlettings of grace for repentance and remission,
Acts 5. 31. for Christ is worthy of his throue and chair of Princely state We
are to believe, as our high Priest, he shall, by virtue of his office, apply by
the Spirit the blood of atonement and sprinkle the nations therewith; As also,
when we sin he gives out influences for believing that our Advocate lives and
intercedes for us; and the acts of opening the heart to believe the Scriptures,
to be guided in all truth, to be comforted and quickened, come from Christ the
great Prophet; and if he be God, what the Governor of Heaven and Earth does by
his office, if he feed all living things, the Ravens move not the question what
they shall eat to morrow, nor the Lillies of the field how they shall be
clothed: far more, believers are to rest upon this, Christ shall fully execute
all his offices in all parts toward them.

3. The Vine-tree, by a flux of nature, sends sap to the branches, and the head
does not deliberate nor interpose freedom of will to send down life and
influences of life to the members; but nature has a strong hand in this: at
least love is soon resolved in the husband what shall be the influences of good
communicated by him to the Spouse. The great thing Redemption is purchased, and
will Christ stand and doubt of influences of grace to complete the Redemption,
and to make out the life of glory until it come to the fruition and enjoyment
thereof?

CHAP. VI.
The two spirits of the world and of God, 1 Cor. 2, 12. and the differences in
order to influences opened. 3. The characters of the spirit of God, and the
relation of the spirit to the word. 3. The spirit of Antichrist. 4. The more of
the spirit the more activity in the ways of God. 5. The Spirit of God a praying
spirit. 6. No praying without the spirit. 7. The suspending of influences. 8.
We are to pray for influences. 9. Twofold power and efficacy. 10. The
difference betwixt the spirits acting, and the literal acting of the word.

BUt influences of the Spirit are mainly here to be eyed; and if any have the
spirit, he cannot want the influences of God. The Spirit is, as it were, all
saving influences, and such as are void of the spirit, know not any thing of
saving influences; Yea, the Father and the Son let out all their influences in,
and by the Spirit.

Therefore to open this; consider

1. That there are two sorts.

2. The characters and differences of the Spirit of God which speak a spiritual
man, and spiritual influences.

3. What are the diverse influences to be taken notice of: The two spirits are
clear, 1 Cor. 2. 12. But we have not received the spirit of the world, but the
spirit which is of God. Paul had said that the world and the Princes of the
world knew not the mystery of the Gospel; why? They had not crucified the Lord
of glory, had they known him. As also the spirit teaches it, ver. 10. how is
that proved? from the nature of an infinite spirit, that searches all the
things of the infinite God; even as a man's spirit searches all the things of a
man, v. 12. How can we know the things of God, they are far above us. He
answers, we who have received, not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit of
God, do know the things that are graciously given us of God: they know the
things of God; But v. 12. we are such.

Q. What is meant by the spirit of the world?

Ans. Its the humane spirit, by which we know Arts and Sciences, The spirit of
the world.
and the things of a present world, which is also the Spirit of God, and a
singular gift of God. But there is somewhat more in this spirit: a carnal
spirit that is opposite to the Spirit that is of God, a spirit that judges the
depths of Gospel wisdom to be foolishness, ver. 13, 14.

Hence the differences of the two spirits.

1. There are no saving influences due to the spirit of the world. The worlds
spirit sees the mysteries of Philosophy and Arts, and the good things of a
present flowing world, and no more. And as an old man sees all that a child can
see and know, and much more in a more solid way: So the children of God often,
as Moses, Solomon, Daniel, Paul, see with the spirit of the world in this sense
all which the men of the world see, and in a more spiritual way; and beside,
the Spirit of God in them knows higher things that are hid from the world and
their spirit. As,

1. How Heaven lies, how many Summers are in one year in that land.

2. The rivers of wine and milk, The glorious things which the spirit of God
shows.
Isa. 55. 1. the garden, the second Paradise, the tree of life that bears
twelve manner of fruits every month, and the leaves serve to heal the Nations,
and the pure river of water of life clear as crystal proceeding out of the
throne of God and of the Lamb, Rev. 22. 1, 2. Rev. 2. 7.

3. What a plantation is there? what streets of gold the rich citizens walk in
with their feet? Rev. 21. the structure of the new Jerusalem, the twelve ports,
the foundation of the wall, garnished with all manner of precious stones, the
building of the wall of Jasper, what a bride the Lamb's wife is, as she is
busked and adorned with the glory of God, what a joyful company of harpers
clothed in white follow the Lamb? Rev. 14. Rev. 19.

Yea 4. Even in this life in the lower country, and the out-fields, the fruits
that grow in the land are good, Romans 14. 17. Gal. 5. 22. Psalm. 72. 16. 1 Pet.
1. 4, 5, 6. Psalm. 16. 11. 1 Cor. 2. 9. what a lifeguard for Kings sons? Isa.
6. 2, 3, 4. Psalm. 34. 7. Psalm. 91. 11, 12. and on the other hand, what golden
nothings and clay-dreams does the spirit of the world follow after? what
spiritual gallantry is in the man, that says and resolves, time and all that
Solomon had shall not satisfy me; I must either be a King above time or have
nothing. Will a beggar aspire to a Kingdom; or a sow seek after pearls? what
does the spirit of the world, but lie, and swear, and whore, and oppress in
the sons of disobedience? the godly is of a far more excellent spirit.

5. Its a poor spirit that acts in Cicero, Seneca, and other Pagans: the
bastard and the servants privilege is little to a Kings heir and son.

As to the second, the differences of that Spirit which is of God are
considerable.

1. How the spirit of God dwells in his own.
The spirit, John 14. 17. remains in his own, and dwells in them, as in his
house, Romans 8. 11. as a man remains and works in a shop or workhouse; and the
soul, lives, breaths, acts, discourses in the man: so the spirit of adoption,
prays, groans, believes, teaches, witnesses, speaks, hears in the
believer, Matthew. 10. 19. Romans 8. 16, 25, 26. Now the world cannot receive this
spirit, John 14. 27. no more then the noble soul of man can find lodging in a
brute beast: try what spirit acts in you, and the principles of your actions,
and you shall know the influences. Every man's moral actings are as John's
baptism, from Heaven or of Men; what sparkles of influences kindle the heart
in your actings?

2. The Spirit of God, John 16. 13. (...), He shall guide the way to you in all
truth; Romans 8. 14. as many (...), as are led, driven either as a flock by the
shepherd, or as a ship by the wind, are the children of God. The Spirit is a
Pilot and a Steersman acting and moving in the Saints, directing, counselling,
enspiring in all actings: its easy to know the spirits leading by what it
drives at, The spirit of the world in the Antichrist and diverse other spirits
lead the world.
Rev. 16. 13. For they are the spirits of devils working miracles, which go
forth to the Kings of the earth, and of the whole world to gather them to the
battle of that great day of God Almighty. This he says of the three unclean
spirits like frogs (the Popes firebrands and incendiaries) who came out of the
mouth of the Dragon, out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the
false Prophet. What hellish influences must drive these men delivered up to
such leaders? There is a spirit who rules in the children of disobedience,
Satan the Prince of the air, Ephesians. 2. The spirit of giddiness and error leads
Egypt, Isa. 19. 14. The spirit of whoredom, Hos. 4. 12. Hos. 5. 4. that
inclines to Idolatry. The spirit of lying, 1 Kin. 22. 22. The spirit of error,
1 John 4. 6. The spirit of unbelief that was in the ten spies led and drive
many, Number. 14. 24. But Caleb had another spirit with him. It Is the sin of the
time we live in, to persecute and resist the spirit; and the more outlettings
of the spirit that appear in Steven, the more the Jews set themselves against
him. For Acts 7. 27. they cry out with a loud voice, and stop their ears, and
run upon him, when he saw heaven open, being full of the Holy Ghost; he was
before full of the Holy Ghost, but now there is a high springtide, and a new
mighty flowing of the influences of the Holy Ghost; and the height of goodness
and excellent actings of the spirit, draws out their malice to the full, as
Steven told them, 51. Ye have always resisted the Holy Ghost. (...), is to
fall cross with all the might in a hostile way upon the spirit. O tremble to
hate and fight against the marrow of godliness, and to mock the spirit! O that
it were not this day the sin of Scotland, and of the generality of the
Ministers of the Gospel in this Land! In the Prelates times the seekers of God
met not with such bitterness as even now they meet with.

3. Liberty of stirring follows the spirit.
Where the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty, 2 Cor. 3. 17. Uphold me with
thy free Spirit, Psalm. 51. 12. It Is proper to natural men in whom the spirit
dwells, not to be vile slaves to lusts; and the more of the spirit in any, the
more active are they in the Lords ways; and hardly can the spirit be where
there are not influences of grace. For it is the Spirits office to be stirring
and active (as the horses of Egypt are flesh and not spirit, that is, lumpish,
dead, feeble, unable to save, not spirited and active to deliver) and in this
especially the actings of the spirit appear in the fiery spiritness of heavenly
influences. Would ye be carried on and helped in duties; get the spirit and ye
cannot miss heavenly influences; the dryness of the earth speaks the
suspending of rain and dew in the clouds, and a heaven of brass; the man is
dead, and under bands, and straightened in prayer, then must the showers of
influences be restrained. Psalm. 51. 12. Uphold me with thy free spirit. What
then? v. 13. Then I Will teach transgressors thy ways. Take a work where there
are an hundred wheels, of which the higher moves the lower; then when the first
and highest moves not, all the ninety and nine must stand. When the spirit
breathes not, and influences are restrained, what wonder if the soul be
deadned? For the Marigold loures and weeps, in its kind, and droops when the
Sun is down: our prayers would blow upon the North and South wind that they may
blow: The breathing and blowing of prayer do readily waken up the spirit,
though he must stir in praying also, else we are dead and breathless.

4. Praying is proper to the spirit.
The spirit that is of God is a praying spirit, Jude. Praying in the Holy
Ghost. Of all the Tongues and Languages on earth, the Holy Ghost loves most to
speak prayerwise, and in the language of humble supplications. Romans 8. 29. We
know not what we should pray for as we ought. What then? shall the work lie?
Nay, the spirit takes it off the poor man's hand; but the Spirit it self makes
intercession for us with sighs that cannot be expressed. And rather or
spiritual work be at a stand, the Third Person lends a lift to the groaning
soul that cannot pray: For the Spirit helps our infirmities. And then praying
is a mass of influences for faith, for holy desires, for sense of want; yea,
and no man gets the spirit but the praying son, Luke 11. 11. Only this shall
bide a question, How shall they pray for the Spirit that want the Spirit? Answ.
Yea Magus, though in the gall of bitterness, is commanded to pray, Acts 8. 21.
The Law commanded praying to God incarnate when he is revealed to be incarnate.
As the first command charges all to know the Lord practically in all the ways
of Law and Gospel by which he shall reveal himself; and the Lord has not abated
a whit, and come down from his holy rigorousnesse, as if the Lord would make
amends, Baron. de peccato mort. and veniali.
and give us (as some Pelagians say) a lower and milder Law, which forbids not
venials. Et peccata quotidianae incursionis praecise sub periculo aeternae
condemnationis. Yea but there is not any Law nor Gospel which forbids not sin
under the same penalty that the Law forbids; and the Gospel forbids not
adultery and murder in David, but he is free from eternal punishment, if he be
humbled for these sins, as he must be humbled for lesser and venial sins, Psalm.
19. 12. Psalm. 51. 5. Psalm. 130. 3, 4. God may strait all men to pay the very
stock which he gave them in Adam.

2. Are not men inexcusable, when they will not await the wind, and lie at the
tide, and use means, but refuse to command body and legs to present themselves
to the seaside and the ship? The body and legs have no influence on the winds,
so they declare that they hate the covenant and bargain of grace as well as the
Law, who refuse to stir in his ways.

3. The first giving of the spirit is like the growing of lillies and flowers
wild on the mountains, The spirit prevenes nature; nature prevenes not the
spirit.
plough or spade can do nothing to cause them so to grow in the garden and the
infield. Pelagians must not get their will, their common universal grace is not
the spirit of Adoption; and those who say men can pray who never received the
spirit of Adoption (happily they may complement with the Lord in word) but

They deny prevening grace, and in effect say, that nature prevenes grace, and
men prevene God; and not grace prevenes nature: For if there be such a thing as
prevening nature, this were to say the child is born before the mother, and the
apple grows before the tree, and the bloom is before the herb. Nay, to pray
for the spirit, and not to pray in the spirit, shall never be my Divinity; that
were to buy Rubies and Jasper-stones with clay and common flints and rocks; nay
nature cannot trade without grace. And while the Lord creates the rose-tree,
the rose-tree cannot seed nor bring forth rose-trees. Oh but it concerns us
much, Ministers and Professors, to have the spirit, and to have more of it. Too
many Ministers in the Land cast never fire on the people; they never warm
hearts but by hewing, and striking, and hammering upon the Letter; the fire of
the Lord falls not down upon the sacrifice. Ah, our fleece is dry, and we are
like the Land not rained upon. And let men speak, Can ye live without the
Spirit and his influences, more then ye can live without God and without Christ
in the world? And who cries, Lord, can my dry bones live? Characters of a
spiritual soul.
miss ye the anointing? The complaining of the suspending of influences, of
the ebbing of the free manifestations, flowings, and out-lettings of free
grace, speaks a spiritual disposition. For,

1. The Church complains to God of it, Isa. 63. 17.

2. Yielding to a temptation is a pain to the Saints, Psalm. 73. 21, 22.

3. We are to pray for influences.
The Saints pray for influences of grace, for teaching, leading, quickening,
inclining of the heart to the way of God, uniting of the heart to fear the name
of God; then must the withdrawing of these be evil.

4. When we pray against temptations to sin, and not to be led into temptation.

5. When we pray for the spirit of grace to be poured on us from on high, we
pray not for the giving of the bare habit, for that could not hinder David,
Lot, Peter, Asa, Iehoshaphat, Aaron, Hezekiah, and others of the Saints, to
fall into sad and heinous transgressions; but we suit also from the Lord the
sanctified use and exercise of grace, and so must suit influences.

6. When we pray that God would not take his spirit from us, Psalm. 51. 12. nor
forsake us, nor take the word of truth utterly out of our mouth, Psalm. 119. 43.
we then also pray that he would not withdraw gracious influences.

7. A gracious finding how sweet, safe, and comfortable it is to be acted, led,
moved, guided by the sweet influences of the spirit, cannot but be grieved at
the departure of such a guide and counselor.

8. It Is lawful to seek sense of Gods loving countenance, in joy in the Holy
Ghost, Romans 14. 17. 1 Pet. 1. 7, 8. in delighting in God, and in duties
relating to him and our brethren, and in the consolations of the Holy Ghost,
and in the spirits work of sanctifying us; then we may, and are to be grieved
at the withdrawings of God, that we see not his power and glory in the
Sanctuary, as we have sometimes done, Psalm. 63.

5. The spirit conveys the word; the spirit's relations to the word.
The spirit that is of God goes along with the word, if we 1. consider the
spirits relation to the word. My spirit and my words, Isa. 59. 21. For the
Gospel is the chief chair and seat of the spirit, Romans 1. 16. Isa. 53. 1. The
word is, as it were, the workhouse and shop, and the spirit the worker; the
word the ship or chariot, and the spirit drives and stirs the promises. The
spirit honors so the word, the spirit moves and acts when the word moves and
acts; the spirit utters not a groan but according to the will of God in the
word, Romans 8. 26, 27. Acts 10. 44. While Peter yet spoke these words, (...),
the Holy Ghost fell upon those that heard the word. When the ship or the
chariot moves, the Pilot or Steers-man and the Coachman are moved with them.
The poor Minister often drives an empty coach, and carries but sounds and
letters; but when the spirit strikes in with the word, and is steers-man in the
ship, the vessel is afloat, and sayls gallantly before the wind.

2. The word preached is the breathing of the spirit, and the spirit speaks and
breaths through the word, and it is the word of the spirit; the holy Ghost
prophesied well of you, etc.

3. The spirit is referred to the word as the soul to the body; the body is but
a lump of dead clay if the soul be removed, and the word is so many sounds,
syllables, and letters, if the spirit act not; this is a similitude and would
be well exponed. A twofold power of the word.
There is a twofold power, one subjective and material, which comes from the
Author the holy Ghost; in which regard the word of God from the Author the Holy
Ghost has actu primo as touching the matter and efficient cause, holiness,
liveliness, divinity, majesty of style even as contradistinguished from the
spirit acting with it; there is no word, no book, no speech of Angels or Men
comparable to it. Of the power of the word and the power of the spirit, and how
they are differenced.
There is 2. A formal power which agrees to the word actu secundo as the spirit
going along with the word makes it effectual, to enlighten, to teach, to
rebuke, to convince, to persuade; so our Divines say (a modern Lutheran widely
mistakes) the efficacy of the word is from the spirit, 2 Cor. 10. 4. the
weapons of our warfare are not carnal but mighty; how mighty, not of
themselves, but mighty through God. We make not the word of it self, a dead
inky letter, as Papists and Libertines both do. The like distinction is clear
in a Sword or an Axe of steel, both the one and the other from the matter and
artificer that made them has actu primo sharpness and aptness to cut: Suppose
the Artificer that made both be dead, yet the sharpest two-edged sword that is,
except it be weelded by the arm of a valiant man can do no good in war: And
the like may be said of the Axe, both are dead things of themselves.

Hence 1. Since we are mere Messengers, we cannot breath life in the word only,
like the Trumpeter that blows his warm breath through a dead trumpet of Brass;
but he blows or breaths no valor or courage in the soldiers, that was not in
them before. But if the spirit go along and breath life in the hearers they
shall live, as speaking and acting are conjoined, Ezech. 2. 1. Son of man stand
upon thy feet, and I will speak to thee. 2. Then the spirit entered into me,
when he spoke to me, and he set me on my feet. So John 5. 25. Ezech. 37. 7, 8.
It not a little concerns Ministers and Hearers to pray that the spirit may go
along with the word: otherwise the shepherds singing through an ^aten reed
shall never feed sheep or lambs, and make them fat: and people often receive in
their ears, a noise of words and syllables, and are not fed with sounds. It Is
true, Christ and the Prophets and Apostles preached in the spirit and in the
lively power of God, Speaking in the spirit is not ever saving to the hearers.
and yet nothing but the letter came to the ears of many of their hearers, Isa.
53. 1. Isa. 28. 9. the hearers are but as weaned children: Mat. 13. 13, 14, 15.
the hearers are fatted hypocrites. And a poor man speaks the letter of the
word, and happily deadly and weakly; yet betwixt the speakers mouth and the
hearers heart, the spirit strikes in and the dead man lives.

2. The letter of the word spoken by Christ lies dead, until the Comforter
which is the Holy Ghost come: then he shall teach you all things (in a lively
way, which the man Christ, as man only did not) and bring all things to your
remembrance, John 14. 26.

3. The light may remain only light and literal and useless: the Disciples in
the garden with Christ knew they should watch and pray, yet they sleep. The
spirit brings not up literal light to spiritually quickening light, John 16. 7.
The spirit shall convince the world of sin, because they believe not in me.
What did not all the Prophets convince the world of sinful unbelief? Isa. 7. If
ye believe not, ye shall not be established. Isa. 53. Who has believed our
report? Did not Christ himself convince the world of sinful unbelief? John 3.
The spirit's convictions.
18, 36. John 5. 24. John 11. 26, 27. and all the Ministers of the New
Testament convince men that they ought to believe and receive Christ by faith?
But all these are but literal convictions, until the spirit carry into the
heart the marrow of the promises and threatenings of the Gospel with a strong
hand, In the spirit's conviction there is some new strength added to the word.
and the natural man while he is in the mouth of Hell with Judas is convinced
of the Law deserving, and of unbeliefs desert, but not of actual damnation. The
deceit of the conscience is this, that all are under sin and the curse, who
believe not but God must give a general suspension against the Gospels decree
and sentence of death for my unbelief, and to most of mankind. Ah, this is not
to be convinced of unbelief by the spirits working: Nor in all this does the
spirit add any divine majesty and power to the word which was not in the word
before, when he effectually persuades and convinces; As the hewer puts no metal
in the Axe which was not in it before, only he applies powerfully his strength
and art to the effects which he produces by the Axe and other tools, by which
he makes curious carved work. Nor does the soldier add any new sharpness to
the Sword which it had not before, only he uses the Sword for valorous
exploits. All that the spirit does is in the powerful and effectual application
of threatenings and promises in actual persuading to believe; all the majesty
and heavenly power the word has actu primo from the immediately inspiring
spirit: and this is alike to all; only much godly trembling is required that
the spirit may in his mighty influences go out with the word.

2. Hence that is wildfire and sparkles of hell not the spirit of Christ nor
the influences of grace when a dumb spirit speaks not in the word, but in
signs, images, ceremonies devised by men, as a dumb man speaks with his
fingers. The Spirit of God loves to work and act with his own tools in the
testimonies and promises; the Spirit of the Lord never bids burn the Bible. A
state of pure spirit and of all spirit beyond the word in this life is a fancy.
Antiochus had such influences from hell, and not from the Lord. Some make the
Bible a horn-book for new beginners only as images are, and the man must be all
spirit turned into pure spirit; why then do themselves speak, write such
fooleries? why do they eat, drink, sleep, hear? such as are all spirit do none
of these. But though holy men of God were far from making the spirit both Law
and Gospel, none had more of the secrets, and mysterious visions of God
revealed to him then John; he saw Christ in his glory, Rev. 1. 14, 15, 16. he
saw Heaven open, and the Throne and glorious company, the new Jerusalem; Yet
Rev. 1. 3. he says, Blessed is he that reads; Can one that is all spirit
speak of reading when he had seen all these visions of God? Rev. 22. 18. he
puts a seal of honor on Canonick Scripture; he is charged to write in his
divine Epistles, These things I have written, I write to you fathers, etc. When
Christ is risen from the dead, and entered in a most spiritual life, Luke 24.
27. he expones the Scriptures: who so mock the Scriptures loath the Spirit also.

CHAP. VII.
Characters of a spiritual disposition are these. 1. To be willing to be under
the guidance of the spirit. 2. Four expressions in the Scripture hold forth
opposing of the spirit. 3. We are to acknowledge and adore the spirit in his
actings, and join hearty consent thereto. 4. Self-denial. 5. In a bewildered
condition to desire to be led by the spirit. 6. Spiritual facility in acting.
7. To act much in public works, in the spirit. 8. Much watching and praying.
9. To converse with spiritual men. 10. To be much in spiritual conference are
all characters of a spiritual disposition.

THe third particular is, what speaks a spiritual man and spiritual influences?

Ans. He who puts himself under the guidance of the spirit, is a spiritual man:
the will of the Guide should be master of the journey.

The Prophets, Acts 13. Paul and Silas, Acts 16. Philip, Acts 8. accurately
observe the command of the spirit, as being as binding as the command of the
Father and the Son. The commands of God to the men of God were more legal in
the Old Testament; but the commands of the spirit now in the New Testament have
more of free grace and persuasive leading, Obedience is to be yielded to the
spirit, as to the Father and the Son.
Acts 10. 19. Acts 11. 12. Acts 18. 9, 10, 11. John 14. 16, 26. John 16. 13. We
shall speak hereafter of the lying under and obedient receiving of the
breathings and influences of the spirit; only here where there is a strong
bensil of will and much freedom in obedience, there is much of the spirit: Much
renewd will is a note of a spiritual disposition.
backdrawing in spiritual works proclaims much carnality; but who had the
anointing above measure, was all will, and all heart, and all spirit to obey
and suffer, John 10. 17, 18. Psalm. 40. 8, 9.

2. The leading and drawing of the spirit, when it brings forth running, and
is strongly closed with, speaks a spiritual man, Cant. 1. 4. Psalm. 119. 32.
Cant. 3. 4. I held him and would not let him go. Is not this violence? sweet
feelings and high commending of him follows; when the spirits violence in
drawing, and the spouses violence in running meet, there is a spiritual
closing, Cant. 1. 4. The King has brought me into his chambers; and what
follows, we will be glad and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy love more
then wine. See ver. 12, 13. Cant. 2. 3. I sat down under his shadow, and his
fruit was sweet in my mouth. Delighting in him is followed with his delighting
in the Spouse, ver. 6. His left hand is under mine head, and his right hand
does embrace me.

2. Here, if in any, it is true, to him that has shall be given: he that is
willing to be led shall be led; and keeping of the Commandments of Christ makes
room for the Father and the Son to come hither and dwell; fire makes more fire.

3. A state of translation is to be gone about; The man has not the spirit
till he be once over the water translated to the Kingdom of the dear Son of
God. Christ is not owner of the man that has not the spirit: If any have not
the spirit, he is none of Christ's, Romans 8. 9. Christ and the Spirit cannot be
severed; the spirit that is in the first heir is in all the rest; and we should
take it hard to be called, or to be none of Christ's,

3. Heed must be carefully taken that none of the Organs or parts of the new
creation be broken. Four expressions in Scripture of wrongs we do to the
spirit.
A spiritual man cherishes the spirit in all his operations, he loves and
honors his guide and leader. The Scripture notes in four words the wrongs we
do to the spirit, Isa. 63. 10. They vexed his spirit of holiness; the word is,
Psalm. 56. 6. they painfully wrested: as they gave another figure or fashion to
my words, Vexing of the spirit and violence done to his actings.
Ephesians. 4. 30. Grieve not the holy spirit. The word (...) is to sadden rather
then to anger, Matthew. 14. 9. Matthew. 17. 23. Matthew. 26. 22. Can a friend lodge
in a house, where he is every hour sadned? is not this to chase him away? and
especially to sadden the King in the act of sealing your Writs and Evidences of
Heaven, Saduing of the spirit and the signs of it.
is not this dreadful? Ye shall know the spirit to be sadned when he acts
deadly and lently; as the man who rides on a lame and halting horse advances
little in the way, the fault is not in the Rider; So when the man is straightened
in praying, and he knocks faintly, life and liberty and godly boldness is
away; the tools of the worker being broken, how unhandsome is the work?

2. Quenching of the spirit.
There should be an eike made to the working of the spirit; there is needful a
sort of helping of the spirit by widening, opening and enlarging the heart; the
extending of love, desires, faith, fear to their outmost borders: there is an
opening of the mouth wide commanded, Psalm. 8. 10. Psalm. We are to make a sort
of eike to the spirit.
24. 7. Lift up your heads and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors. Cant. 5. 2.
Open to me my sister, my love, my dove, etc. And this is needful under the
actings of the spirit, that we stretch the soul beyond it self and make an eike
to the spirit of his own. Hence that charge 1 These. 5. 19. Quench not the
spirit. The word is, Matthew. 12. 20. Matthew. 25. 8. Our lamps are out, or
quenched, Mark 9. 44, 46. Some cast water upon the fire and holy flamings of
the spirit: this makes a cold hearth-stone, and mightily obstructs the working
of God; whereas we should add new fuel to his fire, and blow away the ashes
and wrestle against deadness, dullness, faintness, and stir up the grace of
God, 2 Timothy 1. 6. as smiths with the bellows blow up and quicken the flame: do
not quench it in your self by unbelief and uncheerful walking; and break not
one another, know that so do the enemies of Christ: He trusted in the Lord
that he would deliver him; Let him deliver him, since he delighted in him,
Psalm. 22. 8. That is to act Satan's office, when men cast water on the flamings
of the spirit and crush the spirit and his actings in others.

3. Tempting of the spirit.
Acknowledge and adore the holy spirit as God, and follow not Ananias to play
the devil to the Holy Ghost, to try if the holy Spirit shall find out
hypocrisy, Acts 5. Satan is the great (...), Matthew. 4. 3. who tempted the Son;
And a man may ride so near the rotten margin on the bank of a mighty River, as
he will try the highest of free grace; why but I may do this and be pardoned?
Nay, the holy Spirit never said, Sin at will with greediness, thou wast once a
believer. It Is dreadful to put a trial upon the worth of an infinite ransom.
2. Upon the most noble and transcendent actings of the spirit: this God has
done in me, therefore I have liberty to sin. Tempted free grace is a
transgression with so loud a cry, its heard all Heaven over. 4 Resisting of the
spirit and persecuting of godliness.


4. Join hearty consent to all the actings and influences moral or physical of
the Holy Ghost, and be not beaten from that. There is an anger outed in the
Father as the offended Lawgiver pursuing all that are out of Christ. Ah, who
can drink unmixt wrath, as Christ did, and live? and who may stand when he is
angry? then resisting is terrible.

2. There is vengeance in readiness, and grinding of men to powder, and
everlasting burning for such as so far resist the Son, as they say, This man
shall not reign over us.

3. But there is a vengeance beyond a vengeance, and fiery indignation, and
more then an ordinary hell to such as resist the spirit in the Prophets, and
do despite to the Spirit of grace, Heb. 10. 28, 29, 30. Matthew. 12. 31, 32.
Killing of the Prophets and slaying of them is a sort of killing of the spirit
in men, as the Jews killed the Lord of glory in the man Christ, and wished
there were neither in the world, God nor the Spirit, nor God incarnate: and
this is just as if men would put hands in so much of God and of the Spirit as
they find acting any thing of God in others or themselves: this hateful
persecuting of godliness is the dreadful national sin of this age. Find ye not
the actings of the spirit sweet and heaven-like? if so, it speaks a spiritual
disposition.

4. The spirit above self speaks a spiritual one; he who is least his own is
most God's.
Much of self-denial speaks much of the spirit: he who will be least his own is
most God's, and partakes most of the divine nature. The spirit loves the room
of self; I live not, but Christ (by his Spirit) lives in me, Gal. 2. and the
spirit, to speak so, is the full predominant element in the acting (not that
nature sinless is wholly dead and passive, as Familists and others tea^h) and
self appears to be sunk into nothing, and is denied: as Matthew. 10. 20. It Is not
ye that speak, but the spirit of your Father that speaks in you. Though they be
living persons in their nature and being, Peter and John speaks: and yet the
spirit so discourses and lays aside the creature called self, and sets up God,
that as if self were annihilated and not there at al (I mind no Libertine
annihilation) the spirit as the predominant speaks in the man and acts in him,
rather then the man. And the Spirit of the Father, prays, preaches,
reigns, actech, disputes, confesses in the believer. 1 Cor. 15. 10. But I
labored more abundantly then they all; then must I in Paul be preferred and
exalted above John the beloved Disciple, and all the eminent Apostles? O not; I
labored more abundantly; yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me.
Acts 6. 10. And they were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by
which Steven spoke. He says not they were not able to resist and dispute
against the sinful man Steven. Acts 4. 8. Then Peter, filled with the Holy
Ghost, said unto them, and made answer to the persecuting Rulers; this is a far
other thing then if he had said, then answered Peter the Apostle; for Peter was
before this, filled with the Holy Ghost, but now the Holy Ghost in a new
fullness and flowing of heavenly influences in the man Peter is Master-speaker.
In the Prophets this is clear from 2 Pet. 1. 21. Prophecy came not of old by
the will of man; (though the Prophet was not compelled to prophecy, nor his
will Physically sunken down to nothing) but holy men of God spoke as (...),
acted by the Holy Ghost. 1 Pet. 1. 11. The Spirit of Christ spoke in the
Prophets before hand of the sufferings of Christ and the glory that should
follow. Though there be a difference betwixt the speaking of a Prophet, and the
acting of a believer; there is much of self in the Prophets, who bite with the
teeth and cry peace. Micah sets himself against such, cap. 3. 8. But truly
(says he) I am full of power, by the spirit of the Lord, and of might, and of
judgment to declare unto Jacob his transgressions and to Israel his sin. 3.
There is little of self in children; the children of God ((...), the word given
to sucking children of two years old, Matthew, 2. 18. Acts 21. 21.) are like such
as are learning to walk; there is little self-wisedom or of self-designes in
the motions of young children. So does the spirit act with facility and without
resistance in the sons of God; Who may not see the color of self, and feel
some savor of the creature and of self in men? O if we could savor in
looking, speaking, acting, of the spirit! The rivers, loths, and fountains
issue themselves in the Sea and be mixed therewith; its the salt Sea and not
the rivers which ebb and flow: the under-acting of sinlesse nature in spiritual
actings hinders not the work to be denied of the man and affirmed of the
spirit; So as we say not the man, but rather God in the man acts and speaks.
Indeed things are not denominate from their externals; a vessel of copper
washed over with silver, or a cup of brass over-gilded and lustered with gold,
is not, nor is named a vessel of silver or a cup of gold. Though we name things
by their skin and outside, yet when the hypocrite prays, the Lord says the man
prays, Psalm. 18. 41. but the Spirit of God prays not in him. Nor does the Lord
name Magus a true believer from his profession, only the Holy Ghost says, he
believed. It Is good when the conversation speaks heaven, and the spirit is
visibly seen acting in the behavior and walk of men. It Is true, there is much
of renewed self, (as 1 Cor. 15, 9, 10. Gal. 2. 20. Romans 7. 17, 22. 1 Cor. 9.
20, 21.) in spiritual actings, and this heightens the excellency of the
actions: corrupt self renders the act of praying and preaching wider and
bigger, but not better and excellenter; especially in public renewed self
rendereth it excellenter.

And 5. Not unlike unto that touched before is a character of a spiritual man,
To doubt as a bewildered man of all ways and to desire to be led of God is a
spiritual character.
when the man is spiritually bewildered, and doubts of all ways he walks in,
except the way he is sure to be of God, Psalm. 143. 10. Teach me to do thy
will, thy spirit is good, lead me into the land of uprightness. Hence these
three follow. 1. The spiritual man doubts of all ways, and knows that he is a
bewildered and ignorant traveller of himself, and knows not by his own light,
1. The way. 2. The home and lodging. Or 3. The guide. It says, the spiritual
man judges the spirit of God a good leader and guide: it is no sophisme a
divisis, thy spirit is good, thou art a leader; therefore the spirit is a good
leader and guide: it is much to have the faith fixed upon influences of daily
guiding by God. 3. It says I am willing to commit my goings to thee; Take the
guiding of me; be father, guide, leader, tutor, king to me. All these speak
spiritual bewilderednesse; And those two are well joined. 1. Sense of
bewilderednesse; and 2. Praying to the one only guide in heaven and earth:
Psalm. 119. 19. I am a stranger on earth: hide not thy Commandments from me. The
Commandments are the way, and a hid and covered way is a misery to a stranger
or pilgrim. A frequent sight of ignorance and errors, and a being in love with
the spirits leading is good. Though a man could get the work through, be it
praying, hearing, reading, warring, governing, eating and drinking, yet he is
not satisfied with the bulk of the work, except the spirit be the doer. This
gracious spirit looks not so much to praying as to praying in the Holy Ghost;
nor to hearing as to hearing in the spirit of faith; nor to fighting, though
David be stronger then the enemy, except the spirit of the Lord lead the army,
Psalm. 60. 1, 2, 9, 10. Psalm. 140. 7, 8. Psalm. 18. 29, 30, 31. Nay it is not
enough to eat and drink except the spirit act the man to eat and drink for God.
Men spend and waste away their actings, and call not for the spirit to get them
compassed about. We are men abundance to build the Temple, and mighty Kings
favor us, and workmen have strength in legs and arms to lay stones in the
wall: O but that will not do it, Zach. 4. 6. Not by might, nor by power; but
by my spirit says the Lord of hosts; and so only is the Temple builded.

6. Spiritual facility is a spiritual character.
There is a spiritual facility in the spiritual actings of a spiritual man. 1.
The acting is connatural and easy when it comes from an inward principle; the
stream naturally without violence flows from the fountain, and so does heat
from the fire: nor is it any pain to the earth to fall down and descend, or for
the light bodies, fire and air to ascend; it is neither toil nor labor to the
Sun to give light: for all these come from principles internal. There is
violence in the motion of an Horologue, and therefore the wheels shall be worn
out by time; but the actings of the spirit are sweet and facile; grace makes
the Commandments not grievous; its no pain but easy to a gracious pastor to
love Christ; it breaks neither leg nor arm to desire Christ and be sick for
him, and to feed his flock for love to the chief shepherd. 2. Psalm. 25. 9. The
meek will he guide in judgment, the meek will he teach is ways. It Is easy for
God, to guide any man, to guide and lead Lions and Unicorns; but in the very
object there is a facility to counsel a broken and danted spirit. If a man be
in his flower and prime, and rich and mighty, healthy and prosperous, readily
he will do but what he will; but if the man be in chains and broken and
meekned with the rod of God, he is easily bowed and counseled to what is good;
as iron red hot will bow and yield to the smitings of the hammer: i'ts hard to
lead a Lion. The Lord speaks like the Lord to Job, cap. 39. 9. Will the Unicorn
be willing to serve thee? or abide by thy cribs? Can thou bind the Unicorn
with his band in the furrows? or will he harrow the valleys after thee? but it
is easy to bind a lamb. Meekness is easily led and drawn: when the spirit
comes in, the man is made pliable for counsel; he is a plowed and a broken man,
who says, Acts 9. (...), Lord what will thou have me to do? There was no
pride in him, but the fullness of the spirit of the anointing above all his
fellows and all mankind, who said, not my will, but thy will be done. And if
any living man should have had his will or a piece of his will, it was a man
whose holy will could never crook; and it was now when sinlesse, holy,
harmless nature was debating the greatest question that ever Heaven or Angels
knew. But the fullness of the spirit bids him quit his will, and so he did. The
sweet passive tractablenesse of the spirit of grace will enjoin the man to be
ranged, bridled and led of God: there be some, whom God can neither lead nor
drive: any inspiration falls upon him, a moral influence, this I should and
ought to do; but I shall not, I will not do it let God do his best; and it
is as if a burning cole were cast into the sea or river, will it burn the sea?
will it be welcomed and received? no, its presently quenched. An unbroken
Tyrant void of the spirit, when he heard that charge, Let my people go; They
are my servants (says the Tyrant) not thy people. Exodus 5. 2. Who is the Lord
that I should obey his voice, and let Israel go? Let his influences be lodged
with meekness. O wrestle not against warnings, but yield to them! So are all
gracious influences sweet, delectable and easy; is it pain, nay its sweet and
pleasant for a field of Roses, of Vine-trees to receive showers and summer
influences from the Sun and Heaven. It was sweet for the baptized man Christ to
receive and lodge the Holy Ghost who came down in the form of a Dove on him in
all his influences.

7. A public spirit declares a spiritual man.
To act much in the spirit brings more abundance of the spirit. 1. The more
public the work be, the more is the man under the spirit. Christ must have
been under mighty flowings of the spirit, who for the public Catholic duty of
redeeming mankind was willing to be suspended from the influences of his
personal comfort, and to be under that sad cloud of being forsaken of God that
God might embrace us. It Is the proper work of the spirit to glorify God, John
16. 14. He shall glorify me (says Christ of the spirit) for he shall receive
of mine. Then the more we glorify God and Jesus Christ his Son we testify we
partake the more of the flowings of the spirit. The Church has so much the
more of the spirit that she is willing to bear the Lord's indignation, because
she has sinned, Mic. 7. 9. and bear public sufferings to illustrate the glory
of his justice.

2, We are also with Magdalen and other godly persons so far to be dead to the
private comforts of love to Christ and his presence, and waiting about the
grave to anoint his body, that we are to wait upon the more public duties of
resting in, and of sanctifying of the Sabbath; though otherwise, the rescuing
of the life of an ox be mercy above this sacrifice. If we have much of the
spirit, we shall patiently submit to the Lord's dispensation of his sovereign
withdrawing of influences of comfort, yea and delight in other inferior duties.
What though he will not feast me with the apples of the tree of life, and
suspend his comforts? what if he withdraw joyful influences of believing, of
glorying, and rejoicing in the Lord, and feed the poor sinner with absence and
exercise him with sad desertions?

3. How to improve spiritual feelings.
It Is a spiritual condition, when Christ casts in feelings, and discernable
motions of the spirit, and not only knocks, but Cant. 5. 2, 4. puts in his hand
by the hole of the door, if this follow, my bowels were moved for him. And it is
a spiritual condition when the soul fails, and the spouse falls a swoon at
these words, Open to me, my sister, my love, etc. Cant. 5. 2, 6. And these
lesser feelings would be turned into consent, and into fixed resolutions; as
the spouse, I opened to my welbeloved; I sought him, but I found him not; I
called him, but he answered me not: And that came from the feeling of his hand,
put in by the hole of the door, ver. 4. compared with ver. 6. For that word,
Quench not the spirit, 1 These. 5. 19. includes an affirmative; that is, cherish
kindly and yield sweetly unto the flowings and sweet influences of the spirit.

8. A watching condition is a spiritual condition. The Spirit of God is much
seen in keeping the soul watching. Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying with all prayer and
supplication in the spirit is joined with watching; For it is added, and
watching thereunto with all perseverance: and Jude conjoynes praying in the
Holy Ghost, with ver. 21. looking for or watching after the mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ unto eternal life. The spirit is willing (Matthew. 26. 4. forward,
watchful, so is the ^enewed part,) but the flesh is weak, sleepy, and lazy; And
as much as the man has of the spirit, so much holy watchfulness has he; and
Matthew. 25. 26. the evil servant that dug his Masters talent in the earth, is
called wicked and slothful, (...) sleepy, in opposition to the watching and
painful servant, who ver. 20. gained five talents to five talents. Drowziness
counter-works the knockings and gracious influences of the Spirit of Christ's
calling, Cant. 5. and answers Christ's piercing words Open to me, my sister, my
love, etc. with a carnal excuse from drowzinesse; it is not time of night for
Christ to seek lodging; I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have
washed my feet, how shall I defile them? Cant. 5. 3. The flesh is a sleeping
thing, and a dead: Watching is a spiritual condition and near to receive
gracious influences.
were we more diligent and painful we might be richer; lesser motions closed
with become the seed of larger motions. The moving of the bowels at Christ's
spiritual stirrings that he makes upon the heart grows to this, I rose to open
to my welbeloved. Watching guards against sleeping, and watchfulness puts the
soul upon a resolution to watch: sleeping guards no more against watching, then
then the privation fences off the habit, or does set a man to work against
life. We sit not watchfully upon the motions of the spirit, to warm them and to
draw life out of them, as the Hen by careful sitting upon dead Eggs brings
forth living birds. Who would think a tree and a huge tree can come from a
sorry plant? or sixty or an hundred grains of wheat in harvest to be in one
single grain cast in the earth in sowing time? Can the flesh wait for the Lord?
is not hope an act of life? Yea, it is lively hope opposite to a dead and rotten
hope: and waking is nearer to life, and influences of life, then sleeping,
which is the death of the man as touching the exercise of the sensitive life:
Then since the spirit is a spirit of life, and a quickening and living spirit,
Romans 8. 1 Cor. 15. the more watchfulness in any, the more of the spirit; For
when the spirit enters in the dry bones, they become an army of living men,
whereas before they were farther from life and spirit then sleeping bones. Let
us not sleep as do others: but let us watch, and be sober. For they that sleep,
sleep in the night, 2 These. 5. 6, 7. The night is far spent, let us walk
honestly, as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and
wantonness, nor in strife and in envying, Romans 13. 13. This is like the
putting on of the Lord Jesus, which is a work of the spirit; for sleeping men
put not on their garments. Ministers especially are to watch, yea to watch in
all things: then in sleeping they must watch, 2 Timothy 4. 5. And hardly can
fighting, and enduring hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ, commended
to the Minister, 1 Timothy 6. 12. 2 Timothy 2. 3. consist with sleeping, if we know
how near Satan the roaring Lion (who sleeps not) is to our quarters and camp, 1
Pet. 5. 8. Who can sleep and be secure, and resist Satan? or stand against him
steadfast and fixed in the faith? ver. 9. Christ is much upon this, by Matthew,
Mark, and Luke, Watch, Watch, and pray; and lest it slip them again, I say to
you, Watch, Matthew. 26. 38, 40, 45. Matthew. 24. 42. Matthew. 25. 13. Mark 13. 23.
Mark 14. 38. Luke 17. 26, 27, etc. Luke 21. 8, 38. cap. 2. 2, 46. How can
sleeping men receive influences of grace? does the Lord cast influences upon
sleeping men's bosoms? So are we to act as our acting way be fathered on the
spirit; as the Spirit of the Lord came upon Gideon, upon Sampson, and they
fight, and the Spirit of the Lord upon Zechariah the son of Jehojadah, and he
prophesied, 2 Chro. 24. 20. Luke 1. 64. the father of John Baptist was filled
with the Holy Ghost and prophesied. Simeon came by the spirit into the Temple.
This acting in the spirit is opposed to acting in the flesh, and in the spirit
of Satan; as Bullinger of one brother who slew his brother, and pretended the
spirit: and Pareus tells us the like. As the Lord the Father and Son never spoke
to Abraham, Moses, to Patriarks or Prophets, but he made them know it was the
Lord; so neither does the spirit act in any, though the way seem violent, as in
Phineas and Samuel, their executing of justice, but the Spirit makes it known
that it is the Spirit, and that he is not in the mighty wind, nor in the fire,
but in the calm voice. So Samuel leisurely and advisedly convinces Agag ere he
kill him, and gives a reason to his conscience from divine justice, 1 Samuel 35.
32, 33. though Samuel then had laid down the sword. It Is an useful word Jude
20. Praying in the Holy Ghost; and Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying always, with all
prayer and supplication in the spirit. What, is there a praying in the flesh?
yea, if preaching may be from a principle of the flesh, out of envy and strife,
Phil. 1. 15. so may praying be from some rotten principle of fleshly
presumption. Lord, Lord, open to us. Which us? to us workers of iniquity,
Matthew. 25. 11. Luke 13. 25, 26. And 2. some prayer flows from fleshly despair,
and not from the spirit. Rev. 6. 16. Mountains and rocks fall on us, and hide
us from the face of him that sits on the throne. And 3. The enemies of David
cry to the Lord out of fleshly fear and unbelief, not in the spirit, Psalm. 18.
41. There is a praying out of deadness and from the flesh, not from the spirit:
and often the mere office and the letter not the spirit prays and preaches out
of the man; it is far from that praying Romans 8. 26. And learn to discern the
literal fair influences in praying in the flesh, To converse with the Saints is
a mark of a spiritual condition.
and the sweet, calm, fiery also, and spiritual paining influences of
love-sicknesse, Cant. 5. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, etc.

10. Conversing with spiritual men, born of the spirit of the same Father, John
5. John 3. 1 John 3. 14. Psalm. 119. 63. with Elias, leaning on Christ's bosom,
in whom is fullness of the spirit, declares a spiritual man. None of the
Disciples saw more spiritual and glorious visions then John in the book of the
Revelation: he would have desired to lean on and dwell in Christ's heart, as in
his bosom. Brethren love one another; the common nature and spirit of their
Father dwells in them. Fowls of the same feathers and colors haunt together.
Drunkards, malignants, swearers, love to be together: beware of wearying to
haunt with the spirit and spiritual men, and to loath a spiritual Ministry,
and to look upon spiritual doctrine as upon fancies: If it be so with you, you
shall back to the fleshpots of Egypt again: its a living near to the fountain
to haunt much with the Saints; and as the streams are one in the well, so do
the streams run in the same channel, and love to stick together: Natures of the
same kind, lambs with lambs love to live together, Psalm. 119. 13. I am a
companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy Precepts. A
part of the Air keeps its being best in the whole Element, whereas a part of
the Air is corrupted in the bowels of the Earth, where it is out of its own
Element: a part of water is best preserved in being in the element of water;
put it in a pit or hole of the earth it is alone, and it becomes rotten and
unsavory. The Saints keep their spiritual being with the excellent ones in
whom is all their delight, Psalm. 16. 2. as being in their own element: and no
wonder if it be their woe to dwell long in Mesech, and in Kedars tents with
such as hate peace, Psalm. 120. 5, 6. Psalm. 57. 4, 10. nor is this to flatter
such as separate from Christ and his Ordinances; nor to say, Stand by thy self,
come not near me; for I am holier then thou, Isa. 65. 5. and yet they
themselves remain among the graves and lodge in the monuments. Be rather
frequenting Hospitals of sick ones, making it your work to gain many; it is like
to Christ, Luke 16. 6, 7, 10. Matthew. 9. 10, 11, 12, 13. Luke 15. God ordinarily
showers influences and promises influences to the flocking together of the
godly, and the pouring of his spirit on them, Jer 50. 4, 5, 6. Zech. 8. 21, 22,
23. Mal. 3. 16. and two speaking of Christ, Jesus himself comes in as third
man, Luke 24. 15, 16, 17, etc. and as if they were the fit soil, he rains down
influences of warmness and burning of heart on them while he opens the
Scriptures to them, Spiritual conference frequently used speaks a spiritual
condition.
v. 32. see Acts 2. 1, 2, 3, etc. Joh. 20. 19. It Is a spiritual condition to
talk of spiritual purposes: when the well is full it must run over; when there
is a treasure and abundance in the heart, the spirit comes to the tongue in
Zachariah and Simeon, Luke 2. 25, 27. and grace seeths and boyls up to the
tongue, when the conceptions of the King Christ are the good matter indicted by
the heart, Psalm. 45. 1. so to be filled with the spirit, Ephesians. 5. 18, 19.
says Paul, speaking to your selves in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual songs:
-- Giving thanks always for all things to God is the spirit's work in his
abundant influences. There is a spirit in men seen in language; the seaman
talks of winds; the husbandman of oxen and plowing; the soldier of battles
and wounds; and the shepherd of flocks; and the spiritual man of Christ,
redemption, imputed righteousness: and as the pilgrims heart, and the pilgrims
tongue, the pilgrims thoughts are all upon his way and his home; so is the
spiritual man much upon Eternity, Heaven, Christ: for the three noble
Conferrers, the transfigured man Christ, glorified Moses, and Elias, speak of
the celebrious heavenly subject, the (...) and out-going of Christ when he was
to leave the world. The man has been full of God who could not refrain from
speaking of the Lord's testimonies before Kings; and Princes have no great list
to hear but of State matters and of conquering new Kingdoms, Psalm. 119. 46. the
rotten, unsavory, worldly and carnal speeches of many, bewray how little of
the spirit is within them. It was Christ who had the fullness of the anointing
of the spirit within him, Psalm. 48. 8. I delight to do thy will, O my God, thy
law is within my heart. In Sea and Land, and House and Field, by the way side
journeying, at every table when he should have eaten he made good that word,
ver. 9. I have preached righteousness in the great Congregation: lo, I have not
refrained my lips thou know, O Lord. 10. I have not hid thy righteousness
within my heart, I have declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation: I have not
concealed thy loving kindness from the great Congregation. Influences of grace
are required for this; as page 45.

PART III. Influences of Grace.
CHAP. I.
Of diverse sorts of Influences.

HAving formerly spoken of Influences of grace in general, we are now to
descend to more specials: Hence these particulars.

1. Some influences are from Satan, some from God.

2. The way of Satan's influences.

3. Its lawful to dispute with Heretics, instruments of Satan, but not lawful
to dispute with Satan.

4. Christ sought neither the Tempter nor the temptation.

5. Some influences are natural, some supernatural.

6. Some moral, some Physical.

7. Some Prophetical, some not.

8. Some public on the Church, some personal.

9. Some influences are given for the habit of grace or gifts, some for the
act, some for both.

10. Some proper to the head Christ, some for the members.

11. Some influences are fundamental, some not.

12. Some influences are given for saving graces actings; some for the actings
of a gift.

13. Differences between acting of grace, and acting of gifts.

14. Some influences are viatorum, of such as are in the way to their country;
some are comprehensorum, of perfected ones; some of grace, some of glory.

For the fuller opening of the Doctrine of Influences: some influences are from
Satan, some from God. Influences from God are both moral, when he commands
good, and forbids evil; and real and physical, in that all move in him, as the
first cause and mover in operations of nature. 2. of grace. 3. of glory. But
Satan being no Master or Lord of providence, has no real stirring in second
causes; his actings upon angel or men's souls are not physical, but only moral
or tempting actings, or hellish inspirations inductive to sin; and it is no
small mercy that the Prince and God of a lost world, who by permission acts
really on the air, earth, and waters, yet has no power of immediate, How Satan
knows the actings of the heart.
real, or physical acting upon mind, will, affection, and conscience, he
having only a borrowed key, and at the second hand power to suit the heart, by
fancy, senses, and outward objects, 1 Kings 22. 22. John 13. Acts 5. 3. Some
one way or other the court-gate of Achabs heart, of Judas, of Ananias and
Sapphira, lie open to Satan's scout-watches. It were safer to watch and fear,
then to dispute how that subtle Spirit can blow up the lock and get in; for he
knows not what is in a man's spirit. The spirit of a man is under God, the only
keeper of this castle, and knows rooms, doors, and what is within, 1 Cor. 2.
11. But devils lying about the outworks, the senses, the fancy, and the
imagination, which is a material house, and has doors, windows, and entries
passible to devils; he can here blow the bellows, and kindle iron works.

There be two ways to know the secrets that are done in a cabinet-camber. 1.
Satan can send in posts with letters, and write his (...), Satan keeps
correspondence with the heart.
his wiles to the heart. This is one way of putting it in the heart of Judas to
betray Christ, by sending his mind and will through the fancy to the heart,
and the fancy being set on work by the will and understanding, can carry the
missive letter; else how could the Lord rebuke the sin of actual imaginations?
as he does Jer. 9. 4. Jer. 13. 10. Jer. 18. 11, 12. Nah. 2. 11.

2. The heart can write back an answer of the missive letters, and print it on
the fancy. We know there is fire in the house by the smoke that comes out at
the chimney. A man may speak out at a window to another. Satan conveyed by the
serpents tongue, and by Evahs eyes, the living thoughts of a Godhead growing on
the tree, and can send in a word of a message to the heart, All these will I
give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. And thou shall have thirty
pieces of silver, if thou will deliver up the Lord to us; and from the sons of
disobedience he gets a return; he knew what Achab should answer to the 400
Prophets, and heard that, Thou shall go, and also prevail. And reason would
say since all Satan's prevailings have these two; 1. A commission sought and
obtained to tempt Job c. 1. and as particular as if written, as is clear v. 12.
Or a sentence of the great Judge to punish sin, 1 Kings 22. 20, 21, 22, 23. 2 Samuel 24. 1. It may appear that the lictor and executioner, though he know not
the heart and the thoughts of the Judge directly, yet he knows his own written
commission, and what sentence he is to execute, and what mischief he shall do,
1 Kings 22. 22. as the executioner knows whether the sentence bear heading or
hanging.

2. Ananias is blamed for Satan's lie that he put in his heart, Why has Satan
filled thy heart (it is like there were a good many seeming arguments moved by
Satan to promote the work in Ananias) to lie to the holy Ghost? Then though
Satan's knocking and active tempting be not our sin; for our Savior was tempted
by Satan, yet without sin; It Is lawful to dispute with Satan's instruments, not
with Satan.
yet he has so access to to the heart, as our yielding and being passively
tempted with any degree of inclination to the tempation, is our sin.

3. Neither may we dispute or racket arguments with Satan.

Object. We may dispute with Heretics, and convince them, though they be
Satan's instruments, Tit. 1. 9. Tit. 3. 10. and the blind man John 9. hold up a
dispute in defense of Christ against the Pharisees; therefore we may dispute
with Satan himself.

Answ. Men, to whose ears the Gospel comes, are to be gained by the power of
the truth, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. We are commanded to confess Christ before men, not
before devils. This end is not attainable in the fallen Angels; therefore
Christ rebukes Satan's confessing of him, Luke 4. 34, 35.

Obj. Christ holds up dispute with Satan, Matthew. 4.

Answ. We are to follow what is ordinary in Christ's disputing, that is, to
reject Satan's temptations, not brutishly and irrationally (that is not victory
over Satan by the light of faith) but by evidence of Scripture, and must refuse
to yield to the temptation, and refuse in faith.

2. There is something extraordinary in this, which we cannot follow; for the
second Adam here as Mediator carries the person of all the tempted ones, as the
first Adam did represent all his, and gives a proof that he is Michael,
stronger then the Dragon; and that all the tempted seed are by faith to rely on
the strength of the tempted Savior.

3. Nor did Christ hold up or entertain the dispute with Satan; he only gave
one simple answer to every temptation, It is written. Nor had the dispute

1. Christ sought not the tempter nor the temptation, but (in a sort) a patient
in being tempted.
Its rise from Christ. Christ is rather a patient for our instruction, then an
agent as touching the rise of the temptation; for Matthew says, (...), the
tempter came unto him; then Christ fetched neither the tempter, nor the
temptation, or dispute.

2. Satan brought him to the holy city, Matthew. 4. 5. (...) -- (...), Satan set
him on a pinnacle of the Temple, v. 8. (...), The Devil took him unto an
exceeding high mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world. Then
did not the man Christ go as from himself to the pinnacle of the Temple, nor to
the exceeding high mountain to fetch and bring on himself the temptation or the
dispute. See Luke 4. 5, 6, 7, 8. Yea Divines think he submitted that his holy
body should be so far acted upon by Satan. So Mark 1. 12. the Spirit drives him
(...), casts him violently to the desert. Evah entertains a dialogue with
Satan. 1. Speaks by way of complaining of God. 2. And doubtingly of the Lords
word of threatening, Genesis 3. Saul the 1 Samuel 28. seeks after Satan, and makes
a journey to him. Some influences of God are 1. Differences between Satan's
influences, and these of the Lord.
upon the act, yet so as they are willingly received by us. 2. Though they be
terminated upon the material act under trangression, yet is there neither moral
warrant nor persuasion to the sinfulness from the Lord, but the contrary. But
when the influence is to gracious acts, there are many strong allurements from
precept, promise, threatening, to move us to close with the gracious act, and
virtually with the real influence. 3. Satan's influences are to shameful acts,
to walking naked. 2. To bloody delusions, to kill the children to Molech. 3. To
unwarrantable delusions, to lay aside Scripture, and walk in the dark,
attending on unwritten dreams.

2 Divis. Some influences of God are ordinis naturalis, natural; he commands
the Sun to rise; he sends rain, and joins his concurrence to the things of
nature. Some are ordinis supernaturalis, supernatural; such as are of the
Father choosing. 2. Of the Son. If Christ died without the camp, that he might
sanctify the people with his blood, Heb. 13. 12. and if by his will we are
sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all,
Christ under a necessity of giving sanctifying influences.
Heb. 10. 10. then sure sanctifying influences must be bought and purchased for
his chosen people. The doubt is yet answered more fully; what a wise man has
deliberately bought, and with the price of blood, he must bestow that for the
end for which he has bought it. Then Christ must bestow saving influences for
sanctifying his people. We look too much to what we cannot do, and too little
in this business to what Christ must do, upon the necessity of his offices, of
his bargain of redemption that he has closed; he must work in his own to will
and to do until the end.

3 Division. Moral and physical influences.
Some influences are moral, some physical and real. The moral influences are
the persuading actings of God from the word of precept, of promise, of
threatening, Moral influences that are only moral, are weak.
from the Law, from the Gospel; such are common to all within the visible
Church. Hence from these flow warnings, inspirations, holy motions, strong
convictions, that Christ is to be followed, all are to be forgone and cast
overboard that we may gain him, in regard of these. Christ stands at the door
and knocks, Revel. 3. 20. Thousands refuse to open to him; as howbeit the word
carries along with it the high and glorious authority of the Lawgiver, the
promise of a Kingdom, the threatening of everlasting chains; yet it works but
morally, and the robber in the woods laughs at the paper-lawes, and at the
far-off general justice that is in cities, which cannot reach the robbers that
are in woods; so moral influences from the word bear in upon the thought afar
off a letter-heaven, or a literal hell, with a suspicion of lying unbelief;
these are but fables. But when the Lord in real influences lays hands on the
sinner, the man is then as if he were at the bar; the robber on whose legs and
arms the law has laid bolts and iron fetters, and is really wrought upon by
more then literal influences, as Saul for three days speaks supplications: And
when the influences physical of God are upon the soul of the spouse, then love
it self and love-sickness speak with sense, His love is better then wine. O he
is the chief among ten thousand. Many thousand professors live and die under
letter-influences, and a paper-New-Testament; they hear, read, know the word,
are baptized, and deceive their own souls, and have but seen (as James says)
their image in the glass, and forget themselves. Such never knew
heart-sickness, nor the terrors of God, nor any real work on the conscience:
then seek heart-drawing, and heart-divinity.

4. Ordinary and extraordinary influences.
Some influences are moral and ordinary of some professors; some are
prophetical and extraordinary. Now as to these which are prophetical, it may be
a question whether they be real and physical, or only moral. It seems there are
two things here, 1. The visions. 2. The publishing of them. As to the first,
Jeremiah sees the rod of an Almond-tree, and a seething pot, and the face of it
toward the North. Ezekiel sees a whirlwind and a cloud out of the North, and
fire enfolding it self, and the color of amber out of the midst of the fire,
Prophetical influences.
and the likeness of four living creatures, and every one of them had four
faces, and four wings, etc. And Daniel saw a ram with two horns, one higher,
another lesser, pushing northward, and westward, and southward, etc. It Is clear
these were real visions, and had real influences of God carrying them into
their mind really, and they could not shun but they were in an ecstasy, and God
really made them see as to the publishing of them, just as they saw them. They
seem to be moral agents, yet so as Caiaphas could not shun to prophecy; nor
could Balaam, when his eyes were opened, and he falling in a trance, but see
the visions of the Almighty, and could not go beyond the word of the Lord, but
must prophetically bless (and no more thanks and praise can be due to them in
so doing, then to Satan confessing Christ to be the Son of God, Luke 4.) So
are many, who are convinced, and tremble at the word, and when the terrors of
God, and a fever or ague of the pressing indignation of God takes them, It Is
dangerous to resist strong light and the influences thereof.
declare God to be righteous, and themselves guilty, are but little
praiseworthy: For the Law acting in a natural conscience, is another party
representing God the Judge; and when such turn again to their vomit, as there
be many false births of this kind, how prodigiously profane are such? for they
carry about Satan's light of a natural conscience, and their own profane hearts:
so dreadful it is to do violence to light which speaks from God. Saul at the
beginning of his reign, and Demas, and some others, are hellish examples of
Apostasy to cause others fear.

5. There are some personal influences upon a single man that are more private,
which are very desirable: But there be some more public influences on the
Church; so the Lord walks in the midst of the golden candlesticks, Private and
public Church influences.
and raines down Ministerial blessings on his Church, holds the stars on his
right hand, and waters his Church. So Isa. 27. 2. A garden of red wine. 3. I
the Lord do keep it: I will water it every moment, lest any hurt it, I will
keep it night and day. Beside protection that the Lord is the keeper of the
Vineyard, and Christ answers for the vines, the mystical body is like a parcel
of ground subject to drought and withering, and Christ with showers of
influences must water our withering, and he leading captivity captive, and
ascending on his coronation-day, sent down royal gifts, Apostles, Prophets,
Pastors on his body mystical, which also is made visible by him. The times of
sweet refreshing showers, and of the singing of the birds under the Messiah's
Kingdom, require that we exercise our faith in looking toward these promises.
When the heavens seem to be heavy, and (as it were) with child of Summer-rain,
Ezekiel. 34. 26. I will make them and the places round my hill a blessing, and I
will cause the showers come down in his season, there shall be showers of
blessings. It Is not rain for grass or corn, but of spiritual influences upon
Emmanuels land, where floods and rivers run milk and wine, Isa. 55. 1. as also
Isa. 32. 3. The eyes of them that see shall not be dim, and the ears of them
that hear shall hearken. 4. The heart also of the rash shall understand
knowledge, and the tongue of the stammerer shall be ready to speak plainly.
Then is that true also Isa. 35. 1. The desert shall rejoice and blossom as a
rose. 5. The eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall
be unstopped. 6. Then shall the lame man leap as an heart, and the tongue of the
dumb sing; for in the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the
desert. 7. And the parched ground shall become a pool, and the thirsty land
springs of waters: in the habitation of dragons where each lay (shall be) grass
with reeds and rushes. And that all this is a prophecy of showers of
influences of grace upon the holy people under the New Testament, is clear v.
8. And an highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called the way of
holiness, the unclean shall not pass over it, but it shall be for those; the
way faring men, though fools, shall not err (therein.) 9. No lion shall be
there, nor any ravenous beast shall go up thereupon, it shall not be found
there: but the redeemed shall walk there. Were all the stones and rocks of a a
Land turned into gold, it should prove that the Sun had most strong influences
on that land. The stony hearts under the New Testament are changed into new
hearts, Ezekiel. 36. 26. and a people of hard metal of iron and stone,
transformed into precious stones, Carbuncles, Agats, Saphires; and that made
true, All thy children shall be taught of God, Isa. 55. 11, 12. This does
evince that the influences of God shall be mighty in those who believe under
the New Testament, Strong influences under the Messiah in the New Testament.
even the exceeding greatness of his power, which he wrought in Christ when he
raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in heavenly places.
Such things say that such as live under the Gospel would say what a change is
made in them. The Gospel finds you stones and iron, and leaves you stones and
iron; O but that is sweet, Christ found me clay, and now I am gold, as the man
John 9. 25. One thing I know, that where I was blind, now I see. 1 Timothy 1. 13.
Once I was a blasphemer, a persecutor, an injurious person, but I obtained
mercy. Ah it is a hard condition, born an heir of wrath, dying worse then an
heir of wrath; for sin original, and the habit of wickedness was but a little
brook when the reprobate man was born; but when he dies, it is a mighty river,
and a great sea. What has the Gospel done to you? It Is more then the power of
the Sun, it is a strong influence of God the first cause, that makes clay gold,
and common earth silver, and copper, and brass. Many cannot tell where Christ
found them, and where they are now.

2. If there be such summer-showres of heavenly influences under Christ, how is
our fleece dry? And many are rained upon green, and the bones flourishing like
an herb and a lilly, and thou art dry. This is not seen; profaneness is
exceeding profane, and is twice, yea seven times profaneness under
Gospel-influences. Gospel-influences are strong.
The Gospel-devil is fiercer, and more a devil (to speak so) then the Indian
devil. O but the Gospel makes a sad eik to wickedness, Gospel-swearing,
Gospel-whoring, Gospel-drunkenness, are worse then Sodoms filthiness, Matthew.
10. 15. There is an unperceived vengeance that cleaves to every Judas; the man
who is long in Christ's company; and sees and hears what Christ does, and what
he says, his traitory is twice, yea seven times traitory. Spilt and rotten
wine is a worse liquor then fountain water; some water is better then some wine.

3. How blessed then is that, this man and this man was born in Sion! To be
born and dwell in a Land where Christ dwells, speaks mercy: To be a plant of a
young Vine where the garden of red wine is, must be a mercy; to be a plot of
ground that Christ plows; to be a branch that the Father of Christ purges that
it may bring forth more fruit, is an incomparable mercy. You might have been
born in China, in America, in Brasilia, where Satan dwells; but ye were born in
a land of Vine-trees and Olive Trees. To be born in the Church (though men
despise it) and in covenant with God, and to be baptized, is to be born in
Paradise, in the borders of heaven; for there is the Gospel and the Prince, who
both can promise and give Heaven.

6. Some influences are for the habit, some for the actings of grace, some for
both.
Divis. Some are influences for the habit, others for the act of grace.
Influences for the habit, as Isa. 44. 3. I will pour water on him that is
thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground. I will pour my spirit upon thy seed,
and my blessing upon thy offspring. A land that raines showers of rain and
milk, and raines down showers of glory and grace, must be the glory of all
lands, and it must needs be an excellent and a glorious Sun that shines upon
that land. 2. There are influences for heavenly dispositions. Christ speaks and
opens the Scriptures to them, and their hearts burn within them, Luke 24. 32.
Every word of Christ casts in a fiery coal of love: Every fitting down under
the Apple Tree brings sweetness; he has influences by which he brings on
love-sickness, Cant. 5. 7, 8. Christ casts in a praying disposition on Saul,
Behold he prays, Acts 8. and casts in a mourning disposition on the woman that
washed his feet with tears; and a disposition of love, she loved much, so she
weeped over Christ's feet, and kissed them, and wiped them with the hair of her
head. He cast in a hearing disposition in Mary, Luke 10. A love-sickness after
Christ in the Spouse, Cant. 2. a mourning disposition on Peter, he weeps
bitterly. 3. There are influences by which Christ acts in us, and the spirit
acts in us to will and to do, Phil. 2. 13. and the spirit groans and prays
in the Saints, Romans 8. 26. Christ by his influences makes some one new work or
other what he has done in you. Are ye a dry Eunuch, and the heath in the
wilderness? and are ye the dried up fig tree, and withered up by the root,
neither leaves nor fruit? God will blast brambles, and cast them over the
hedge, and deny Sun and rain to them. Some there be on whom Christ never acted
as Christ; they are in the shadow all their life, and never saw nor felt the
Sun.

7. Influences proper to the head Christ, and influences on the members.
Divis. There be some influences proper to the head Christ, some peculiar to
the members. O what rare actings upon the Son, Psalm. 45. 2. Grace is poured in
thy lips. v. 7. God thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness. Isa.
61. 1. The spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me
to preach good tidings to the meek; he has sent me to bind up the
brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the
prison to them that are bound. 2. To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord.
In which words are holden forth the influences of the Lord in their fullness,
the anointing of the spirit of the Lord upon the head upon the head Christ, and
the influence of that anointing upon the members, to wit, on the meek, on the
brokenhearted, on the captives, on those that are bound and sold. Then says
the man Christ, the Spirit of the Lord has sent the strong and
fountain-influences of the abounding anointing on me, and I may send the fruits
of these holy influences upon the meek to preach to them glad tidings, that
they may believe, and influences upon the broken hearts, that they may be bound
up, and influences on the captives and prisoners, Mediatory influences are some
way due to the broken in heart, and what sort of right they have thereunto. A
fourfold right to influences is considerable.
and the sold and oppressed with debt, that they may be made free for binding
up of hearts; and freeing of captives and prisoners are impossible without the
healing influences of Christ. Then (says he) God lets out to me and to the
members; (...) the head receive anointing, and a full fountain, and I issue out
streams and life to the members; look then as the dry earth has a sort of
connatural right of means and end to the full clouds and bottles of heaven,
and the rain in the clouds, and the cold and dead earth has a sort of
connatural right, by the Lords holy appointment, to the influences of the Sun;
so by a decree of free grace, the brokenhearted, the meek, the captives, the
prisoners have a right of means in order to the end, to the influences of
compassion and tenderness, and of real grace, that in its fullness is in the
soul and heart of the Mediator Christ, toward their brokenness bondage and
misery who are his. Then may the captive and prisoner claim influences from
Christ, as the dry earth in its kind suites and ^egges that rain that is in
the bosom and womb of the clouds for its refreshments: and so much the more
that fullness of Christ's anointing is not only ordered by a free and gracious
decree as the means for this end, to supply the emptiness of the meek and the
poor captives, but 2. also which is more, the influences of the fullness of
Christ's anointing is due by way of merit, and of buying and selling to those
captives, as when there is a large price of blood given for to redeem the man
in his vain conversation, as 1 Pet. 1. 18. from the present evil world, Gal. 1.
15. from the living to sin and in sin, 1 Pet. 2. 24. from all iniquity and the
bondage and filthiness thereof, Tit. 2. 14. There is a due right in law, by way
of bargain and payment, made to Justice upon Christ's part, that such ought not
to be detained slaves, captives, and prisoners. Now the earth has no such
right by buying, nor any Jus emptionis, to have rain and influences from the
clouds and the sun; for the Lord may without violation of any bargain turn the
earth into iron, and the heavens into brass; and so may the Lord simply and
absolutely deny the fruits Christ's anointing, binding up of wounds, and
freedom to the brokenhearted, and to the captives and slaves of sin, for any
deserving in them; yet as touching the bargain and engagement of redemption
from sins, and the dominion, masterdome, and law imprisonment thereof, the meek
and the captives have a more noble right in the surety Christ, by way of buying
and selling, to the healing influences of Christ's holy anointing, then the
world can express. See also how the spirit in its fullness is given to Christ,
Isa. 11. 2. The spirit of the Lord shall rest on him, the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of
the fear of the Lord. Isa. 42. 1. I will put my spirit on him, he shall bring
forth judgment to the Gentiles. These be mighty influences on him, to whom
(said John the Baptist) God gave not the spirit by measure, John 3. 34. 3.
There is a right of promise to influences, Rev. 2. 7, 17, 26. Rev. 3. 12, 20,
21. John 14. 18, 21. John 15. 1, 2. In Christ promissio facit legale jus,
Christ, as it were, owes me showers of grace; for he promised to water me.
This promise is a draught of the river of life to the deadned spirit. 4. There
is a mystical dueness and connatural love-right: The head by natures law is a
sort of debtor for influences of life to the members.

Here are sweet grounds for the streams to beg from the fountain, the members
dry and withering from the living head.

2. It was fit there should be another higher providence about the head, then
about the members, and so more admirable and transcendent influences extended
toward Christ, then toward any of the sons of men, as that a new star should be
created at his birth.

That 2. God should give testimony of him from heaven immediately, This is my
beloved Son, etc.

3. That Angels, immediate messengers from heaven, should preach his birthday
and place, Luke 2. should minister to him in his agony in the garden; should
watch the corpse of this King sleeping in the grave; should witness his
ascension; Strong and mighty influences in Christ.
and what mighty influences above nature must be in his raising the dead,
commanding devils, etc. In his coming down from heaven to be man, in whom all
the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily; and that the holy body should ascend
visibly through the air, and through the heavens, cleaving, yielding, and
giving way to him; what influences in that the clouds are his chariots, and
that the man Christ intercedes at the right hand of God, and sends influences
of life all the world over to his members, rules all Empires and Kingdoms, the
languishing and fainting believer is comforted? O how suitable is Christ's
fullness and life to my death and emptiness!

3. These must be strong influences, that with the anointing, Isa. 61. 1, 2. is
given a power to preach the year of vengeance, to judge and trample upon the
necks of all his enemies; that the man Christ shall come visibly and locally
from the highest heavens, and the heavens bow and yield to his blessed manhood,
when he comes with his mighty Angels to judge all.

And he sends 4. influences of judgments through the stars which fight against
his enemies, Judge. 5. 20. through winds, seas and rivers, fire and sword, and
evil Angels that are armed against his enemies, Exodus 14. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25,
26, 27, 28. Exodus 15. 10, 11, 12. Judge. 5. 21. Genesis 19. 23, 24, 25. Numb. 16.
31, 32, 33. Psalm. 78. 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, etc. All which teach
us not to murmr at providence, government of the world. Why say we, this is
sad, and yet fallen out? God might otherwise have disposed of all, and we
reflect upon his providence, while as we offend at second causes, but be
comforted in a new world, and in a more glorious providence of influences in
ruling heaven and earth, and in carrying the chosen of God to glory, then if
all were ruled to our will.

1. Gospel-providence how far above the law-providence of Adam.
None shall wither or be blasted that are planted in Christ, and committed to
his husbandry.

2. We could not in the other first providence, which was before sin entered
into the world, have claimed to influences of glory from the fullness of the
anointing that is in Christ; for Christ then was not the public good, and
communicable treasure of his redeemed, he was not our God, nor our Emmanuel,
nor our Goel or Kinsman-redeemer, but a reserved and estranged God to be made
our God by our own earning and law-merit.

3. The Lord Jesus was infinite God, and the fountain as large as now; but he
was not our own fountain, nor the influences and waterings due to in our
witherings as now.

4. Christ is made the new great Lord, Factor, and public Agent for his
Church, to rule all for their good and salvation; and heaven, and earth, and
the world, and life, and death, and things present, and things to come, are put
over in Christ's hands; the morrow, the next years deliverance, the believers
outgoing in death, are all made over to Christ, and then in Christ all things
are ours, 1 Cor. 3. 21. and the watering of my witheredness, and the quickening
of my deadness hic and nunc, in this same moment of time is first Christ's, and
I got it seasonably from him in a better time and way then according to my time
and way.

Object. Many things fall out which may be well otherwise.

Answ. Not so; one godly husbandman prayers for rain to his ground, another
godly husbandman prays for drought, as more useful for his field, for he has
rain enough. Now is it not good that there is a wise providence in Christ,
which fits both their prayers, and does the business well? A number of
believers are to fail to such a land, they pray for a North-east-wind; another
number of believers are to sail to another land, they suit from the Lord a
South-west-wind; is it not best that Christ in his new spiritual providence
take a course to hear both their prayers, to deny both the winds they suit, and
to bring both in his own way to their desired harbors.

Object. 2. It were better God should hear the prayers of his people in their
straits.

Answ. The Lord neither casts off his foreknown people nor their prayers,
though visible Israel externally called be rejected.

2. God hears wicked men's prayers, and grants them not in a way of promise,
but in his wrath, 1 Samuel 8. 22. 1 Samuel 12. 13. Hos. 13. 11. Psalm. 78. 20, 24,
27, 28, 29, 30.

3. God hears the prayers of his people in way of promise which is better then
simple hearing. Mr Gee treats of prayer, Sect. p. 187, 188, and 195.
See the judicious Treatise of the servant of God Mr. Gee.

Obj 3. Many wicked men are green and flourishing, that they may swallow Jacob.

Answ. Nor is it evil that the Lords fire in Sion be hot and fierce, that he
may remove the dross, though the coals that melt the gold be dug out of
hell, and their flaming against his people sinful and cruel; it is not only in
relation to him, who is above his laws, binding Angels and men; not evil, but
equally done in wisdom and righteousness; for as much may be said by carnal
reason in the Lords efficacious permission of sin, which he may hinder in the
reprobate, as well as some way he hindered it in the elect Angels, and in
chosen heirs of glory. 1. Against the wisdom. 2. goodness. 3. sovereignty. 4.
righteousness. 5. and love of God, as Jesuits, Arminians, Socinians, and others
say against the holiness of God. No earthly Father but he should fail both
against natural love, goodness, and wisdom, should he permit, if he could
hinder, his children to commit sins, which shall procure their eternal misery
and woe. Let all flesh be silent, here is holy dominion.

8. Influences of Christ fundamental, and not fundamental.
Divis. Some influences of Christ are fundamental, and simply necessar^, and
principally promised; some not fundamental, and less necessary. As

1. The influences by which the Lord gives a circumcised, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. an one
and single, Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20. a soft and a new heart and spirit, Ezekiel. 36. 26.
Zech. 12. 10. Isa. 54. 13. John 6. 45. Isa. 44. 1, 2, 3. These are simply
necessary.

2. These in^uences are also fundamental, in which the Lord promises and does
put in act the habit of grace for the persevering of believers, Ezekiel. 36. 27.
Isa. 54. 10. Isa. 59. 21. Psalm. 1. 3, 4. Psalm. 89. 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34,
35. John 10. 27, 28, 29. John 15. 1, 2. If Christ plant, his planting lays on
him some necessity, so far to give watering-influences, as not to suffer his
planted trees to dry up by the roots, The comfortable necessity which lies on
Christ to confer influences of grace.
and to wither root and branch; and Christ so builds on a rock his people and
believers, never to be prevailed against by the ports of hell; as he must watch
the city that it be not surprised, nor the living stones hammered to nothing,
and removed off the rock and the foundation Christ. Christ so buys with a
price his own, that he carries them on to the purchased glory, and brings
them actually to the fruition of life eternal; for Christ is an established
high Priest to intercede for his own, and the intercession of Christ is nothing
but a continual showring down upon the redeemed ones new vigorous influences as
the head, so long as it lives, night and day, sleeping and waking, sends down
influences of life to the members: ever-living and ever-interceding Christ is
the fountain, running along through the roots of the Lords planting, so that
they are ever green, ever blooming and budding, and in old age bring forth
fruit, John 14. 19. Isa. 27. 3. Christ interceding is that live fire on the
Altar, Isa. 6. ever sending forth live flamings, and heat of life through his
live coals to all his, John 14. 19. Because I live, ye shall live also. Now
there is no interruption of Christ's living by sickness, sleeping, or death, and
so he lives always. Just as the Sunbeams and rays of light and heat are kept
in their being by the presence of the body of the Sun, casting out these
influences, and the darting out of heat, and warmness, and light, and the
flamings are kept in being by the presence of the fire, which by new fuel is
continued still in the act of flaming; so are the Saints kept still in a
spiritual living, being by Christ issuing out his influences upon them. So
sweet is the union of dependency daily and momently upon Christ that blessed
root of Jesse. Ah, if we knew what it were to live in Christ, to breath in
Christ, pray in him, love in him, rejoice in him, suffer and triumph in him,
praise in him, wait in him for the Lord; but our actings, separated from Christ
and his influences of life, not known to be such, through our unwatchfulness
are dreadful. Now there be some single influences hic and nunc, Influences not
fundamental, not simply necessary.
that the Saints may want and be saved; as the influence necessary for Peter's
confessing of Christ when he denied him; the influence by which David should
have been guarded against the tempration to adultery and murder, the Lord may
withdraw such influences, that the fallen Saints may know that they stand by
grace; and therefore from the Lords withdrawings hic and nunc, let us not
conclude we are out of Christ, yet we are not to be slack, but in trembling and
godly fear to keep near to Christ, and censure not the Lord for withdrawing of
his influences, since he stands obliged by his holy covenant not to deny the
substantial and fundamental influences by which we shall be saved, and
persevere to the end.

9. Influences of grace for the habit of saving grace, and influences for a
gift.
Divis. There be some influences in which the Lord concurrs with the actings of
saving grace; as of faith, love, hope, and other influences, in which the Lord
concurres with the actings of a mere gift, or other principles, possibly the
flesh, custom, etc. and it were good to know the difference betwixt the one
and the other.

Psalm. 57. 8. Awake my glory, awake psaltery and harp; and so he speaks to the
gift of music to awake and be concurrent in the praising of God, and stirs up
the grace of God in himself to praise, when he says I my self will awake
early, he teaches that gift and grace should concur and be stirred up in
spiritual duties of praying and praising: hence how we may know when we act
from a gift, and when we act from saving grace these Assertions following.

Assert. How we may know when we act, pray, or hear, etc. from a gift, and when
we act from a grace.
1. Some sinful sleepiness of the flesh may concur in both the acting of the
gift and of the grace; for David bidding both his harp, and so the gift of
music awake, and himself awake, teaches some sinful dullness was upon both one
and the other. So when David excites his soul and all that is within him to
bless the Lord, Psalm. 103. 1. he insinuates that in praising of God fleshly
dullness may come upon all that is within him, both the powers of the soul, and
the habit of grace and gift, and the skill of singing: it is much to get the
fountain made clean in our actings.

2. How condescending is his mercy, who denies not his influences of grace to
us, though the flesh be acting often, and retarding the spirit in our actings?

Assert. 2. We are to take heed that we knock not at the wrong door: we may
pray and preach from a gift of praying and humane eloquence, and a civilized
and well-skilled fancy, and a literal mind versed in the letter of the
Scripture, when we think that we are praying from the spirit of adoption, Some
pray from a mere gift, when they mistakingly imagine they pray from the saving
habit of grace: the mistake is habitual in hypocrites, only actual hic and nunc
in sound Believers.
and the gracious habit of praying. So the like may be said of Preaching, and
singing praises; how many prophesied and cast out Devils from a mere gift, and
die in that deluded condition, and are possessed with that habitual mistake
(which is never tried) that they prophesied and cast out Devils from a
sanctified principle? read Matthew. 7. 22, 23, 24. Luke 13. 25. Matthew. 25. 11, 12.

If any say, May not sound believers also blow at the wrong harthstone and
think the like?

Answ. There may be a particular mistake in this or that act, but not an
habitual deluded condition all their life; as sometimes the believer may pray
from mere custom, when there is little stirring of the spirit.

Assert. 3. It Is not enough to do the same that heathens do; for if ye love
them that love you, what reward have ye? and if ye salute your brethren only
(not your enemies also) what do ye more then others? So Christ Matthew. 5. to the
multitude, and to the disciples, Matthew. 5. 1, 46. Believers then should not
stint themselves to only publicans and heathens duties. Samuel speaks as a man,
as Samuel when he calls Eliah the Lords anointed, 1 Samuel 16. and supposes that
he speaks as a Prophet; so does Nathan, 1 Samuel 16. 6, 7. 2 Samuel 7. 3. There is
a vast difference betwixt ( thus says the Prophet by the Lord) and ( thus
says the man) and therefore where are we when our righteousness does not
exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees? The devils believe there
is one God, and they do well, James 2. 19. and we fools say in our hearts
there is no God, Psalm. 14. 1. and do we well in so saying? The devils do
tremble when they believe there is one God: ah, Satan believes in sad earnest
when he believes! We sport, yea do not we laugh and mock at a Godhead, or at
the word of a hell? The faith conveyed with godly trembling were good: Ah, that
we know not the influences of God conjoined with the out-lettings of a gift,
and of a temporary faith, and the influences that go along with the
out-letting of saving grace, as touching the matter!

Assert. 4. Hardly can the use of a gift ascend above it self to intend God and
his glory; for the glory of God is graces end, not gifts end. Zech. 7. 5. When
ye fasted, did ye at all fast unto me? 6. And when ye did eat, and when ye did
drink, did ye not eat for your selves? and did not ye drink for your selves?
Heb. did not ye your selves eat as carnal men? did ye not eat, and drink, and
feast, and fast? He means the spirit of grace in them did not keep these
religious fasts and feasts, but their own spirit, and custom, and self; and
did ye fast for me at all? and he doubles the word, that so he may the more
convince them, even for me? So the Lord might say to the Pharisees who prayed
in the streets, Did ye at all pray to me, even to me? or did the gift and
vainglory in you, or the spirit in you? So he may say to us, Do ye preach,
hear, swear a covenant for me at all? Grace sanctifies the gift used in all due
and spiritual circumstances, but the gift can never fanctifie grace.
Saving grace must sanctify the gift in its use and end, that it be for God;
but a gift can never sanctify saving grace in its use and end. As grace which
is above nature sanctifies nature, and heightens nature in its actings,
principles, and end; but nature, that is below grace, can never sanctisie and
heighten grace in its actings, principles, and ends.

Assert. 5. The same sun, the same air and heaven, send the same influences on
the true and natural olive, and on the wild olive; the same clouds and rain act
upon the vine-tree and the thorn-tree, upon the rose, and the briar, and the
nettle; and so the same word comes to the ears of both elect and reprobate, but
not the same quickening influences of grace upon both. The same word, but not
the same influences act upon all within the visible Church.
Saul governes, and leads the Armies of the Lord by a gift; and David governes,
feeds, and leads the Armies of the Lord by the grace of God, and the same word
of command lays an obligation upon both; false Apostles preach Christ from a
gift, and labor by a gift, but Paul labors not as Paul, but the grace of God
in him. We are not to rest upon the actings from a gift, but watchfully to try
when we act from a gift, and when we act from a grace.
The virgins are drawn and run, Cant. 1. and John is drawn and runs; but the
same lively influences act not upon the one and other: it is a deluding
conclusion, we have eaten and drunken where Christ was present, and his Saints
present, therefore the Lord should open to us; and Christ has preached and his
faithful Prophets in our hearing, in our streets, therefore should we be
admitted into the Bridegroomes chamber, Luke 13. 25. What can then be builded
on this? I was at the Lords Supper, where undoubtedly Christ was in his
influences of life; I did swear a covenant to God, I preached the Gospel, I
heard ordinarily such a Preacher in whom undeniably the Spirit of God spoke,
and was intimately acquainted with him, and loved him dearly, and shall that
man be saved, and I thrust in hell? The great error is, men try not their
ways, principles, motives, and ends.

Now as touching influences of grace, it is not as when the same hand smites
upon the string of the harp well tuned, and on another string of the harp that
is mistuned; it is the same word that sounds in the ears of these in the visible
Church, but not the same spirit of grace in the same saving influences that act
upon the heart; yea the spirit leaves the heart of some to its own deadness,
and acts upon others to bring them to wonder, to be amazed and astonished, and
leaves them there; and acts upon a third sort, to leave a strong conviction and
a work of humiliation upon them; but it does no good, it is nothing above a
law-work mixed with some letter of the Gospel; and the Spirit works in some a
lively sound work of saving grace; and the same word is the common instrument
in all. So our Saviors enumeration of four sorts of hearers takes in all,
Matthew. 13. How many wonder, and despise, and persecute? Luke 4. Mark 7. Mark 9.
Matthew. 12. John 11. Acts 3. Acts 4, etc.

2. Influences of the spirit saving and lively are called by the names of the
Fathers drawing, of the Bridegroomes drawing, John 6. 44. Cant. 1. 4. the
Spirits leading, Romans 8. 14. the Lords teaching, Isa. 54. 13. John 6. 45. the
blowing and breathing of the wind upon the garden, Cant. 4. 16. the Lords
quickening in his way, Psalm. 119. 37. the Lords circumcising of the heart, Deu.
30. 6. the Lords opening of the heart, Acts 16. 14. the Lords instructing and
speaking to men with a strong hand, Isa. 8. 11. the Lords power in believers,
not inferior to that by which he raised his Son from the dead, and quickens the
dead that are in the graves, Ephesians. 1. 18, 19, 20. Joh. 5. 25. But no such
showers of influences go along with a mere gift; which is eminent in many, and
exercised to the full, to the good of the Church, and yet such builders of the
ark for saving of others perish themselves in the waters.

3. If we consider the Lords intention, this is clear; Did ever the Lord decree
or promise to bring any to heaven by the gift of prophecy, of wisdom, of
learning and arts, whether the men believe or not? or does the husbandman so
labor the ground for the growing of the bramble, as for the growing and
flourishing of the vine-tree, or for the thistle and the briar as for the
wheat? What can Christ make out of a preaching Judas never given to him of the
Father? nothing, he never believing, but to send him to his place.

Assert. 6. In one and the same spiritual acting of praying and believing the
spirit and the flesh may concur, not as formal principles, for the flesh and
corrupt nature is no formal principle of praying in the spirit, and of
believing; the holy Ghost uses no such tools, but the flesh concurres by way
of retarding and weakening of the acts of praying; for it is of the flesh only
that our praying is not with that deepness of humble sense of want, with that
strong desire with that fervor of believing that becomes.

So corruption concurs in the work as the broken thigh or leg in the halting
horse, as half a tooth in eating, not as a formal principle of motion. Hence
the influences of grace must be accommodate to our gracious actings, that are
mixed: he is a meek Spirit, who is willing to sigh in a Saint, beside the body
of sin which casts in something of our sinful corruption to retard the work.

2. In the same prayer the spirit and the flesh speak at once or by turns,
Jer. 15. 15. prays in the spirit, O Lord thou know me, remember me, and
visit me, and revenge me of my persecuters; take me not away in thy
long-suffering; know that for thy sake I have suffered rebuke. 16. Thy words
we^e found, and I did eat them: and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing
of my heart. But in the same prayer the spirit in his suspended influences, as
it were resting, lies by, and the flesh mixes in it self, v. 18. Why is my pain
perpetual, and my wound incurable, Calvin. praelect. in Jerem. 15. 18.
distinguendum inter ipsam doctrinam quae pura fuit, and inter ipsos (homines,
prophetas) nunc autem dum in seipsum descendit (propheta) fatetur se agitari
multis cogitationibus, quae carnis infirmitatem redoleant, nec careant omni
vitio.
which refuses to be healed? will thou be altogether to me as a liar, and as
waters that fail? Calvin says we must distinguish betwixt the doctrine, yea I
add the prayer that is from the spirit, and the sinful complaint in the prayer
from the flesh. So Job complains spiritually, 10. he acknowledges and adoreth
the power of God, which poured him out as milk, and crudled him like cheese,
clothed him with skin and flesh, and fenced him with bones and sinews, and
gave him life and favor, v. 9, 10, 11, 12. Yet the flesh almost casts all
down, and makes him to lose his thanks, v. 18. Wherefore have thou (says he)
brought me forth out of the womb? O that I had given up the ghost, and no eye
had seen me! Compare Jobs sad complaint with his triumphing faith, in looking
through so many hundred years to his living Redeemer and Kinsman, who shall
stand the last man upon the earth, v. 25, 26. Then are we taught to difference
betwixt influences from our sinful flesh and his holy Spirit, and to beware of
mixing our clay with the Lords pure fountain actings of his Spirit, and not to
adulterate and vitiate his wine with our rotten water. It looked like the zeal
of God in the disciples to desire to call for fire from heaven to burn the
Samaritans old and young; it was a cruel end merciless thing to refuse Christ
and his disciples lodging. O but says Christ, rebuking them, Luke 9. 55. Ye
know not what manner of spirit ye are of. Pray that God would rebuke the flesh
while ye pray; and try your own spirit, and take heed to it.

2. Rest not on a gift, nor upon the literal stirring and bastard heat that
comes from a gift, or upon literal tears that often flow from a weakened fancy
in prayer. Esau both runs and was hot in his hunting for the blessing, and
sought the blessing with tears; but there were here no influences of the
spirit of grace. Esau, Heb. 12. was a profane man.

Assert. 7. It may be a child of God may be deluded in a particular, thinking
his actings from a gift to be actings from grace; but

1. An habitual delusion, such as was in the five foolish virgins, all their
life, and until the market of buying oil was spent and over, cannot fall into
a regenerate man; for the Lord reveals his state to him.

2. A child of God may all his life not put a distinct difference between the
gift of preaching in Judas and the grace of preaching; for there is no
certainty of faith, of the saving grace of others as touching particular men.

3. There is in the Saints a spiritual sense of discerning Christ's voice; and
here two things are to be distinguished.

1. The actings of sense.

2. The objects of sense, and spiritual discerning the acts of sense in order
to others, are not infallible either in the habit or the act; the eleven may
all their life mistake Judas. But as touching the object, the saving influences
and actings of God have them in some singular and peculiar thing by which actu
primo, and in themselves they may be discerned. As Christ's preaching had such
grace in it, never man spoke like him. Paul's preaching in the evidence, and
demonstration, and power of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. had something that a
spiritual discerning might take up: the garden flower and the wild flower that
grows in the mountains are like other, yet the senses of seeing and smelling
find a difference. It Is dreadful when Christ's preaching, and the Apostles
speaking and praying in the holy Ghost, brings forth mocking and persecution,
and the miracles of Christ that were done by the power of God are fathered upon
the Prince of devils; it is hard to persuade men of the naughtiness of their own
heart. What comes from self, comes from grace: the heart, because it is the
man's own, is good to God; the prayers are the man's own and good; the lamps they
are our own, and they shine, and therefore the shining is from the oil of grace
within, and yet the lamp is empty.

2. As to others, hardly see we what condition they are in; and because the
smell of dead bones comes not through marble-stones in the Tomb, therefore the
paintry of a profession satisfies us; yet it was not want of charity that made
Micah 7. 2. say, The good man is perished out of the earth, and there is none
upright among men; they lie in wait for blood. As now it is called morosity,
rash judgment, to say that the generality of Ministers, and too many
time-covenanters know little of any work of the Spirit on their hearts.

10 Divis. There are influences proper to the way to the Country, and
influences proper to the end and to the Country; or influences of grace, and
influences of glory. Influences for the way, though they come from Christ our
life, yet for the most part they come by some means, the word, Differences
betwixt the influences of grace, and these of glory.
the seals, prayer, faith in the promises: what influences they have who never
heard the Gospel, but have the law of nature within, and book of creation and
of providence without, by which they may read and spell a Godhead, and duties
they owe to God Creator, is harder to determine: But they shall be witnesses to
judge us, and shall justify Sodom, Matthew. 10. 15. But did we read more,
meditate more the covenant of grace, we should have more of the influences of
grace: the influences of glory are the immediate and eternal out-lettings of
God without word, or faith, or praying. The tree of life has growing on it
apples of life all the moments of the year; that is, a long summer, and a long
year; the tree is ever green, ever blossoming, eternally bearing fruit, and the
inhabitants eternally feasting on the fruit. The river of life runs for ever
and ever, flows eternally and never ebbs: they eternally drink in life and joy
from him which sits upon the Throne, and the Lamb. So many millions of
glorified ones as there are, so many eternal and immediate dependencies and
living beams of glory united to the Son of righteousness: because Christ is
our life, Col. 3. 4. therefore must heaven be a life of immediate influences of
grace in the first glorious conserving power of God in preserving bodies of
clay in a being of 1. Incorruption and immortality, beyond sickness, cold,
pain, old age, and death. 2. In a state of glory, free of shame. 3. In a state
of bodily strength, power, and activity free of weakness. 4. In a state of
spirituality, free of a necessity of earthly helps, eating, drinking, sleeping,
1 Cor. 15. 42, 43, 44.

2. It must be an immediate out-letting of God in the fourth life of eternal
blessedness and glory above the life of nature.

2. The life intellectual of reason.

3. The life of grace, in the vision of the face of God, 1 John 3. 2. Rev. 22.
4. Job 19. 26. knowing him.

4. In the influences of fullness of joy and delights, or pleasures, and that so
long as Christ-God shall live for evermore.

Now these three. 1. Fruition of God, as the last end and satisfaction in him
only, seeking no other lover but God in Christ.

2. Loving and adhering to God, there being no room for faith and hope, 1 Cor.
13. 13. (whence comes filling of the concupiscible part, desire, delight.)

3. Praising him eternally and the Lamb.

These three (I say) have both the consideration of duties, and of a reward; in
both considerations the Lord lets out his immediate influences on that blessed
company in all these. 1. We are sick of love after our prison here, rather then
for our choicest life. 2. We seek not the earnest and first fruits of this life.

CHAP. II.
The nature of the habit of grace; that there is 2. Such a habit is clear in
the word. 3. It Is purchased by Christ's merit. 4. Has supernatural actings
flowing from it. 5. Influences without this habit are but delusions. 6.
Differences betwixt the habit of grace and other habits, 7. Resolutions must be
followed with prayer. 2. Godly trembling. 3. Faith. 8. The stronger the habit
of grace is, the stronger and and more connatural are the acts flowing from it.

THe third particular is, how the Saints may fetch the holy breathings of the
Spirit by supernatural habits: And touching this we shall speak to these.

1. What the habit of grace is.

2. How it is the seed of influences of grace.

1. What necessity there is of the connection betwixt the habit of grace; and
how we may fetch breathings of the Spirit from the habit of grace.

As to the first: The habit of grace is a fixed disposition infused in the soul
by the Lord, purchased by Christ's merit of his death, by which we perform
supernatural duties.

1. The habit of grace is a permanent disposition.
A habit is a heavenly disposition or quality gracious, by which the man even
sleeping is denominated a convert, a believer, a translated man from darkness
to light, Col. 1. 13. Acts 2. 44. Acts 4. 4. 1 John 3. 14.

2. It is a fixed quality different from a spiritual disposition, as Psalm. 57.
7. My heart is fixed or disposed, O God, or prepared; but his heart was not
ever and always fixed and prepared to praise, though he had ever the habit and
seed of God in him after his conversion.

3. It is a fixed disposition infused in the soul by the Lord, as a permanent
quality; so Isa. 44. 3. I will pour water on him that is thirsty, and floods
upon the dry ground. What is that flood? I will pour my spirit upon thy seed.
Zech. 12. 10. And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants
of Jerusalem the spirit of grace and of supplication. Ezekiel. 11. 19. And I will
give them one heart; and I will put a new spirit within you; and I will take
the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them an heart of flesh. Jer.
31. 33. I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts.
Ezekiel. 36. 26. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and will
give you an heart of flesh.

And also that this is an inbiding and permanent quality, infused of God, and
an habit not acquired by our industry, by which the Saints are, and really are
named anointed, renewed, born again, new creatures, is clear 2 Cor. 3. 3.
Forasmuch as ye are manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ, ministered
by us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not in
tables of stone, but in the fleshly tables of the heart. So this habit is
called the seed of God, 1 John 3. 9. The anointing (says John 1. 2, and 20.)
which ye have received of him, and abides in you. 27. Yea the Father and the
Son making their abode in the soul. John 14. 13. The well of water springing up
to life eternal in the believer. John 4. 14. Rivers of living waters flowing
out of the belly. By which the Saints are said to be denominated quickened,
Ephesians. 2. 1, 4, and 5. and to be light in the Lord, whereas they were once
darkness, Ephesians. 5. 8. new creatures, 2 Cor. 5. 17. born of God, 1 John 5. 1. 1
John 3. 2. Now this is infused, and no more an acquired habit then
regeneration, conversion, translation is acquired.

4. The habit of grace is given through the merit and grace of Christ.
This new fixed disposition is given through the merit of Christ, Acts 5. 30.
Whom ye slew and hanged on a tree, v. 31. Him has God exalted with his right
hand to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel and
forgiveness of sins. Then is Christ the giver of repentance, and of all
spiritual habits, not simply, but as crucified and made a meriting Prince.

2. The Father has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places
in Christ; then also with the habit of sanctification.

3. We are sanctified by the the willing offering that Christ made, when he
gave himself a sacrifice once for all, Heb. 10. 8, 9, 10. and the people
sanctified by his blood, Heb. 13. 12. Then in the merit of this blood must we
have the habit of sanctification.

4. If the conscience be purged by the blood of sprinkling from dead works,
Heb. 9. 14. then is the heart of stone removed, which is nothing but this
deadness in us before our conversion and new birth; and if this be done, so
that we are sprinkled with clean water, cleansed from all our filthiness and
idols, and the heart of stone taken out of us, and a new heart of flesh, even a
new heart given us, not for our own doings, but for his own names sake, Ezekiel.
36. 22, 25, 26, 32. that is, from the precious and only saving grace of Jesus
Christ, as it is exponed in the New Testament, Acts 3. 16, 25, 26. Acts 4. 12.
Romans 3. 24, 25. Ephesians. 1. 17. Coloss. 1. 13. Acts 10. 42, 43. So for David's
sake is exponed in the New Testament for the Son of David's sake; and for the
Lords names sake, is all one with this, for the merits and death of Christ.

5. Christ's blood is a ransom, not to buy us from wrath only, and from the
evil of punishment, but also from the evil of iniquity and sin, and so from the
bondage of our vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 18. from all iniquity, Tit. 2. 19.
from living to sin, 1 Pet. 2. 24. and so to purchase the grace of the new
birth, and to make us Kings and Priests to God, Rev. 1. 5, 6.

6. The Spirit poured on the thirsty ground, Isa. 44. 3. on the house of David,
Zech. 12. 10. is either a gift of nature or a grace. The former can be said by
none but Pelagians and Socinians; for if the only principle of the life of God,
and the new birth, be a work of our industry, Christ died in vain; if it be a
free grace, we must receive it out of Christ's fullness; For out of his fullness
we all receive, John 1. 16. From the habit of grace we perform suitable actings.


5. By this supernatural habit, we perform supernatural duties, and new acts of
life; for Isa. 44. By the Spirit given they shall spring up as among the grass,
as (verse 4.) willows by the water course. They shall graciously profess and
swear a covenant to the Lord, v. 5. One shall say I am the Lords, and another
shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his
hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the name of Israel. And when the
Spirit is poured on the house of Jacob, the second acts flowing therefrom are
acts of believing, and looking on Christ whom they pierced, and mourning over
Christ, and being in bitterness, as if his firstborn were dead. So Ezekiel. 36.
the putting in the new heart has walking v. 27. in the Lords statutes, keeping
his judgments. The first young motions and life-stirrings of the circumcised
heart, are the loving of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. the returning and obeying the
voice of the Lord, v. 8.

Then 1. saving influences in spiritual actings, in praying, praising, hearing,
are mere delusions without this new habit, not the motions and actings of a
living man from influence of life: Vital actions flow from supernatural habits.
But some cozeners by the art of Satan have made dead images to speak, but that
speaking, or laughing, or weeping was but counterfeit, and from no kindly
influence of life in the dead stone. The heavy elements move downward, and that
from an inward principle of nature; but the motion of the wheels in a
horse-mill is not from nature within, but from the beasts that draw the wheels;
nor is the motion of the several pieces of the horologe from a principle of
life, but from art. And the actings of men destitute of such a supernatural
habit, suppose they give all their goods to the poor, and give their bodies to
be burnt, yet are there no influences of the life of Christ in these actions,
they come from composed art and industry of hypocrisy, custom, formality, and
vainglory, and such leave their name in the earth for a curse. Be not
satisfied while the wind breaths out of the right air, even from a life of
Christ, and from the head Christ. Christ lives in me, Gal. 2. and the actual
influences of grace from above are suitable, having Christ living in you.
Christ shall furnish wind and sweet breathings of the Spirit to his own life;
it is a cursed case of conscience, when the man has peace and so much quietness
as to be satisfied with, and to thank God for his formal fasting, and paying of
his debts to all, Luke 18. 11. and such counterfeit influences please him all
his life.

2. How do they undervalue Christ and his blood, who father all influences of
praying and seeking of God upon their own industry and nature; in this the
mouth may kiss the hand, we kiss not the Son. It speaks grace when every
sincere sigh, and every good word and thought is referred to the price and
ransom of blood; when the soul is at this, O I would kiss Jesus Christ for
this loosing and melting of heart; and I am the endeared debtor of Jesus Christ
for this lively breathing upon the heart. This keeps from murmuring and
fretting at other times when the man weeps over his deadness; ah, it is (says
the complainer) long since I saw him.

2. The differences of the habit of grace from other habits.
The differences betwixt the habit of grace and other habits of arts and
sciences would be considered,

1. In the rise; industry and free-wills trading may purchase the habits of
sciences and arts; this is infused from heaven. I will pour water on the
thirsty ground, says the Lord, for mine own sake do I this, Isa. 44. Ezekiel. 36.
32. This habit is indeed Christ's trading, and the fruit of the travel of his
soul, and stands Christ at a high price.

2. Other habits may be forgotten and lost; this is a part of the believers
stock, of Christ's buying, and so in Christ's keeping. Christ keeps his own
purchase from wasting in shipwreck: It Is the immortal seed, the well that
springs up to life eternal, John 4. 14. the remaining anointing, 1 John 2. 20.
the imbiding seed of God, 1 John. 3. 9.

3. The less excellent the habit is, the more it is under the dominion of
free will: the Musician may sing when he will, he needs no influences of grace
to stir up his habit; the natural man from himself may blow upon the natural
habits of arts and sciences, and the remanents of the image of God, and he may
do much from common honesty; but the more excellent and spiritual the infused
habit is, the further it is from being under the dominion of free will; only
the North and South Wind of the Spirit can act upon this habit supernatural:
nor can we pray simply at the nod and stirring of free will, only the Spirit of
Jesus is steeresman here; and this is to be holden, that the Spirit so
withdrawes, as we are guilty consenters to his withdrawing, and in the sinful
omission of calling upon the Lord; and when the Spirit acts upon the free will,
and the habit of grace, we are willing consenters to that blessed breathing,
and willing joyners in the work of praying; and some commendation and praise
the holy Ghost gives to his Saints in all holy actings, Number. 14. 24. Genesis 22.
16. Genesis 32. 28. Number. 12. 7. Rev. 2. 3, 13, 19. Rev. 2. 4, 8, 9, 10.

So we are 1. We are to follow holy resolutions with prayer. 2. Godly
trembling, and 3. Faith. The falsehood of vows.
not to engage in the strength of free will; and let us know thus much, that
when resolutions of relying upon the grace of Christ are taking, and we say
this we shall do by the grace of Christ, we but use the name of grace; but
there is within 1. A fixedness of relying on nature, and we follow not our
resolution with prayer, as David, Psalm. 119. 106. I have sworn and will
perform, that I will keep thy righteous judgments. He seconds his vow with
prayer, v. 108. Accept, I beseech thee, the free will offering of my mouth, O
Lord; and teach me thy judgments. In praying for any mercy, as for grace to
keep the way of God, which we have vowed to keep, we are to interpose Christ as
Surety for the performing of the vow.

2. There is not godly fear and trembling in distrusting our selves. David,
after the Lord makes a covenant with him, and David by the Lords grace had
accepted and engaged to stand to it, he casts himself down to the dust, 2 Samuel
7. 18. Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my house that thou have brought me
hitherto? If we did but consider how cozening and unstable as water our hearts
are, we should fear our own bentness to backsliding when we so vow. It speaks
honest ingenuity after a man has borrowed money, and given word and writ to
pay it, when he is anxious how to answer the day, and be acquit of the debt.

3. Faith should rely upon the promise of God for influences of grace, and look
away from nature, and cease from the breathings of free will, especially since
they are involved in the promises of perseverance, and in the promises of the
covenant, Isa. 54. 10. Isa. 59. 21. Jer. 31. 35. Ezekiel. 36. 27. For among men he
who engages for a good harvest, does also engage to labor, to harrow and sow.
He that covenants to bring home to a Prince a ships loading of gold from India,
he must also engage to prepare a ship, and seamen, and provision for them, and
to set out to the Sea for sailing, and to take the opportunity of the winds.
Now since the Lord has promised to bring many children to glory, this puts on
Christ a sort of engagement, especially if we add to this the trust that the
Father has put on him, John 17. 2. chap. 6. 37. to work in them to will and to
do, and when they fall, to raise them again: and as faith relies upon the
promise of glory, so is faith to rely upon Christ for grace and influences, and
new breathings of the Spirit, without which, perseverance promised, even
undeclinable attaining to glory, is impossible.

3. The stronger and the more intense the habit is, the more connatural and
kindly, and the more signal, bended, and strong are the acts that flow from the
habit.

1. A strong habit of grace produces easy, and connatural, and strong acts of
grace.
Rain and sweet showers poured upon the dry ground, make the growing the more
easy and connatural; and when a strong habit of the love of Christ, stronger
then death and the grave, which many waters cannot quench, was fixed and rooted
in the heart of the Martyrs, the acts of suffering, even the torments of the
rack, of burning quick, of the teeth of wild beasts, of exquisite and
longenduring tortures, were exceeding both easy, and rejoicing, and refreshing
to themselves and others, and they had answerable strong acts of influences,
and a mighty presence of God; as the three children have the fourth man, the
Son of man walking in the fiery oven with them, Daniel has the increated Angel
to stop the mouths of the lions; and there must have been strong influences of
grace, when they refused deliverance, and believed a better resurrection, Heb.
11. 35. 2. When there is a strong habit of love, and of soul-love to Christ,
there are strong and painful acts of diligent seeking, as Cant. 3.

There be three acts of seeking and not finding. 1. In the bed. 2. About the
streets, and the broad way. 3. At the watchmen; and yet no giving over until
she find him whom her soul loves, Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. The habit of love, even
going on to love-sicknesse, produces strong praying, fervent adjuring of the
daughters of Jerusalem to tell Christ that she is sick of love for him, and a
most pathetick song of praising of Christ in all his excellencies, Cant. 5. 10.
My beloved is white and ruddy, and the chief among ten thousand. v. 11. His
head is as the most gold, his locks are bushy and black as a raven. 12. His
eyes are as the eyes of doves by the rivers of water, etc. And there must be
strong love within, when such high expressions came out, Psalm. 42. 1. As the
Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God. v.
2. My soul thirsts for God, for the living God. Psalm. 84. 2. My soul longs,
yea even faints for the courts of the Lord: my heart and my flesh cries
(shouteth aloud) out for the living God. Now answerable to these must be the
actual breathings of God, strong impressions, even until the soul be like the
thirsty ground, like the chased heart, dying, swooning, and fainting, and in a
fever of love-sickness for Christ: all which argue there must be valid and
mighty influences upon the soul. Ah, little of the love of Christ is a feast
that soon fills and satisfies us. Dry, faint, and dead acts of praying and
seeking, speak weak influences and coldness of indifferency, whether we have
Christ or want him.

CHAP. III.
A supernatural habit is a seed of influences. 2. We are to improve the habit
of grace. 3. The habit of grace in order to the three persons brings a
necessity of gracious influences. 4. The Lord is under diverse necessities to
confer influences. 5. Christ intercedes for the non-converted. 6. Christ's
Office. 7. The Spirits office, put both under a necessity of conferring of
influences. 8. Diverse uses result from the necessity that the Lord has brought
himself under to confer influences. 9. How the habit of grace is acted upon,
how it cease not.

AS to natural powers, the God of nature has prepared influences to seeds and
plants apt to grow. There are prepared of God also influences for their actual
growing: So to the Sun, fire, clouds, he has in readiness such influences,
though he freely let them out; so to supernatural powers and habits he must let
out and prepare supernatural influences.

The habit of grace is a sort of new nature, a heavenly power, a kind of seed
of spiritual actings, and a weight that inclines the soul to acting, and by a
sort of a pleasantly refreshing disposition swayes and draws habitually the
man to supernatural acting. In nature suitable influences are due to the
powers; Actions supernatural, and influences suitable, are some way due to the
habit of grace.
as the habit of music inclines the man to singing, and a natural instinct
draws the bird to build its nest; and the Lord has ordained suitable
influences for this instinct: so this habit of grace as a weight inclines the
soul to act, not by any necessity of exercise, but by necessity of
specification; it inclines not by determining to the act, but only habitually.
Therefore influences suitable to this habit must be some way due; as in nature,
so also in grace. A habit of grace in the renewed man, does not determine him
continually to pray, believe, praise God, while the habit is in him. Hence

1. Because corruption is in David, though as a broken and subdued habit, he
sins in numbering the people, he is violently carried to be avenged on Nabal, he
commits adultery and murder, which do weaken the habit of grace.

2. If the habit of grace be strong, and much of the fullness of God in Steven,
in John Baptist, in Paul, they act in the way of God accordingly.

3. Sometimes the habit of grace is qualified with heavenly dispositions.
If the habit of grace be qualified with a super-added disposition, heavenly
and spiritual, there are boylings and stirrings in the heart; as in Paul to
pray, Acts 20. after the spirit in him has been graciously and heavenly
exhorting the Church of Ephesus, he kneels down and prays; and Acts 17. 16.
while he is waiting for Silas and Timothy, there is upon his mind a burning
fever, when he saw the city wholly given to idolatry. And there will be some
sweet akings and gnawings of the heart pressing the man to pray, praise, and
sing, Psalm. 57. 7. My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed, I will sing and
give praise.

2. What are we to do in such a case then?

Answ. We are to pursue these warmings and flamings of the habits of grace with
new spiritual actings and exercises of grace, We should pursue the dispositions
of grace, when they are added to the habit, with spiritual actings.
as David verse 8. Awake up my glory, awake Psaltery and Harp, I my self will
awake early: And therefore know,

2. That a kindled habit of grace qualified with an heavenly disposition of
grace, is a fire near the flaming, and the call of God to you to pray hic and
nunc. Besides the command of God for praying continually, smite the iron while
it is hot; throw the rod while it is green; sail while the Lords wind and tide
does call; stir up and blow upon the grace of God in you: happily we blow upon
the gift of praying, when we should stir up the grace of praying.

Yea 3. We are to stir up the habit of grace, though^ deadned.
Suppose the habit of grace were not kindled, or in any near disposition to
flame, but there were deadness on the soul, and the habit of grace lying
deadned and covered with ashes; yet is there warrant to blow aside the ashes,
to stir the fire, and to smite upon the flint seven times until it cast fire.
David Psalm. 42. and Psalm. 43. three times, Ps. 42. 11. and Ps. 43. 5. chides
his casten down and unbelieving soul, and wakens up, and puts upon the habit of
faith; and Psalm. 103. and Psalm. 104. four times he wakens up his soul to bless
the Lord, and all that is within him to praise the Lord; Psalm. 1^6. 7. he
charges his soul to return to its rest. It is dreadful to smother and bear down
these births of God, and to blast and wither such buddings of the Spirit, and
also to yield to carnal deadness, and to lie down under it; but let us await at
the pool, and when the Angel comes down and troubles the water, step in and be
healed. As the Martyr condemned to die was under great deadness of spirit when
he was in the prison, and going to the place of execution; yet coming to the
place, a gale of the wind of the Spirit blew fair, and he cried out to his
Christian friends, to whom he made known his former deadness, now he is come,
he is come, and he rejoycingly triumphed over death. In a moment there may come
in a carnal disposition, and drown and quench the smoking and flaming of an
heavenly kindling. We might draw down rich influences and sweet actual
breathings, which are connatural and suitable to spiritual and supernatural
influences; the Lord (though his liberty in breathing when and where he will be
admirable) yet should we more vigorously improve ordinances, and specially
promises: for ordinarily the Lord would let out more of his breathings, did we
more improve the habits of grace; and sure he that trades not at all with his
stock, may become poorer: and we might make influences more near to us; for the
habit of grace is nearest of kindred of any thing else to the actual breathings
of the Lord, and the only culpable cause of our not growing in grace, and
augmenting of the habit of grace, is our own sinful sluggishness.

CHAP. IV.
Now the third particular we proposed to speak to, was the connection between
the habits of grace, and actual breathings; and how we may by using habits
fetch home the breathings of the Spirit.

The habit of grace is to be considered two ways. 1. In order to God. 2. In its
own nature.
In order to God 1. The Father. 2. The Son. 3. The Spirit.


1. IN order to God and his holy decree, if the Lord ordain a certain number to
glory, The Lord by insusing the habit of grace comes under some necessity to
give suitable influences thereunto.
and upon that account bestow the habit of grace upon these so chosen; then
God, who does nothing in vain, when he creates powers and habits, must intend
to send influences to act upon these powers and habits; as when God creates the
Sun, a heavenly body, which is apt to move, to send forth heat and light, he
must intend by constant law and decree to join his influences to the moving and
shining of the Sun; otherwise, if he had created these heavenly bodies never to
be acted upon for the sending forth of their virtues of light, heat, motion, he
had created Sun and Stars in vai^: ^o if the husbandman make a plough, and
never make use of it for tilling the ground; and make a sickle, and never put
it in act for reaping, Diverse necessities under which the Lord is to confer
influences of grace.
he must have made the ploug^ and the sickle in vain. If the Lord pour the
habit of grace and supplication upon the house of David, then have the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, who have received that grace, ground of faith and
hope, that the Lord shall suit^bly to his intended end, and begun work, bestow
saving influences on them, to believe and repent, to look on him by faith whom
they have pierced, and mourn over Christ whom they have slain by their sins, as
a man mournes and is in bitterness for his firstborn, Zech. 12. 10. otherwise
the Lord bestows that habit of grace in vain, which we are not to imagine of
the only wise Lord, Psalm. 89. 47. If the Lord pour water upon the thirsty
ground, and his Spirit upon the seed of Jacob, the nature of husbandry, which
joins end and means, requires that he join to the new heart, and new spirit,
influences for the growing of the seed of Jacob, as the willows by the water
courses; and that he lead the trembling hand at the pen, and give influences of
grace to swear and subscribe that they shall be the Lords married land, joined
to him in a perpetual covenant, Isa. 44. 3, 4, 5.

2. The graciousness of the Lords holy nature revealed, Exodus 34. 6. The Lord
God merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth
to fallen man (for he has revealed no pardoning grace and mercy to fallen
Angels; nor is that the scope of Moses, Exo. 34. or of the Scripture any
where.) Now if so, he as the Lord is under some necessity (upon supposal that
he created men and Angels) to declare his pure immixed justice in the fallen
Angels; so by some necessity of decency suitable to his goodness and holy
nature he must choose some to glory, and give them inherent habits of grace,
that he may carry them to heaven in a way of voluntary obedience: so that upon
supposal he has so declared himself to Angels and men, there must be glorious
emanations and outgoings of free grace, both to ordain some to glory, and
beautify them with the habit of faith to believe in him that justifies the
sinner, and habits of sanctification. I say, upon supposal he so reveal himself
in his word; otherwise, absolutely and simply the the contrary order, that he
had placed fallen Angels in man's room, and men in the place of fallen Angels,
had been as just and good as that which now is.

3. The holy Lord gives some to Christ: and his enduing them with grace to
come, and giving to them of his free grace the habit of faith, it is an engaging
of the holy Lord to give influences suitable to the habit: upon the very
account that the Lord make over a man to Christ, and create his own image in
him, he intends to make him an honorable vessel in his house, and to adorn the
man so gifted to Christ; as when the Lord builds a house, he minds that some
shall dwell in it.

And 2. the great design of free grace in Christ must in these two bring him
under a holy necessity to bring his many children to glory; for the decree of
election is an act of the three persons, John 10. 16. Other sheep I have (...),
and they are not yet in his actual possession, but he has an actual right to
them, I have paid a ransom for them, them also I must bring in (...), Christ
is under a necessity of driving them in, then is Christ under a necessity of a
decree common to him with the Father and the Spirit, to breath upon and cherish
the habit of grace, that his great design of free grace in the work of
redemption may stand sure, and attain its graciously designed end; as also he is

2. Under an official and mediatory necessity to the chosen, to bestow on them
the freely given habit of grace; and so I judge, Christ advocates for the elect
yet not converted, to bring them in to himself.
with reverence of the judgment of others, that Christ has an advocation and
office of intercession for the elect, even such as are not yet actually
converted: not that he extends the same acts of advocation to the chosen
converted, and to the chosen not yet converted.

1. Because Christ as Mediator and high Priest prays for them, and so that
habits of grace and influences may be bestowed on them, John 17. 20. Neither
pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through
their word. Nor can it be said that Christ intends not they should reap any
mediatory fruit of his prayer, till they be born and actually believe; for he
prays and intercedes for their conversion and faith, they yet being in nature
and unrenewed; for that is true in some sense, Christ prays for their faith
actual, when it is in being, and shall actually be assaulted, that it may not
fail them under temptation; and so that prayer of Christ for the disciples and
Peter, stands good for all believers, when they shall actually believe and be
winnowed, as Peter was: the millions of them neither did believe nor were born,
when Christ as an high Priest offered to the father both the one and the other
prayer; but that Christ in no sense intercedes for the chosen till they be
converted and actually believe, cannot be defended. For

2. Whatsoever Christ has purchased by the merit of his death, as our high
Priest, offering himself on the cross for the elect, that same Christ as our
high Priest in heaven applies them as Intercessor. This proposition must be
sure; for what Christ purchases and buyeth by the merit of his death on the
cross, that he actually makes good as Intercessor in heaven. It Is true he is
said to buy and redeem persons, not things, or graces, as faith and the habit
of grace, he purchases an inheritance and a redemption to us, and we have
repentance and remission of sins in and through his blood; for, in his blood,
by an Hebraism, is, for his blood; and yet remission of sins is not properly
redeemed or ransomed, never being captivated; but in justice that remission
could not be ours but by satisfaction. But so it is, that Christ purchased by
the merit of his death, as our high Priest, offering himself for the elect^on
the cross, that we should be freed from all iniquity, Tit. 2. 14. from our vain
conversation of unbelief, 1 Pet. 1. 18. that we should have repentance,
remission of our sins in his blood, and faith, the free gift of God in Christ
even when we were not yet born. And he died for us while we were yet sinners,
weak and ungodly, Romans 5. 6. And God commends his love to us that Christ died
for us (...), while we were yet sinners; for if when we were enemies, (...), we
were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled, we
shall be saved by his life. If Christ as high Priest offer himself a sacrifice
for us, to obtain reconciliation to us, when we were not born, and when we were
ungodly and enemy, she must intercede, that such a purchased reconciliation
and merited grace, the grace of faith, and the habit of faith, be in his due
time bestowed on us.

3. If Christ as our high Priest have received the elect from the Father, Thine
they were, and thou gave them to me; John* 17. 6, 9, 10.
and as Redeemer entrusted to bring them in, he must send the Gospel to them as
Mediator, and intercede, that Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers may be
gifted with the Spirit, and sent to preach; for the giving of the Spirit that
way is a fruit of Christ's ascension and kingly triumphing, while as he led
captivity captive, and gave gifts to men, as Intercessor, for perfecting of the
Saints, and the work of the Ministry, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. that the Gentiles
who believe not, and the blind, may see and be converted, Acts 26. 17, 18. Acts
13. 46, 47, 48. 1 Cor. 3. 5. Matthew. 4. 15, 16. John 10. 16.

4. Christ, who had reared up a new form of providence, having chosen his own
to life, must, as Mediator, take care of the coming of the elect into the
world, and have a special eye over the ways of his own chosen, that Saul and
others fall not into that unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost, and that
Saul before his conversion go not farther on then making havoc of the Church,
yet ignorantly through unbelief; and this is the more to be laid hold on, that
the man Christ's coming into the world, is, and goes along with his own decree
of electing some to glory, and to the great work of saving lost sinners, Luke
19. 10. Matthew. 20. 28. 1 Timothy 1. 15. of bearing a rare and singular testimony
to the Gospel beyond all Martyrs that ever lived, John 18. 37. as is clear in
the birth and deliverance of Moses, Exodus 2. Exodus 3. And also Christ in his
providence of predestination to life, as Lord Mediator causes the chosen to be
born and live, when the Gospel is preached, and comes to their ears, and works
powerfully on their hearts, Acts 16. 9, 10. Acts 8. 7, 8. Acts 19. Acts 9. 11,
12, 13, etc.

5. In another consideration there is an official love of Christ, founded upon
the identity of nature which is between Christ and chosen ones, and the man
Christ loving his neighbor as himself; and the humanity and natural compassion
in Christ is not destroyed, but perfected by his state of glory; he remains a
feeling, compassionate high Priest, Heb. 4. 14, 15. Luke 5. 1, 2, 3. And also
this puts Christ to stretch his love to the unconverted that are his flesh, and
given to him, that he must bestow habits of grace on them, and gather the sheep
with his arm, and drive gently those that are with young, and give new
influences to fainting ones, and refreshing warmness in his bosom to the cold
and weak young ones in the flock, Isa. 40. 11. Isa. 42. 1, 2, 3.

3. The Spirits office puts him under a necessity of giving influences.
If the Spirit be a sanctifier, and a leader, he must be no less constant to
his holy end, and gracious design, to give what fits the chosen for their
journey; and so must both give the first anointing (the dewing and first rain
of spirit poured on the wilderness) and also add new oil to prevent withering
and drying up, and add the royal and kingly seal to confirm and make out his
work unto the day of redemption. Ah, am I master of the fountain? (says the
withered dry tree) yea, the three Agents in heaven bring themselves (to speak
so) under this holy necessity to bring down influences to the souls of all his
chosen.

2. Uses from the Lords necessity of giving gracious influences
If any saving work be in you, it speaks a design of grace in the Father and
the Son, which they shall ripen and carry on to perfection.

3. Fret not at such as are without. God minds love to the chosen ones of them,
and to reach them with his love in time.

4. Get the Spirit, he shall not be idle, but daily act, and Christ in him
shall set up a new fabric of providence, and a new reign in the soul.

5. In the looking on the frame of providence in them, that they are not born
in China, not in Turkey, not in America; but in a land of life, in the kingdom
of heaven, where the Gospel is preached: Look spiritually, not naturally upon
the time and place of your birth; it is either the greatest good, or the
greatest ill and misery that ye can meet with.

2. Consider what is the weight of the guiltiness of (...) despised Gospel,
that you go to hell through Christ's bounds, Emanuels land, where the word of
the kingdom is preached in the very eye of the Redeemer; whereas Heathens are
in a manner behind the Redeemers back.

3. The husbandmans plowing preaches bread and corn in the land; the setting
up of the shepherd-tents before your door, proclames Christ's shepherd-care to
feed you; love Christ, and follow the shepherd.

4. Collect rather the affirmative (...) the negative conclusion. When Christ
sets up a husbandry in (...) Vineyard, can ye tell who are interdited heirs,
and say, I am a bramble, and a cursed briar, and no plant of righteousness, no
vine-tree, therefore he has no thoughts to make me a part of the soil that the
Father of Christ shall labor and purge? Who told you news of Christ's thoughts
to interdite you from getting good of the Gospel? rather collect the contrary.
I found a candle lighted in the land of my nativity, though my father be an
Amorite, and my mother a Hittite. Why, but I may be a piece of lost money whom
he seeks; if yea, love Christ. Loves logic is, I love Christ, or I desire to
love Christ, therefore Christ loves me; and I desire to use the means of
salvation, and to go up to Jerusalem to worship the King, and keep the Feast
of Tabernacles; therefore I shall be no family or part of the land of Egypt, on
which there comes no rain, Zech. 14. 17, 18, 19. Seldom does the use of means
want influences; where the Lord gives any tolerable conscience of plowing and
planting, there he sends down watering and refreshing showers from heaven.

There Is an instinct of natures logic, framing hellish consequences; Christ
loves not me, therefore I will not treat with Christ, First to frame doubts
about predestination t^ life; and to miss eternal love before we miss inherent
saving grace is Satan's method.
nor come in terms of communing with him; and withal there is no anxious
missing of inherent habits; it is not from the Spirit of God ever to be missing
objective grace, which is eternally in God, and never in a paining way to miss
subjective grace inherent: who is angry? who has resisted his will? Romans 9.
And it is Satan's method first to miss Gods love to you, and make a quarrel with
God for that, before you miss your love to God, and to the Redeemer Christ, and
make a plea with your self for not loving of lovely Jesus Christ. The servants
word is Matthew. 25. I knew thou wast a hard man. Know thou not thy self to be
a servant graceless and malignant?

The habit of grace in its own nature is of a middle nature, betwixt a power
and an act: (and to come now to the third particular) there is for the further
clearing of the connection betwi^^ (...) habit of grace and the acts of grace a
question ^o be cleared, Whether the habit of grace may cease in the regenerate
from all its operations.
Whether or not the habit of grace may ^e by and utterly cease from acting? to
which the answer is in these assertions.

Assert. 1. No habit of grace, or any habit as such, can reduce it self to
acting, for it is well near to the nature of a power; the Sun, Moon, and Stars
move not themselves, but are moved by some other powers whatever they be. 2. We
are commanded to stir up the grace that is in us, 2 Timothy 1. 6. then must the
habit lie dead as it were, except we improve it: the two talents do not make
themselves four; the man to whom the talents were given must do that, Matthew. 25.

Assert. The habit of grace is not eternal.
2. It Is not improbable that saving grace of it self, being not God, nor the
holy Ghost himself, but a created thing, may, as to its own nature, perish and
dry up. 1. For it is not to be trusted in; nor does the weight of our standing
against temptations consist in our stock, but in the Lords conserving power.
Peter had saving faith, but that faith could neither keep Peter from falling,
nor keep the faith from failing; but the standing of Peter's faith ( Luke 22.
32.) is in Christ's intercession; I have prayed for thee, le^t thy faith (...)
be sunken down: that which needs a keeper without it self, cannot keep it self;
for faith is but an instrumental keeper. But 1 Pet. 1. 5. we are kept, and our
faith (...) by the power of God. As also Jer. 1. 9. the weight of Jeremiah's
standing courageously in his Ministry is not on Jeremiah, his stock and habit
of grace, though the Lord had put much precious metal in him, and made him a
brazen wall (as Prophets are of themselves but clay bottles that are soon
broken) but in the Lords actual supporting of him by influences from God, 19. I
am with thee, says the Lord, to deliver thee; and therefore the strength,
immortality, and stability of the habit of grace is in his power who furnishes
actual influences. 2. In the decree of God. 3. In his covenant and promise. 4.
In the intercession of Christ; no man then can commit idolatry with saving
inherent grace to put it in the room of God, and to trust in it. Be not secure,
but be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6. 10. who must
furnish new influences of grace.

Assert. 3. The habit of grace so far may cease to act and lie dead, The habit
of grace cease not.
as notwithstanding that the beloved Christ knocks and speaks heaven into the
Church, Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, etc. Cant. 5. 2. yet she opens
not; the habit being under the ashes, yea, being a little frozen and blunted,
the spouse shifts his presence; I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on?
I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? And the habit of grace does not
hinder David, and Peter, and Lot, but upon the Lords withdrawing of actual
influences they may fall into atrocious and heinous sins.

Assert. 4. Yet in some sense the habit of grace rests not. For 1. The habit of
grace according to the degrees makes the man stronger: as John Baptist by the
indwelling of the holy Ghost in some fullness is stronger against temptations of
persecutors; and so is Steven fuller of the holy Ghost, then men not converted.
2. The habit of grace debilitates, weakens the acts of sin in the regenerate,
that they sin not with full bensil of will; as the indwelling body of sin again
weakens the acts of faith, and others the like flowing from the habit of grace;
the combat betwixt the flesh and the spirit proves both the one and the other,
How many acts we may bring out of the habit of grace.
Romans 7. 14, 15, 16, etc. for this combat is ever in the regenerate. 3. The
habit of grace of it self as a weight disposes the renewed man to resist sin;
as a stone though violently detained in the air, actu primo, habitually of it
self, inclines the stone to move downward to its natural place; whence come
some far-off tendency and habitual bowings of the heart to the love of Christ,
as warmness of heart, Luke 24. 32. stirring of bowels at the inward motions of
Christ on the soul, even when he is kept out, Cant. 5.

5. The covered and borne down habit of grace may and does break out into
praying after him when he is away, and most anxiously and carefully seeks him,
Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. John 20. 13.

6. There is no such sleeping but the heart is waking, and breaks out in these
acts first, and misses him; he knocks, and says, Open; then she knew he was
without. They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him,
John 20. I sought him, but I found him not, Cant. 3. 2. there is a discerning
that it was his knock and breathing. And 2. his voice, My heart waked at the
voice of my Beloved. 3. She knew his very words, and repeats them, Open to me,
my sister, my love, my dove, etc. though then sleeping. 4. There is a spiritual
wishing; O! if I could open and overcome the temptation of carnal drowsiness;
this appears in the Spouses confession of the excuse, he knocked and spoke
lovely, and I refused rudely to open; I have cast off my coat, this is told by
her by way of confession of sin; I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on;
for there may from the habit of grace arise an habitual and a conditional
desire that the temptation had never assaulted, There is a consenting to the
temptation, which is a wishing that our lust and Gods Law might both stand, and
a virtual wishing that the Law of God had never had being.
and yet there is an absolute consent to the temptation, and a wish that this
sinful pleasure were not astray to the Law; which is in effect a laboring to
reconcile my carnal lust and the Lord's holy Law, and it is as if I should say,
Ah, if I might enjoy my lawless pleasure, and yet the Lord not be displeased:
some sick man's lusts after contradictions that in his fever he might drink
wine, and yet be free of a further pain of fever; but all this is but a virtual
fretting against God that ever he made such a Law. Evah desired that the falsely
supposed Godhead which Satan said should be the reward of eating the fruit of
the tree of knowledge, should have been really and truly in eating that fruit,
and that was a clear fretting against the wisdom of God, who made such a law
as lays bands upon men, and forbids them to eat of all fruit, Genesis 3. 2, 3.
yet would difference be made betwixt the carnal man's wish, Eight evidences that
in the regenerate the saving habit of grace never cease from omitting some
influences.
that he might enjoy his sweet lusts, and not feel the smart of the evil of
punishment; and the spiritual man's woulding not to do the evil that he hates,
Romans 7. 15, 16. and yet he does it, and so virtually desires there were nothing
offensive and displeasing to God in it. 4. From this habit it is that the
Spouse sends commendation to absent Christ (to speak so) and desires the
daughters of Jerusalem to tell him that she is sick of love for him, Cant. 5.
8. 5. There are checks and soul-sorrow at the thoughts of the words he once
spoke, Cant. 5. 6. my soul failed when he spoke; hence there are godly
reluctancies and spiritual propensions of the spirit and renewed man entering
dissent and protestations on the contrary. Romans 7. 15. For that which I do I
allow not; for what I would, that I do not; but what I hate, that I do. Hence
the spirits spiritual counter-workings contrary to the flesh, and the gracious
pleadings in favors of Christ, What do you? is not this against free love? Ah,
will you grieve such a beloved? hence the inward prickings and cuttings of the
heart, like the wane-rest of the Horologue, ever stirring and checking the
conscience; if experience say nothing of this thorn in the soul, and of the
weakness of the bones, little is known of the work of the spirit. 6. There is
ever an holy apology and clearing of the renewed part, that the spirit does his
part. Romans 7. 22. I delight in the Law of God after the inward man. v. 9. The
renewed man would do good; v. 16. consents to the Law, that it is good, and
lays the blame upon the fleshly will and sin dwelling in the man; v. 17. now
its no more I that do it, but sin dwelling in me. 7. From this habit it is that
the renewed man is a captive, a sufferer, a complainer, Romans 7. 23, 24. O
wretched man that I am, etc. 8. The spirit is contrary to the flesh, Gal. 5.
17. and when fire and water yoke in the cloud there is thunder, and nature
suffers pain; and there are actions and passions, and reactions on both sides,
and finally the habit of grace so far never rests, as the flesh cannot get sin
perfected without a battle, and some thunder in the soul. Hence we see, did we
improve the habit of grace, how many spiritual actions we may set about, and
what wind and breathings we might fetch if we should^hoise up all the sails;
the very setting out to sea, and laying all the sails open in their breadth and
length to the heaven should create some wind; we lay not open our affections in
their length and breadth, in the use of all the ordinances before the Lord; Open
thy mouth wide and I will fill it, Psalm. 81. nor do we improve the stock of
habitual grace; the not improving of the stock in trading brings on poverty.

CHAP. V.
The fourth particular by which we fetch influences of grace is by heavenly and
spiritual dispositions: hence in this we speak 1. Of heavenly dispositions, in
order to heavenly influences. 2. Of our actings to come under the influences of
grace. 3. Of the obstructions and impediments of heavenly influences, and the
contrary cures.


AS touching dispositions: 1. What dispositions are, and how differenced. 2. Of
the division of good and evil dispositions. 3. Get heavenly dispositions, and
influences connaturally follow. 4. Evidences that dispositions go and come. 5.
Spiritual dispositions are different from the affections. 6. There are heavenly
dispositions through all the powers and affections of the soul. 7. Sinful
dispositions are in all, and they latently creep in. 8. Actings and life under
deadness. 9. Many sweet actings there are under deadness. 10. It Is fit to go
about duties under deadness. 11. Less of strong real influences, and more of
moral influence prove the obedience to be more perfect.


1. What dispositions spiritual are, and how they differ from the habits of
grace.
Dispositions are moveable qualities of the soul, beyond and above the habit
inabling us to act graciously, and to perform actions suitable to those
dispositions; I speak now of gracious dispositions, for there are wicked and
sinful dispositions added to the habit of sin original.

2. Gracious dispositions are moveable qualities, this differenceth the
disposition from the habit of grace; and therefore know wherein spiritual
dispositions and spiritual habits agree; and 2. wherein they differ. 1. Both
are above nature, for we being born in sin, mind, conscience, will, and
affections, being polluted and corrupt in such heirs of wrath; no man is born
with habits of grace, or gracious disposition. 2. Through the want of both, all
are alike unfit by nature to be the workhouse of the holy Ghost. 3. Both the
habit of grace, as it is proved Book 2. and much more gracious dispensations
are the purchase of the merit of Christ. 4. Both are the supernatural gifts of
God infused from above, and neither of them acquired or purchased by natural
actings: it is clear of the habit of grace. John 14. 16. I will pray the Father,
and he shall send you the Comforter. Christ sends him, the Father sends him in
Christ's name. John 14. 26. he shall receive of mine and show it to you. Now the
holy Spirit, the Comforter dwells in the Children of God not personally, though
he be said to dwell in them, and to speak in them. 1. In the habit and divine
power, given to them to confess Christ before men, Matthew. 10. 19. Acts 4. 8. or
in preaching, working of miracles, Acts 6. 8. or in praying, Acts 6. 10, 11.
Acts 7. 55, 56. 2. In actuating that power, in giving grace actually to will
and to do, to confess, prophecy, Luke 1. 27, 41, 42. Luke 2. 27, 28. to pray*
Acts 7. 55, 56. as the Lord is said to thunder in the clouds, to give rain, not
that he is personally united with the clouds, but because he creats in the
clouds the power of thunder and raining, and does actually determine the clouds
to rain. 5. Supernatural habits and supernatural dispositions are near to
other, as the fire and the flaming of the fire, the clouds and the rain, the
sea, and the ebbing and flowing of the sea; not that the disposition is the
very operation and second act of the habit, but because the diposition is a
quality superadded to the habit, or the nearer principle and power of spiritual
acting. Stephen, and Peter, and John, were full of the holy Ghost, habitu, from
the time that the holy Ghost was given them; but when they are conveyed to
answer before the rulers, they are said to speak being full of the holy Ghost,
Acts 4. 8. Acts 7. 55, 56. which is either an enlargement of the habit of
grace, or a new springtide of the same sea, or a new infused disposition,
promised by our Savior, and given (...), Luke 12. 11, 12. Matthew. 10. 19. Mark
13. 11. in that same hour. And

3. There is much nearness of heavenly habits, dispositions, and heavenly
influences; and they are like other, as life and breathing, Get heavenly
dispositions, and influences follow connaturally.
fire and the flaming of the fire. get heavenly dispositions, and influences of
grace to pray, to praise, to believe, almost connaturally follow. When the tide
of the Spirit flows, Steven and the Apostles must prea^^, and boldly confess
their precious Master Christ Jesus; and this is great condescension of love,
that the spirit and the sinful believer are fellow-workers; for the Spirit to
act in the man Christ, or in the elect Angels, is not so much a wonder, for
they never ^inned: influences upon us, who have but a sort of obediential
power, as we are sinners, such as is the power of swimming in iron, is
lowliness of love. What is it for the Spirit of grace and glory to beat upon
such broken and mistuned harps, and to bring forth such excellent actings, as
praying, praising, confessing, believing, rejoicing in God, in such unhandy
tools? What holy trembling is required in us, that we offend not such an
honorable and glorious help, and that we neglect not to join his own habit to
his own influences, when he renders the work sweet and easy! O let us lend our
heart, and give organs, and a workhouse to the Spirit, who comes down to sigh
in sinners! He mourns like a dove, and weeps like a father who has lost his
firstborn in heirs of glory.

Q. But is not the habit of grace and spiritual dispositions all one and the
same?

Answ. They are not one: For 1. The habit is the seed of God that remains
always in us, 1 John 3. 9. and the anointing that dwells in us, Dispositions
are not ever alike, but various and changeable.
1 John 2. 20, 27. but a disposition comes and goes, ebbs and flows. A child
of God will be under deadness and witheredness, the soul cleaving to the dust,
dropping away for heaviness, like a bottle in the smok^, when the man with the
habit of grace will pray like one sweating and rowing with oars against the
tide and stream. Why does David pray so often to be quickened, if he was ever
in a lively disposition?

2. Does not experience teach that there be times when David says, Evidences
that dispositions go and come.
2 Samuel 7. 27. Thy servant has found his heart to pray this prayer. Was not
this so much as to say, the heart and disposition to pray is lost sometimes,
and is away, Psalm. 57. 7. My heart is fixed, O Ood, my heart is fixed or
prepared.

3. To say that spiritual dispositions are as permanent and constant as habits,
is to deny the going and coming of the Spirit in Christ's love-visits. Now
certain it is the Spouse is not ever sick of love for Christ, as Cant. 2. nor
is there such a flaming of love dispositions, as when the Spouse says Cant. 1.
5. A bundle of myrrh is my beloved to me, he shall lodge all the night between
my breasts. When a sleepy drowsiness is on, that she suffers the welbeloved to
knock, and stand and knock, while his head is full of dew, and his locks wet
with the rain of the night, and refuses to open, yea positively gives a reason
that she cannot lodge him in the house, nor between her breasts, I have put off
my coat, how shall I put it on? Such a spiritual love-sicknesse is far off.

4. When a contrary disposition to adultery is on, and David's hand at the pen
writing a letter to contrive the killing of innocent Vriah; and the unbelieving
fear of loss of life is upon Peter, so that he denies his Lord, there could
not be an heavenly disposition to make spiritual songs, to pray, to praise, to
confess Christ before men, on either the one or the other.

5. If those heavenly disposition were ever in it, it should speak much against
the liberty of the blessed Spirit, whose breathings and out-lettings are
soveraignly free. Now by this the work of grace should be like the work of
nature: we see the fountain always casts out her streams, the Sun ever gives
light; the work grace has a day and a dark night, and Sun-light and
Moonlight; that we are in a state of outlawry when he withdraws, to be humbled
to the dust for abused love-visits, and may know what is Christ's, and what is
ours; the fire is ever alike disposed to cast heat; a millstone, if not
hindered, is alike disposed to fall to the earth, or down the mounrain.

Q. Are not spiritual dispositions nothing else but the hearts affections?

Answ. Spiritual dispositions are different from the affections.
Dispositions heavenly are different from the affections, much more then they
are different from the habit of grace.

1. The spiritual dispositions go and come; the heart and affections of love,
joy, sorrow, remain.

2. The heart is one thing, and the heavenly preparedness of the heart is
another thing: As the subject iron differs from the fierceness and heat in
iron, and the water differs from the cold and heat that goes and comes from and
to the water; so dispositions are spiritual qualities, and the affections the
subject; the heart is sometimes cold, and sometimes hot, lively or dead, as the
Lord is pleased to visit.

Q. May we not then say that dispositions are the affections heavenly disposed?

Answ. Not so neither; the affections are not the complete and adequate subject
of heavenly dispositions, There are heaven'y dispositions in the as well as in
the affections.
because there is often a heavenly disposition in the mind to know spiritual
truths; so Elihu, Job 34. 32. That which I see not, teach thou me. An heavenly
propension in the mind to be taught of God, Psalm. 119. 18, 26. There is a
heavenly disposition of the spiritual mind to believe the Scriptures; and in
place of that there is a slowness to believe divine truths, rebuked by our
Savior, Luke 24. 25.

3. There is a spiritual disposition in the conscience of the Centurion, Luke
23. 47. in Thomas, John 20. 27. in Peter 5. 8. The contrary whereof was in the
Pharisees and Rulers wrestling against the manifest light of God, Matthew. 12.
22, 23, 24. Matthew. 21. 33, 34. and 45, 46. Matthew. 28. 11, 12, 13. John 9. 13,
14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. and 34, 35. John 42. 47, 48. Acts 4. 13, 14, 15. Acts
13. 44, 45. As also there is a heavenly disposition in the memory to retain the
word, Psalm. 119. 11. forbidden, Heb. 2. 1. And gracious dispositions go
through the whole soul, in order to all gracious actings, in mind, conscience,
will, memory, affections of love, faith, hope, desire, fear, anger, and order
to all the spiritual duties that can be performed by men, as sinful
dispositions may be in all the powers of the soul; if so, the heart being so
ticklesome a piece, so ill to be guided, it is of great concernment to see with
what dispositions the heart is seasoned, and who they be that lodge here: as
heat and cold come in the water by turns, as the summer is hot, and the winter
cold, so the soul even of the child of God has ebbings and flowings of dead
and lively dispositions; as the frequent triumphing and rejoicing, and the
ordinary and much repeated complaints of the Saints do abundantly evidence,
Psalm. 22. Psalm. 31. Psalm. 77. Psalm. 89. Lam. 3. Jer. 20.

There is a sinful disposition.

2. The children of God may act spiritually under sinful dispositions.

3. What acts they then put forth.

4. The obedience performed under greatest indispositions, upon the sole motive
of the word, is the most spiritual obedience.

5. Sometimes the less sense, the more spiritual is the obedience.

That there be sinful and gracious dispositions in men can hardly be denied

1. In all men by nature there is the habit of natural and original sin. Hence
an indisposition, and a reluctance to believe in Christ, to love, desire, fear
God.

2. There is an acquired wicked disposition in Doeg, he loves to lie; a
disposition satanical and and hellish in Saul when the evil spirit troubles
him, he is disposed to kill David.

But the special ill disposition here is the dead untowardness of the children
of God to pray, or praise, or confess Christ, etc.

Hence these considerations of this indisposition.

1. That it may befall the children of God.

2. That they may act under this indisposition.

3. What acts they may and ought to perform under it.

As to the first, it needs not much probation.

1. A doubting disposition comes on the disciples Matthew. 8. when the ship is a
drowning, and they in hazard of sinking. Christ reproves not the act not so
much as the root and disposition, Bad spiritual dispositions creep on on the
children of God.
v. 26. (...); why are ye fearful? He says not, why fear ye? and he rebukes
both in Peter, Matthew. 14. 31. (...), for what end should thou doubt? and both
are clearly reproved, when they were (...), affrighted, 37, 38. why are ye
troubled, jumbled, or put out of order? or why do dialogues, or bounded or
racketted thoughts ascend in your hearts?

2. Job, David, and Jeremiah, sadly complaining and challenging God as an
enemy, as fiery, and a God burning with ho^ displeasure, and as lying waters;
and that says, that hardly could they but be under a disposition and fretting
impatience.

3. El^sha is so jumbled, that the soul is made like muddy water with
indignation at Jehoram, that he is in no spiritual disposition or capacity to
see the visions of God, 2 Kings 13. 14, 15. and Jonah is distempered at tender
mercy in the Lord toward great Ninive, and old and young in it, a straw, the
withering of a gourd: the renewed soul may be hammered and knocked to pieces
like a broken crystal glass, while the Lord be pleased to soldar the broken
pieces of the soul together again.

As to the second, There is some acting and life under much deadness in the
^egenerate.
under such dispositions there may be some stirring of the habit of grace, and
of the new creation; the soul either under swooning or sleeping is still acting
as the soul one way or other: it is not to be supposed that the life of God in a
believer can more intermit all sort of lively and vital actings, then the soul
can live of breathing, or to communicate vital heat to the body: the unbroken
and intense habit of sin in the unrenewed, is the mother-indisposition that
hinders influences of grace; as cast sparkles of fire on cold iron, it makes no
flaming, because of the density and coldness of the object: the Lord does not
bestow every the same Sun-influences on the thistle or nettle, and on the
vintry; nor is it supposed that God more bestows actual influence of saving
grace upon a man dead in sin, until there be a new heart, and the life of God
first infused in him, then the Lord bestows moral or rational influences on a
horse or a mule that has no understanding. Now cast sparkles of fire upon flax
or tow (though the sparkles be small) and there is presently flaming: if the
Lord but blow upon the smallest measure of the spiritual life of God, though
under many ashes, and a huge deal of indisposition, and there is some work
flaming, which will beger more fire. There is much deadness and dullness of
life in the affections to act in duties; when there is life, and some quickness
of spiritual light, the life and warmness retiring in to the heart the fountain
of life, when there is palenesse and coldness in the external members: and as
fire within creates fire in the nearest dry fuel, there is an act of renewed
light consenting Romans 7. to the good to be done, and yet deadness in the
affections to perform, and lively light in the half sleeping Spouse, discerning
the knock, voice, and words of the beloved, and assenting that it were just to
open to Christ, and give him lodging in his own house; and yet a prevailing
drows^esse in the affections, refusing to let him in.

As to the Third, Many sweet spiritual actings may be under indispositions.
under indispositions there may be diverse lively actings. As

1. Terrors and distractions, and all the waves of Gods displeasure. Heman
Psalm. 88. 1. O Lord God of my salvation, I cry day and night before thee. v. 9.
Lord I have called daily unto thee, I have stretched out my hands unto thee.
Psalm. 102. the afflicted soul says, v. 4. My heart is smitten and withered
like grass. And here though buried and dead bones sca^tered at the grave mouth,
as when one heweth timber, speak and pray to God, Psalm. 141. and the Church so
overwhelmed, so that they cannot speak, Psalm. 77. 4. yet they speak prayers.

2. There is holy complaining laid in the bosom of an apprehended angry God;
and though arrows of God stick in the flesh, Psalm. 38. 1, 2, 3, 4. Psalm. 119.
25. My soul cleaves to the dust. 28. My soul droppeth away for heaviness. 83.
I am become like a bottle in the smoke, Psalm. 42. 1, 2. Psalm. 6. 1, 2, 3,
prays and complains in a holy way to God; Like a crane or a swallow, so did I
chatter, I did mourn as a dove; mine eyes fail with looking upward: O Lord I am
oppressed, undertake for me.

3. It Is half a closing with a sinful disposition, when it pains us less.
Paul protests against the fleshes sinful disposition, Romans 7. 15. I allow not
the evil which I do.

2. He disowns it, v. 17. It Is no more I that do it, but sin in me.

3. He condemes himself for it, v. 18. I know in me, that is, in my flesh
dwells no good.

4. He complains of it 23. I am led captive to the law of sin.

5. His complaining so grows, that he ends in an outcry, O wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? No agreement betwixt
these two champions the flesh and the Spirit.
and triumphs victoriously in Christ, v. 25. From which it is clear that Paul
and the flesh part open enemies, and that there is no treaty of peace betwixt
the spirit and the sinful disposition flowing from the flesh, as if the flesh
and the spirit were two free, coequal, independent Lords and Princes, and each
must have his own kingdom and princedome to himself, and the one must not
encroach upon the other; for the flesh and its accomplices must down, and the
spirit must be up in Christ: Nor is there any arbitrary agreement of the
matter; for the spirit yields no liberty to sin, nor gives away one jot or
tittle of the holy Law, to say Herod by the new covenant may keep his lust and
Herodias, so he gladly hear John the Baptist.

4. There ought to be a going about of all duties, of praying, believing,
hearing, praising, etc. under the lowest ebbings of the spirit, and the saddest
deadness; so deadness and indispositions be the sin and sinful affliction, It Is
fit to go about duties under indispositions.
and the afflictive sin of the child of God; for our obedience to God is the
more spiritual, that it has no moral motive from sense and comfort, but rather
the contrary, save only the word of command. So excellently Christ, Heb. 10.
9. Lo I come to do thy will, to suffer wrath, and the curse for man; but
Psalm. 40. 8. I delight to do thy will, thy Law is within my heart. His delight
was in that saddest commandment (to speak so) in laying dow his life for his
sheep, and so had no sense to bear him up; for an agony, and sadness, and
sorrow to death was upon the holy Savior, when he obeyed, and that peculiar
law was in the inner part of his heart. It Is true, his Father loved him for it,
John 10. 17. Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life that
I might take it again.

But 1. It Is a question if in the act of suffering he felt that love, when he
complained that he was forsaken of God.

2. Therefore the Father loved Christ, and Christ did abide in his love,
because he kept his Fathers commandments, John 15. 11. because they were the
Fathers commandments.

2. It Is a temptation to act under deadness, which actually blunts the heart;
therefore to obey under a formal temptation, is more spiritual obedience. As
for Christ to pray, to believe, to exhort his disciples to watch, and when
pain, wrath, the actual pressing curse puts him to tears and hideous cries,
Heb. 5. is a perfect copy to all obedience: less thanks to you to pray when
the heart is oyled with real influences, Less of sweet real influences, and
more of moral influences from the word makes obedience the more perfect.
and feasted with some holy, and the bridegrooms honeycomb, and the feelings of
the out-lettings of freest love; as what praise to a wheel to roll down the
mount? or for the fire to cast heat, or the Sun to yield light? Feelings of the
strong impulsions and breathings of Christ's love carry along such a strong
necessity of obeying Christ's love, being a stronger and a more imperious
commander then a fiery Law, almost steals away the elective power, but to pray
under the frame and current of a dead disposition working and re-acting on the
contrary, from a principle that is strongly real, but from pure moral
influences from the pure spiritual commands, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. Pray without
ceasing, and Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, is the most
spiritual and perfect obedience. That wine has the most kindly taste and
color of wine, and is preserved most connaturally, that has it is being on the
mother grape; it is not so when there is something of art (I know not what) to
preserve it by, steel or something like that. Hence appears the decitfulnesse
of our hearts, when the delight in the duty comes rather from a mere physical
cause, and less moral, to wit, from the heavenly flamings of quickening
influences, not from the command, the only kindly mother and moral motive of
obedience. The withdrawing of the rays and beams of the personally near
Godhead now (as it were) under a cloud, which was wont to give the savourness
of strong delight, made our Redeemers obedience (as is said) the more excellent.

2. It speaks much of savoury graciousnesse, when the temptation is cos
gratiae, a whetstone to grace, and to the spirit of adoption, and as sails and
oars to praying, and does not blunt us in duties.

3. The greater combat with nature, the more perfect is the obedience.
Abraham's natural disposition was strong to love Isaac his only son, to let
the child take his good night at his aged mother; but the command of Jehovah
his God in covenant so prevailed, as he would shift the temptation, and hid the
matter from the mother Sarah, and strongly second the design of Gods trying
with resolved pure spiritual obedience from only the command of God

CHAP. VI.
The place Luke 24. 32. Did not our heart burn, etc. is opened. 2. Believers
can tell the history of the actings of the Spirit. 3. Feelings may be strongest
after the actings of the Spirit. 4. The differences between literal heat and
spiritual heat in many particulars. 5. And betwixt the Spirits actings with the
Word, and Enthusiastical raptures.

There be other holy dispositions most considerable, specially these. 1.
Burning of heart. 2. Enlargedness of heart 3. Fixedness of heart. 4.
Love-sickness after Christ.
Besides these there be special dispositions to pray, to praise, to submit to
God, to adore, to walk humbly, to walk circumspectly and tenderly, and such
like; but most of them may be reduced to these.

NOw to speak of the burning of the heart, the place Luke 24. 32. is clear. The
two disciples having parted with Christ, now risen from the dead, and not
knowing him to be Christ, 32. they say one to another, Did not our hearts burn
within us when he spoke to us in the way, and opened to us the Scriptures?

In which words the nature of heavenly heart-burning, in the causes and
properties thereof, is laid open; and the differences between the heat natural
from natural influences, from the lively heat spiritual.

In the words these particulars are to be observed.

1. When the heat is gone and past, 1. they perceive it; they said one to
another when he is gone, our heart did burn, in the past or preterite time.

2. They accuse their own stupidity, (...), did not our heart burn? were we
sleeping when he burnt us.

3. The Author speaking, Christ, while he spoke to us in the way.

4. The fuel that made the fire, and the burning coals, the Scripture opened
by Christ.

5. The object of the burning, or the subject recipient, our heart, was
burning, as an oven or a furnace.

They said one to another. The coal of fire which Christ cast into the heart,
and is now smoking among the firewood, and on the heart, leaves two things
behind it.

1. Telling of their experiences one to another.

2. The feeling and perceiving of the heavenly heart-burning, better when it is
gone, We can tell the actings of the spirit when they are on, and after they
are over and gone.
then when it was on. Then the heart-working of Christ will leave histories
behind it; as what is much of Solomon's Song, but a Narration of the daughters
and virgins one to another of Christ's actings upon the soul, or a chronicle of
Christ's love, and the Spouses sin; as

1. Of Christ's dispensation in withdrawing, Cant. 3. I sought him, but I found
him not. Cant. 5. 6. I opened to my beloved, and my beloved had withdrawn
himself.

2. She tells his saving actings upon the soul be like to the virgins, Cant.
1. 4. The King has brought me unto his chambers. Cant. 2. 4. He brought me
into his banquettinghouse, and love was his banner over me.

3. She tells over songs of Christ's loveliness and excellency, Cant. 5. 10, 11,
12. of the savouriness of his name, of the memory of his love, Cant. 1. 3, 4.
of the seat and room that Christ has in her heart, and betwixt her breasts,
Cant. 1. 13. all the night.

4. Differences betwixt spiritual heartburnings of the love of Christ, and
literal heat.
She tells of her carnal drowsiness; of her sinful refusing to open, and let in
Christ to the heart. So does Jeremiah tell a sad experience of his own; he had
quit the prophesying trade, and would speak no more in the name of the Lord;
and he was burnt with a fire in his breast, he could not get the word housed in
his heart, but it did come abroad. 1. Difference.
This shall be the first difference betwixt spiritual heart-burnings, and the
influences that the Spirit leaves, and the natural heat. The literal burning
leaves no work upon the heart, nor any impression of heavenly experiences. Jehu
his heat against Achab and Baal left no impression of God on him to hate the
golden calves, or the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin:
He did cleave to that way, 2 Kings 10. 28, 30. Let fiery professors show any
influence of a gracious work in the heart: the flaming of thorns under a pot,
and the flashes of heat from burning straw leave no fire but ashes, and much
cold behind them in the cold winter frost; and the generality of dead
professors can say nothing to one another, but I have long heard the Gospel,
and yet am without God and without Christ. 2. I am convinced of the excellence
of Christ, and there yet is no fire or coal of heart-love to Christ in me; and
it were good such a missing there were.

2. Did not our hearts burn?

This is convinced to be a disposition spiritual rather then a habit; its a
burning of heart while Christ speaks, that had a cooling before, though they
were believing Disciples. Feeling may be stronger after actings of the spirit
are gone.
But here observe, they feel not so the burning of heart in the mean time as
afterward, when v. 31. Christ was vanished out of their sight and gone, now
they take special notice, in a feeling way, of the warmness of heart they felt
while he opened the Scriptures to them. The Lord preaches in a ladder reaching
from earth to heaven; Jacob sleeps, and can give no judgment in the mean time;
but Genesis 28. 16. when the sweet vision and preaching is e^ded Jacob awaked out
of his sleep, and he said, Surely the Lord was in this place, and I knew not. A
strong impression of the presence and glory of God sometimes comes on after the
Lord is away. David desires and thirsts, Psalm 63. 2. (says he in the
wilderness of Judah) that I may see thy power and thy glory as I have seen
thee. The enjoying of Zion and Zions songs while the people is at home in their
own land, has not such influence on their spirit as when the Sancturies glory
is removed; then Psalm 137. 1. By the rivers of Babel, there we sat down, yea,
we wept when we remembered Zion. While one is in a fever, they may be ignorant
that they are in a fever, but when the cooling of health comes, then he well
remembers he was sick of a fever. When there is a fever of glory on Peter, he
speaks he knows not what, Mark 9. 6. yet after, 2 Pet. 1. 16, 17. he makes
sweet comfortable use of that glory of Christ on the mount: when the Lord
waters the sown seed, and sends down new influences of grace, then does it
appear what warming has been in the soul; (...) Difference.
this is a second difference betwixt literal heat and spiritual burning of
heart; literal heat has most sense when it is a dowing; Spiritual ^arning of
heart leaves some impression^ (...) which literal heat (...).
there are no spiritual reflections upon that burning when it is gone and over,
except the Lord give repentance, and that is accidental to all sinful fairds
and flaming of the flesh, or of a moral gift, it dies with its flaming, as
fired powder that endures not long; whereas its useful to call to mind the
gracious burnings of heart, yea, or any of the Lords ancient paths, according
to that Psalm 119. 52. I remembered thy judgment of old, and have comforted my
self; and its good to receive and lay up influences of heart warmings of
Christ, Isa. 42. 23. Who among you will ^ear this? who will hearken and hear
for the time to come?

Did not our hearts burn? (...).

The godly reprove their not knowing and not discerning of Christ in his heart
flamings of love; godly and spiritual sense ^^lengeth self-dulness, Cant. 5. 6.
I opened to my be^^ved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself and was gone. This
is a sense of Christ's withdrawing, with a challenge of her refusing to open:
(...)
Ah! why did I not op^n while he did ^ovingly (...) knock, and lovingly speak,
Open (...) my ^^ster, my love, etc. sense of Christ with chal^^^^^d good* (...)
with tears for (...) in the woman th^^ (...) his feet with tears; sense with
faith going along (...) is commendable: its a spiritual case (...) up our
rec^nnings, what we have profited spiritually by the heart-^^^ing^ wrought by
Christ; and this is a third diffrence. The moral and (...) man (...) so ^^prove
his hear, as to call himself to a reckoning; nor (...) say, when near am I to
God for my stirring (...) reforming religion? its kindly life-heat that makes
the man more lively and vigorous.

While he spoke. The third particular, who works burning of heart in these men,
speaking Jesus Christ; when Christ takes the bellows and the fan and stirs up
the fire, it must need^ burn boldly; and when Christ casts in a coal in the
soul* it must make heart-flamings. John 4. I am he that speaks to thee, that
made a fire in the woman's heart, then she leaves well and water-pot and runs to
the City. So Matthew. 9. 9. Matthew. 4. 20, 21, 22. with a word he kindles a fire
in the breasts of fishermen, who knew nothing of him before, and has an inward
work upon the heart. Cant. 5. He put in his hand by the hole of the door, and
my bowels were moved for him; that was fire in the bowels; and what did Christ
here but speak words? 4. Difference.
and this is the fourth difference, with little pain, but a word speaking he
makes a fire. There is sweet leading, no violence spiritual in heart-burnings
for Christ; its not so in the litera^ heart.
There is a huge deal of violence in Esaus running, sweating, hunting; Jacob
stirred not after works, but staid at home and believed, and faith made him
blessed: the spirit drives not, but by the words leading and persuading. But is
there no violence in the natural and literal heat? Yea, for B^als priests to
cut and bleed themselves with knives, and cry till noon, and to shout to a deaf
God, must have in it much violence; and its a very unnatural fire, and its a
most unnatural wildfire heat to slay their young children to Molech. A man who
forces a sigh when a sigh forces not him is a sufferer; but what violence is in
the constraining Gospel-promise? what compulsion is there in love or
love-sickness, when Christ makes love a key that opens all doors? how strongly
and how sweetly does the word of promise carried on by the spirit of Christ,
force thy soul? there is a huge deal of force and violence in fair^heed
sickness, as when a man makes and counterfeits distraction and madness, and
runs naked.

While he opened the Scriptures.

The fourth particular is the fuel that makes the fire; the Scriptures opened,
and opened by Christ's key; Is not my word like a fire? says the Lord, Jer. 23.
15. Yea, in Christ's baptizing there is fire. John baptizeth with water, and no
more, as a cold and watery seal; but Christ, Matthew. ^. 11. batizeth with the
holy Ghost and with fire. The word of prophecy was in Jeremiahs bowels, 5.
Difference. The heavenly beat goes along with the Scriptures open and applied,
not so the literal heat.
as a fire shut up; and this is the fifth difference betwixt the literal and
spiritual heat; the heavenly heart-burning goes along with the Scriptures. 2.
With the Scriptures so opened and applied by the spirit of Jesus as by a strong
power, burning coals are cast into the heart. As touching the former, the
difference betwixt this and the Libertines spirit, or the Enthusiasts, are to
be observed, and the spirit of the children of God.

1. Christ's spirit extols the Scriptures; It is written, says Christ against
Satan. Have ye not read in the Scriptures, says Christ against the Sadduces,
Matthew. 22. Search the Scriptures, says Christ, they bear witness of me. He
taught the multitude and disciples, as its written in the Scriptures. He
rebukes them, Luke 24. v. 25. as fools and slow of heart, for not believing the
Scriptures. When he would carry in real influences of grace to the heart, he
carries them along by the Scripture, and opens the understanding that they may
understand the Scripture, Luke 24. 45. that is the spirit of Satan in some, who
boast that they are beyond and above the word of the Kingdom, and such must be
beyond and on the other side of heaven.

2. They who wait for the Lord, and whose soul waits for God, they hope in his
word, Psalm 130. 5, 6. Libertines souls cannot wait for the Lord as the watch
for the morning. Hence considerable differences betwixt motions of the Spirit
and loose Ensiasms.


3. Its a work of the spirit strongly to convince the conscience of not
believing in Christ, John 16. 7, 8. now to believe in him is the sum of the
Scriptures, of the Gospel. Enthusiasts extol persuasions by raptures, according
to which the brother kills the brother, as Bullinger relates, in place of the
Scripture-convictions of the spirit.

4. The work of the spirit is to comfort, for its the spirits office; and the
sound comfort is patience and comfort of the Scriptures bringing hope, Romans 15.
4. The spirit of Enthusiasts persuades men of peace and comfort without and
beside the promises of the Gospel.

5. The words of the book of the Law melt the heart of godly Josiah, 2 Kings
19. 22. and the Lord looks to him that trembles at his word to dwell with him,
Isa. 66. 2. The Enthusiasts boldly mock the word as an instrument of carnal and
fleshly regeneration, and seek a new birth from a spirit alone separated from
the word.

6. Deep humiliation is wrought by the word, 2 Kings 22. 14. the pride of Satan
reigns in the spirits of Enthusiasts, who despise Scripture humility, and
reproach tears and the work of repentance, as a work of the Law and the flesh.

7. Strong and courageous fighting, even to overcoming, gets for a reward the
hid manna, the white stone, and the new name written thereon, which no man can
read but he that receives it: now fighting and overcoming is by the word of the
spirit, Rev. 2. 17. Ephesians. 6. 17. and faith in the word, 1 John 5. 4. Enthusiasts
tell us of a dumb and Scriptureless persuasion by which men are persuaded they
are chosen to salvation, and can know others by the face that are so chosen.

8. The true spirit leads unto all truth, John 16. 13 and opens the true sense
of the Scriptures, and leads no man by a new wildfire light; nor does the
spirit of God sway and determine a topic conjectural way, while there is a
speculative doubting as touching any light from Scripture, whether the course
be lawful or warranted by the word or not: for the spirit of God leads by
Scriptures infallibility, Isa. 59. 20, 21.

9. The actings of the true spirit are gentle, civil, human, and he bids us
follow whatsoever is of good report -- whatsoever things are pure, Phil. 4. 8,
9. The spirit of Enthusiasts, leaving Scripture, licenses men to abominations
which Heathens abhor.

10. The actings of the spirit of Christ are seasonable, Matthew. 10. 19. in that
hour it shall be given you; it is not ye that speak, but the spirit of your
Father speaks in you. Enthusiasts spirit suggests night-works to be done in
day light, and many unseasonable actions contrary to godly prudence, as to read
godly Treatises when they should hear the Word preached; the spirit that
suggesteth this is not of God, for the spirit of God cannot counter-work
himself.

11. The spirit of God acts the soul and the man within his own orb and sphere
of grace. Nature acts not upon the Moon to move it up to the sphere of the Sun,
nor could it be called a kindly and connatural motion for the Sun to move down
in the orb of the Moon. It Is not the spirit of the Lord which acts the plowman
to move out of his element in the throne or in another calling in which God
has not placed him: for it is not from the motion of the spirit of
sanctification for David to go out of his element of grace, and move in Satan's
orb of uncleanness and bloodshed: the spirit of holiness is a friend to the
holy Law of God; all influences and actings of the spirit are to be tried by
the same rules by which the spirit is tried: some influences to Scriptural
duties are from God and his spirit, other influences from the Scriptureless
spirit of Satan, or corrupt man himself; every stirring and impulsion must not
be fathered upon the spirit of grace.

The fourth particular is the subject or seat of burning, and its the heart;
did not our hearts burn within us? the heart is the only seat of heavenly
burnings; not simply, as the heart of man, which is evil, and only evil by
nature in all its outgoings, Genesis 6. 6. Genesis 8. 21. and supplanted and wicked,
Jer. 17. 9. But the new heart of man, Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. the heart in which the
love of God, as a flood, is spread abroad by the holy Ghost, Romans 5. 5. the
heart and soul that loves the beloved Christ, Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3. as for the
unrenewed heart it is no more a hearth-stone, or a seat to kindle this fire
upon, nor will it burn in this heart, then if you would kindle a fire of coals
and fuel and dry timber upon the superfice of the ocean sea; for the heart of
the unrenewed man would eat up and quench all this fire; and the spirit does no
more give influences for the heavenly burnings in the heart of an unrenewed
man, then he gives influences to the water to burn, and cast out flamings as a
huge fire does, or to the midnight darkness to shine as the Moon or Sun: and
this is the sixth difference. The renewed heart is only the seat of this fire
that comes down from heaven, the natural heart is not capable thereof.

Q. Is there not an heart warmness in the natural and unrenewed man?

Answ. Such as is the heart, such is the heat; such as is the hearth-stone,
such is the fire and the fuel that but as on it

But the differences be these:

1. The heat of the unrenewed man is strong, and cannot be commanded; they
hasten as mad men after their idols, who run after other gods, Psalm 16. 4. And
Paul says of his heat in persecuting the Saints, Acts 26. 11. I compelled them
to blaspheme, (...), I was abundantly and exceedingly mad, and phrentick, out
of my wit, in burning malice against them: now the mad man can hardly command
his madness, yet upon other sinful and mad grounds Paul could have been
persuaded on the contrary: as the Pharisees were mad against Christ, yet the
fear of the people and of their own ^^ns restrained them long from doing
violence to him: and in matters which nearly concern God, the hear of ^n
^^renewed man may be quenched; as a man that counterfeitech himself to be mad
can command his madness, and (...) who fains himself to be sick, can command
his sickness; out one who is really possessed with a Devil and mad, and one who
is really sick of a raging fever cannot command either madness or sickness*
hypocrisy has some dominion and empire over its own cursed heat and (...);
^ut say mountains on the love of Christ, love breathes and lives under it:
devise torments, lent, burning quick (...) of (...), or in a see^^ing Caldron
to the Mar^^rs of Christ, in ten days out off the ten singers one by one, and
so the rest of the members in diver^ days, or some (...) devise hellith (...);
the witness, of Jesus (...) and bounded hand and foo^ (as the word (...) is
made use of) by the commanding (...) sweetly (...) love of Christ, to die an
hundred deaths (...) rather (...) deny Christ; for such as so love not (...)
lives to (...), are not their own nor has a believer (...) his (...); not can
the word, if (...) could (...) and an ^^rth of the gold of (...) of Christ, and
the strong in^^ence, thereof. So true is that Cant. 8. 7. Many waters cannot
quench love. That is a strong fire which all the waters in the Sea cannot
quench. Nor can the floods drown it. If a man would give all the substance of
his house for love, it. would utterly be contemned. Then drowning and burning,
death, fair allurements and gifts, cannot counterwork the love of Christ. What?
and are loves coals so hot? yea he spoke to that, v. 6. Love is strong as
death: jealousy is cruel as the grave; the coals thereof are coals of fire,
which have a most vehement flame, the flame of God. But natural men for all
their heat in the matters of God, can let out and let in, and stretch out the
truth for all their heart-burnings, as if it were kid-leather; and they may
take and give, and borrow and lend upon Christ's matters, whereas the Saints are
awed with that, Buy the truth and sell it not. Let indifferent and cold men,
who never felt the influences of loves fiery coals, know this. Ah, the
interests of Christ have been looked on in Scotland too indifferently and
coldly; the coals of self-interest burn strongly.

2. The bare letter of the Gospel wins not in upon the heart, it warmes the
skin and not the heart; whereas Christ's speaking and opening the Scriptures
with his Spirit, and the key of David, Literal heat is all upon the letter and
forms, not so as the spiritual heat.
casts not fire upon the heart, the heat is all upon the letter and
externals, and upon Sacrifices, New Moons, Solemn Assemblies, forms without
taste: All Paul's heat is about Christ, and the hope of the resurrection; the
Jews his adversaries heat could be nothing of this heart-burning, but for
Moses Law in the letter, circumcision, and other ceremonies, now wanting their
life Christ. For Christ had now 1. removed from the letter of the ceremonial
law, and there is no life there as touching the observance thereof.

But Christ has 2. not departed from, and gone out of the ceremonial law, as
touching the doctrinal teaching thereof to lead us to Christ; and therefore
that law should be read, preached, believed, and stands clothed with the
authority of Canonick Scripture, otherwise Libertines must cashier the books of
Moses.

3. Nor has Christ removed out of the letter of the Scripture Law and Gospel,
to teach us no more thereby, but only by the Spirits instruction; for even the
doctrine of the Law curses, Deuteronomy. 27. Deuteronomy. 28. are a part of the immediately
inspired word of God shining with the same majesty, holiness, divinity,
convincing power, as the letter of the Gospel, Psalm. 19. 7, 8, 9, 10.

4. Christ has not removed (as Saltmarsh, Dell, and others teach) from the Law
moral the divine obligation to holiness and righteousness; for it lays the
same bands and obligations to the duties of love and obedience to God, and of
love, truth, mercy, righteousness, soberness, to man, which was upon us in
Moses time; for that way grace should teach looseness, lawless wantonness, not
holiness. We would press good works, holiness, godly walking, on all, as they
would see God, and not be trees hewn down and cast in the fire. Suppose we
could not with School accuracy rid marches as touching the necessity thereof;
but we are to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, justification by works.

5. Christ and the Spirit of Christ dwell in the Law, to join gracious
influences therewith to humble sinners, to cast them down, to bring them to
self-despair, that they may flee to Christ

CHAP. VII.
Of enlargedness of heart, Psalm. 119. 32. I will run the way of thy
commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart.

THe words have no great difficulty. Running imports a cheerful, nimble,
willing activeness, in giving obedience to Gods commandments. Enlarging is a
widening of the heart, and the Lords giving of a wider capacity to run, by
bestowing influences on David, in heavenly dispositions and actings for God.
Hence the Text shall be cast into these questions.

Q. 1. Whether David was now under straitning, that he so speaks?

Q. 2. What the straitning is?

Q. 3. Whether David might promise and undertake to run, upon the supposal of
an enlarged heart granted him of God?

Q. 4. Is there no running except the Lord give enlargement and new influences,
and what we may here do?

Q. 2. What enlargedness of heart is, and the branches thereof?

To the first. The frequent complaints of David in the Psalm, seem to say some
straitning was on him.

1. He complains of his soul cleaving to the dust, of his soul dropping away
for heaviness.

2. He frequently seeks from God teaching, quickening, enlightening; which says
that some deadness, darkness, and narrowness of heart was on. David was Ps.
119. and a believer may be under some straitning.
He who is nearest heaven, and is (as it were) all prayer, misses many things.
Psalm. 119. 11. Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I may not sin against
thee. He must then be well instructed, when the word is hid in his heart; yet
says he v. 12. Teach me thy statutes. v. 14. I have rejoiced in the way of thy
testimonies, as much as in all riches. 24. Thy testimonies also are my delight
and my counselors. 30. I have chosen the way of truth; thy judgments have I
laid before me. 31. I have stuck unto thy testimonies. What wants David then
that a glorified and perfected man has? yes, he wants more enlargedness of
heart, v. 32. he wants more of Gods teaching, v. 33. Teach me, O Lord, the way
of thy statues. He wants a bowed heart to the Law, 36. Incline my heart unto
thy testimonies. He wants more life and spiritual vigorousnesse, 37. Quicken
thou me in thy way. Begging and suiting supposes need and want, at least a
want of the degrees of grace. How sweet is it to be rich in missing and feeling
of wants! and that is the dangerous state of Laodicea, Rev. 3. 17. I am rich,
and increased with goods, and have need of nothing.

2. A true and a false missing.
Where there is much sinful complaining, and only complaining, there is less
praying and praising. Satan can make use of bastard sense of unworthiness, and
counterfeit letters from the Law to lay a man in prison, and weaken praying.
David does not so complain, but he misses, and also is rich in praying and
praising.

To the second. What straitning is, and whence it is.
Straitning is a sort of narrowness and scarcity of heartiness in the ways of
God. It comes sometime from heinous sins; the runaway child blushes, and is
straightened to speak to his father. Adultery and bloodshed brings on David sealed
lips and a closed heart in praising, Psalm. 51. 15. while God enlarge both. Lord
may I have leave to pray, to believe, to apply the promises, Psalm. 51. 12.
Psalm. 119. 45. I will walk at liberty; for I seek thy precepts. Then casting
aside the precepts brings straitning, restraint, and bands on the Christian in
his walk, and in praying, praising, hearing, loving, running in the way of Gods
precepts. A fettered man can act little; hence drought of soul, and the rain of
influences are withholden.

2. Heaviness of desertion brings on straitning, Psalm. 77. 4. Thou hold mine
eyes waking, I am so troubled that I cannot speak. Possibly from this Hezekiah
is locked up in chattering like a crane in stead of praying.

3. Diverse sorts of straitnings.
Satan may have leave as a faingied Pursevant to imprison where he has no Law.
What have thou to do to pray? Is not Joshua ragged, and clothed with filthy
garments? And Satan stands before the Angel at his right hand to resist him in
praying for Jerusalem; for he is not worthy to pray for himself. But the Lord
that has chosen Jerusalem rebukes him, Zech. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4.

4. There is a narrowness that comes from ignorance, until God give spiritual
wisdom and largeness of heart, see 1 Kings 4. 29. when we mistake God, and
unbelief represents God as a lion or a bear, Lam. 3. 10. Isa. 38. 13, and
Christ is represented as a terrifying Spirit, not as Christ, Matthew. 14. 26.
Luke 4. 37. How can the poor man pray to a lion, or a terrifying spirit? What
weak influences are there in speaking to God covered with a cloud of anger.

5. The Lord out of the depth of holy sovereignty withdrawes the breathings of
the Spirit, and straitens the man, that he cannot speak with lively liberty,
that he may depend upon the free outgoings of the Spirit: He who waters the
garden, waters every plant of the garden every moment, Isa. 2. 7. and when he
waters not, there is a drying up.

6. Neglect of praying and fetching enlargement from the fountain may straiten,
as appears from Paul's suiting of the prayers of the Lords people, that God
would grant him a door of utterance with holy liberty to preach the mystery of
the Gospel, Ephesians. 6. 19. Col. 4. 3. For much of the anointing there is in the
man Christ, that draws wondering at the gracious word spoken by Christ, Luke 4.
18, 22. See also the Churches prayer, Acts 4. 29. For it is a grant of grace to
speak with enlargement.

7. If fear and dismayment be on the heart, Jer. 1. 17. and Ezekiel may not
speak at all, Ezekiel. 2. 6. Self must be denied, and shamefastness before Kings,
Psalm. 119. 46. see Psalm. 39. 1, 2. laid aside.

Q. Rules to be free of straitning and to get enlargement of spirit.
What then shall be done to be free of the indisposition of straitning, and so
to get influences of enlargement of heart?

Answ. 1. Get and entertain large apprehension of God. Who is a rock save our
God? Psalm. 18. 30, 31. Be principled in the broad apprehensions of Christ, he
is altogether lovely, all loves. Cant. 5. 16. A touch of him can save.

2. Rid marches betwixt the Law and grace: some renewed ones must have their by
past life and the strict law reconciled; otherwise they but walk in the flesh,
and so live (as they imagine) in Law bondage, and are sick of the old diseases,
and so weaken their faith. Hence straitning. Thou art under the Law, and having
made a bargain with the Law to keep it, thou art in the flesh, thou can not
speak to a strange King in another land, a King of grace, since thou have fled
back again to the old prison; and if thou speak, it is with much straitning and
doubting; thou art the Laws man, and not Christ's.

3. Keep near communion with God; keep the vessel free of leaking, and of under
water; sin weakens faith, and saddens the spirit; and where the Spirit of the
Lord is there is liberty, 2 Cor. 3.

4. Improve much faith. Frequent believing shall come up to full assurance, and
that makes strong and bold knocking: for a Son who has right to come where his
own flesh is within the vail, is vigorous; the servants knock is weak; unbelief
knocks faintly. Yet mistake not heaviness, as if it were unbelief; Christ had
much heaviness, even to death, Every heaviness is not weakness of faith.
in his suffering, but no weakness of faith. But Matthew. 26. these, O my
Father, O my Father; as that also, my God, my God, speak strong faith, much
enlargement in his heaviest case. These four being observed, influences are
near.

5. Grow in sonly love, as a child to cry Abba Father, a word of a child
learning to speak, Romans 8. 26.

6. Get and cherish the inward witnessing of the Spirit, Romans 8. 16, 17. and
the confirmed assurance of justification by faith: hence access and boldness,
Romans 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. Ephesians. 3. 16, 17, 18, 19.

The third question, How far we may undertake obedience upon supposal of grace.
How far David, or a child of God, may undertake to run, upon the supposal of
an enlarged heart? Hence these.

Assert. 1. There is an undertaking, as if the child of God had influences at
his hand. Of this nature in Scripture, Psalm. 51. 10. Create in me a clean
heart. 11. Cast me not away from thy presence. 12. Restore unto me the joy of
thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit. 13. Then will I teach
sinners thy ways. So v. 15. O Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show
forth thy praise. Psalm. 119. 27. Make me to understand the way of thy precepts,
so shall I talk of thy wondrous works. 88. Quicken me after thy loving
kindness, so shall I keep the testimonies of thy mouth. In which he lays it for
a ground, How dispositions necessarily fetch influences.
if God graciously give a new heart, he will graciously give influences of
grace to teach sinners. If the Lord of free grace open the lips, he will also
give influences to make him show forth the praises of God; not that
dispositions of grace do necessarily determine us to gracious acts, or can
determine the Lord to bestow influences of grace, but the Lords free promise
determines him. Where he opens one door, he opens a second, and then a third,
until his child be in his bosom: when he gives one grace, he gives another;
yea because he gives grace, he lays holy bands on himself to give more grace;
the Lord of grace chooses some to savation, and gives them to his son; and
because he chooses them, he gives his Son to death for them; and because the
Lord redeems them by his Son, therefore he gives to them strong faith; and
because he gives to them saving faith, therefore he gives to them perseverance
and glory, and so gives influences of graces in a golden link and chain, Romans
8. 29, 30. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. Acts 13. 48. Ephesians. 1. 4, 5. 1 Pet. 1. 2, 3.

Assert. 2. A believer under the sense of mercy and deliverance, is to engage
his soul to praise. David delivered in the cave, Psalm. 58. 7. I will sing and
praise. Psalm. 30. Thou have turned from me my mourning into dancing. v. 12. O
Lord my God, I will give thanks to thee for ever. Psalm. 116. 8. Thou have
delivered my soul from death. 9. I will walk before the Lord in the land of the
living, out of the sense of the Lords goodness to all. Psa. 104. 33. I shall
sing unto the Lord in my lives, or as long as I live. Psalm. 63. 3. Because thy
loving kindness is better then life, my lips shall praise thee, thus will I
bless thee while I live. Heb. in my lives.

Assert. We have not assurance to be delivered from sin hic and nunc.
3. The man Christ may absolutely undertake, Psalm. 22. 22. I will declare thy
name unto thy brethren, I will praise thee in the midst of the congregation.
For he knows perfectly, he neither can sin, or come short of his vow; nor can
the Lord withdraw influences of grace from the man Christ; but Peter had no
assurance that under that particular temptation the Lord should not forsake
him. The general, all the renewed have, that the Lord will not suffer his own
to be tempted above their strength: Peter was obliged to watch and pray under
all the particular temptations that could occur, and especially under the trial
of his suffering Savior, of which he was forewarned by the mouth of Christ,
from that Prophecy Zech. 13. 7. I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of
the flock shall be scattered.

Obj. How we are to rely on God for influences.
The faith of believers is to rely upon the promised help of Christ in every
temptation. Then may the believer pray to be delivered, not in the general, but
in every particular not to be tempted above his strength.

Answ. The promise of preserving the elect, and of giving promised perseverance
Isa. 54. 10. Jer. 31. 25. and 32. 40. to them now converted is absolute, that
the Lord will put his fear in their hearts that they shall never depart from
him.

2. That his grace shall fortify them against attrocious sins committed with
the full strength of consent and inconsistent with the seed of God, and the
inbiding of that seed in them with the holy anointing, 1 John 2. 20, 27. c. 3.
v. 9. But there is not any promise in the New Covenant that David and Peter
shall be delivered from particular sins, hic and nunc, such as may consist with
the habit of grace and the seed of God. There faith is to rely upon God and
his grace that he shall not lead them into temptation, hic and nunc, in such
particular sins, not absolutely, but conditionally; so the Lord in his wisdom
and holy sovereignty shall judge it fit for their humiliation and the promoting
of the work of their salvation, and especially for the glory of holy
Sovereignty: they are to believe that the Lord shall absolutely confer upon
them fundamental, and amply necessary influences of grace, but not that he
shall bestow on them absolutely non-fundamental influences.

Assert. 4. Its not lawful to engage to run the ways of the Lords commandments,
leaning to the habit of grace, and the stock within the Believer; Peter relied
on this, I am ready ((...)) nothing habitual grace and faith) to go with thee
to prison and to death, Luke 22. 33. and John 13. 37. Peter is angry because
Christ lesseneth his stock and habit of grace and strength of faith; Lord, why
can I not follow thee now? (...). This habit of grace is not Christ, neither
the Spirit; and therefore the enlarging of the heart, upon the supposal whereof
David engages to run the way of the Lords commandments, What enlarging of
heart David speaks of Psalm. 119. 32.
is not the only habitual enlarging of the heart, but he supposes also that
the Lord must add his actual breathings and influences of grace, else he cannot
run nor move at all in the way of God, John 15. 5. 1. Cor. 12. 2. 2 Cor. 3. 3.

Assert. 5. Far less can we engage to run the way of the Lord upon our own
strength. For

1. The Apostle James rebukes such as say they shall go to such a City and buy
and sell, We cannot engage in our strength or habitual grace, to run in the
ways of the Lord.
and say not if God will, James 4. 10, 11. far less can we engage to spiritual
duties on our own strength.

2. This is carnal presumption for men to lay wagers on their own strength, and
to say with Peter and the Disciples, they will do wonders.

3. Men believe not the wickedness of their own hearts, nor see they to the
bottom of sovereignty, the depth of sin original.

4. Its contrary to godly watchfulness, and an hardening of the heart; as Prove.
28. 14. Blessed is the man who fears always, but he that hardens his heart
shall fall into mischief.

5. Its atheism to suppose that influences of saving grace are as due and
connatural to men now fallen in sin as influences natural are some way due to
the falling of rain, the rising and going down of the Sun, the growing of
trees, the ebbing and flowing of the sea, and that we have dominion of
free will over the saving breathings of the holy Ghost.

Whereas 6. The Gospel bids us pray, and by faith rely on the Lord for
influences of grace, and give the glory and praise of the breathings of the
Spirit to God.

7. Its against that humble self-denial, and godly trembling, and humble
despairing of our own strength that should be in us in our undertakings of
obedience.

So an huge deal of pride; 2. want of mortification to self must be lurking in
our undertakings.

Assert. 6. Its not lawful to blame the Lord for our sinful omissions, Isa. 63.
17. O Lord, why have thou made us to err, etc. opened.
for that is to father our sin upon the holy Lord; nor is that Isa. 63. 17. O
Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our hearts from
thy fear? a complaining against God.

Its 1. a tacit complaining of themselves, that they are gross matter, and the
dunghill on which the Sun with his beams stirs up a stinking smell, which is not
the Suns fault.

2. As Gods active hardening of us is a punishment of sin, the Church may
lawfully complain of it to God, and deprecate that and all the like sad evils
of punishment; yet it shall never follow that God is the author or the cause of
the sins of our being passively hardened of God, or of active hardening of our
selves.

3. Its a prayer for softning and grace not to err, return for thy servants
sake. v. 16. thou, O Lord, art our Father, our Redeemer, thy Name is from
everlasting.

2. None of the Saints yielding to temptations do blame the Lords withdrawing,
but blame themselves and clear the Lord. Psalm 51. Against thee, thee only have
I sinned; thou have taught me wisdom in the inward parts: here is a clearing
of the Lord. Isa. 64. 6. We are all as an unclean thing; v. 4. since the
beginning of the world -- men have not perceived a God beside thee, 5, 8. So
Lam. 3. 34.

Assert. 7. A Believer may undertake in the strength of God, Psalm. 119. 33.
Cant. 14. Draw me, we will run. Grace and the Spirit in his sweet breathings
being undertakers, one may undertake for a journey, when Christ engages for
such a chariot, the midst whereof is paved with love. O be humble, and lay not
great wagers upon self; ye know not sin original as a sin, but ye know it as a
mere punishment. What? we are sinners by nature, and we can do no otherwise;
Pharaoh and Judas knew it so.

CHAP. VIII.
Q. 4. Is there no running except God enlarge the heart? what then can we do?

ASsert. 1. Without some enlargement of heart there is no running; the negative
is true, none come to Christ except such as the father draws, John 6. 44. John
15. 5. and the affirmative is true, all that are drawn, and have heard and
learned of the Father, do run and come apace, Cant. 1. 4. John 6. 44. There is
a spiritual riches in heavenly and spiritual suppositions. O for more of Christ
to ern his praises with a shout which might waken Angels and Men, all men in
this side and in the other side of the Sun, and that all creatures might hear
and put to their seal, and cry Amen to the Psalm.

Assert. 2. The use we are to make of our sinful weakness is not to sit still:
he loves death who says, I cannot heal my self; What use we are to make of our
inability to run except God enlarge the heart.
art and skill must only do it, therefore I Will seek to no Physician; if the Lord
will not do it, let me die. The husbandman were mad who would say, my plowing,
sowing, early rising, and late laboring can never make the corn to grow except
God give the increase, therefore I Will fold my hands and take the other sleep:
and if another say, God only creates the wind, therefore I Will never set my foot
in a ship; so is it here, what can the dead and the sick sinner do if the
Physician Christ will neither quicken nor cure? his influences of life are
above my reach, therefore I Will never make out to Christ, nor ask for the Gospel;
if Christ will not heal us we must pine away in our sins; how then shall we
live? this is to tempt Christ, and to bring him under a new miraculous way to
heal and save the sinner in his dream, without hearing the Gospel; which is,
that God should bring bread and clothing to the sleeping man's bedside. The
contrary is Phil. 2. 13. work because he works. Cant. 1. Draw, and we will run;
the Spouse says not, Lord, draw that we may sleep.

2. Our impotency leads us to turn sinful wickedness in mournful confession and
godly complaining, as the Saints do Psalm 51. 5. Jer. 14. 4. Isa. 64. 8, 9.
Dan. 9. 5, 6, 11. Psalm 116. 6, 7.

3. How men naturally complain of sin original.
Cain, Pharaoh, Saul, Magus, never complain of themselves: Heathens complain of
sin original, not as man's sin, but as Socinians and Pelagians complain of it,
as man's misery, and the Lords fault and sin (with reverence to his holiness) in
that God and the stepmother nature have dealt worse with man in bringing him
into the world naked, weeping, weak, sick, dying, then with bulls, that are
born with thick skins, and have horns to defend them: Its a shameful accusing
of God to deny original sin to be a transgression of the Law, such as deserves
death eternal. Ah, our pride, who dare bark against God when we should weep
over our own wolfish and beastly nature.

Assert. 3. We do not so much in the use of means as our lameness does permit.
We do not so much as by strength of nature we may do, and we add to our own
lameness, and unjustly complain of God for our sinful impotency.
The Lord has drawn a bill in the conscience, that the blind will not so much
as open their eyelids; we may be a law to our selves, Romans 1. 14, 15. we know
God (by nature) and glorify him not as God, Romans 1. 2. 15. we may go many
miles farther toward God by Natures light, but we sit still.

2. Yea, we blow out the candle; and here the criple and lame man breaks his
own legs and arms the second time, and complains of the Physician Christ that
he will not heal him against his will: he who adds to his sickness a poison
drink, cannot father his death upon the Physician. Ah, we stir not broken legs
and arms upon and toward the Physician Christ.

3. The criple may move and creep toward the Physician. The motion of such as
stepped in the pool immediately after the Angel troubled the water, John 5. was
not a motion of perfect nature, nor a perfect motion, but yet a means of health
it was; Christ rejects not criple and sickly motions in using means toward
himself.

Assert. 4. The motions of the Spirit (to come to the renewed man's case) serve
as legs to bear the criple-man, but not as eyes; for Psalm 119. 105. Thy word
is a lamp to my feet, and light to my path. Yea, a doubt it is if the motions
of the Spirit, The Spirit as the Spirit lays no obligation on us, but to move
in Scriptural duties.
as the Spirit without the word, lay an obligation on us to follow these
motions, except when the Spirit speaks to Paul and Barnabas to go to Macedonia,
not to Bythinia; and then the word of the Spirit becomes formally the word of
the Lord, as the word of Christ from his mouth is the word of God: but heed is
to be taken in a special manner, when the bastard spirit speaks to Becold, to
Hichol, and such wizards; for God speaks like God, and his own know his voice,
and the children of the Devil know also their fathers voice; learn to go as far
as you can in the way to Christ.

1. No violence but from your own heart stands in your way; No violence but
from our selves hinders us to believe.
the birth helps it self in the womb to come out, work with the tide or against
it; he who rows with oars in a manner helps the wind; they desire not to sail
who will not stir a foot to the ship.

2. Hearing in Lydia, and the Jailer reading, in the Eunuch diligent taking
heed to the word of the Gospel preached by Phillip in the Samaritans, God loves
using of external means pro tanto.
the woman of Samaria conferring with Christ, have in them, though they come
not up to the nature of a perfect duty, somewhat of the ordinance of Christ,
and Christ loves to be in his own ordinances pro tanto; How far we may act to
fetch the wind, and to get influences.
its true, the unrenewed man cannot use the means formally as they are referred
to Christ, and for Christ, until his will and intention be renewed, yet he is
in the way to Christ, and materially he comes to Christ; nor is walking to the
ship on dry land an act of sailing; nor the sick man's journeying to the
Physician, or his simple receiving of medicine, an act of healing; its good to
come to the workhouse of the spirit, the preached Gospel, and to lie under the
breathing of the Lord when the word is spoken; lend the letter of the Gospel,
lodging in the outer house, the ear and literal understanding; go in to the
Potters house, and stand beside the furnace, and behold what work the Lord has.

3. Upon the wheels toward others, and how many he meets with in the way of
his ordinances and frames the new creature in them, and makes a real change in
them, that you wonder at them, knowing thy were blind, and now they see.

2. As for renewed ones these cases are considerable,

1. When the letter of the Law is granted, there is something, and a great
something wanting, Psalm. 119. 29. remove from me the way of lying, (...) be
grace over thy Law to me; which is first a suit that deeper and deeper
spiritual impressions of God in the Law may be engraven on him, till he be
filled with all the fullness of God; and influences may amount to a strong
habit, following of hearing, reading, conferring, meditating, with much praying
for spiritual teaching from him (as all along through Psalm. 119.) would make us
rich in influences.

2. The natural man never misses life and quickening influences in the word, the
spiritual does, Psalm 119. 50. This is my comfort in mine affliction, for thy
word has quickened me. Its not a bad property of the earth to gape and thirst
for rain, there is no such gaping and thirsting in the rock; the stone is never
parched for want of rain; but this parchedness is a nearest disposition for
influences of soap and moisture from the clouds, and though the thirsty man
pray not, yet thirst it self calls for watering influences; as the Lord
disappoints not nature, so uses he not to frustrate gracious thirst of suitable
influences of grace, and these are put together, and both are satisfied Psalm
145. 15, 16, 19. So his way, Matthew. 5. 6. Luke 1. 53. if thirsts for life, and
not for the bare condemning letter.

3. There is something which we call fetching of the wind, and casting of a
board again to wind to the right harbor, and it is a sort of courting the
wind, and that is the case of the soul that would live upon influences, its fit
to pant and gape, and carefully wait on for the holy breathings of the Lord;
could we wait in the way that the Spirit uses to come, and attend him in
ordinances, he must come that way, as Zacheus cast himself in that way of
Christ; providence places two blind beggars in Christ's way, and the Lord
thereby bestows the Son of David's mercy on them; and providence placed the
woman of Samaria at the well of Jacob, and Christ must needs go through Samaria,
and her way, she looked for water from Jacobs well, and looked not for the
Messiah; yet she meets with him, and feels his influences before she goes
hence: but we are with ordinances to lie at the tide, and wait for, and seek
the flowings of the Spirit; in one and the same work the sounding of the word
and the breathing of the Spirit may be attended, Psalm 130. 5. I wait for the
Lord, my soul does wait. Whether in his real helping and hearing, my crying out
of the deeps, or on his saving actings upon the dead heart, and in his word do
I hope: there may be a casting of the goods in the sea to help the ship to
land: there is failing of the eyes in waiting for God, Psalm 69. 3. Psalm 119.
8. My soul faints for thy salvation. 13. I opened my mouth and panted, for I
longed for thy salvation; I cannot create breathings. But the man in a pit or
dungeon, though he can make no help to himself, yet he can cry and make use of
arms and legs when a rope is cast down to him.

4. Blowing of the bellows adds nothing to the fire, yet it removes the ashes,
it fans away the earthy part, and rarifies it, and acts upon the smoke, and
adds quickening; it is fit to blow upon the habit of grace and heavenly
disposition, yea, to blow in a sanctified way, in a gift; so Paul, 2 Timothy 1. 6.
Wherefore I put thee in remembrance, to stir up the gift of God which is in
thee by the laying on of my hands. Erasmus says (...) is an elegant metaphor
from such as care for the fire, which is as it were buried under ashes, they
blow with the bellows, and revive and stir up the fire like to die out; others
think it an allusion to the Priests daily watching to cherish and keep in the
fire which the Lord sent down from heaven, and to cast new fuel to it. So is
that 1 Timothy 4. 14. (...), neglect not the gift that is in thee; let it not
rust: self-sharping and self-impulsion upon the heart, and acting upon the
habit, which is in worse case because it lodges in a lazy heart, is required:
we may deaden and neglect both our souls and the new habit, whereas that prayer
( Lord, increase our faith) teaches that we by diligent acting add to the
habit, to the gift, talent and dispensation, and the improving of these are
forcible means to draw down fresh influences of life: the Lord of his grace
having brought himself (reserving actings of sovereignty and deep wisdom)
under a sort of promissory necessity to bestow influences, and to give one
talent to him who makes five talents ten; idleness and sleeping then must be no
small obstruction to new quickening influences.

5. As the husbandman is a fellow-worker in his way with industry and art, with
the Lord and nature, to fit his ridges by plowing and sowing to receive
influences of dew and rain, and impression from heaven; and he works with God
and nature, who labors the vineyard, purges out brambles, briars, stones,
prunes the young vine-trees, that they may receive influences from Sun, Moon,
Heavens, and Clouds. Yet no husbandman, no vinedresser, can be Lord of the
influences of heaven: so has the Lord commanded us to plow up the
fallow-ground of our hearts, and not to sow among thorns; to lie under the
husbandry of Ministers sent of God; to frequent ordinances; to yield up our
hearts by willing consent to be acted on by God; to resign them, and put the
heart out of our possession, and yield to that suit, My son give me thy heart;
else we mock God in suiting from him enlargedness of heart, in a sort of
compromising that we shall run, if he shall draw and enlarge: But we keep fast
possession of our own hearts, and do not resign them to God. Hence a word of
wakening to cry to harp and psaltery, to our gift, and to our tongue, and to
our sleepy hearts, Psalm. 57. 8. is requisite; as also 2. that we chide with our
unbelieving souls, Psalm. 42. 5, 11. and command the renewed part to act upon
the heart, to accuse, and convince, and rebuke the heart, 1 Samuel 24. 5. 1 John
3. 20.

6. The soul can be in no such dead case, but it is capable of an Evangelick
command. Sardis has a name; they are living and yet are dead: then is it
useless to speak to Sardis now dead? no: Rev. 3. 2. Strengthen that which
remains. There fly sparkles of fire from the red hot iron of the smith upon
those about, whether they will or no. From that charge, Open to me my sister,
my love, etc. there came upon her, whether she would or not, flamings of love,
which brought influences on her bowels.

CHAP. IX.
The fifth Question is what is the enlarging of heart. It is nothing but the
wideness and fullness of the soul and powers thereof in its actings. Hence these
Propositions concerning enlargedness of heart.

Prop. 1. WHen the soul is widened and stretched out in its actings, we are
ready to say, I shall never be moved, Psalm. 30. I shall dwell in the house of
the Lord for ever, Psalm. 23. 6. which though true, when he was banished from
the Tabernacle, Psalm. 42. Psalm. 84. Psalm. 63. he had uttered thoughts of his
state. Some say, Shall I ever again be dead? Shall I ever again doubt as a
down-casting soul? no, I shall believe and hope under temptations to the end.
But we are no more to judge of our selves by our present enlargedness, then we
are to pass sentence of the multitude of people of a City by a solemn fair or
great market, the town is not every day so peopled: nor are we to esteem of a
river by its swelling and running over banks after a mighty long continued rain.

2. Nor are we to judge of our selves according to our ebbing and deadness of
disposition, that we shall ever again believe. Says the doubting soul, Shall I
ever again see the beauty and glory of his power, as sometimes I did in the
Sanctuary? Psalm. 63. The birds reason not so; they say not in winter, shall
ever the Spring and the season of building our nests come again? shall birds
ever have Summer-singing again? And we are ready to make a weapon-shew of grace
when the heart is enlarged; I Will do wonders: as if the man were the Father who
begat grace, and the Lord of his own believing; as some believe the horses
swiftness is the swiftness of the rider. Be humble, and pull down the sail when
the heart is enlarged.

Prop. 2. See in the Text enlargedness of heart and running are near of kindred
and blood. The disposition and the gracious acting by divine influences are
near other, as the powder and flamings, the dry timber and the warm
harth-stone, to receive flamings. There is a near disposition in the Embrio, in
the framed mass of the birth, to receive by the Creators influences a living
soul, Psalm. 38. 1, 2, 3, 4. So in Christ, Psalm. 40. the law in the heart, and
preaching the Lords righteousness in the great congregations are near other.

2. The enlarged heart is ripened to receive influences and quickening of grave
for running. The God of nature, by a sort of necessity, must give influences to
the egg so prepared to be a living bird: when the heart is boiling and seething
with thoughts of the King, the tongue is the pen of a ready writer. When the
heart is fixed, Psalm. 57. 7. as if he were master of influences, he humbly out
of the abundance of the heart engages to sing and give praise, I my self will
awake early. There is here fire, therefore the Lord shall blow upon his own
kindling; no question we may cast water on our own coals. The heart of the two
disciples is burning like an oven, while Christ speaks to them by the way, Luke
24. 31. yet they fortify themselves, and fetch reasons to strengthen unbelief;
so as they seem to fetch unbelief, and unbelief comes not on them unsent for,
ver. 21. We trusted that it was he who should have redeemed Israel, we are
beguiled. This is the third day, the women said he was risen again, but none
saw him. Strangle not heavenly dispositions, they shall break out.

Prop. Branches of enlargedness of heart.
3. For the branches of enlargedness of heart; there is a fullness of the holy
Ghost, in the Baptist, in Steven, which was not a transient disposition, but a
permanent habit; but this breaks out in something more then an habit. The
Spirit of the Lord came upon Sampson in mighty influences, when he broke the
cords, and carried away the ports of the City. Psalm. 45. 1. My heart is
inditing a good matter; like a boiling and seething pot, and that puts him to
speak of the King. Elihu, Job 32. 18. I am full of matter, the spirit within me
constrains me. 19. Behold, my belly is as new wine which has no vent; it is
ready to burst like new bottles. There was a heavenly spring, a new fountain
broken up in him, and excellently beyond all the friends he pleads for the Lord
his sovereignty. O what fullness above measure above his fellows was in the man
Christ! the law was in his heart, and the fullness of grace; and (as it were) to
overtake the running over well, he takes whole nights to prayer; and for
Preaching and working miracles, he has not leisure to sleep or eat. If there
be a fire in Jeremiah's bowels, what wonder then prophesying flame out of his
mouth, and he confess he was weary with forbearing, Jer. 20. and God obtains
his holy end. The people are warned of their sin, when Micah says in
opposition to the empty Prophets, Micah 3. 6. But truly I am full of power by
the spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and of might; and that fullness fetches
influences from heaven, to declare unto Jacob his transgression, and to Israel
his sin. This condemns the cold, indifferent, and dead actions of many, who are
far from that, whatsoever ye do, do (...), from the heart or soul, which
says some duties are soul-less actions, and actions dead without heart and
soul. Isaiah would have us, Mr. Leigh (...) active, eructare, evomere tanquam
ebrium. Metaph. depromere, producere.
if we fast aright, to give bread; and not that only, Isa. 58. 10. but to draw
out, or vomit out (so the word) the soul to the hungry. There is often great
scarcity of the soul in our actions, every acting in Gods way being an act of
hypocrisy, and a dumb and dead action. When shall we lay the Lords glory to
heart, and do things from the soul? Ah, prayers without a soul! what influences
of grace are here, hearing and no soul-hearing?

2. There is a wideness and an all-ness in regard of wisdom. Solomon had
wisdom, and largeness of heart, as the sand that is on the Seashore, 1 Kings
4. 29. So Paul Col. 1. 9. We cease not to pray that ye may be filled with the
knowledge of his will in all wisdom. Ephesians. 1. 8. Christ has abounded,
overflowed to us, in all wisdom and prudence. Col. 3. 16. Let the word of God
dwell in you, richly in all wisdom. Here is wideness of heart.

2. And Solomon was but a shadow, and the sand of the sea, which none can
number, a shadow of a shadow in comparison of Christ, Col. 2. 3. In whom are
hid all the treasures of wisdom. And therefore he went about doing good up
and down, sowing good deeds to the world, Acts 10. 38. Whom God anointed with
the holy Ghost and with power. Here is wideness of heart, and abundance of
influences, and acting of good night and day.

3. The wisdom of Angels is large. Hence that ( wise as an Angel of God) and
also the fullness of God in their affections teaches us that wideness of heart
is outed in continual acting, Influences on Angels and the glorified ones.
and so in multiplied breathings of God: and Angels do not walk and run only,
but fly with wings, cheerfully to do the Lords will: and what influences must
be there, when each having six wings, they cease not night nor day to cry one
to another, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts, Almighty, which was, and which
is to come, the whole earth is filled with his glory, Rev. 48. Isa. 6. 3.

4. The glorified see him face to face (that is wideness of heart) and they
serve him night and day, and weary not, Rev. 14. 2, 3, 4. Rev. 7. 9.

5. The more the Prophets and Apostles saw of God, the more the heart is
enlarged to teach and to warn every man, Col. 1.

3. There is an enlargement of heart in loving Christ, and in the experimental
knowing and feeling thereof, and in godly fear and joy, Ephesians. 4. 19. Paul prays
that the Ephesians may comprehend the love in all the dimensions of it, That ye
may be able to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, that ye may be
filled, not that it may be in you, but be filled 2. with fullness, that is a
wide fill. 3. with the fullness of God, that is yet wider. 4. with all the
fullness of God: and then follow influences above the prayers of the godly, v.
20. He is able to do exceeding abundantly above all we ask or think, according
to the power that works in us. Of the latter, Isa. 60. 5. when the Gentiles
shall be brought in to the Church, Thou shall see and flow together, thine
heart shall fear and be enlarged. And hence wideness of heart in acting, the
Church shall willingly receive them, and with joy also, and hold open their
gates night and day, v. 11. and influences of grace and glory shall so be
rained on the Church, that her Sun shall no more go down, nor her Moon
withdraw it self. v. 20. All her people shall be righteous. 21. A little one
shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong nation. Nor shall they be
weary in running, Psalm. 92. 14. They shall still bring forth fruit in old age,
they shall be fat and flourishing. The oil burns, and the oil grows; for Isa.
40. 31. They shall run, and not be weary. A glimmering of news come that
Christ is risen, and John and Peter try their speed, who shall be first at the
grave; and Magdalen outruns both, and seeks with tears, and stays about the
grave until she find her Lord.

The Lord must be displeased with our narrowness. How little a portion of him
do we see? We are not straightened in the Lords heart, but in our selves: He
calls for wider hearts, Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it, Psalm. 81. 10.
not the mouth, but the heart: our narrow heart, and narrow faith, is like the
little hand of the child, who has not fingers to hold the large and great
apple.

2. Many straightened and dead ones reproved.
The fool wants a heart, Hos. 7. 11. Prove. 9. 4. Then must the fools of this
world know little of an enlarged and wide heart, as little as the horse or the
mule that has not the understanding of a man; nor have they the heart of the
new man. Speak to the natural men of the fatness of the Lords house, of all the
fullness of God, and the showers of influences of grace, of the anointing of all
wisdom, and ye speak to new weaned children.

3. Idlers and sleepers, that run not in the way of Gods commandments, but are
hot as fire, and mad, and run as the Galatians in a wrong way, are hence
rebuked. Many run, and sleep little, after their corn, and wine, and oil, after
their vineyards, honors, but not with enlarged hearts in the Lords way: They
run to set up themselves, and in place of Religion set up all the wicked
religions of hell. Toleration is high, but he shall be laid hold on who
prophecies and cries against the cursed Altar.

4. There is a Spirit of deadness on many professors, the judgment of the
Church of Sardis, Rev. 3. 1, 2. and hardly can sleepers waken themselves: we
pray not as David, Psalm. 119. Quicken me, quicken me. Unrenewed professors are
painted men praying and hearing, men risen out of the grave, dead on their
feet, preaching, praying, hearing, and yet dead.

CHAP. X.
Of fixedness of heart. 2. Prayer begets an heavenly disposition, and an
heavenly disposition again begets prayer. 3. Holy acts beget holy acts, and
an heavenly disposition begets an holy disposition. 4. The Lord so frames his
precepts and his promises, as our actings are suitably required to his
influences. 5. These three are to be differenced. 1. The spiritual state. 2.
The spiritual temper or constitution. 3. The spiritual condition. 6. The reason
of doubling of sentences and words.

Psalm. 57. v. 7. My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed; I will sing and
give praise. 8. Awake up my glory, awake psaltery and harp: I my self will
awake early.
MY heart is fixed. Genesis My heart is prepared, my heart is confirmed,
established. The doubling of the word, my heart is confirmed, notes the
vehemence of affection.

2. As also the speaking of it to God, O God my heart is fixed, declares the
sincerity of it.

3. The speaking to his tongue to awake it, his calling it his glory, as Psalm.
16. 9. My glory rejoices, that is, my tongue expresses joy, is an elegant
fiction of a person, as speaking to his soul, Psalm. 103. 1. Psalm. 116. 7. Psalm.
42. 11. and notes some dullness in tongue and heart to praise God: his bidding
his psaltery and harp awake, is also an elegant prosopopeia; as if the harp
could sleep and wake. And there is another figure; the instrument of music is
put for the gift of music; he tacitly prayer God to waken up his gift and his
grace of music to praise, and that God would awake himself to praise, being
under the sense of the Lords deliverance of him, when he fled into the cave for
fear of Saul, and the Lord delivered him out of the hand of Saul, and put Saul's
life in his reverence.

The words contain

1. The disposition of fixedness of heart.

2. His vehemence of affection in doubling the expression.

3. His speaking of it prayer-wise, O God, my heart is fixed. His sincerity.

4. What the disposition wrought in him, a fixed resolution to praise; and a
waking up of his gift of music, awake psaltery; and of himself, I my self will
awake early.

The word, my heart is fixed, is rendered by Amsworth, my heart is firmly
prepared; Diodati, my heart is re-confirmed, or re-assured; Calvin in the
French, my heart is well disposed; Geneva, prepared.

Q. How got David this heavenly disposition?

1. The occasion was 1 Samuel 24. as the title of the Psalm bears, Saul with
three thousand men-persons, David in the rocks of the wild goats in the
wilderness of Engedi; Saul went into the cave to cover his feet, and David and
his men remained in the sides of the cave; and David went in and cut the lap of
Saul's garment, and had in his power to kill Saul, and his men counseled him so
to do; but in stead of arfrighting Saul and his army, the Lord suggests the
fear and awe of God, he durst not kill him.

2. He trusted in God for deliverance another way then to put hands on the
Prince, as Psalm. 112. 7. A good man is not afraid of evil tidings, his heart is
fixed trusting in the Lord. This is the fixedness of faith, opposite to fear
and unbelief, when another man would tremble, being compassed with three
thousand instruments of death, as many men, as many deaths; yet his heart is
fixed on God, both to believe and to pray. David by prayer, Be merciful to me,
O God, and by faith gets this confident disposition, and this confident
disposition brings forth acts of believing in stead of trembling, and
resolutions to praise and to sing, and give thanks. But if the question be
moved how gets David grace to believe, and grace to pray? Certainly by
influences of grace upon the occasion of the delivery: So that here acts of
praying bring forth holy dispositions to pray and to praise, as is clear, Be
merciful unto me, O God: and God both delivered him, and gives him fixedness of
heart to pray and praise, when a natural man would tremble at the sight and
fear of so many deaths. And again, a disposition and fixedness of heart brings
forth a resolution to praise and give thanks. And 2. a stirring up of himself
and his music to praise, yea and actual praising, v. 11. Be thou exalted, O
God, above the heavens, let thy glory be above all the earth. Prayer begets
heavenly dispositions to pray, and heaven^y dispositions to pray beget prayer
and faith, etc.
As the herb brings forth the seed, and the seed again brings forth the herb,
and so the herb brings forth the herb, and the seed the seed; and the apple
brings forth the tree, and the grape the vine tree; and again the tree brings
forth the apple, and the vine-tree the grape; the water is the maker of ice,
and ice is dissolved into water; and again that water is turned into ice.

Q. What shall beget a holy disposition to pray?

A. Praying begets a holy disposition to pray. When David goes up the mount of
Olives, fleeing from Absalom, he weeps and prays, Psalm. 3. and that praying
begets a fixedness to believe, and a disposition to pray, v. 6. I shall not be
afraid of ten thousand of the people, that have set themselves round about me.
Psalm. 6. he prays, Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath, have mercy on me; return
again, O Lord, deliver my soul. That prayer is heard, and the result is an
heavenly disposition to part with wicked men, 6. Depart from me ye workers of
iniquity, and a new disposition of assurance, The Lord has heard the voice of
my weeping. And assurance that God heard the man, is a new seed of praying to
him again, Psalm. 116. 3, 4, 5, 6. Psalm. 18. 3, 4, 5, 6. So Psalm. 31. after
complaints and heavenly petitions, v. 4. Pull me out of the net. Holy acts
beget holy acts, and holy dispositions beget holy dispositions.
9. Have mercy upon me, O Lord -- make thy face to shine upon thy servant, etc.
follow heavenly dispositions.

1. Of commending the seeking of God, v. 19. O bow great is thy goodness which
thou have laid up for them that fear thee. A disposition to encourage others to
seek God, v. 23. O love the Lord all ye his Saints, etc. A disposition to
encourage fainters, v. 24. Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your
heart. How shall I get praying? Praying helps to praying. How shall I get holy
dispositions? Holy dispositions beget holy dispositions? How shall I get
courage and spiritual strength? Psalm. 31. 24. Be of good courage, and he shall
strengthen your heart; that is, be strong in the Lord, and he shall make you
strong in him. So Psalm. 27. 14. Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and he
shall strengthen thy heart; wait I say on the Lord. The courage of faith is
commanded, and the argument is, God shall strengthen thy heart, and give thee
courage. As if we were the beginners of the good work: so does the Lord frame
his precepts and promises to shake us out of our laziness, that we abuse not
his grace and gracious influences to wanton idleness. So the Apostle, The Lord
so frames his precepts and promises as our actings are suitably required to his
influences.
Be strong in the faith, and courageous, and God shall strengthen your heart,
and furnish you. So the Father speaks to his child, lift at this burden, I will
lift your arms, and strengthen them to lift the burden, and to bear it.

2. They are refuted hence who say, The Lord bids us be of good courage, and he
knows courage and strength is from himself; yea, but so as you are to go about
acts of courage. He bids us pray, and he knows prayer is his own gift, and the
work of his Spirit. It Is so here; but he bids you pray, that you may pray;
believe, that you may believe. So he commands heavenly dispositions, and he
only can give them. So he commands heavenly habits, and heavenly dispositions;
but yet so as ye act. When a Physician enjoins one for such a disease, strive
to have your body and clothes to cast a good savor: does he not enjoin also
that this sick man should carry about roses, precious ointments? Would we act
more in God, and pray more, and haunt more in heaven, we should savor more of
heaven: And when men complains of deadness, it is with reflection on God; he
quickens me not, and therefore I am dead; his Son is the resurrection and the
life, and he sends no inflnences of life on me. That is the physical cause, and
the Lord is free of your sinful deadness and unsavouriness in so doing: Why?
complain of the moral faulty cause, that is, complain of your self; complain
that ye lie not among the roses; ye are not much meditating and drawing life
out of the precious promises; ye are not often in wisdoms house; ye are not
much with the King at his banquet; ye draw not near to his house of wine:
habits and heavenly dispositions grow from multiplied spiritual acts; and
spiritual acts come kindly from heavenly dispositions.

My heart is fixed.

What is the particular disposition here aimed at: For clearing of this, know a
disposition in general (of which I spoke above) is one thing, and this
disposition is another.

These three must be differenced.

1. The state.

2. The temper and constitution.

3. The disposition.

The state is to be renewed in Christ, or in nature born of the spirit, or yet
remaining and walking in the flesh, acted by the prince of the air, that rules
in the children of disobedience: the birth and state of living is neither up
nor down to the temper and constitution, which is either strong and vigorous,
or weakly and sickly; or betwixt these, the state of living or birth consists
in indivisibili; The differences of the 1 Spiritual state. 2 Of the temper 3 Of
the condition.
if the man breath and live in nature, or in Christ, being now a translated
person, he has a natural or a spiritual life: but howbeit some be born again;
some are fathers and experienced, radicated, and confirmed Christians; others
are young men strong in the faith, and both these are of a good spiritual
temper and constitution. But there are a third sort that are babes in Christ,
and though born again, yet weakly and sickly, frequent out-breakings, much
doubting, liable to strong unmortified passions, 1 John 2. 12, 13, 14. And to
be born of God is common to all the three sorts, and the essence and nature of
the new birth agrees equally and univocally to them all: all have their own
influences finished to them from Christ; but the spiritual tempers may differ,
as weak and strong, healthy or sickly, good or bad, at least less good.

But as for dispositions of the regenerate, they are qualities that go and
come, now and anon. I judge you will say the new birth and the heavenly
disposition are all one; For David was born of God, while he was under a wicked
disposition to deflour Bathsheba, to kill Vriah, to be avenged no Nabal; all
which were bad dispositions, when the new birth is the new birth and saving
work of the spirit.

And again, the spiritual disposition differs not a little from the spiritual
temper.

1. The spiritual temper is permanent; as one is a weak man until he come out
of his childhood; for so many years or months he is Infant, so long a child, so
long a youth: So one is so long a babe in Christ, and grows to be stronger in
the faith, and at length comes to be a father in Christ; but even while the
same babes age in Christ continues, and the same weakly and sickly temper and
inclination to yield to temptations; in David new born and a babe, good
dispositions may be on to pray, to praise, to commit his life to God in extreme
dangers, to make Psalms, and yet David's spiritual temper and constitution is
and may be bad and sickly; as Peter before our Saviors death is born again,
and a believer, Matthew. 16. 16, 17. and by his much ignorance and frequent
slips, as acting Satan's part in dissuading Christ from the necessary work of
redemption, his carnal confidence in himself, in saying, he should never deny
Christ, his smiting off Malchus ea^, his denial of Christ with an oath, it
appears that the spiritual temper was weak and much carnal: nor can it be
denied all that time when Peter's temper was weak; but when he gave a confession
of Christ, Matthew. 16. he was under a gracious disposition; and Peter's
continuing with Christ in his temptations did suppose a gracious dispo^^tion in
these acts of his, and the rest of the believing Disciples, Luke 22. 29, 30. 3.
The Lords Disciples are all born again ( Judas excepted) but it were hard to
say that John, the beloved Disciple, was of the same temper, before the death
of Christ, with Peter, who proved more sinfully rash in many things then John.

2. A disposition is a transient impression that may be left upon the spirit by
an occurrence of providence, which though it sometime continue long, is not
necessarily always so. Upon the supposed death of Joseph, Jacob refused to be
comforted; upon the departure of the Ark, Phineas daughter in law is disposed
to die for sorrow; which in a great part was a gracious disposition: its like
this great deliverance left a strong impression on David's spirit, and brought
out praising of God.

But to the particular: this disposition is a fixedness of resolution to
believe, What David's present disposition was.
pray, praise, having its rise from this present merciful deliverance, its
opposed to the trepidation and doubting of unbelief, which made him say
elsewhere, One day or other I shall perish by the hand of Saul; which also
says, that this was not ever David's condition; but being deserted of God, he
was under a contrary disposition: but good it were always to keep the heart
under such a fixedness. Ah, but we are up and down, out and in, as touching
stedfastness and unmoveableness in the work of the Lord; the Galatians did run
well a while; the balasting of saving grace is most necessary: it was a sad
word, 2 Timothy 1. 15. This thou know, that all they which are in Asia are
turned away from me. John 6. 66. from that time, many 2. of his disciples, 3.
(...) took them to things behind, went backward, and 4. walked no more with
him: they left both Christ and the profession of Christ. It was a sad
suspending of influences when all the Disciples forsook him and fled, Matthew.
26.

My heart is fixed, my heart is fixed. The second particular is the doubling of
the words. In this and in the following words we have diverse considerable
characters and properties of heavenly dispositions.

1. The doubling notes the heat and fervor of affection in David, as that My
God, my God, notes the heat of faith; two gripes of faith is better then one:
so says the tripling of that prayer, The doubling of words or sentences notes
certainty, 2. Addition of assurance, 3. Freeness of affection.
O my Father, O my Father, remove this cup, Matthew. 26. There is fire in the
desire Psalm 57. 1. Be merciful to me, O God, be merciful to me: and twice in
this Psalm, v. 5. Be thou exalted, O God, etc. and again v. 11. Be thou
exalted, O God, Psalm 46. that is doubled, the Lord of hosts is with us, v. 7,
11. for his mercy endures for ever, is repeated twenty six times in one Psalm.

1. In sinners (in Christ it could not be) it notes a sort of distrusting of
the Spirit; they will not believe the heart at the first word: Not unto us, O
Lord; that is not enough, the heart is ready to steal the Lord's glory;
therefore he adds, not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory: therefore
the doubling of it speaks the certainty, Genesis 41. 32.

2. It notes that we are to make an eik to our assurance; my heart is fixed, O
God; therefore two witnesses are better then one, he says it over again, my
heart is fixed; for we shall deny that any such heavenly disposition was in the
hour of temptation, and say all is but false work; in so doing he blows the
coal when he finds it smoking, and blows twice, and strikes the iron again and
again when he finds it hot. So he awakes up tongue and voice, music and harp,
gift and grace, to praise the Lord; as when he finds his heart in a praising
disposition, he desires an eik of all creatures in heaven and earth, Psalm 103.
all the Angels, all his hosts, all his works in all places of his dominion to
join with his soul to bless the Lord, v. 20, 21, 22.

3. It notes a fierceness and a strong flaming of the affection, and a sort of
violence of assenting to the influences of grace which brought on that holy
disposition; which teaches us when holy dispositions offer a divine violence
to the soul to join our violence to his violence: we will run, that is our
violence; Draw me, that is his violence. Psalm 119. 32. I will run the way of
thy commandments, and press my self to willing and hot obedience if thou shall,
or when thou shall, enlarge my heart.

2. To this purpose we are to meet his actings of love, Cant. 1. 4. The King
brought me into his chambers, with extolling and praising his love: we will be
glad and rejoice in thee; we will remember thy love more then wine; the upright
love thee.

3. It Is fit to make an eike to the holiness of influences which the Lord
offer^ to us.
Let us intend and enlarge the acting of our heart to him. Christ puts in his
hand by the hole of the door, which was a strong inward stirring of the Spirit
of Jesus; and the Spouse meets this with bended and mighty acts of loving
obedience. As

1. My bowels were moved for him. For whom? for him, my Beloved, who did stand
and knock, while his head was full of dew, and his locks (wet) with the drops
of the night, v. 2.

2. I rose up to open to my Beloved, and my hands dropped with myrrh, and my
fingers with sweet smelling myrrh upon the handles of the lock. Here are both
repentance in rising to open, whereas she excused and shifted the business
before, and sense of the savouriness and heavenly feeling as of a sweet smell
of myrrh, joy, sense of joy and delight in obedience to him.

4. There is a formal holy violence offered to him, the Angel Christ wrestles
with Jacob, which is a sort of fighting and opposing his strength to Jacobs
strength, and he opposes trying and tempting reason to Jacob, Let me go, for
its dawning; and Jacob opposes his violence on the contrary, I will not let
thee go until thou bless me. And the Beloved is wrestling to win away, after
long absence and much painful seeking, Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3. but the Spouse offers
violence on the contrary with all her strength, I held him, and would not let
him go, until I brought him to my mothers house, and unto the chambers of her
that conceived me.

5. Its sit to meet a thirst of the Lords Spirit in a flowing of feeling with a
thirst of faith; when Christ says to Thomas, John 20. 27. Reach hither thy
finger, and behold my hand; and reach hither thy hand and thrust it into my
side; this was a great condescension of Christ in bestowing on him a flowing of
feeling; and Thomas answers it with a strong act of the application of faith,
My Lord, and my God.

6. When strong convictions come upon the spirit we are to yield our hearty
assent to him. Matthew. 27. 54. the Centurion and the watchers of Christ seeing
the earthquake and other wonders from heaven, say, (...) Luke 23. 47. (...)
true, certainly, undoubtedly this was the Son of God: this was a righteous man:
but ah, he calls and we answer not; we love to be wrought on as stones and
blocks, and could wish to be carried sleeping to heaven in Christ's bosom.

2. We often suffer the heart to cool and obey not the Spirit in his heavenly
disposition, and let the fire die out, and the furnace cool.

3. It were good if we did not counter-work heavenly dispositions by refusing
and shifting Cant. 5. 3. of God, and the actings of his Spirit, Cant. 5. 2.
open to me; nay, (says the Spouse) how can I open?

The third particular is, that David speaks this prayer-ways to God: there
may be so heavenly a disposition upon the child of God, as he dare lay it
before God in point of sincerity, that it is not rotten. David prayer-ways lays
before God the fervor of his desire of God, Psalm 42. 1. As the heart pants
after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God. Psalm 63. 1. My
soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee. Psalm 73. 25. Whom have I
in heaven but thee? Psalm 119. 103. How sweet are thy words unto my mouth! v.
97. O how love I thy law. Psalm 139. 17. How precious are thy thoughts to me.
And the Church says, Isa. 26. 8. Yea, in the way of thy judgments we have
waited for thee, O Lord, the desire of our soul is to thy name. Jer. 15. 16.
Thy words were found, and I did eat them, and thy word was unto me the joy and
rejoicing of my heart; for I am called by thy name, O Lord God of hosts.

Q. We may speak to God, and profess in prayer the sincerity of our heart to
God, and the causes why.
1. May we not lay out rotten and unclean hearts before God?

A. No doubt the pained man may lay out his boils before the Physician: and
confession of sins and of the evil of our ways make way to making of a new
creation in us, Psalm 51. 5, 10.

Q. To what end should we speak to God of the sincerity of heavenly
dispositions and fixedness of heart?

A. 1. Because neither David nor any of the Saints can order their own hearts
under heavenly dispositions, therefore the telling of this to God is a seeking
help from him to improve these dispositions. Peter cannot make use of the glory
of Christ's transfiguration which he saw, except grace help (in a manner) glory,
and the Lord enable Peter to make the right use of it, as he does 2 Pet. 1. 16,
17. and not as he does Mark 9. 5, 6, 7. It Is hard to guide well grace and glory
so long as sin dwells in us.
The Spouse banqueting with Christ in his garden, eating honey and the
honeycomb, is in greater danger to miscarry, and turn sleepy and carnally
secure, as it fell out Cant. 1. 2, 3. then when she wants his presence Cant. 3.
1, 2, 3. Its not easy to guide a new heart, or to guide and use well the
heaven of a fixed heart and such heavenly disposition at the Kings banquet of
wine, when he gives the hidden manna and the white stone; when Christ's banner
over you is love, and his left hand under the head, and the right embracing
you, there is then, if ever, need to pray; and Christ is our precedent in this
when he was transfigured, and in that heaven, so as he seemed to be beyond
praying, in a state of praising, yet he prays Luke 9. 29. and then there is
need of watching; yea, a believer is to pray, in a good sense, to be delivered
from the evil of our prayers, and from the sinful abusing of spiritual acts of
a renewed heart from the evil of the flowings of free grace and heavenly
dispositions, so to speak, and therefore should we tremble for fear that our
sinful abuse of the impressions of the Spirit and heavenly dispositions move
not the Lord to hide his face from his own shinings of grace, and darken his
own Sun, and overcloud his noonday beams, and rays of light and love; and who
knows that God may mar his own feast, and remove the table before the believer
eat, because he was sinfully wanton at the sight of dainties, and prayed not
humbly that Christ would bless his coming down to his garden, and his
banqueting with his Spouse. Psalm 141. David prays for his own prayers: its a
great art to carry equally the running over cup of consolation, or to guide the
comforts of the Spirit: when the man is high, the head is giddy. Psalm 77. 6,
7. I will offer in his tabernacle sacrifices of praise, I will sing, yea I will
sing praises to the Lord: this has been a warmly condition of his spirit,
therefore he follows it with prayer, v. 7. Hear, O Lord, when I cry with my
voice. The body being warm and sweating, there is need to take heed that cold
get not into the heart.

2. To tell the Lord of our fixedness of heart is a sort of in aging of him to
perfect his own new building, and to send rain and summer warmness on his own
sowing, and to perfect what he has begun; and its a secret praying that God
would make an eik to his own work, that he would give influences of grace, and
would be pleased to milk out holy actings, willing and doing out of holy
dispositions. Psalm 119. The Lords giving of grace lays bands on him to give
more grace and to add new influences to old.
35. Make me to go in the path of thy precepts, for therein do I delight. If
the Lord give freely of grace a disposition to delight in his precepts, he will
also give grace to walk in his paths: he that made the plant, creates the tree
and the fruit; he who made the vine-tree, makes the Summer-sun to nourish it.
v. 159. Consider how I love thy precepts; quicken me, O Lord, according to thy
loving kindness. The Lord who gives the life of love, and a warmly disposition
of heart to the precepts of God, must also give more quickening to that life: he
that brings the sown corn to a blade, brings it to an ear of corn, and to be
bread: the saving work of grace is one piece, one building, foundation, walls,
and covering; its one growing tree, root, bulk and branch, one complete new
man: Does the Lord of free grace create half a new man, or rear up half a new
building? No; grace is grace is grace going on and advancing, till it be reaped
grace, and so glory.

3. He tells the Lord of his fixed heart by way of thanksgiving and praise, as
Psalm 131. Lord, my heart is not haughty: he lays before the Lord the depth of
the mercy of heavenly dispositions, and of a fixed and prepared heart, though
he was at the mouth and entry of death; the cave was like to be his burial
place, being chased for his life into it, yet he tells the Lord he feared no
evil in the valley of death.

Hence 1. Try the disposition of the heart, see what hearts ye can bring out
before the Lord; its true, the repenting thief could not, as Hezekiah, say,
Lord, I have walked before thee with a perfect heart; or as Paul 2 Timothy 4. 7,
8. I have fought the good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith; yet the crown is laid for love, and such as love his appearance, though
all cannot wind up to be such fighting soldiers as Paul was: What a heart the
repenting thief, and what an heart Hezekiah brought out before the Lord in his
dying.
the repenting thiefs flock was small, his race short, yet what he wanted of
inherent grace that Hezekiah and Paul had, he had it of free righteousness, and
Christ crucified was the gloriation of both. David brings not out his fixed
heart in his extreme danger, as building his peace on it; the influence of
works on justification and peace is not causative, no more then the poor bride
can say she has put a debt upon the bridegroom to love her with marriage love
because she wears his golden chains, his bracelets and jewels; its the
bridegrooms comeliness that he puts upon her: nor can roses and lillies say, our
Creator is our debtor, owes us love because we are subjects bearing his
colors, smell, virtue, and beauty of the Creator: What would the rose be if
the Creator should take all from it he gave to it? We know such a rock to be
covered with water, therefore its full sea; here is smoke, therefore here is
fire: And ah! what a heart in death can the unrenewed man bring forth before
the Lord? except he say, Lord, I was never in Christ; Lord, I never wept for
sin; Lord, I never did a good work for Christ, but all for my self; Lord, I
prophesied in thy name, but I was never born again, but hated all those that
were born again.

2. How strongly may the believer argue who has any heavenly fixedness of
heart, or any thing of Christ in him? Its a sort of holy obligation (with
reverence) that he shall bring forth to acting all his own holy dispositions;
it speaks an engaging of holy unchangeableness, that he shall perfect the good
work he has begun; but be not ye lazy, and do not ye sleep, and say, God shall
do of all his grace; that is a strong argument that the man who habitually uses
such logic has nothing to do with Christ: Ah, the Spirit will do whether I
will or not; and in the mean time thou live a sensual beast; know that thou
but foments lies of the holy Ghost. Jude puts these two together, v. 19.
sensual, not having the Spirit: and before, v. 8. Likewise all these filthy
dreamers defile the flesh: dreaming and filthiness are conjoined. Men dream the
influences of grace shall go along with their dispositions for good, and they
are but natural dispositions at the best; and the Lord never said he would
perfect nature, and finish works of nature that are begun in swinish dreamers:
woeful secure dreaming destroys external professors; men will not awake, neither
are they afraid of that condition, but a trembling professor is the surest and
safest professor.

-- Verse 7. I will sing and give praise.
V. 8. Awake my glory, awake psaltery.
The fourth point in the text tells us what this fixedness of heart produced in
David, I will sing; so we are led to the rest of the characters and properties
of the heavenly disposition of fixedness, for it brought forth holy actings, as
singing of praise, and awaking of his gift and grace, which flow from holy
dispositions: hence the second property of holy dispositions.

1. 2. Property of holy dispositions
Once grace brings forth another, and so holy dispositions holy actings; faith
and trusting in God brings forth claiming of God as the man's own. Psalm 16. 1.
In thee do I put my trust: Hence v. 2. O my soul, thou have said unto the Lord,
Thou art my Lord. The disposition of believing brings forth speaking; Psalm
116. 10. I believed, therefore I spoke.

2. A disposition of loving God brings forth praying; Psalm 18. 1. I will love
thee, O Lord, my strength. 3. I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be
praised. Hannah, Jonah, Hezekiah, David the afflicted soul, Psalm 102.
graciously sad and heavy, pray and call on God in that case.

3. The disposition of felt mercy brings forth praises; Psalm. 30. 5. O Lord,
thou have brought up my soul from the grave -- v. 3. Hence that, Sing unto the
Lord, O ye Saints of his, and give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness.

4. David's joyful disposition to glory in the Lord brings forth his dancing
before the Ark with all his might, and his constancy therein to be yet more
vile before the Lord, what ever Michol said to the contrary; Dispositions
spiritual are seeds of holy actings.
and this is most suitable to the nature of heavenly dispositions: motion comes
kindly from the wheels, when they are oyled; the heavenly dispositions oils
and anoints the soul, and renders the powers more active, as they anointed
wrestlers of old to make them more nimble and active in wrestling.

2. The very intention and apointment of God speaks so much: God has ordained
heavenly dispositions for heavenly actings as he has appointed the plant to be
a tree, the seed to be growing corn and bread; the Lord sends a praying
disposition on David, as a seed of praying; and a praising disposition that he
must rise at midnight and praise, Psalm 119. 62. and prevent the dawning and
the night-watches to cry and pray, v. 147, 148. And an hoping disposition on
Job, that when he is dead bones lying in a bed, he must profess his persuasion
to see his living Redeemer stand the last man on the earth, and desires his
words were printed in a book, and graven with a pen of iron and lead in the
rock for ever, Job 19. 24, 25, 26, 27. And dispositions on Elihu to plead for
the Lords Sovereignty, so as if he should hold his tongue, he should give up
the ghost, his belly should burst like new wine-bottles, Job 32. 19. And Job
must plead for God, and for his own integrity, that he was not an hypocrite, as
his friends slanderously said, his disposition pressing him, so as he says,
Job 13. 19. Who is he that will plead with me? for now if I hold my tongue,
Zeal brings forth holy actings.
I shall give up the ghost. And the Lord gives such a disposition of zeal for
God to Moses, though he was a man of a meek disposition, that he breaks the two
Tables of stone containing the written law, when he heard of the peoples
worshipping of the golden calfe; and such a heavenly self-denying disposition
to prophecy on Jacob that in his testament he curses his two sons Simeon and
Levi, for their unjust anger against the Sichemites; and there is such an
impression of zeal, and a fever against Idolatry on Paul's spirit at Athens,
Acts 17. that he must dispute against their false gods. Nor are we to think
that holy dispositions are but as sails to the ship, and wings to the bird,
Heavenly dispositions are real helps to holy actings.
which add no strength to the ship or bird: for they are such principles as
do actively render the soul able for works of grace; and in nothing do we
fail more then in not striking on the flint to bring out fire. We improve not
heavenly dispositions, as the Prophet complains, Isa. 64. 7. There is none
that stirs up himself to take hold on thee.

Qu. But to act when the soul is under an indisposition, is as if the bird
should fly without wings?

Answ. Properties of heavenly dispositions: to act under indispositions.
If we speak of the renewed ones that are in Christ, when dispositions heavenly
seem to be a fire quenched out, and turned to cold ashes, we are to stir up and
awake the habit of grace, and act thereby; for the instinct and nature of the
new man has in it virtually gracious acts, and we are to improve the habit of
grace.

2. When one disposition is smothered with the downcasting of unbelief; yet is
there an half of a contrary spiritual disposition alive, working contrary to
unbelief, by reason whereof David chides his own soul, Psalm. 42. 5. Why art
thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in
God, I shall yet praise him for the help of his countenance. Whether David's
soul pleads against David's soul by the habit of grace, or by an heavenly
disposition, or by both, it says something to this, that all dispositions
spiritual are never so removed, but there is a seed of God which may be wakened
up.

2. When the disposition is smoared with heaviness, there is another
counterworking heavenly disposition, Psalm. 119. 28. A disposition
counter-working a disposition.
My soul melts for heaviness. Then there has been some disposition of
deadness on, yet behold a disposition to pray counterworking that disposition,
Strengthen me according to thy word. v. 81. My soul faints for thy salvation.
Fainting speaks some weakness, yet there is a disposition to hope, which
counter-acts fainting, But I hope in thy word. v. 83. I am become like a bottle
in the smoke; which is some disposition to deadness on the spirit; but see the
counter-working disposition, but I do not forget thy statutes.

3. The Spirit in a heavenly disposition at length prevails.
As the Spirit at length in the renewed prevails over the flesh, Romans 7. 23,
24. so the gracious disposition is victorious over, and has the better of the
sinful disposition: So whatsoever was David's doubting disposition at another
time, or now, when he is forced to flee to the cave, and part with his few
Soldiers, his faith and believing disposition prevails over his fears and
doubting, as is clear v. 1. My soul trusts in thee. 3. He shall send from
heaven and save me. 7. My heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise. Else
could a slain man buried in the cave sing and give praise? And let this be
considered as the third property and character of heavenly dispositions. 3.
Property.


Hence under indispositions we would do as those who would be over the water,
if one foord be too deep, try another, and try every foord; there is an
indisposition to believe, there may be a spiritual disposition to pray beside
it set to praying; there is a deadness that hinders praying, that the Church
cannot speak, What we are to do under dispositions spiritual.
Psalm. 77. 4. yet there is in the Church a disposition to praise in the same
Psalm, v. 14. Thou art the God that do wonders, thou have declared thy
strength among the people. 15. Thou have with thine arm redeemed thy people the
sons of Jacob and Joseph. Then set about praising; there is nothing left but
the habit of grace, dispositions, motions, experiences are all gone; turn over
the promises, and act upon the habit, and blow upon the live coal, and
strengthen that which remains: when one instrument is broken, the tradesman
makes use of another.

2. Though sinful dispositions for a while and the flesh have the better, wait
on the Lord, and trust to his strength, and act, the heavenly flamings of God
at length shall prevail. The Spouse is drowsy for a while, and refuses to
open, and shifts Christ of lodging, Cant. 5. 2. yet at length when Christ puts
in his hand by the hole of the door, Spiritual dispositions are at length
victorious.
faith and heavenly dispositions are victorious, and she rises and opens, and
misseth, and seeks, and prays, and becomes sick of love for him, v. 6, 7, 8.
and bursts out in a high song of extolling her beloved, v. 10, 11, 12. Job is
under much sadness of unbelief and dumpishness of spirit, Job 19. 6. Know that
God has overthrown me, and has compassed me with his net. 7. Behold I cry out
of wrong, but I am not heard; I cry aloud, but there is no judgment. Hard
words! if there be no judgment for an oppressed man crying to God, there is no
providence, no governing God who rules the world; yet v. 25. I know that my
Redeemer lives, I know I shall see him. Get any of the habit of grace and
spiritual dispositions, and act with them, and ye shall not want victorious
influences upon this ground, because greater is he that is in you, then he that
is in the world, 1 John 4. 4.

3. How to get heavenly dispositions.
Get heavenly dispositions, and God shall act upon his own work, and bring
forth all his own actings out of his own seed. Now the way to get heavenly
dispositions is 1. to be much in perusing the word and promises: David's
meditating. 2. Learning. 3. Observing, loving the testimonies of God, prove
that David was a heavenly disposed man, Psalm. 119.

2. Keep communion with God in praying, hearing, reading, conferring. He who is
much and daily among the ointments of the Apothecaries, smells shall cleave to
him whether he will or not, Luke 24. 34. John 7. 45, 46. Cant. 2. 4, 5, 6. 7.

3. Mind much, seek much the things that are above, Col. 3. 1, 2, 3.

4. Cherish the Spirit, obey him, grieve him not, work with him, be
instrumental under his breathings, follow sweetly and willingly his drawings.
See Ephesians. 4. 29, 30. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19, 20. Cant. 3. 4. Cant. 5. 8, 9, 10. 11,
12, etc.

5. Beware of frequent smoaring divine light; deal tenderly with the light of
the natural conscience, and tenderly with convictions and warnings; if so, you
can hardly want divine dispositions and suitable influences, 1 Samuel 24. 4, 5,
6. My heart is fixed, I will sing. Awake up my glory. See, the touch of the
Spirit in his heavenly dispositions set afloat the tongue. 2. The Psaltery and
Harp. 3. David. 4. David's heart to sing and praise: and though they were all
sleeping, they are all awakened out of their sleep: As a great high Springtide
set all the ships afloat though there were many hundreds of them. And this is
the Fourth Character of heavenly dispositions, in which these are considerable.

1. Such as are the dispositions, such are the acts in their nature. 2. Strong
and mighty dispositions have strong and mighty actings. 3. Smaller actings of
dispositions waken up the soul to strong actings.
Sinful dispositions to the love of the world, to vainglory, empty pleasures,
bring forth sinful actings; the thorn-tree brings forth a thorn-tree, and the
thistle-seed a thistle; it is clear in Cain, the Pharisees: So gracious
dispositions produce acts of love, faith, hope, godly sorrow, works of
righteousness and mercy. As wine-grapes grow out of the vinetree, and the Lord
fits influences of grace for such dispositions: like sowing, like harvest; and
here also men gather not figs of thistles: the vessel smells of good or sour
wine: Some must foam out their own shame, and all wonder at the gracious words
that proceed out of Christ's mouth. For dispositions in Christ were strong
habits of grace; and the running-over fountain and fullness of the holy Ghost,
the savor of the breath of the anointing, and the dispositions that accompany
the fullness of the holy Ghost, is a very garden and a heaven: and here there
is some truth in that, Cant. 2. 13. The vines with the tender grapes give a
good smell. Cant. 5. 8, 9, 10, 11. Psalm. 45. 1, 2, 3, 4.

2. Psalm. 119. 136. Rivers of tears run down mine eyes, because they keep not
thy Law. Some fountains that are less have small streams and ebb-brooks;
Heavenly dispositions connaturally cast out acts suitable.
other large fountains have mighty rivers and floods issuing from them: we may
judge what a fountain both of habits and dispositions are within, where there
comes out joy unspeakable and full of glory, leaping for joy, fullness of
assurance, like a ship with full sails and full wind. As fullness of love and
of all spiritual dispositions of tenderness must be in the bowels and heart of
Christ, who sends out acts of enduring pain, blood, shame, death, horror of
wrath, and the curse of a revenging God for sin. The love of Christ needs no
exhortation to acts of love; nor is there need of earnest request and
entreaties to the fire to cast out heat, and the Sun to give light: need you
exhort an extreme pined-away sick man to be pained and weak, or request the
Sun to shine? How mighty and strong are the acts of longing and languishing
after Christ that flow from love-sicknesse? and then what suitable influences
of grace must go along with these actings? what pullings of strength to pluck
up mighty cedars? what an influence of love in God to bear up all things, and
so to bear mountains, to bear torments, to bear new deaths? O what a mighty
arm of omnipotent grace, Col. 1. 11. Strengthened with all might according to
his glorious power, unto all patience and long-suffering with joyfulness. A
power above all that we think or ask. Thoughts even of men can go far, and far
in apprehending of power and strength, ever that can remove out of their place
as many millions of mountains and whole earths, as Angels and men can write on
the outmost and highest heavens, East, West, South, and North. Suppose they
were all paper, and double, and treble, and multiply them again to millions of
millions of heavens, and writ new figures of signs and excellencies on them;
yet the power of grace, furnishing influences, is above these acts of thinking
and counting; and yet the short thinkings of unbelief are at this, can he help
me to spit at fame, glory, riches, and a whole earth of pleasures? know ye his
strength and his mighty pulls that have translated many?

3. When the disposition of grace is on, a small object brings forth suitable
actings; Christ lets out one cast of his eye upon Peter, and he went out and
wept bitterly; a small shake of the tree brings down ripe apples, they fall of
their own accord: a gentle quiet gale of wind will cause a light swift vessel
to make twice as much way as a huge ship: a rent in the garment of a deadly
enemy seems a small transgression; but to David it has a mighty smiting of
heart. We are afraid to come under the pull of Christ's arm, as if it were pain
and death to be loved and translated by Christ, John 5. 40. Isa. 30. 10. Jer.
51. 9. Ezekiel. 24. 13. Some will not be cured, and are averse from being drawn to
come to Christ and be saved; and an hating of means is a virtual hating of the
sweet and special alluring attractions of grace; and we value actings of grace
at so low a rate, as if we could do all our alone by pure nature.

I my self will awake early.

What, 5. Prop.
was David sleeping, or his tongue sleeping, or his harp sleeping? yea even
when the heart is prepared and strongly fixed to praise, there is some
sleepiness on the man. I insist not on this, that none run so swiftly for the
price and wager of glory, but a cramp or a stitch may come on, so as they need
a spur, and turn dull and slow.

But the 5th Property of a heavenly disposition is to cause the man reflect
upon himself and his own sleepiness. Heavenly dispositions cause a man act
upon himself.
8 -- my self will awake early. What if tongue and voice awake? what if harp
and the gift of music wake, if man's heart sleep? 1. Grace has an immanent
working, and a reflect acting on it self and the man's own heart as well as a
transient, and a direct acting: the vessel of honor, or the chosen man purges
himself, 2 Timothy 2. 21. And every man that has this hope purifies himself, even
as he also is pure. 1 John 3. 3. Jude exhorts so v. 10. Building up your selves
on your most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost. Some think if the holy
Ghost act, pray, sigh, believe, praise in them, they need to do nothing, the
holy Ghost prays in me, and in my stead. Nay but Jude wills you to edify your
self: the actings and influences of the holy Ghost are not given to this end,
that we should sleep, and sport, and play. 21. Keep your selves in the love of
God. Will not the love of God keep the man in the love of God? Shall not Christ
in you the hope of glory keep Christ himself in you? nay what need were there
then of watching? Watch thou in all things, 1 Timothy 4. 16. Take heed to thy self
and to thy doctrine. Then may one take heed to reading, and not take heed to
himself, Acts 20. 28. Paul to the Elders of Ephesus, Take heed to your selves
and to the flock. They shall not heedfully watch over the flock, who do not
carefully watch over themselves. Is this right, that men should doubt of the
influences of God, and fear that God forgets himself and his own begun work of
grace, and never fear their own lazy back-drawing? Why but we should be on our
wings, and waken our selves, and crow more loudly. It Is a gracious complaint,
Cant. 1. 6. My mothers children were angry with me, they made me the keeper of
the vineyards, but mine own vineyard have I not kept. Ask hourly what your own
heart does, how the husbandry at home thrives. The Spirit of the Lord was in
Jehoshaphat without doubt; but 2 Chro. 20. 3. When he heard of the host coming
against him, he feared, and set himself to seek the Lord. The Spirit of the
Lord came upon Jahaziel, but he was not idle, but prophesied and stirred up
himself to believe. Often it is said the Spirit of the Lord came upon Sampson,
yet so as Sampson roused up himself, and shook himself, Judge. 16. 20.
Spirit-raptures, wherein we lie from duties, are but delusions: all the
visions, raptures, and high actings of the Spirit set men on to duties of
hearing, prophesying, praying. See all the Scripture for this.

CHAP. XI.
Of the fourth disposition, which is Love-sickness. 1. Parts of the Text. 2.
The meeting of Believers for godly conference is owned by the Lord. 3. Smaller
means of grace, and short visits of Christ, are to be highly esteemed,
especially when flowings are neglected. 4. Sense is prouder then Faith. 5.
Withdrawings of Christ teach us profitably. 6. Except we find Christ, we cannot
pray as becomes. 7. The real withdrawings of Christ make no real change in
moral or legal interests; four great interests stand entire and safe under
desertion. 8. What lovesickness is. 9. The wisdom of God in suspended
influences of grace. 10. The wisdom of Sovereignty therein, and how
dependence on the Lords guiding is best. 11. How we may deprecate the pain of
love-sickness, and pray for comforts and influences, and 12. may contradict the
Lords permissive will. 13. We are to have peace as touching the satisfied for
guilt of sin, when we have not peace with the inherent blot. 14. How
Love-sickness rightly pains. 15. Pain of Love-sickness. 16. Sense above faith.
17. The Idol of moderation. 18. Of spirtual savouriness.

Cant. 5. v. 8. I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved,
that ye tell him that I am sick of love. 9. What is thy beloved more then
another beloved, O thou fairest among women? what is thy beloved more then
another beloved, that thou do so charge us?
THe charge by an oath is given to the daughters of Jerusalem, of whom the Holy
Ghost, Cant. 2. 7. Cant. 1. 5. If you find my beloved in the Ordinances by
hearing or prayer, tell him: what shall you tell him? a passionate kind of
speech, that I am sick of love. Greek, wounded with love, pained for the want
of Christ in his comfortable presence, who was now to her feeling absent. Here
is a comfortable dialogue between the Spouse and her companions, who are less
experienced with the way of Christ then she; there was a more comfortable
dialogue betwixt Christ and the Spouse, but she slighted that, and therefore
now is glad to speak with the servant when the Master is away.

In the words there is the Spouses speech, containing a charge, that the
daughters of Jerusalem carry a message to Christ.

2. The particular message, I am sick of love.

3. The daughters of Jerusalem their reply and carnal disposition is noted,
bewraying their ignorance of Christ, and finding fault with vehemence of words
doubled, What is thy beloved? what is thy beloved more then another beloved?

2. Yet a feeling of some savouriness in the Spouse in her love-sickness, O
thou fairest among women!

The Church did formerly of late confer with Christ, and refused to open to him
when he was knocking and showring down influences of grace; now she is glad to
confer,

1. With the smiting watchmen, where she found little of Christ.

2. Next with private Christians in Assemblies. This is a mean of the Lords
showring down of influences in the public and domestic, or less public
meetings of his Saints; for ordinances of all sorts that are appointed of
Christ, they drop down savoury and seasonable dews. The Lord writes in his book
the savoury conferences of such as fear the Lords name, Mal. 3. 16. and three
things follow.

1. The Lord owns such as are his.

2. His forbearance though there be faults in their service.

3. His making known to his the difference betwixt such as serve God, and such
as serve him not: and Zech. 8. the inhabitants of one City encourage the
inhabitants of another; and the fruits of it is 1. The meeting of believers for
godly conference is owned by the Lord.
Praying. 2. Owning the Saints. And they take hold of the skirt of a Jew; and
both say Christians meeting for prayer and conference want not God, who raines
down impressions of grace upon them as his people, especially when they warm
one another; as many coals in one heap make a great fire. Nor is the acting of
the Spirit tied only to the public Ministry; the Saints take to their houses
clusters of wine-grapes, which they feed upon at home. Let the Saints meet, and
by conference and prayer draw down new influences of the spirit, Jude 20. Isa.
2. 1, 2, 3. Jer. 50. 4, 5. Col. 3. 16. Heb. 3. 13. and 10. 24. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.

Tell him. Why did not you your self tell him, when he knocked, and spoke, and
said, Open to me my Sister. She might have told him her self, Small means of
grace, and short visits of Christ, are to be highly esteemed at some time,
especially when larger love-flowings have been neglected.
when he lovingly knocked, and sweetly and comfortably spoke, open to me, my
Sister: now she is glad, wanting his own presence, to send salutation to absent
Christ, Ah, I cannot see him my self! but tell him, I charge you, that I am
sick of love. What speaks such a dispensation, but 1. Saints be content to sail
with an half-wind, or a side-wind, and improve it well. Husbandmen in the midst
of a long continued drought, bless the Lord for twelve hours of Summer^rain,
that brings a comfortable reviving. A sight of the Lord in the wilderness of
Judah, Psalm. 63. when David cannot have Sanctuary-presence, is good. A prayer
of the prisoner, or a groan, or Psalm. 102. 19, 20. tears by the rivers of
Babylon, and a praying eye and heart looking out at Daniels window, when all
those are banished and exiled captives far from the Temple, are sweet: and we
are to make use of these lesser dispensations: though the well be ebb in a
drought, yet here the water is sweet. Fret not because it is (as Bernard says)
rara hora, brevis mora. His visits are but half-visits and short, yet they
speak whole, rich, and everlasting mercy; little gold may arle a rich man's
inheritance. Ab, I have seen showers of influences in plenty, and now feeds me
with far off and half-bedewings; did ye use them well when ye had them?

2. It says that sense is prouder then faith. Sense complains the breathings
of the spirit are not strong, Sense is prouder then faith.
the wind is not fair: But faith is not content to look through the keyhole,
and see the half of his face, and is humbler: Ah, may I but hear of him, or
kiss his feet and weep over them, touch but the skirts or the hem of the
garments of Christ, and it is good. Some must be feasted with the King, taken
into his house of wine, embraced in his arms, or there is no peace, but
fretting: But here faith was commended as great, Matthew. 15. who would be well
pleased with the crumbs that fall from the table; nay it was humble, and hungry,
and yet lively faith, Luke 15. 18, 19. Father; I have sinned, I am no more
worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy hired servants.

3. Is not spiritual hunger humble? David had a great room in the house, and
was a type of the chief cornerston, and prepared in abundance for the building
of the house, and was a man according to Gods heart; but when he was banished,
ah, how happy was a door keeper in his house, Psalm. 84. 3. The room of a
sparrow or a swallownest beside his Altar is a Kings inheritance, v. 4. Blessed
are they that dwell in thy house, they will be still praising thee, says
David, at such a time.

Qu. But are not love-dispositions now under desertion and the Lords
withdrawing, the stronger and more powerful in Christ?

1. The very withdrawing of Christ, as touching his end, is mercy, and requires
strong missing: Christ's hard pulling to be away, suites strong holding on our
part, I will not let thee go; for there is strength and bones in love to
resist a contrary.

2. Dispositions heavenly in the affections, make a huge deal of noise and
tumult, as here there is pathetick charging to tell Christ her love-sickness
under desertion; and it is good when desires for Christ under absence are
strongest: that faith humbly and submissively waiting on in hope, is stronger
also when it makes least noise and tumult; as the deepest river without
rumbling runs quietly down the banks. But

1. Learn to husband well love feasts of nearer and sweeter presence; believe
for the time to come; pray for the time to come; hear and observe for the time
to come; lay up love in store for times of spiritual scarcity: Ah, we waste
dispensations of the love of Christ, and swallow them over without humble
believing, and godly watching and fear, and waste prodigally feasts of love: we
then learn to grow in experimental knowledge, in solidity of believing; sense
is wanton, and feeds it self, and we neglect faith and the growth thereof.

2. Withdrawings of Christ teach to try whether we have abused his
manifestations formerly.
Be submissive when influences are withdrawn; examine whether they have been
abused, and if you might not have made five ten, and had a richer stock if you
had been spiritually diligent; and if so, mourn for the abuse of these showers;
for Paul tells that the Lords working in us to will and to do, which is
showring of influences of grace, is the great teaching argument that lays bands
on us to will and to do: and the Lords teaching David wisdom in the hidden
part, Psalm. 51. 6. which was holy breathings and inspirations of the spirit, to
make the letter of the word effectual, is an argument of heightning his sin of
adultery and murder; and he lays bonds on his own heart to improve
influences, Psalm. 119. 33 Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes, and I
shall keep it to the end. Certainly the Lords sending the first and latter rain
on his garden of red wine, and watering it every moment, must lay bands on his
people to be plants of righteousness; and his blowing with the North and South
wind of his spirit upon his garden requires the duty of the flowing of the
spices and their thriving; and the spirit of the Fathers purging calls for
bringing forth of more fruit; and the spirits leading requires that we should
willingly follow such a guide; and the Spirits teaching requires that we be
docile and spiritual; and the Spirits convincing, that we bow and yield to his
conviction. The Spouse then under the withdrawing of Christ, v. 6. is here put
to see her poverty, and speak by others her case to Christ, when she neglected
to speak to Christ when he was nearer to her then now.

If you find him, tell him.

There is then some spiritual capacity, without which the daughters of
Jerusalem cannot pray, Except we find Christ, we cannot pray.
and that is, if they find him not, Christ cannot be prayed unto, and if the
faith meet not with him as Immanuel. Paul says well, Romans 10. 13. How shall
they call on him in whom they have not believed?

2. Can one call on God, or cry to him Abba Father, who never laid hold on him
as a Father? Know then that unbelief is an iron door betwixt Christ and many
who pray, or rather cry to him: for many pray to an unknown Christ. Could Jacob
wrestle with an unfound and farre-off God, Hos. 12. 4. He wept, and made
supplication to him: he found him in Bethel, and there he spoke with us. Can
any knock, and neither find the right door, nor 2. know the King and the Lord
of the house within? ye never went into the Kings chamber, nor to his house of
wine, and how can ye speak to him?

Obj. 1. You lay much weight on the quality and worth of prayer, when you say
we must first find Christ, before we can pray to him?

Answ. Praying must have some spiritual quality in it, since it^s a work of the
Spirit: for speaking of words is not praying. The legion of devils in the
possessed man, Mat. 8. spoke words, and made a suit to Christ, but they prayed
not: David's enemies cry, even to the Lord, Psalm. 18. 41. but pray not. How to
judge of the nature of praying.
The damned in hell speak words to God, but they blaspheme and quarrel with
holy justice, but pray not.

2. The lowest discernable breathing out of a sigh through the holy Ghost, has
as well the nature of prayer, as an eighth part of an ounce of gold partaketh
of the nature of gold no less then a mountain of gold.

3. The groaning of the Spirit of the Lord is in every praying, and therefore
let none be beguiled, who are destitute of the Spirit; for no man can say that
Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12. 3. It Is not want of
charity, nor unnecessary discouraging of any, to say a thistle is a thistle,
and not a rose, a thorn is a thorn, and not a vine-tree. Where the spirit of
grace joins no influences of saving grace, can you call that speaking to God a
work of saving grace? It were good men were not permitted to treasure up pieces
of brass and copper, and suffered to dream they have a treasure of gold.

4. Sense of deadness in prayer oftener speaks the life of prayer; and a godly
sense of blindness is a large measure of seeing, John 9. 41.

Obj. 2. Then must we not pray till me first find Christ?

Answ. Not so neither; for praying fitteth for praying: Stirring of the birth
brings and increases lively heat; Praying fitteth for praying.
better mar praying, especially if you dare not dissemble, then restrain or
omit praying.

Obj. 3. I cry, and I am not heard.

Answ. The godly man may move the same doubt, Job 19. 7. Psalm. 22. 2.

2. There are degrees of discerning an answer.
There are degrees of discerning an answer, and degrees of the Lords opening to
the knocking of faith; it were sit yet Magus prayed more, Acts 8. 22. and that
he went about means with more sense of deadness.

If you find my beloved.

The Spouses withdrawing beloved, v. 6. is her beloved. Christ is a seeking,
The real withdrawings of Christ make no change of legal interests in Christ.
yet, says she, he is my beloved. The interest in Christ is moral, or (in a
manner) legal; the Father made him ours by free gift, the withdrawing of
influences. 2. The shining and smiling. 3. the suspending of influences needful
for the act of feeling is physical and real. The Lords outward dispensations
make no change of 1. Covenant Interest, the Covenant is eternal; the Lords
absence from his own is not eternal. Nor is there change in relation of
interest; no distance of miles, no frowning or hiding of his face makes Christ
leave off to be a husband, a head, a ransom-payer, a Father.

2. Faith lays hold on right and on propriety. When the heirs possession is
suspended, and an outlawed heir, here is an heir; the use of the breathings
and influences is removed; the mill stands and grindeth not, the ground is
plowed; yet the same Lord and heritor of mill and land remains. Hang not your
rights, writs, and charters upon your sense, or upon the ups and downs of the
Lords dispensation; nor does a believers heaven stand in the particular
out-lettings of the Lords free grace, or his withdrawings, though the more of
the Spirit any has, the more does their spiritual life and being depend upon
the operations of grace; as all things that grow and have life depend upon the
influences of the Sun and Heaven, trees; and plants, The life of grace depends
on influences of grace.
and flowers, and herbs, suffer a sort of death by the departure of the Sun
from them, and they begin to live again when in the spring the Sun moves near
toward them; so are the outgoings and gracious influences of the Sun of
righteousness to the renewed ones, in whom is the life of Christ: for Christ
keeps in being his own life, and cannot but keep it in being and operation,
Romans 8. 10. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin: but the
spirit is life because of righteousness. v. 11. But if the Spirit of him that
raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you; he that raised up Christ from the
dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies by the Spirit that dwells in you.
See both the life of grace in this life is kept in being by the Spirit; and the
life of the body, which shall be made spiritual in the resurrection, is
restored again by the Spirit of Christ.

2. Deserted souls under the Lords withdrawing would neither cast away their
confidence, nor be too securely comforted when the Lord withdrawes (to speak to
the former) the right in Christ is entire.

2. Christ's right and acts in redeem^ng of us stand entire when we are deserted.
The bargain of Redemption. Christ's act of buying, and dying, and paying a
price for his own.

3. The care of the trust and charge of redeemed souls committed to Christ.

4. The act of Atonement made by Christ, accepted by God, by which justice and
the law stands fully satisfied, are all whole and untouched under desertion:
For our obedience is neither in whole nor in part, neither in toto nor in tanto
any penny of satisfaction to the law, but paid upon another account. All these
4. stand entire, and the land and shore sail not, and move not, though the
green Sailer judges so, because he and the vessel are in sail.

2. Nor is it safe to sleep, and lie and be secure, when the Spirit in his
flowings withdraws. It speaks some outcast, or out-lawry; and the child should
not be quiet, when he knows the Father is displeased: nor would Ministers heal
them with all Gospel and honey, and lay aside all Law; for what cures help the
disease and the first fever, the same are good some way for the second fever
and recidivation.

I am sick of love.

As Cant. 2. Greek, wounded of love, the Hebrew word imports weakness, Judge.
16. 11. If they bind me with ropes, I shall be weak as another man.

Hence it implies languishing pain, What love-sickness implies.
through want of the feeling and enjoying of Christ's presence, Cant. 2. 5.
Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3. Cant. 3. 6, 8.

2. It implies sickness and weakening of the person, as in Amnons love to his
sister Tamar, 2 Samuel 13. 1, 2, 3, 4. It comes from apprehended wrath, and the
curse of the Law, Psalm. 90. 8. Psalm. 32. 3, 4. Psalm. 6. 1. Psalm. 38. 1, 2, 3,
4, etc. Dan. 9. 11. Romans 7. 24. Isa. 33. 24. Job 13. 24. Psalm. 77. 7, 8. Psalm.
88. Psalm. 80. 7, 19.

3. It imports the feeling of that pain. The second act of sickness, Matthew. 9.
12. as to the pain through want of feeling and enjoying God. 1. Two things are
here.

1. The want of the life, though the believer be still loved, chosen, redeemed,
translated from death to life; but the Lord, who can put a check-lock and an
iron bar on all our comforts, withdrawes, and lets the Spouse swoon, and stays
not the heart with flagons of wine and apples, that is, with the effectual
applying of the word of promise, by which the heart is established or
strengthened, Jam. 5. 8. Romans 1. 11. and by which we stay and rest our selves
upon the word the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 32. 6, 7, 8. Acts 14. 21, 22.

2. There is here suspending and the want of the consolations of the Spirit the
comforter, which is the other want. Now the Lord has holy and necessary
reasons why he suspends influences to the feeling and knowledge of these rich
comforts.

1. His holy Sovereignty. Now sovereignty never acts separated from infinite
wisdom, when it is most abstract from the object; as in making a world, or not
creating any thing; in ordaining of the same lump, some to be vessels of
honor, and some of dishonor. There is a reason of the object, but never a
reason concludent, or so objectively binding and limiting the Lord; but the
contradicent, to wit, no created world, no ordaining of some to honor and some
to dishonor, should be as good. As we see in thousands and millions of
possible worlds of other men, other Angels, and other creatures which he can
create.

2. Infinite wisdom judges it fitter that old Jacob weep and be not comforted
that Joseph be sold into Egypt, then be a rejoicing free Patriarch at home;
that the man Christ lie before him with tears and strong cries, then that it be
otherwise.

3. To infinite wisdom it is clear, that a creature and a sinful creature
cannot so measure out sense and comfort as the only wise God; as it is not so
fit all the members of the house, servants, children, strangers should be their
own stewards of the bread, wine, and dainties of the house, spices, ointments,
myrrh, aloes, and cassia, as that there should be one wise and faithful
servant over the family, that all and every one hand over head run not to the
heap. Withdrawing of comforts come from wise and holy reasons in God.
Therefore is the Lord to be adored in his wisdom, as much in withdrawing
influences of sense and comforts, as in bestowing them: Judge if all the
fatherless infants, and pupils, and minors of the earth were left to be fathers
and tutors to themselves, how would it be with their inheritances? If all the
sick on earth were their own only Physicians, whether old or young, should it
not be ill with the health of many? Some cures are worse then the diseases:
there is a sickly and unnatural thirst on some persons sick of a fever; The
wisdom of Gods appointing that we depend on him.
it would be ill with them if either abundance of wine, or a fountain of water
were at their bedside: the choice and elective faculty of the sick man's mind,
is often as sick as his body. Let me not then be my own comforter, but let the
Spirit of infinite wisdom enjoy his own office, and be the other comforter,
whom the Father sends in Christ's name.

Q. May not such as are sick of love pray for sense and comfort?

Answ. How we may pray for comforts.
There are some relative mercies that the Saints may pray for; and if they be
denied, praise and bless the Lord for the denial of them; because we often
pray for sense, comfort, full assurance, not as they are acts of gracious
duties (which were good) but as they are taking and alluring rewards and wages
before we do our work.

Q. How we may deprecate languishing pain in love-sickness.
2. Is not languishing pain in love-sickness after Christ an evil to be prayed
against?

Answ. No question we may pray against swooning and fainting of the life of
God, and may pray for the contrary comfort, but with submission to infinite
wisdom. Some diseases are so diseases, as some fluxes and some fevers, as they
are also medicinal helps of health, and healthy and lively diseases. The Lord,
and nature under the Lord, gives excellent medicine: who knows but Hezekiah's
running botch, which was otherwise deadly, was a natural help to his fifteen
years health and life which followed? Look not on the holy Lord when he is
acting as a Physician, as if he were acting as a Judge. Want with good will the
sense and comfort that the Lord would have you want in his infinite wisdom.

Obj. But whatever we pray for, we are to pray for it with submission, and a
reserve to holy sovereignty, as well as we are to pray for sense and comfort?

Answ. It is a doubt and a great one, whether with alike submission we are to
pray for that which is bonum honestum, and a gracious duty, as we are to pray
for bonum jucundum, that which is pleasant, or the reward of a duty: Hence the
question, Whether it be lawful to pray for saving influences of grace, and how
far, whether conditionally or absolutely? Hence the first Assertion.

Assert. 1. Whatever the clay suites from the potter, it should be suited,

1. With that general submission, or rather subjection, which all creatures as
creatures owe to their Creator: How we may pray for gracious influences.
Hence the clay cannot contradict the potter, though but a sinful man, and say,
why have thou made me thus? Romans 9. 20.

2. A negative submission is far required, as the contrary, to wit, a chiding
and contending with the Lord in any case, whether he give or deny influences,
is unlawful; it is sin to reply on the contrary to judge or misjudge God, v. 20.
(...)
Isa. 45. 9. Woe to him that strives with his Maker. See the word in the Hebrew.

Assert. 2. It is most lawful to seek influences of grace for duties at all
times.

1. The Saints do pray for influences, Psalm 119. 25. Quicken me according to
thy word. 27. Make me understand the way of thy precepts. 29. Grant me thy law
graciously. 33. Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes. 35. Make me to go
in the paths of thy commandments. Cant. 1. 4. Draw me.

2. We may pray that God would withdraw his influences from sinful actings,
Psalm 119. 29. Remove from me the way of lying. Psalm 141. 4. Incline not my
heart to any evil thing, to practice wicked works with men that work iniquity.
Matthew. 6. 13. Lead us not into temptation.

3. Influences to will and to do are promised in the covenant of grace, Deuteronomy.
30. 6. Jer. 32. 39, 40. Ezekiel. 36. 27. and so does Christ promise the Spirit and
his teaching, John 14. 26. convincing, John 16. 7. guiding, v. 13. Then we may
suit from God what he promises to give.

4. Our will is to be conform to the holy will of God in his law, Romans 12. 2. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. 1 Pet. 2. 5. Then may we seek necessary helps for these actings.

5. Christ commends praying for the Spirit, Luke 11. 13. Matthew. 6. 9. John 16.
23. and James is clear in it, Jam. 16. 6. and therefore he commands also
praying for the saving operations of the Spirit and his influences.

Assert. A twofold contradicting of the Lords will.
3. There is a twofold contradicting of the Lords will. One by way of
replying, striving and challenging the Lord as doing unequally. This is
condemned in the cited places, Romans 9. 10. Isa. 45. 9. There is another humble
contradicting in the woman of Canaan, Matthew. 15. 26, 27. In wrestling Jacob,
when the Lord says, Let me go, Genesis 32. 26. In Moses interceding, Exodus 32.
10, 11, 12. Yea when Christ commands the disciples to watch, and in order to
watching cites the Prophecy of Zechariah, c. 13. who foretold that the flock
should be scattered, and that they should sinfully forsake and deny their
Master; he also charges them to contradict that permissive will and decree of
God by which it was ordained that the Lord shall withdraw his influences from
Peter and the rest of the disciples, that their sinful weakness might appear,
therefore suppose the Lord say it is my decree and will to deny influences of
grace to us in such particular actings, it is the Lords mind that we should
humbly contradict that holy will and desire, and pray in the contrary: nor can
the Lord command the reasonable creature to will, or not to desire saving
grace; for so the holy Lord should command sin: yea to desire and pray for
grace is our duty commanded in the Law, and by Christ, Matthew. 6. 12, 13. Luke
11. 13. even when we pray that the Lords name may be hallowed, his kingdom
come, and his will to be done by us and others cheerfully, Matthew. 6. 9, 10, 11,
12. we desire to be kept from sin, and to have grace in all things to obey the
Lord, though we know that he denies his saving influences to us and to many
others.

Assert. 4. With this holy contradicting of the Lord will, is conjoined an
humble submitting to the Lords denying of saving influences, without a sinful
counter-working of his holy will now revealed, or without charging folly or
unequal dealing upon the Lord. For,

1. His own grace is his own grace, and he is free of all debt and obligation
to give gracious influences to Angels or men; as also grace to use the measure
of grace given, is rather to be sought then a large measure.

2. There is in love-sicknesse for Christ a weakness of the soul, A
love-sickness from the want of Christ.
and a fainting for the want of Christ; and this may come from the apprehended
curse and anger of God for sin, which is a disease after conversion that the
child of God may be sick of. So David, Psalm. 6. 1. Lord rebuke me not in thine
anger. Psalm. 38. 2. Thine arrows stick fast in me, thine hand presses me sore.
3. There is no soundness in my flesh because of thine anger, neither is there
any rest in my bones because of my sin. 4. For mine iniquities are gone over
mine head: as a heavy burden they are too heavy for me. Psalm 90. 7. We are
consumed by thine anger, and by thy wrath we are troubled; thou have set our
iniquities before thee; our secret sins in the light of thy countenance.
Therefore that Romans 8. 14. For ye have not received the Spirit of bondage again
to fear, is all one with this, we ought not to receive it, or we have not
received the habit, but are and may be under the temptation and actual assaults
of that spirit of law-bondage. Now in this sickness in the renewed soul, this
is wrong, that the conscience goes back to its old prison, As touching pardon
we have peace with God jure and de facto, but as touching the blot and
indwelling of sin, we ought not to have peace with sin or with our selves, as
under that blot.
and comes again under the spirit of bondage: for Christ having made our peace
by the blood of atonement on the Cross, there is ground of peace with God, as
touching the Law-debt of sin; otherwise we fail against the sufficiency of the
paid ransom: but as touching the blot of sin, we are never to have peace that
way, and so it is good that the soul is troubled that way; and that the world
is whole and needs not the Physician Christ, is the death of the world and a
worse disease.

Hence the third; it is also good that the soul is pained for the want of
righteousness; those ingredients make love-sickness a spiritual disposition for
Christ.

1. That the soul is sick and pained for the want of saving influences.

2. Ingredients of love-sickness.
It is pained with a spiritual burden; a carnal man cannot be pained with a
spiritual burden, no more then a horse or an Elephant can be sad for the want
of a reasonable soul, or a sucking child weep because he has not learning, and
the knowledge of a Philosopher.

3. Sickness is a pain and distemper through want of health, and argues a
constitution of life, and this sickness is a fainting and weakness of the soul
for the want of Christ, he being the health and life of the soul; and that
speaks an excellent soul-constitution, that the soul lives, breathes, enjoys
its best being of life, and the most vigorous and strong life in Christ, and
when Christ is away in his sweetest operations of felt love and intimate
embracings, flamings and out-lettings of free grace, the soul is deadly sick,
and there is no cool for this fever but the shining and lovely speaking of the
Physician Christ: love has killed some because they could not enjoy the party
loved. Elies daughter in Law not only is sick, but died because the glory was
departed.

4. The fits of this Ague are strongest when the Lord is away; cold paineth
most in the absence of heat; sickness in the want of ease and life: hence
seeking him whom the soul loves in all means, and seeking him with care, Saw ye
him (O watchmen) whom my soul loves? So there is panting, as is in sickmen, or
chased wild beasts dying a thirst; the flesh and the sen^ble soul crying out
for the living God. Psalm 42. 1, 2. My soul longs, yea even faints for the
courts of the Lord. In this love-sickness fainting and swooning are near to
dying: the moisture turned into the drouth of Summer: leanness of body speaks
sickness; My heart and my flesh cry out for the living God; when the pain of
the stone, and childbirth pain put some to shouting the sickness must be
vehement; shouting and crying out of pain, O pain of pains, I want Jesus
Christ, my soul is away; this causes spiritual distempers and doubts; this
sickness keeps the sick person waking; there is no sleep, there is no
rejoicing: The woman cannot sleep, but rises early in the morning, and weeps
on Angels and men, John 20. 1, 12, 13. Ah, they have taken away my Lord, and I
know not where they have laid him. It was a branch of this sickness in the man
Christ, though of a far other kind, feeling God to forsake him, he with tears
and strong cries bemoans himself to God.

It Is a wicked disposition 1. to think we shall do well enough without
influences, and the breathing of the Spirit. David is in the mist, and misses
the way when he prays in his blindness, Lord, lead me; and misses life and some
degrees of it, when he prays so often for quickening: the Artificer that wants
his tools and instruments can work none.

2. The pain of love-sickness.
When a soul can live contentedly and joyfully and wants God, and lives fat and
rejoycingly 60. or 70. years without Christ, and never missed Christ; how few
know this sickness? Especially 1. The pain of hunger and thirst which is
destructive to life; the fruitful earths disease and pain in a manner is want
of rain and long drouth; as Psalm. 63. 2. Psalm. 14. 4, 6. Lam. 2. 20. this
plague brings forth overwhelming of spirit, stretching out of the hands when
one is a dying and cannot speak, the eating of young children; the hind for
drouth and want of grass calves in the field, and forsakes her young ones, Jer.
14. 5. Few are put to shifts of all sorts for want of Christ. 2. Few know the
sorrow and sadness of an absent husband: every wind is blessed in the wifes
thought that blows where he is; every ship that is thought to carry him home is
a ship of desire; the earth is loved that he walks on; the house blessed that
he lodges in; and when the husband is dead, what mourning does the wife of
youth make over his grave? Ah, few know heartbreaking and sorrow because
Christ is gone; The righting of the complaining of the damned.
this were a holy moral happiness in the damned in hell, if their sorrow for
being banished and punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of his power, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. were for the want of
the saving presence of Christ, which makes holy as well as happy. 3. Impatiency
of desire is paining, how long shall the Lord hide his face? when shall I see
him? come, even so come; there is much paining impatience in that prayer for
the marriage day in such as long for his appearance, Cant. 8. 14. Make haste my
beloved, and be thou like to a Roe, or a young Heart upon the mountains of
spices. So as the song began with desire of Christ's first coming to kiss her
with the kisses of his mouth, in Christ's more bright appearance in the Gospel,
preached by himself in the flesh, and his Servants the Apostles, Pastors, and
Teachers; so it ends with a strong desire of his second coming, that he would
come with speed, as the young hearts, which flee for succor to the mountains
where spices grow, Cant. 2. 17. as there are diverse words expressing this
impatient desire, every hour seeming a day, and every day a year to
love-sickness, longing for that day the dawning whereof is the eternal
celebrating of the solemn marriage betwixt Christ and the Bride the Lambs wife
without parting for ever, Rev. 22. 12. Behold I come quickly. 17. And the
Spirit and the Bride say, Come. And let him that hears, say, Come. And v. 20.
Surely I come quickly, Amen: even so come, Lord Jesus. These five comes speak
loves desire upon the Bridegrooms side, and upon the Brides side in
love-sickness.

1. How sweet is it when pain it self makes prayers to Christ? and want speaks
to riches, death and deadness to him who is the resurrection and the life.

2. Yet sense alone speaking often mistakes and chides, yea, impatient sense,
mistaking the wise and holy dispensation of God; for Christ's absence is wise,
but not unkind and void of love; he does not ever absent himself because he is
angry, or hates such from whom he withdraws his influences, Says above sense.
but to increase hunger and lively desire.

And 3. Holy missing of Christ.

2. Careful seeking, Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. Cant. 5. 6, 7, 8.

And 3. Strong desires of love-sickness are more solid and edifying graces then
feeling, sense, and comfort of his presence as we use them; and these are often
stronger when Christ is absent then present, and so the influences of the
spirit that accompany missing of Christ.

2. Seeking of him.

3. And impatient longing for him are more useful then influences that
accompanies sense. See how lively they are in David when he wants
Sanctuary-presence, Psalm. 42. 1, 2. Psalm. 63. 1, 2. Psalm. 84. 1, 2, 3, 4. In
the Spouse, Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. Cant. 5. 6, 7, 8. compared with v. 10, 11, 12,
13, etc. Sense never brings forth such a love-song, so highly extolling Christ,
as faith under absence.

3. Strong believing and resting upon the promises when the Lord hides himself
under love-sickness and apprehended wrath, fetch sweeter influences then sense
of presence: as may be clear in the godly, who 1. move questions, yet so as
love and faith incline most to the edifying conclusion, and to faiths side
rather then to the judgment of sense. Faith with stronger influences then
ordinary controlleth sense under desertions.
Psalm 71. 7. Will the Lord cast off for ever? faith under a cloud believes he
will not cast off for ever: and will he be favorable no more? 8. Is his mercy
clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? 9. Has God forgotton
to be gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender mercies? In these questions
the flesh and unbelieving sense have a great hand; the question in sense
includes this, Is the Lord the Lord? and pure faith never moves such a question
as that, but the aim and scope of faith is to beat down such questions; and the
sense of faith in these is, the Lord has not cast off for ever; the Lord will
not leave off to be gracious for ever and ever; his mercy is not clean gone;
his promise and covenant is everlasting, and fails not.

2. Under the sense of wrath, faith eying the nature of God revealed in his
word corrects sense. Lam. 3. 8. When I cry and shout he shuts out my
prayers. Ah, no, v. 25. The Lord is good to them that wait for him, to the soul
that seeks him: that is a harbor in place of a rock. 2. He was unto me as a
Bear lying in wait, and as a Lion in secret places. Ah, not so. v. 24. The Lord
is my portion, says my soul, therefore I will hope in him. These are strong
and edifying influences of grace under absence.

9. What is thy beloved more then another beloved? This is not the speech of
enemies, for they discern her to be the fairest among women, and see heavenly
beauty and grace in the Spouse.

2. They are daughters of Jerusalem, professors, that seek the beloved with
her, c. 6. v. 1. yet they are less spiritual, and more carnal then the Spouse.

For 1. They perceive her in a passion, and they meet her with a sort of
passion, What is your Beloved? whereof is your Christ made of more then ours?
either enemies or believers, in so far as they are carnal or apt to mistake a
spiritual state; so must the world say of Noah, who was just in his time, The
Idol of moderation is an enemy to true zeal.
sure the world thought him too just; he will build an Ark, and he will have all
the world to be drowned but himself and his house. Hence Jeroboams word, 1
Kings 12. 28. It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem. Why? and the Lord
commanded them; does God command too much? is the Lord too strict? So Satan,
Genesis 3. 1. yea, has God said ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?
that is a strict Lawgiver who lays bands on your eating of fruit which he
has created to be eaten. The believing disciples, Matthew. 15. 23. Send her away
(...), she cries and troubles us with her prayers. Were there not some godly
who might think Daniel needed not cry his prayers out at his window? he might
pray and not blow a trumpet? There is an Idol called discretion and moderation,
pray, profess Christ leisurely, we think to be saved and come to heaven as well
as you. O what precise lips were David's! I will not name Baal with my lips,
Psalm. 16. 4. It Is too great Morosity for Moses to say to a King Not a hoof
shall bide in Egypt. What matter of cowes, if the Church of God be brought out
of the house of bondage? what if there were not one Israelites four-footed
beast breathing on earth, so the Church live?

And 1. Men that find fault with too much zeal, and cry, moderation, look to
that; walk (...), Ephesians. 5. 15. strictly, precisely, numbering all your
footsteps; then shall we be called heady, precise, fools. Nay, walk as wise
men, not as fools.

2. Moderate professors stint themselves, this I Will do, and no more; it shall do
my business. Ah, speak of influences of grace, the ebbing and flowing of
spirits, the breathings of Christ, the Kings chambers, the house of wine; these
are imaginations: preach fundamentals, faith and repentance, what should more?
such truths as are beyond fundamentals are not necessary, obliterate them out
of the Scripture; that eight souls were saved in the Ark sure it is not
fundamental, many are saved who know it not; yet if any say its not necessary
necessitate praecepti, he is like a man who pulls off the covering off the
house, and says, what aileth you? I touch not any foundation-stone of the
house; I hurt not the building.

What is thy Beloved?

All professors see not with one measure of light: the Spouse is a wonder to
many professors not so acquainted with Christ; some are led to heaven through
much love-sickness and pain, and others with stronger influences of grace upon
the soul then others; it rebukes such as are censorious and uncharitable to
others, because they have not thronged through the same needle-eye with
themselves.

Ah! 1. How many cast we out that Christ receives in? Romans 14. 3. Luke 7. 39.

2. We look to what men have not, and not to what they have, and consider not
what God may give them, Matthew. 19. 30.

3. Some see no good in Christ, no good in John Baptist, Luke 15. 1. Matthew. 11.
18, 19. Can any good come out of Nazareth? no prophet arises from Galilee.

4. We pity the sick though our enemy, and extend not compassion to the sinner
erring, though the son of the same father.

5. We see the spot in the face, the crook in the nose, but our own unseen
boyls we overlook.

6. Spiritual savouriness active and passive.
We see not the secret good in some, and their sincerity which is dear to
Christ, Luke 21. 3. Luke 7. 44, 45, 46. God has so ordered, that the
infirmities of some of his children are ever visible in the streets.

O fairest among women.

Here the character of this heavenly disposition of love-sickness, which is
called savouriness, the Spouse savours of the Spirit, and speaks like one sick
of love, and the daughters of Jerusalem smell this savor, and look on her as
the fairest among women. There is a savouriness of grace passive, whereby words
and behavior cast a smell whether the children of God will or not; and an
active savouriness by which those who have any thing of Christ can smell the
savouriness of grace in others.

Now a word of this savouriness as it is in the head, Savouriness in Christ, in
his Spouse, in single members.
in Christ, the cause and fountain. 2. In the Spouse. 3. In the single members.
The sweet smell of the fountain, suppose a well of rose water, is the cause of
the sweet smell that is in the streams.

1. There is dwelling in him all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. John 1. 44.
we beheld his glory as the glory of the only begotten Son of the Father.

2. What a savoury lump and mass of grace must the man Christ be, who is the
public channel of grace? through him the savoury waters of the Sanctuary, and
the river of joy does water all the indwellings of the City of God, Psalm 46.

3. Christ, God-man, is anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows,
Psalm 45. 7. without measure, John 3. 34. The fullness of anointing is upon him,
Isa. 61. 1. Luke 4. 18. His name is as a precious ointment poured out, Cant. 1.
3. And the savor of the knowledge of his name in the preached Gospel is sweet,
and savours out heaven and life eternal, 2 Cor. 2. 14, 15, 16. and the fullness
of grace in him, John 1. 16. out of which we all receive, John 1. 16. makes him
more, nor savoury, and natural men wonder at the gracious words that proceed
out of his mouth, Luke 4. 22. and enemies see some of the anointing and shining
of God in him; never man spoke like him, never man did like him, never man
lived like him, never man died like him: would we come nearer to Christ by
faith and love, we should smell more of Christ. O what a savor has his birth,
his life, his precious ointments, his death, his resurrection? he is all
savoury, Cant. 1. 3. Psalm. 45. 7, 8. Cant. 5. 13. his lips, like lillies,
dropping sweet smelling myrrh. 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. His word a sweet savor of
life; His countenance is as Lebanon, Cant. 5. 15. O what perfume is in his
death, the smell of Lebanon is delicious.

2. There is much savouriness in the Spouse, Cant. 3. 6. to the wondering of
many. Who is this that comes out of the wilderness like pillars of smoke,
perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the Merchants? Cant.
4. 10. the smell of her ointments is better then all spices. v. 11. The smell
of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon. Now Lebanon was a field where
grew odoriferous trees, roses, sweet smelling spices, and herbs in abundance.

3. Every particular professor has received sweet smelling anointing, 1 John
2. 20, 27. of the Spirit; and they that are after the Spirit savor of the
Spirit, Romans 8. 5.

1. Use. If the savouriness of love-sickness be in any, they shall use means
for it; bring the soul under the influences of the sun of righteousness, for
the sunbeams draw out sweet savours, and the actings of love-sickness out of
the habit of grace; such smell as myrrh and roses, and odoriferous herbs and
flowers, and they have within, such comes out; ye cannot draw out sweet smells
out of a dead carrion; some plague themselves with the Gospel, and the Gospel
plagued them: Satan's influences for hating of Christ, loathing of the Gospel,
persecuting the godly, are mighty.

2. To thrust the heart by acts of love upon Christ increases love; to lay him
between the breast as a bundle of myrrh all the night, begets more
love-sickness for him.

3. Much praying changes the countenance of Christ and of his; Jude 20.
building up your selves in the most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost. Much
praying mnst be much edifying of our selves in the faith.

4. Know the stink and corrupt breath of many professors, rotten words, corrupt
sects speak disgracefully of Christ, as of the man crucified at Jerusalem, of
the holy Scriptures at of Ink-forms; their throat is an open sepulcher. O the
dead bones and the rotten smell in the heart which come out in words and
actions.

CHAP. XII.
What may be done in the using of means, hearing the word by us, to fetch
influences, if there be any truth in that, Deus facienti quod in se est non
negat gratiam. God denies not grace to the man who does what he can. Whether
does God command all use of means external or internal, in whole and part? 2.
Whether grace be above. 1. The desire. 2. The disposition. 3. The prayer. 4.
The purchase of nature. 3. No sufficient universal grace is due to Brasilians.
4. Martinez de Ripalda abuses many Scriptures to prove sufficient grace. 5. No
Gospel-promise, no Gospel-threatning in Scripture concerning universal grace.
6. Sinners are now interdited heirs. 7. The connection betwixt natural and
supernatural acting in conversion. 8. Of the natural providence of God Creator,
and the supernatural and Redemptory providence of God by which the chosen are
converted.

1. Whether God commands all use of means external and internal, and every part
thereof.
It Is a question whether the Lord commands the only mere bulk of the duty, to
use means, and hear and read, whether we act in faith or no; certain it is not
the full and plenary intent, sense or purpose of any command of God to enjoin
acts that are maimed, lame, hypocritical.

1. It Is against the perfection of the command; The Law of the Lord is perfect,
converting the soul, Psalm 19. 7. Not only extensively, but also intensively,
and arrests the whole man, and all the thoughts and powers of the soul, and the
principles of the moral actions.

2. The Lord forbids rather, and rebukes such an use of means, as includes
sinful defects in the principles, manner and end. Psalm. 50. 16. But unto the
wicked God says, What have thou to do to declare my statutes? Isa. 1. 12. Who
required this thing at your hand, that ye should tread in my Courts in the way
and manner that you do. So Christ rebukes the Pharisees praying and almsgiving
with the blowing of a trumpet in so doing, and shows them they have no reward
for such works, Matthew. 6. 1, 2, 3. therefore there was no reward promised to
such works.

3. Hypocrites, as touching the manner of their doing, do counterwork their own
work as touching the substance of the duty commanded: vainglory,
hypocrisie-like poison, and death in the pot pollutes the action as Ink and
mire vitiates a cup of wine being mixed therewith; better it is comparative to
do something of the bulk of the duty, then wholly to omit it, and do nothing
less or more.

2. Ass. Both all the good action and every part of it, totae actio and totum
actionis falls under the command of God: he who commands us to hear in faith,
and read with believing, commands us also to walk and journey to the place of
hearing, and commands us to incline our bodily ears to give attention of mind
to the word, as we hear a moral oration without wandering of heart, though in
these ( hear the word of God, consider, hear diligently, incline your ears, lay
to your heart what is spoken) God lays the obligation of a divine command on
us, to the physical act of walking to the place of liberal hearing, as to the
substance of the act, and a tie to far more, even to do the act with all the
spiritual circumstances; he who commands his servant to go to such a City
forty miles distant, he commands him to go ten miles of these forty miles
also, and while the servant is moving ten miles toward the City, he gives
obedience in part pro tanto, and in so far to his masters command: hence it
must follow, that giving of alms in the substance of the act, is nearer in
nature to the giving of alms in a spiritual Gospel-way, then not giving of alms
at all, but a closing of both bowels and hand to the starving and famishing of
the poor.

To the other question it may be enquired, 1. Whether grace be above the desire
of nature?

Answ. Nature has no power of getting supernatural gifts by the strength of
nature; but nature has a capacity, not such an actual desire, which supposes
use of reason and discourse to supernatural happiness; Nature and Grace.
a capacity is an inclination to that which may perfect it; so man intends or
enclines toward God, and is unquiet while he find him: but it is to abuse all
Grammar to call a natural capacity an inbred appetite, and natural desire.

2. Whether grace be above the disposition of nature?
Whether grace be above the disposition of nature?

Answ. This receives the same answer almost: the habit of sin by which a man is
dead in sin, Ephesians. 2. cannot consist with a sweet disposition of nature to get
grace; the same wine cannot be both sweet and sour; nor is there any sweetness
in sour and bitter or unrenewed nature.

3. Whether grace be above natures prayers?
Whether the grace of God be above the impetration, purchase and prayers of
nature?

Answ. The Scripture teaches us of no prayers by natures help, but by the
Spirit interceeding in the Saints, Romans 8. nor of any purchase of grace that
nature can make; grace prevenes nature, but nature prevenes not grace.

4. Whether grace be above natures merit?
Whether grace be above natures merit?

Answ. It were strange to say that nature can of condignity merit grace, so as
God should be unjust if he deny grace to nature: where is that written? and
does not this make man and nature to make God a debtor? as for the other merit
of congruity, if grace were not above this merit, we should teach that nature
may so far act as to make God a debtor to the man's acting, as God should fail
against decency, good manners, courtesy, if he should deny saving grace to
Seneca, Cicero, Aristides, and such.

5. Whether God gives supernatural grace as due to natures acting?
Whether to the man, who prepares himself by the works of nature to receive
grace, any supernatural grace is necessarily due?

Martinez de Ripaldo says, this opinion cannot be defended, sine scrupulo,
without some scruple of conscience: but an opinion may be true, and yet by some
weak conscience cannot be defended without some scruple of conscience; but it
is the bottom and marrow of Pelagianism, as any versed in the doctrine of
grace, and in Augustine, Hieronymus, Fulgentius, their works know.

6. Whether the Lord does infallibly tie grace to works done by the strength of
nature, not as to a disposition or merit, Whether the Lord tieth grace to works
of nature, though not as by merit, yet by condition.
but as to a condition by the law of God (says Martinez) or by the law of
grace, and covenant of grace, and pur-chase of the merit of Christ (as Alvarez.
lib. Respons. ascribes to diverse Schoolmen and Jesuits) which condition is
conjoined with the gift of helping grace. This has no shadow of ground in
Scripture.

6. Whether Gabr. Vasquez. 1. part. disp. 91. q. 1. 14. does upon good grounds
defend that rotten opinion of the Schoolmen? Whether God does confer such an
help of grace, which is necessarium ad fidem and justificationem necessary and
sufficient to says and justification, to the man who does what he can, ex
viribus gratiae naturalis, by the help of natural grace? this also destroys it
self.

Q. Whether God gives, or whether God denies not sufficient grace to the man
who does what he can.
7. Whether or not God uses to give sufficient grace, or not to deny
sufficient grace, and other more abundant helps of grace, to him who does what
he can by the strength of grace intrinsecally supernatural?

This is not better then the rest; for it supposes that free will disposes
absolutely of, and determines this grace, and earns by its endeavors faith and
justification; no man ever yet did what he can.

Q. 8. Whether Martinez de Ripalda, Tom. 1. de Ente supernaturali lib. 1. disp.
20. sect. 3. sect. 4. sect. 5. says right, that God does so ever confer helps
of supernatural grace to all men, as he stands and knocks at the door, Rev. 3.
20. and its in men's free will, be they Jews, Christians, or Pagans, to open and
believe; but grace, ex lege providentiae supernaturalis est necessaria, is
necessary to excite and stir up free will. Hence these Assertions.

1. Assert. This rotten principle of the Schoolmen, that to the man in nature
who does what he can, either by the strength of nature, or by the strength of
some grace which is sufficient, universal, and common to all men, but yet
determines not the will, but leaves it to its own indifferency to will or nill,
God denies not saving grace for conversion, is not to be holden.

1. Because the places which speak of our natural inability prove the contrary.

Now if the natural man cannot know nor discern the things of God, The natural
wicked inability of all to know, believe and love Christ, proves that there is
no such thing as sufficient grace given to Brasilians and Indians, those of
China.
but judges them foolishness 1 Cor. 2. 13, 14. If his wisdom be enmity
against God, and is neither subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be,
Romans 8. 7. If there be a necessity of the Spirit of revelation, that the eyes
of the understanding being enlightened he may know what is the hope of his
calling, and what is the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints,
and what is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward who believe, Ephesians.
1. 17, 18, 19, 20. And if as touching the will and the affections, he be wicked
in all the frame and imaginations of the heart, Genesis 6. 5. Genesis 8, 21. Jer. 17.
9. Ezech. 36. 26. Ezech. 11. 19, 20. and that he cannot believe or come to
Christ mediatly or immediately except it were given him of God, John 6. 65.
Phil. 1. 29. 1. Act. 5. 31. 2 Timothy 2. 25. and except the Father draw him, Joh.
6. 44, 45. Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. Tit. 3. 3.

Why should the Masters of general grace tell us that Christ enlightens every
man that comes in the world? Joh. 1. 9. for men enlightened by Christ the true
light, are no more blind then seeing men, and because this is actual
illumination, give us a place of Scripture where it is said, that all the
Brasilians, Indians, and other Gentiles are actually illuminated by Christ the
true light even from the womb. If from the womb, Martinez de Ripalda Jesuita
tom. 1. de ente supernaturali l. 1. disp. 20. sect. 4. number. 17. p 180. Dum deum
ante ostium audio recolo illud Apoc. 3. Ecce ego sto ad ostium and pulso, si
quis operuerit mihi januam, Introibo ad illum: and mihi persuades nunquam per
deum stare (tanquam causam moralem, inquam ego Jesuitae respondens) ut
concursus naturae in affectum virtutis salutaris non sit; ac proinde auxilia
gratiae pulsantia and excitantia voluntatem (suadendo tantum, ut Pelagius suasu
nihil virium novarum additur libero arbitrio) quibus talis concursus edendus
erat salutaris nulli conatus naturae in bonum defuisse aut deesse, alias
operante voluntate quantum ex se est, neque deus neque salus hominis
appropinquaret; si quidem ex defectu gratiae supernaturalis homo per eum
concursum, qui potuit esse salutaris, non promoveretur in salutem.

Martinez ib. sect. 7. number. 29. Gratia supernaturalis adeo frequens ut continua
providetur homini animum advertenti ad bonum honestum, ut eo auxilio juvetur ad
amorem honesti; ergo ex lege and providentia supernaturali dei semper assistit
gratia praeveniens supernaturalis homini agenni quod in se est, in amorem
honesti, adeoque frustranea esset tanta frequentia illustrationum
supernaturalium and gratiae.


when was that true Ephesians. 5. 8. Sometimes ye were darkness, but now ye are light
in the Lord? for such as are actually illuminated by Christ were never darkened:
for the actual illumination denominates men as truly as the morning light names
the air lightsome. And when did the Ephesians and other Gentiles walk in the
vanity of their minds? having the understanding darkened, being alienated from
the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the
blindness of their heart? And if Christ shall destroy in this mountain the face
of the covering cast over all people, and the vail that is spread over all
nations, Isa. 25. 7. then there is such a covering and vail over all faces: and
if people be blind in darkness, and under the power of Satan, Acts 26. 18.
until the preached Gospel open their eyes: If Christ the true light do
actually illuminate the Brasilians, Indians, Turks, those of China who never
heard the Gospel, is a question.

2. If Christ stand at the door of the heart of Brasilians, Indians, and knock,
and they have power of free will to open, as Martinez says, and the Lord every
moment knock and awaken up the will by moral swasion, or preaching of the
Gospel (the Pelagian grace) by inspiration, which adds no new strength to the
will; then is there here a market for the buying of influences of saving grace:
how comes it that never man in Brasilia, India, was ever converted to Christ,
and professed Christ? The Scripture which says, there is no name under heaven
by which men are saved, but by the name of Jesus, Act. 4. 12. is here silent;
all stories of human writers are silent.

3. The place Rev. 3. 20. is meant of the visible Church of Laodicea, v. 14. to
the Angel of the Church of the Laodiceans, write, These things says the Amen,
etc. 18. I counsel thee to buy of me fine gold tried in the fire, etc. Did ever
Christ by John or any other Apostle or Pastor write Gospel and command faith
and repentance to the Angels of the Churches of Brasilia, India, and those who
never heard any such Gospel-counsel to buy fine gold and white raiment, and
eye salve from Jesus Christ? as also the Jesuit with the same breath names this
converting and saving Gospel grace; for he cites that of John 15. The Jesuit
Ripalda cites many texts of the Gospel for universal grace to Brasilians, and
to all which were never intended by the holy Ghost.
without me ye can do nothing: and the other texts hereafter, which our Savior
clearly expones to be growing in Christ, as branches in the vine-tree, by faith
drawing life from Christ, v. 4. Abide in me, and I in you; as the branch cannot
bear fruit of it self except it abide in the vine, no more can ye except ye
abide in me. 5. I am the vine. 8. for without me (the true vine) ye can do
nothing, ye can bring forth no saving fruit. Now* the bastard-grace which the
Jesuit will have to be saving, and Christ knocking at the door is nothing, but
cogitationes and affectiones naturales honesti: and I should gladly know if
Christ's meaning, John 15. 5. Without me, ye Brasilians and Indians, and except
by faith ye abide in me, as branches in the vine-tree, you exercise no acts of
desiring or thinking on an honest object, nor can ye do what is in you to
attain to natural thoughts of the same kind. Must the Jesuit have the Apostle
to speak to the Brasilians and Indians, O ye Brasilians, work out your
salvation with fear and trembling; for it is God that works in you to will and
to do, Phil. 2. in all honest natural thoughts. And 2 Cor. 12. 6. God is in you
working all in all; that is, v. 11. All these works the same Spirit of God,
giving to you Brasilians the spirit of wisdom, the gift of healing, the gift
of working miracles, as v. 7, 8, 9, 10. And the God of peace ( Heb. 13. 20,
21.) make you Brasilians perfect in every good work to do his will revealed in
the Gospel, working that which is well pleasing in his sight through Jesus
Christ. If this be not abusing of Scripture, what is it? for he cites these
Scriptures. So Prove. 1. Wisdom cries without, she utters her voice in the
streets. Christ, Suarez de gra. lib. 12. c. 32. Suarez lib. 3. de aux. c. 2.
Suarez de praedest. lib. 2. c. 6, 7, and 18. Cumel. 1, 2, 4. 109. az. 3. disp.
1. Bellar. to. 3. l. 2. de gra. and lib. arb. c. 6. and seque. Greg. de Val. 1,
2. disp. 8, 9. 3. puncto 4. Vasquez 1. part disp. 97. c. 5. Bonav. m. 2. d. 18.
art. 2. c. 1. Alb. Magnus in 2. d. 28. art. 1. ad 4. Si hoc fecerimus (quantum
in nobis est) deus inevitabiliter dat gratiam. Marsilius in 4. 9. 20. potest
homo interioribus dei motionibus, vel etiam excitamentis exte ioribus facere
quod in se est: quod si faciat, deus dat illi charitatem. Dominico Sotus h. 1.
de not. and gra. c. 18. ad 2. ita deus est omnibus praesentissimus ad ostium
pulsans et a se nihil omnino desit officii quin perditissimo etiam cuique opem
ferat. Stapleto. Antid. in Romans 9. Antidot. in Joan. c. 6. Curiel. l. 2.
controv. 4. number. 134. Vega. l. 13. III. Trident. c. 12. Driedo de capt. tra. 5.
c. 3. Viguerius inst c.10. 9. 4. auxilium speciale semper est paratum homini
facienti quod in se est.
the eternal wisdom of the Father, never proclaimed the wisdom of the Gospel,
which has so many Gospelpromises annexed to it, to the stupid Brasilians: read
Prove. c. 2. c. 3. c. 4. c. 8. and the manifestation that God makes to the
Gentiles, Romans 1. is a natural, not a Gospel manifestation. But I cannot stay,
see the Authors on the Margin.

3. He who loves persons and hates them e're they be born, or do good or ill,
and has mercy upon these same by softning and hardening their hearts, not
because they run, or run not, or will, or will not, but because the Lord has
mercy on whom he will: then there is no purchasing by our endeavors of the
work of conversion.

4. All Gospel-promises and all Gospel-threatnings are revealed in the Old and
New Testament as well as the Gospel it self, and the Gospel-commandment; for an
unwritten Law and Gospel binds not us. But neither in Old or New Testament is
there such a promise. The nation and the person that does such things shall be
rewarded with the blessing of the preached Gospel. Nor is there any such
threatening that the nation or person that commit such sins, and omit such
duties, shall be punished with the want of the preached Gospel for ever, and
with the want of faith and repentance: only the latter suffers an exception in
persons that sin against the holy Ghost: for of Nations that sin, and that
before they hear the Gospel, we read not. It Is true, the word of the Kingdom
for great sins may be removed, Zech. 11. 5, 6, 8, 9. v. 12, 13, 14. Amos 8. 4,
5, 6. v. 11, 12. Matthew. 21. 33, 34, 35, 41, 42, 43. Acts 13. 44, 45, 46, 47.
Rev. 2. 5. But that proves nothing, it is because the elect in that place do
fail, and there be not any chosen thereto called.

5. The Gospel-promise, or Gospel-threatning of sending or denying the Gospel
to Pagans, who act or who omit such previous performances is an unwritten
tradition. Sinners under the fall of Adam are now enterdited heirs and declared
Idiots, not worthy of the trust of grace.
Nor should the glory of conversion be due to the grace of God, but to our
well-guiding free will, and to the works of righteousness; that we had done
contrary to 2 Timothy 1. 9. Tit. 3. 3. Ephesians. 2. 4, 5. if we could procure by our
good endeavors our own conversion.

6. But so much the man fallen in sin is under the state of enterditement; as
the eldest Son of a King, who is a fool, is declared an idiot, and the
government not committed to him. In the Gospel the Lord has declared man a
simple fool, and laid the Princedome of grace and glory upon the Catholic
Tutor and chief heir Christ Jesus; yet we fools will needs be Masters and
Freemen before we have served our apprenticeships. Gladly would we be from
under the dominion of Christ and free grace, and be our own; yea even fools and
mad men take it not well to be fettered and in bands.

7. Influences of free grace, and the gracious actings of the spirit, are paid
for by the price of blood, Heb. 13. 15. Let us by him (then) offer to God the
sacrifice of praise continually, Phil. 4. 18. Heb. 13. 15, 20, 21. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
16. The budding and blooming of the branch in every act of growing, depends
upon the immediate impulsions of life, and from the sap of life that is in the
root, and the vine-tree Christ.

Assert. 2. But the habit and seed of God being within, though the
indisposition be great, yet we would act, do well.

2. Because a natural heat in literal stirring does pre-paratively work upon
the soul (though not by way of any Gospel-promise) to make it ready to receive
an influence of believing. Moses his wondering at the bushes burning, and it
was not consumed, made him draw near to see more of God, and the acting of
faith: and wondering ripened Christ's hearers for influences of believing; so
Cant. 5. 6. Moving of the bowels makes way for influences of opening to let the
Beloved in, and of praying and seeking.

2. The very noise and literal stirrings in these actings, have far-off acting
upon the dead habit to awake it up; so beating of the lump of perfume, The
connection betwixt literal acting and supernatural influences.
wakens up the smell. The blowing of the wind on the garden of delicious
flowers extracts sweet smelling: the first three or four throwings of the iron
bolt in the ship, brings not out water; but five or six causes the water to
flow out apace. The two disciples conferring, Luke 24. concerning Christ
crucified, seem cold and indifferent; yea there is much unbelief and deadness
on the Spirit, v. 21. We trusted that it should have been he which should have
restored Israel; though they say he was a Prophet mighty in word and deed
before God and all the people, v. 19. Yet their speech says their heart was
very cold concerning his office as Redeemer, and concerning his Resurrection;
but they go on in the conference, and pursue the duty, though literally, till
he begun, v. 25, 26, 27. to open the Scriptures to them, and then the heart
begins to burn with heat, v. 32. It Is considerable that the woman of Samaria's
is very literal at the beginning, and only concerning Jacobs well; yet she
going on in the conference, there comes a warmness, and a liking, and a
seeking of the water of life, and a discerning of Christ to be a Prophet; and
at length a warmness, of faith in believing him to be Christ, and a leaving of
the water-pot, and a running to the City to invite others to come to Christ.

Here it is that the first three or four steps bring not heat upon the man; but
to walk a mile brings warmness. To strike the flint oftener then once brings
out fire at length; and when there is a kindled and a fixed habit of grace, and
gracious dispositions, flamings of heavenly dispositions follow apace: because
creation is a mids to the execution of the decree of predestination to life
eternal, therefore he who in predestination to life gives his own to Christ,
John 17. 2, 6, 11, 12. v. 6. has established a new supernataral providence, or
a providence of redemption different from that providence of God Creator, which
should have been, if Adam had never sinned. Of this providence these Scriptures
are to be understood. John 5. 17. My Father works hitherto and I work. The
new supernatural providence set up by Christ the second Adam, by which the
conversion of the elect is brought to pass, and influences accordingly given.
Col. 1. 16. All things were created by him and for him. 17. He is before all
things, and in him all things consist. Hence Rev. 3. 14. He is the beginning of
the Creation of God. Col. 1. 15. Who is the image of the invisible God, the
first born of every creature. Rev. 21. 5. And he that sat upon the throne
said, Behold I make all things new. Heb. 1. 3. Upholding all things by the word
of his power.

1. As by the first fall all things fell. 2. The first Adam was the public
catholic misguiding Tutor, who marred and destroyed all; and the Creation, and
the workmanship of heaven and earth was made subject to vanity, because of man's
sin, and is now as a woman traveling in birth, crying in pain under corruption
and vanity, Romans 8. 20, 21, 22. So the second Adam coming to the throne, made
a new heaven and a new earth; and as a Midwife to the travailing woman, brings
forth the birth, the free sons of God, and carries on the work in bringing the
man Christ in the world; for the man Christ is not created and brought in the
world by God simply as Creator and Lawgiver, by the covenant of works, but by
God as now acting to redeem the world, and making a new Creation and a new
world.

3. Hence the blessing of the creature, and of the earth, which was under a
curse for man's sin, Genesis 3. 17, 18. is now from Christ, whom he has appointed
heir of all things, Heb. 1. 2. and by reason of Christ's reigning and sitting at
the helm of the world, and governing all things, all the creatures because of
this King are called to rejoice, as Psalm. 96. 11. Let the heaven rejoice, and
the earth be glad; let the Sea roar, and the fullness thereof. 12. Let the field
rejoice, and all that is therein: then shall all the trees of the wood rejoice.
Psalm 98. 8. Let the floods clap their hands, let the hills be joyful together.
See Isa. 49. 13. Isa. 65. 7. Jer. 31. 11, 12, 13.

4. And look, as when a Kings son and heir is married, all the servants and
Courtiers are clothed in Scarlet and gorgeous apparel: So when Christ is
declared Mediator, husband and head of the body the Church, the whole servants
of the creation have a new right, through Christ the heir of all, to the
liberty of the sons of God, and to be delivered from bondage. And hence the
Saints have a right through Christ to the influences of this new providence,
the chief of which are the influences of saving grace: and though there be no
promise made to the chosen, do this and ye shall be converted; yet Christ has
by his blood merited conversion, and influences for conversion to them; and as
in Christ all providence are redemptory providence, so has the Lord ordained
according to the decree of predestination and of redemption, that hearing,
coming to such a place where Acts 2. Peter preaches, where the Jailer hears
Paul, Acts 16. to the well of Jacob, where the woman confers with Christ beyond
her intention, are means of the conversion of such as are ordained to
salvation; so as providence of themselves natural, are sometimes through the
intention of God made redemptory providence for the conversion of the chosen.

3. There is no connection promissory betwixt natural or literal acting begun,
and spiritual acting and heat of the life of Christ: As these actings are
considered in themselves, they seem to be one web; but the one part of the web
is course and gross cloth, the other is silk and cloth of gold; they depend
one upon another as some providential and general means, and are intended of
God.

2. there is a coevistence betwixt them by a practice of grace, not by a
promise of grace.

3. There is an order of priority and posteriority betwixt them.

4. There is a vicinity material betwixt them; as five is a number nearer to
seven then three; and yet three, five, seven, all differ among themselves in
nature and essence: to hear is nearer to hearing in faith, then no hearing at
all, or obstinate turning away the ear; they are knit together as a piece of
institution watered (if I might so speak) with a command, and a heavenly acting
of God; for as was said before, the literal acting some way falls under a
commandm^nt: he who commands hearing in faith, commands hearing also.

4. If there be a literal fixedness of consideration in looking to the duty,
and some literal missing and sense of deadness: it puts the man in the borders
of a spiritual duty, and hardly wants the soul so acting the saving flowings of
the Spirit: the very bulk and body of a promise may give some literal wakening
to a dead soul; and the skaddings of a threatening man put the dead soul in some
motion, 2 Samuel 12. 1, 2, 3, 4. David gives a literal hearing by the light of a
natural conscience to Nathans general parable. At length, when the Spirit sets
it on by application, thou art the man, David, v. 10, 11, 12, 13. comes to some
life of confession, I ^ave sinned; and there begin the spiritual seeds of Psalm
51. Indeed these two, the literal part, and the spiritual part, make (as it
were) in gross one bulk or body of a work; but they are conjoined as the clay
and the gold in Nebuchadnezzars image; they are joined by God, not by congrui^y
or decency on the Lords part, but of free grace, not by promise, not by merit,
nay, not as work and wages, but accidental, as touching their natures, yet the
wise Lord intends the one ^or the other; it is therefore good to be about means:
the waiting at the tide is not sailing, yet it makes way for sailing. What
connection is there betwixt Readiness journey in seeking his fathers asses, and
Samuel's anointing him King of Israel? none at all, but a providential union
there is; but no man can say that there is here either a divine institution, or
a gracious promise, yea, or a congruity of means and end, of work and wages:
though there be something of a marred institution in dead and dull hearing tied
to saving believing: here the same sweet breathing that falls on the rose, acts
on the hemlock, which to me is some mystery, to others merit of congruity
(which is detestable) to others a free promise (but it being examined well is
but merit) to others half a promise: however the dispensation forbids laziness,
and commands all, even though yet in nature, to go about duties as creatures
rational covenanted externally with God.

CHAP. XIII.
Q. 13. What the unrenewed and the renewed can do in the respective dead
condition at the use of means? 2. Influences work as God sets them on. 3. A
gracious heart reflects upon it self. 4. We may do more by the habit of grace
then we do. 5. Diverse cases of renewed and unrenewed. 7. No promise is made to
using of external means only, yet a sad threatening is made to the not using of
them. 8. The opposition by unbelief that reprobates make to the Gospel.

IT is a matter of difficulty to determine, because of the various cases, what
we may here do in the using of means. 1. Unrenewed men and renewed both can do
less in using of means, when two mountains and two rivers are in the way, then
when one only is before them; an unrenewed having both his natural corruption
and a strong temptation against him can do no less. So Naaman by his office
being obliged to go to the house of the Idol-God Rimmon, and not yet converted,
could more hardly abstain from that outward Idolatry, then now when to natural
corruption fear of offending his master the King of Assyria is added. No doubt
Pilate naturally loathed and hated Christ, as Herod Acts 12. did the Apostles
and the Gospel, but when Pilate is afraid to offend the people, and to seem an
enemy to Caesar, and Herod willing to pleasure the Jews, it is no wonder then
both be not only weakened in using the means to believe in Christ, but also
positively oppose Christ and the Gospel, and if both had been engaged in a
profession of Christ, as many now are, they might have used means more largely
to believe, and preferred Christ not in their heart and real estimation of mind
to men pleasing, but in some externals also; but that should be no concludent
argument that they really loved Christ, because a name may put men to hazard
court, and means, and life, rather then deny Christ.

2. Corruption and temptation both increase the difficulty of using of means.
This seems a considerable difference, the earth cannot plow and sow wheat of
it self, yet when it is plowed and labored, and seeded, it can enlive and
nourish the sown corn; but though we can do much more in the using of means
then we do, yet means work upon us, if they be only external, Influences work
as God sets them on.
by no necessity of nature, but according as he stirs, who has mercy on whom
he will, though men run and will: Nor can we deny but the child of God, endued
with an habit of grace, has actu primo, a power to draw life from the head,
The gracious heart may reflect upon it self spiritual actings and purge it self.
as the living members can draw nourishment from the stomach through the liver
and veins; yet the Sun and heaven has influence in all actings of nature; the
necessity of actual grace does not remove any of the virtue and power of the
habit of grace: so does the renewed heart lie fair to a Gospel-command: and as
actions vital are immanent, and received often on themselves, so here, the
heart renewed can work upon the heart. Prove. 23. 19. Hear thou my son and be
wise, and guide thine heart in the way: it is grace that guides the heart in the
way, but the graced heart also guides it self, in its manner of working, in the
way of God. 1 Timothy 5. 22. Keep thy self pure. 2 Timothy 2. 15. Study to show thy
self approved unto God. Jude v. 21. Keep your selves in the love of God. So 1 John 3. 3. Every man that has this hope purifieth himself, even as he is pure.
The sea purges it self of mire and dirt, and new wine casts out the scum and
refuse, and gold melted seperates and casts out its dross, and the superfluity
of the metal; far more does the renewed heart keep it self by a lively power
against every power contrary to it self: only the heart cannot plow the heart,
and remove its rockiness, the Lord by an omnipotent infusion of a new spirit
does that. Ezech. 36. 26. I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh,
and I will give you an heart of flesh.

Now 2. The renewed man does not so much as the renewed heart would carry him
to do: it is clear saving wisdom, if David had improved it, should have kept
him from adultery and murder. Psalm. 51. 6. Beh^ld, thou have delighted in
truth in the reins, 1. Case, We may do more by the habit of grace then we do.
and in the hidden part, thou make me to know wisdom. So is fornication
against the price of redemption that Christ has given for us, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20.

3. The renewed man may and does forget that the habit of grace is given to him
to trade withal, and for promoving of acts of sanctification; he thinks as
Papists do, it is given to be his justification and pardon, and that it may
compense his other sins; this I may do because I am a renewed man; 2. Case. We
vainly look tha^ the habit of grace is given to be our justification, and that
for a dispensation for sin.
and the gifts and ca^ings of God are without repentance; and God will dispense
with it, I being in a state of grace. But the Scripture says, 1 Kings 15. 5.
David did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, save only in the
matter of Uriah the Hittite: and so David's being a man according to Gods heart
was no shelter to his shedding of innocent blood. Now grace is not given to the
child of God as a piece of overguilded copper to a child to play withal, as if
he needed not to trade with it, nor to put it to the bank.

3. The unrenewed man is under the debt of Gospel-obedience to Christ: a deep
habitual sleepiness on the sluggard frees him neither from an obligation to the
duty of plowing, nor from that justice of God which clothes the sleeper with
rags. Now the shift that the natural man has, 3. Case. Inability to do without
grace is pretended by the lawless bankrupt and by the humble convert, but for
diverse ends.
is, No man can come to the Son except the Father of Christ draw him: it is
true, and Scripture-truth of it self; But it is told, 1. By the proud and the
lawless bankrupt as a shift. 2. It is told also by the humble and broken diver.
In the former man's sense the meaning is, I cannot believe; I can do no more, he
denies me grace, blame himself; hence he must keep his lusts.

But 1. Nature and acting of nature must be before the acting of grace; he has
not denied to you the grace of using external means, to come to the assembly of
the Saints, to lend the ear, and not to turn the ear away from the law, and
this you refuse.

2. Proud fools would cashier both Law and Gospel: but that eminent preacher
Mr. Fenner's Wilful impenitency page 60.
Will. Fenner, God will not help that man to go that has legs to go and will
not. 2. God is to be waited for in the way of his judgments, Isa 26. 8. so
thou must not look to fetch God out of his walk, 4. The unrenewed man would
have God to come down to his way.
the means of grace and salvation. 3. Heaven is an end, and an end can never be
gotten without means. 4. God will not set up another door to heaven for any man
in the world -- he will never make another Bible; Page 62, 63.
either be ruled by this or by none: the drunkards way shall never be his; the
worldlings way shall never be his. The truth is, 5. The natural man would be in
heaven without means.
the carnal man would be carried sleeping with his lusts and filthiness in
Christ's bosom in heaven, as an eagle flies over a river and never wets one
feather; he would be over word, reading, hearing of Sermons, learning,
knowledge, repenting, mortification, self-denial; there be no Bibles nor
Ordinances in heaven, and by a miracle he would be over all these: otherwise I
hear, I pray, I whore not, but the way of doing I cannot reach; and if I cannot
get this way chalked out, let me lie (says he) where I am; God can do this,
and he will not, but he will have the Gospel, like a millstone, tied about every
man's neck that shall be saved. Even among men this is no excuse, ah, you must
pity him (say ye) it is his natural temper; he is mad in a prevailing habit of
malice, he is kind and loving otherwise: will ye judge and law-absolve him from
the guilt of manslaughter, and spare his life for that? Another acts a prank
of covetousness, and goes along in an act of treason; ah, (say some) he is a
simple man, and short-witted, but otherwise not wicked, in that he has been
foolish; we sa^ his other virtness satisfy not the Law; he has wit to act
mischief, and is a greedy fool.

2. This same tale is said by the humbled man, Ah, I cannot believe, and I look
upon this weakness as afflictive paining wickedness, and he weeps over his
wounds, and weeps over his Physician, and this complaining is good, and has
good in it. But another doubt there is, there is no promise of rewarding
natural acting with faith; true, what then? will ye go no farther then on
natures leading because there is no promise of grace made to natures acting?

2. 6. No promise made to using of external means only.
We are obliged to obey God in the covenant of works, and believe in Christ in
the covenant of grace: suppose there had been no hire of life eternal in the
one or the other; the Lord might stand on his points, and command as Lawgiver,
and never come down as a Covenanter, to hire and to bude us as children to
embrace a great and large Kingdom on a low condition, a poor farthing or half
penny of faith.

3. There is no promise of a rich harvest made to all who plow painfully, but
often the contrary; the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong,
Eccles. 9. 10. nor have they ever riches who rise early and go late to bed, and
eat the bread of sorrow, Psalm. 127. and for that shall the husbandman hang up
the plow, and till none? there is not a promise made that all that sail shall
bring home rich ships full of gold; what then? are all the Merchants in the
earth loosed from the duty of trading, and sailing cried down? then all
shipping must be laid aside.

4. 7. But there is a sad threatening to the not using of means external, an^
yet no promise made to the only using of means external.
There is not a promise made to using of means, but there is a sad threatening
of wrath to such as use no means; he that plows none, but sleeps in Summer,
shall be clothed with rags: but there is no word that all who plow painfully
shall be rich men, and clothed in scarlet, Prove. 28. 7. He that turns away his
ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer shall be abomination; but all that
hear the Law are not converted; this shows that the Lord is provoked by the not
using of means in natural men, as both the Lords plea with the wicked clears,
and their sinful neglect of not putting God to it, to see if God will not do
more, when they have done but a little of their duty; the Lord is at the pains
to charm them, and does it wisely, they will be deaf as the adder; well then,
Psalm. 58. since they will keep the Serpents poison whether God, who uses means
to the contrary, will or no. v. 4, 5, 6. Break their teeth, O God, in their
mouth. 7. Let them melt away as waters which run continually. 8. As a snail
which melts, let every one of them pass away. So plagued and melted away
sinners, you might have been charmed by God and would not, can you blame God?
Jer. 51. 9. We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed: well then, it
follows, forsake her, let us go every one into his own Country, for her
judgment is reached up to heaven, and is lifted up unto the skies. So God is
clear, and even Babylons refusing to be healed, and to hear the Prophets, and
her nelecting means is justly plagued, Prove. 1. 20. What can wisdom do more
but cry and utter her voice, and throw over the line to such as are in the
Kingdom of darkness, the promises? 22. Behold, I will pour out my spirit to
you. But v. 24. Ye refused, no man regarded. 25. ye set at naught all my
counsel, and would have none of my reproof. 29. They hated knowledge, and did
not choose the fear of the Lord; and therefore the Lord laughs at their
destruction, and mocks when their fear comes. And Luke 14. 16, 17, 18. many
are bidden come to the Supper, The opposition made by Reprobates to Christ in
the Gospel is only in the outer gate.
and the Lord is cleared, an offer is made to them; they all with one consent
refuse the use of other means, and the Lord says, none of them who were bidden
shall taste of his Supper. So the Lords justice goes no farther then the
obstinacy of men, who refuse to come in at the outer gate opposes him. Christ
and reprobates so never come to wrestling, and to ay and no in the inner gate,
or in the pains of the new birth: the sentence of a refused treaty with Christ,
long e're it come to the out-breaking of the new birth cuts, them off: green
corn is frost-slain long e're it come to the blade; and it is not the rotting of
a white and ripe harvest that is the loss of it; it is just providence in the
Gardener to cut down and throw over the hedge a plant that is withered while it
is yet young, as it is right that he hew down a tree ready to bear fruit when
it is barren and rotten. The Lord has not set down in his word the degrees of
transgression against the covenant of works; some in Adam might have been more,
some less grievous transgressors (should all have been saved or damned by that
only covenant;) and since it cannot be denied that multitudes within the
visible Church perish for their sin against the Law, or the externally proposed
Covenant of grace, and yet all these so perishing are not alike guilty; our
Savior says some had greater guiltiness in his sufferings then Pilate had,
John 19. 11. holy and spotless justice does cut off some in their sins for
sinning against that Covenant, whether it be the Covenant of grace so called,
or the Covenant of works, who even are many mile distant from sinning against
the actings of the regenerating spirit, and some come nearer to the strangling
of the new birth, Reprobates resist not the formal acts of Regeneration.
and are cut off by holy justice also. When our Savior says, John 3. 18, 36.
He that believes not is condemned already, and the wrath of God abides on
him; his meaning shall not be, that all condemned within the visible Church
perish, because the man coming to the nick of a gracious receiving of Christ,
and having done all requisite to a professor until it come to the breaking
forth of the new birth, he there only fails; for many sins and degrees of
failing against that Covenant (however it be called) go before that, by reason
whereof men are said not to believe in the Son of God, and upon which account
they remain under wrath, and are condemned for non-believing: he who will not
hear of the Physician, though he never come within reach of personal communing
with him, dies of his disease deservedly, because he contemns the only
Physician who can cure him, as well as he who sees the Physicians face, hears
his words, and beats back on his face the saving cup which would cure his
disease.

Yet withal here we would beware of Mr. Baxter's order of setting repentance
and works of new obedience before justification, which is indeed a new covenant
of works, meriting the sprinkling of Christ's blood and washing in
justification, and this blood pays them back again; for by the merit of
Christ's blood good works do justify and save.

2. Mr. Baxter's order of repentance before justification.
How clean walkers in new obedience must men be? w^ashen e're they come near
the fountain, redeemed before they be redeemed.

3. So must men sweet and repent of their life before they be justified
completely, but of half or quarter remission and justification the Scripture is
silent: it crushes joy, peace, hope, liberty spiritual, for if men earn not out
their repentance, they may and do lose their labor and reward before the third
part of the day be ended; nor does the man accept Christ as Lord in a naked
intention to serve him; for so saving faith includes in its nature an intention
of new obedience to God: but a man cannot be said to have his reward of pardon,
because he has wrought his work, or reformed his life only in his intention,
or because he intends to work his work, Scripture should here speak.

4. Why does not Mr. Baxter say right down, tacienti quod in se est Deus non
denegat gratiam? The Lord has made the covenant of grace with all mankind,
Americans, Brasilians, with these of Chinah, and it has these two halfs: 1. Do
and live the life of grace and of faith. 2. Do and live the life of glory. So
that the Gospel and pardon, and the life of grace are promised to the
Americans, so they trade well with nature, or a general grace of Christ
crucified, they know not whom, and they never heard of; show such a covenant
made in Scripture, and made with the Brasilians.

It Is true, the Scripture says, repent for remission, and repent, that your
sins may be blotted out, Acts 2. 37, 38. Acts 3. 19. But truth suffers here.
Antinomians to exclude strict walking, make repentance to be nothing but faith.
So Mr. Den, Hobson. etc. Again, Socinians, and Mr. Baxter, a man of a strong
wit, on the other extreme to exclude the loose faith of many, make Gospel-faith
to be nothing but repentance and new obedience. But the place Acts 2. can no
more prove that repentance, and a fixed walk in good works, is such a part of
the new Covenant, as this, do and live the life of faith, and be pardoned, then
that Baptism, which is in the text joined with repentance, is necessarily
required before pardon; whereas both repentance, faith, baptism, new obedience,
are the way to the possession of the crown; not causes, not the price, not the
ransom of the right and title to the crown, and both as conditions of pardon
and title to the crown and the place. Acts 3. 19. speaks of repentance
continued all the life (for such a repentance is commanded in both places, and
all along in Scripture, Matthew. 3. 8, 11. Matthew. 3. 13. Acts 11. 18. Acts 13.
24. Acts 26. 20. Ezech. 14. 6. Matthew. 4. 17. Mark 1. 15. Mark 6. 12. Acts 17.
30. Rev. 2. 7. Rev. 3. 19. as a work not of a day, but of all the life) also
the words should bear, that sins were not pardoned until the time of
refreshment, that is, till the day of the eternal happiness and rest from our
labors of this life, in which day sins are only blotted out declaratively,
says Diodati. But let it stand, repent, that you may be pardoned; and that a
turning to God is a condition and a way, and a means of remission of sins: it
shall not hold up the fabric of Mr. Baxters justification by inherent
righteousness; for sure in concreto no man is pardoned who continues in his
sinful way, but he that repents and so continues repenting that he may be
pardoned to himself and to others, is the only justified man of all those that
are adult and come to age. For the Apostles, Acts 2. 3. John Baptist, Matthew. 3.
having to do with loose professors and hypocrites, who sought righteousness by
law-works, and yet slighted Law and all Law-works, do urge first repentance
sincere. 2. Continuing to the end. 3. Visible to themselves and others; nor do
we bid proud and whole Pharisees, and men going on securely, and workers of
iniquity, as such, immediately lay hold on Christ as their Savior: and it is
true, the motive of Gods abundant pardoning, and so the faith of pardoning
mercy leads to repentance, Isa. 55. 6, 7. let the wicked return, for he will
abundantly pardon; and therefore faith goes before repentance as touching some
acts. In these Matthew. 6. 14, 15. If ye forgive not, your father will not
forgive you. Christ speaks not of the order, as if we must first love our
neighbor and our enemies as our selves before we be justified; nor is the holy
Ghost upon order, 1 John 1. 19. Prove. 28. 13. Romans 10. 8, 9, 10, 13. as if
penitent confession of sin to Christ, forsaking of all sin, and sound and
complete repentance, must go before justification and forgiveness: but the Lord
designs the persons pardoned, that they must be such as forgive their enemies,
forsake their sins; because men are ready to sooth themselves, as if haters of
their brethren might be (while they habitually continue in such a wicked way)
justified before God.

Mr. Baxter in his confession, c. 5. sect. 1. concl. 6. page 101. I believe
that by the new law of grace, or the promise, God has delivered all men (in
the tenor of the promise the promulgation reaches not to all) from the guilt
of sin, and as to the destructive punishment, on condition they will accept of
Christ and life; and no man is accepted out of this promise (till they
remediesly reject it) but it is so general, that whosoever will have Christ,
may have him (on his terms) though none will have him till Gods special grace
make them willing, yet whosoever will is called to drink of the water of life.

My doubts are shortly these, 1. What Scripture says that Christ has
delivered all men, Doubts and reasons against Mr. Baxter 's new remedying Law
of grace made to all mankind.
i. e. Brasilians, Indians, all the race of man from the guilt of sin, as to
the destructive punishment, or from hell, why not from their vain conversation?
1 Pet. 1. 18. the same ransom is paid to save from the one as well as the
other.

2. How is it not a scenical and a poor delivery, and satisfaction and ransom
paid to justice, if justice inflict eternal destructive punishment on all
Brasilians, Indians: millions of this huge (all) must then be the covenanted
people of God if they be saved conditionally; can a covenant-promise be made to
all, if all be not the people of God by this covenant-promise?

3. Can a promise of God never promulgated, never by fame or sound of words
reaching the ears of these to whom the promise is made, be either promise or
obliging Law? the Lord's will to do good is but a mere decree, never a promise
till it be spoken; was there such a thing from eternity as a promise of God to
make the world? a decree there was, never a promise. God said never in Old or
New Testament, if all the Brasilians, Indians, shall believe in Christ, they
are saved: and to them come to age a promise conditional it cannot be; when not
only never promulgated, but Apostles and others are expressly forbidden to
promulgate it to the Gentiles, Matthew. 10. 5. Acts 16. 6. as being no people of
God, Lo-ammi, not obtained mercy in Christ, Hos. 1. 10. 1* Pet. 3. 10. Romans 10.
24, 25. and yet for all these Christ died, all these Christ saved
conditionally; they are saved, and my people, and I promise to them life in my
Son so they believe, but tell them not of it; what a Gospel is this?

4. How can the Brasilians be guilty of remedylesse rejecting of a Christ they
never heard of? for how shall they believe in him of whom they never heard?
Romans 10. 14. how have they sin in hating Christ; for Christ came never to them,
either in proper person, or the Gospel, John 15. 22, 23. preached?

5. How can this promise be so wide and general, as none are excepted? for
either Christ dyed not for Infants, and so no Infants are redeemed, nor washed
in the blood of Christ, no Infants are part of the world or mankind, or Infants
are condemned for not actual accepting of Christ and life, and for wilful and
remediless rejecting of Christ, because they will not come to Christ and
drink; as Rev. 22. 17.

6. If whosoever will have Christ may have him, Brasilians and Indians, and
grace be universal, as says Mr. Baxter; Brasilians and all Mankind must be
freeholders, and sovereigns of Heaven and Hell, of the Decrees of Election and
Reprobation, of Effectual calling: it must then be in him that runs and wills,
and not in God who shows mercy; nor does the Lord have mercy on whom he will:
It Is but a mock to say, that God's special grace does make men willing; for
Americans and Brasilians are Lords, having in their power both general and
special grace; except Mr. Baxter yield to us a grace which does predetermine or
indec^inably bow, fix and set the free will the way the Lord decrees, and that
the Lord must infuse a new supernatural power, and it is above us to have
special saving grace, and that the Lord bestows on his chosen, because he has
freely chosen them; and then the matter is not in their, may have, or may not
have.

7. Mr. Baxter would have done well to have put one Scripture at least to this;
For neither in that John 7. 37, 38. nor Rev. 22. 7. cries the Lord to
Brasilians and Indians, Whosoever will, let him come and drink of the water of
life; for that promise is made only to those within the visible Church, who are
the called of God, and do, and may hear it. But the Brasiilians and millions
of that kind are not the called of God.

8. A remedying Law we acknowledge in the new Covenant; but it is remedying to
clear the justice of God, and to make these within the visible Church the
refusers of the Gospel more inexcusable then Sodom, Matthew. 10. 15. then Tyrus
and Sidon, Matthew. 11. 23, 21, 22, 23, 24, then a people of an unknown language,
Ezech. 3. 5, 6, 7.

But 1. It should be proved from Scripture by Mr. Baxter before he had asierted
with Mos. Amyrald and other Universalists, his new remedying Law, as remedying
the justly deserved misery of Americans and Brasilians; For sure if Christ died
for them, and has stricken with all the savages on earth, ^ews, and Gentiles
for whom he died, and with all generations of men, a new Gospel Covenant of the
greatest love among men, in Christ's dying for them; and yet this Covenant is
never revealed to them by either revelation made by preachers, nor by the works
of Creation and Providence, nor by the Law of the Gospel written in the hearts
of these men,

There is 1. little Remedy for clearing the glory of divine justice, to make
their furnace hotter in Hell for a Chymerical and imaginary sin of which their
conscience cannot accuse them; for how can they be guilty in rejecting a Christ
they never heard of, and by no superable providence could hear? in that the
Gospel came neither by Angels, nor by Men gifted with tongues, nor by
inspiration to their knowledge; and this darkens the glory of God's justice.
Its true, Abimelech and Pharaoh and others may be plagued for sins they
actually know not; but light of conscience teaches that Adultery and
Oppression of innocent strangers, deserve judgment. But read we ever that
Brasilians, Indians, or the wisest of Heathen, Socrates, Plato, Cicero, and the
most tender of them, die with any such challenge? ah, we sinned against the
blood of the Son of God shed for us! What, and shall the Lord write and speak
to Israel in their hearing? I brought you ou^ of Egypt, and yet he will not
tell the millions of the Heathen Christ dyed for them, and saved them from the
guilt of sin and everlasting wrath, as touching their everlasting destruction?
which love yet he expressed not to them.

2. Though it ill becomes us to censure the wisdom of God; if the Lord rebuke
those within the visible Church for refusing offered mercy; as Jer. 3. John 5.
40. John 8. 21. how does he not reprove the Brasilians for rejecting a promise
of so much love?

3. As no reprobate can be guilty of love of Election to glory from eternity
(suppone such a love had been in the heart of God toward them) because it was
never revealed to them: So if there be such a law of grace and
Covenant-promise, the Lawgiver, the Mediator God-man was never revealed to the
Brasilians.

2. Where is this wide promise and Covenant to be found in Scripture? who are
the parties?

3. What is the nature of the Covenant? whether is it a Covenant of works ( do
this and live) or a Covenant of grace ( believe this, and you have the reward
of the Gospel preached, to wit, the restored image of God) and where is this in
Scripture?

4. A remedying Law must bring a remedy to men: the remedy is either real; and
so some real help must be conferred upon fallen man: show if there be one
Brasilian healed and saved thereby: a real power of believing in Christ, and
laying hold on the Gospel-promise remote or nearer, cannot be given to all in
Christ, for any thing we read in Scripture, since the Brasilians are heirs of
wrath, cannot receive the things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. cannot believe or come
to Christ. John 6. 44. cannot submit their wisdom to the Law of God. Romans 8.
7. cannot bring forth good fruit more then thistles or thorns can bring forth
figs or wine grapes, Universal Redemption extols nature and free will, and
makes a moral swasion, which heals not nature: all the grace that the Gospel
owns.
Luke 6. 43, 44. Matthew. 7. 16, 17. being dead in sins. Ephesians. 2. 2, 5. Walking
in the vanity of their mind, having their under^tanding darkened, being
alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because
of the blindness that is in their hearts, Ephesians. 4. 17. 18. Enemies in their
minds by wicked works, Colos. 1. 21. Foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving
diverse hearts, Tit. 1. 3. having an heart of stone, Ezekiel. 36. 26.
uncircumcised, Deuteronomy, (...)
30. 6. Jer. 9. 26. deceitful above all things, desperately wicked, Jer. 17. 9.
every imagination of man's heart only evil every day. Genesis 6. 5. from his
youth, Genesis 8. 21. So that a Brasilian must be born over again, August. lib. 1.
ad Bonif. c. 15. Julian. Sic nos dicimus liberum arbitrium in omnibus esse
naturaliter, nec Adae peccato pe^ire po^uisse; quod scripturarum omnium
authoritate firmatur. Lib 2. imperf. oper. fol. 133. Liberum arbitrium
(inquiunt Pelag^ani) and post pecca^a tam plenum est quam fuit ante peccata.
Pelagius lib. 1. de lib. a b. apud August. c. 18. Habemus possibilitatem
utrisuque partis a Deo insitam, velut quandam (ut ita dicam) radicem
fractiferam atque soecundam, quae ex voluntate hominis diversa gig^at and
pari^t, and quae possit ad prop^ium culto is arbitri un v^l nitere flore
virtutum, vel sentibus horrere vitiorum. Lib. 1. impe^f. oper. fol. 381. Hanc
voluntatem and concupiscentium ante peccatum in Paradiso fuisse, res illa
declarat, -- non potuit -- esse fructus peccati In Epist. ad Demetr. Pelagius,
Est enim in animis nostris quaedam, ut ita dixerim, sanctitas, quae velut in
arce animi praesidens, exercet mali, bonique judicium, and ut honestis
rectisque artibus faver, ita sinistra opera condemnat. August. de gratia
Christi c 10. Pelag us, operatur in nobis velle quod bonum est, v^l^e quod
sanctum est, dum nos etc. futurae gloriae magnitudine and praemiorum pollicita
ione succendit, dum revelatione sapientiae in defiderium Dei stupentem su
scitat voluntatem, dum nobis suadet omne quod bonum est. August. Epist. ad
patres Milesita^os; tribuit Pelagianis quod ad omnia vitae perficienda mandata,
sola tantumodo liberate contenderemus. August. 9. 9. Veteris and N. Test. q.
3. Deus bonus qui fecit existere quod non exstiterat; justus, quia quaecunque
fecit ut proficerent, propriae libertatis arbitrio dimissa sunt: quia tamen non
tam perfecta sunt, ut labi non possent, seminaria his legis inesse decrevit,
naturaliter addens auxilia manifesia legis, ut authoritas ejus perfecta esset
hominibus. Ja. Arm. disp. priv. 8. th. 4. Sim. Episcop. Remons. in conf. sua, c
1. sect. 14. Remon. in Apol. c. 1. fo 33. Potest homo absque gratia Spiritus
sancti sensus Scripturae, quantum sufficit ad salutem, intelligere, nec opus
est superinfusa potentia in intellectu, sufficit sola literalis Evangelii
oblatio.

Corvinus Arminii sectator con. Til. c. 12. pa. 48. Diximus nos credere per
renovationem spiritus, praevia renovatione mentis and affectuum, voluntatem
quoque mutari, renovari, and ex mala bonam fieri.

Corv. con. Moli. c. 32. S. 23. and 13. Primo itaque volumus per gratiam mentem
illuminantem and cor, hoc est affectus reformantem, effici bonos actus, five
fidei, five conversionis: per actus autem habitus acquiri, per quos rursus cum
fidei adjutorio actus eliciuntur.

Corvinus contra Tilenum c. 6. page 234. 235. Tria praecipue manserunt in
homine post lapsum, quae ipsum capacem novi foederis capacem faciunt. 1.
Reliquiae imaginis Dei, quas Dens ex gratia in homine reliquit. 2. Mansisse
libertatem ad bonum and malum, prout intellectus monstraverit. 3. Mansisse in
illo affectum naturalem, ad illud omne de siderandum quod sibi bouum esse
intelligit.

Remon. in scriptis Synod. art. 4. page 164. Cum homines irregeniti dicuntur
caeci, in tenebris positi -- nihil aliud denotat, quam rerum divinarum and
voluntatis salvificae ignaros and nescios, ac proinde et am a Dei timore
aliencs: at ex eo nihil aliud concludi potest, quam eos indigere clara
veritatis propositione, ut scientiam consequantur.

Remon. in scrip. Syn. art. 3. and 4. page 6. Ad voluntatem quod attinet, de ea
ita pronunciamus, in statu irregenerationis non habere ad volendum ^llum bonum
salutare: Hoc confi^mant argumento Pelagio digno, neque enim voluntas id velle
potest, quod in illo statu intellectus scire non potest, unde fit ut affectus
quoque dessituti speciali Spiritus sancti gratia and renovatione, bonum ullum
quod vere salvificum appetere non possunt; quare libertatem volendi
indifferenter tam bonum salutare quam malum in statu lapsus, voluntati ad esse
negamus, quia potius liberum arbitrium ad bona hujusmodi, non modo vulneratum,
sauciatum, infirmatum, inclinatum, attenuatum est; sed and raptivum and
perdi^um and amissum, ejusque vires non modo debilitatae and cassae nisi
restaurentut a gratia, sed planae nullae; hoc illi, sed nihil sani. Remon.
Synod. art. 3. and 4. page 7. quare, cum ante lapsum intellectus primorum
parentem nosset quod bonum esset salutare, quod malum, in lapsu boni salutaris
and salvifici cognitione destituta men's, nequaquam illud ut volendum voluntati
monstrare potuit, nec voluntas illud velle: libertatem itaque and potentiam
volendi tam bonum salutare, quam malum non habuit; eam tamen libertatem quae
homini essentialis est, retinuit; Nihil sani hic, nulla est intrinseca laesio
in voluntate per lapsum, nulla ablatio potentiae bonum ab intellectu monstratum
amplectendi. Sic Jesuita Suarez, tom. de great. c. 8. prolog. 4. n. 14. Per
peccatum originale nulla ignorantia pravae dispositionis in nos transfunditur,
sed sola ignorantia negationis and privationis, quatenus nascimur sine fide,
sine ullo habitu, vel per se vel per accidens infuso, and sine ulla specie vel
principio cognoscendi praeter nudam potentiam intelligendi; eam autem
ignorantiam vel nescientiam haberet homo creatus in puris naturalibus. Jesuita
Martinez de Ripalda de ente supernaturali lib. 1. di. p. 4. sect. 3. 11. 21.
Bonitas and possibilitas objecti supernaturalis voluntati proposita, sufficit
excitare in voluntate desiderium, ex se absolutum and efficax, quid desideraret
hic Pelagius? Nihil prorsus, videat lector quaeso in 2. Thom. tract. de gra^.
q. 1. and seq. Gab. Vasq. in 12. tom. h. disp. 91. c. 2. and seq. Phil. Gamach.
12. q. 109. c. 4. Alphons. Curiel. 12. q. 189. art. 2. dub. ult.


or he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3. 3. Nor can flesh and
blood, but the Father of Christ only cause us believe that Jesus Christ is the
Son of the living God, Matthew. 16. 16. Now this is but a moral work to Mr.
Baxter, to cause a dead man live: and if there were no intrinsecal wound,
impotency and deadness in the soul, but only moral dimness of mind, so as the
literal, clear, external and objective proposal of the Gospel, which wakens the
stupid will, as Pelagians and Arminians say, perfects the whole work of the
new birth, and grace is nothing but the letter of the Gospel; and the strongest
operation of this grace is only moral swasion and counsel: as if by Rhetoric,
and good words, the midwife could bring forth the birth; and this remedy that
Christ brings to Brasilians, is at best, the raising of man dead and rotten in
the grave, by blowing a Trumpet beside him, and by making a persuasive oration
over his dead corpse: if so, the man so raised was never dead: Nor is the
remedying Law so much; for a preaching of the Gospel comes never to the ears of
millions, with whom this remedying Covenant is made: and it were a strong
inducement, as any can be, to move Brasilians, Americans, those of China and
Turkey, to receive the Gospel, to show them Christ by the blood of his Cross
has made peace between God and you: ye are all of you, old and young, bought
with a price, ransomed by the blood of God: ye are not your own, Christ has
taken away your sins, and does now begin upon a new score; God has expressed the
greatest love imaginable, he has redeemed you his enemies: this in the Old or
New Testament is never told them; for then the Ministers of the Gospel should
find all the Pagans a Church, bought with the blood of Christ, and the reality
of a Church should be in all societies of the earth. But such glad news are
preached to the chosen in the visible Church only; never to Brasilians: Paul
preaches at Athens, Acts 17. Creation, not one word of Redemption: as also
Aristotle, Plato, and others should beget over again to God Creator all their
disciples, whom they find rude and ignorant, and infuse by moral swasion and
teaching a new life of learning: and all rude and ignorant men before they be
taught Methaphysick, Mathematics, should be dead in ignorance, enemies in
their heart to knowledge and Philosophy: and the same ground should make
Ministers suppose there were no learning, and teaching of the Father in drawing
of men to Christ, by that Omnipotency, which raised Christ from the dead and
created the world, John 6. 44, 45. Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. 19. 2 Cor. 4. 4. as true
real Fathers of the new birth, by only the letter of the Gospel, as Aristotle
and Plato are fathers to beget Philosophy in men. Now for any remedying
Gospel-promise that is made to Brasilians to purchase by way of merit, we shall
believe it, when Mr. Baxter shall prove that to Indians and Brasilians, who
lived and dyed without the sound of the least notice, or rumor of the Gospel,
Christ has purchased and merited grace to believe the Gospel.

2. That Christ by the blood of his Cross has made peace betwixt God and the
Brasilians, who so lived and dyed without the Gospel; that Christ has
satisfied upon the Cross for their sins against the Law, and born their fins
in his own body on the tree; that Brasilians being dead to sins should live
unto righteousness, by whose stripes Brasilians are healed, 1 Pet. 2. 24. that
Christ suffered for Brasilians to bring them to God, 1 Pet. 3. 18. that Christ
bought Brasilians from their vain conversation with his blood, 1 Pet. 1. 18.
that Christ gave himself for wild Indians, that he might redeem them from all
iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works, Tit.
2. 14. And who so tell us of a general, dubious, and conditional intention in
the Father giving his Son to death, and of the Son's giving himself to death
for all these poor savages to whom he would never send the air of a rumor that
he so loved them; and of a special intention going along with the free decree
of Election to glory, that so many only should live unto righteousness, be
redeemed from all iniquity, are holden to prove two such redemptions, two such
loves of Christ dying, two such intentions and decrees, two such providence:
one special redemption, one special greatest love, one special intention, one
fatherly providence indeed toward the elect; we find John 10. 10, 11. John 3.
16. John. 11. 51, 52. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Rev. 1. 5, 6. Rev. 5. 9, 10. 1 Pet. 2.
24. 1 Pet. 3. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 18. Tit. 1. 14. Gal. 1. 4. John 15. 13. Romans 8. 32,
33. Isa. 53. 4, 5, 6. Rev. 14. 4. all which places make the redeemed to be
loved with the greatest love, sanctified, bought from their vain conversation,
redeemed from among men, made Kings and Priests to God, delivered from this
present evil world, redeemed from all iniquity, etc. we leave the other
General, dubious love, intention, and reconciliation of Brasilians, to our
Adversaries to be made out by Scripture.

And Q. What is the grace of Christ's meritorious blood if it be shed for all
and every one, if it put the nature and free will of all and every one in a
better condition, and if his merit restore not the image of God into a more
firm and excellent condition then we had in the first Adam? and what healing of
nature, and the restoring of the image of God is made to the savages who eat
men as we do beevs, kill their aged fathers, use wives promiscuously, and never
heard one word of the Gospel?

CHAP. XIIII.
The Law discovers the disease, but heals it not. 2. How nature begins, and
the spirit acts. 3. We, not God, in withdrawing his grace must be the culpable
cause of non conversion. 4. Some truth we must first physically hear and
consider, before we believe.

KNowledge, or the commanding Law strengthens the wicked desire by forbidding
it. A strong stream runs with more strength that a dike of stone and clay
stands in its way: I know not (says Augustine) epist. contra Hilarium 89, etc.
de spir. and lit. 4. how that which is desired becomes more pleasant, because
it is forbidden: Nescio quo enim modo hoc ipsum quod concupiscitur, The Law
teaches but heals not.
fit jucundius, dum vetatur; the letter of the Law or bare knowledge meets with
unrenewed nature, and then a severe master and a froward servant make no work
betwixt them: the Law came in, that sin might abound, Romans 5. Jubet (Lex) magis
quam juvat, docet morbum esse, non sanat; imo ab eo quod non sanatur, augetur,
ut attentius and sollicitius gratiae medicina quaeratur; The Law commands, but
it helps not, it teaches the disease to be there, but heals it not.

There are two extremities here we love on the one hand; Our formality in
praying and in going about other means.
the barbarous opus operatum, the literal deed done in praying; the charm of
the external work is by hand, if God sell not the blessing: yet I have blown
words of praying up to Heaven, and told down the price: It Is heavenly wisdom
to go about praying and other means not as acts of trading for our nighest
ends, but as acts of serving and glorifying of God, though no thing should
redound to us: but we use praying, and hearing, as a man does his horse, or his
ship, all for self-use and self ends. Ah, can the man charm the blessing of the
Holy Ghost with bare words, when scarce the literal attention goes along? and
here our Idolatrry says, I buy, and God will not sell; I plow, and God binds
up the clouds: the Lord pays not the reward of a rich harvest, How nature
begins, and the spirit acts on, and with our literal acting.
to the merit of plowing on the other hand: let ordinances, reading, praying,
and hearing of the Bible sleep until the spirit blow: and we forget it is not
the Spirit of the Father, which works without the word and the testimonies, the
tools of the Father; is this God's Spirit or a delusion? plow not, sow not
until it be first harvest; blow not at the fire until it first flame boldly:
pray not until the Spirit breath strongly, but first give words, I pray you, to
be a lodging to the spirit to breath in: Let nature stir first in the using of
means; First bow the knee, stretch out the hands; should the Spirit from above
first bow the knee? and first physically act upon the hands to lift them up?
nay, nature begins in its order before the heat and fire of the spirit come;
flaming goes not before smoking, but contrarily smoking leads the way to
flaming: the flaming of faith, of love, of paining desires in their spiritual
vigor, go not before stirring of the lips, and lifting of the eyes to Heaven
to pray: that is no more true then refreshing and cooling of the heart go
before eating and drinking: will ye say, I will not pray, while first the
spirit flame, I will not hear, while first I believe, and I will not lay up the
promises in the heart, while first the heart burns in heat of love with the
promises: You then say, I will not throw about the key until the door be first
opened; I will not hear the word until the Lord give me faith; whereas the way
of God is, that faith as the end, comes by hearing, as the means leading to the
end; Romans 10. and Gal. 3. Ye received the Spirit by the hearing of faith; then
of necessity our hearing and lending attention to Christ, by the outer entry
the ear, must go before faith as the mean before the end, whereas faith comes
by hearing: as vital heat is stirred up by running, so it is true, some inward
burnings and flamings of spirit begin like smoking before flaming, Psalm. 39. 1.
Psalm. 45. 1. Acts 17. and then follows spiritual acting of praising, preaching,
praying, in which case there is, as it were, in the soul a fever, and an inward
boiling of a pot that must run over, or new wine that must break the vessel,
and force vent, so that silence or no acting must torment and pain the poor
man: but that is not ordinary; for the set way is that we set to acting, and
the spirit strikes in as he thinks fit, and the believer is to blow and stir
the fire under the ashes, as if he were seeking the wind, and must stir and dig
some fire and warmness out of the letter, and let the spirit blow and flame as
he will. If any say a preparing of the heart goes well before acting, that is
true also; if any say God commands not simple hearing, but hearing mixed with
faith, what ever truth were in that, as hearing without faith is sinful
formality, yet he commands in a divine order, that we should hear to the end we
may believe; and the Lord commands not that we may believe, that we may hear,
as nature ordains not growing and nourishing, that the living creature may eat,
and sleep; but by the contrary, nature appoints eating and sleeping that we
may grow, and be nourished. If any say the Lord commands not hearing as to the
substance of the act, but saving, Some truth we must first physically hear and
consider before we believe.
spiritual, and humble trembling at the Word, and hearing in faith; and this he
commands to be done in believing and trembling at the Word, in the same act, in
which he commands hearing. It shall be denied that in the order of begetting
faith, this is necessary, that they ever be on and the same act: the Lord
preached to Adam, Genesis 3. 15. the seed of the woman shall break the head of the
serpent: Adam by the Law of God, of nature, was first to hear and consider this
first Gospel Truth, and then to believe it, and receive it in faith: he was a
rational and moral agent in believing, and was not obliged in one and the same
to hear and believe, but as a rational agent he was first to hear, and then to
believe, after consideration of the Gospel now heard and received in the ear
and mind. And the like may be said of Pagans at the first hearing of the
Gospel, they must hear and literally consider the letter of the Gospel before
they believe. As for the Lord's commanding to believe, to pray, to read, to
praise, sure we are to begin our duty of natural stirring in these acts, though
in another kind of cause, God must first act us thereunto: nor is the Lord's
stir^ing of us by omnipotent grace, enjoined to us, but we are commanded to do
our duty, and to pray for his drawing that we may run: but yet by order of
nature, we are to do our parts first in our physical way before we feel the
stirring of divine influences.

Obj. He cannot pray, he cannot believe, and yet God commands him to believe.

Answ. But his cannot ( as Mr. Fenner says) does not hinder. If a wicked man's
cannot only did hinder him, he might excuse himself before the tribunal of
Christ; Lord, thou know, I did my best, I would have been ruled by thy Word,
but I could not; I would have been humbled and reformed better then I was, but
I could not: Though it be true, If God had given me efficacious grace, I should
have been converted; yet does it not follow therefore, I am not the culpable
cause of my non-conversion, or that the Lord is to be blamed for my
non-conversion.
For the culpable only hindering cause is, Prove. 1. 29. They hated knowledge,
the fear of the Lord (...) they chused not. They would none of my counsel, they
despised all my rebuke. These four acts of wicked will are set down, as the
only faulty cause of their non-conversion, and their not harkening to wisedoms
cry. But if God had given efficacious grace, which he, out of his absolute
liberty denied, certainly they would have been converted: true; and who denies
that? All that have heard, and learned of the Father come to me, John 6. 45. If
all such come and none miscarry, then thou would have come also to Christ.
Surely after I was turned, I repented, Jer. 31. 19. but that is the cause of
non-conversion physical, and leaves not the blame on the holy Lord; for the
wicked (will not) yet remains, and the conscience lays not the blame there, Our
sinful will not, not the Lord's refusal of a power, is the culpable cause of
our non-conversion.
but loves to have a physical bar of non-conversion, to block up the way of
moral non-conversion, and four times subscribeth and consents to the absence
and want of the Lord's saving influence; therefore except the unbeliever could
say, I had a desire, hic and nunc, to abandon my lusts and to believe, only
this hinders; God ref^sed the sowing of a gracious power in me, to believe,
pray, repent; and as an austere master, he reaps and exacts believing and
praying from a man who does his best, and all that in reason and justice can be
craved of a man; lays upon me, threatenings, commandments, punishments, who am
only fettered against my will from obeying.

Hence faithful Mr. Fenner page 8. the ( moral and faulty) reason why the
wicked do not repent, and come out of their sins, is not because they cannot (
though they cannot) but because they will not. His reasons are,

1. The wicked think they have power, and yet they will not do according to
their thoughts; what is the reason they hope to repent on their dead beds, but
because they think they have power? or at least they are able to beg power of
Jesus Christ. Now by their own thoughts, God will convince them that they do
not give over their sins.

2. Thou do not so much as try whether thou can do or not: when a Master
bids a Servant carry a sack of corn to the Mill, I cannot, says he; but cannot
you try, says his master, cannot you go about it? no, he will not try; why,
then he is wilful: if his master should see him sweating and striving to carry
it, it were something, then he will say he stuck at a cannot; but when he will
not be at the pains to try, he sticks at a will not; page 10. God offers the
good motions of power, I will help thee, and I will enable thee, and thou will
not be helped. Jer. 6. 17. Hearken to the sound of the trumpet, but they said,
they will not hearken. -- O, say thou, I do hear the word, and I cannot hear
it better; I do pray daily, and I cannot pray better; thus thou retortest upon
God, as the unprofitable servant, Lo, here thou have what is thine; lo, here is
the best faith thy spirit helps me to, here is the best obedience, that thy
power enabled me to do, etc. lo, there thou have that is thine, thou helpest
me with no more.

3. God gives thee a talent, a new power: has God given thee eyes, thou have
more power to glorify him, then he that has none -- give account for thy wit;
Lord I have contrived businesses and bargains with it, I have jested, quirped,
been merry with it; but why would thou not be witty for God, and for the good
of thy soul?

4. The more power thou have to repent, the more thy will is against it; -- the
more your righteousness should increase, it goes the more away: The sinful
cannot.
like the dew, the more the Sun rises, the more it vanishes away: like many,
the more preaching the farther off.

5. Thy cannot is a voluntary cannot. I cannot give to the poor, say thou;
yea, thou had once Lands, and Means, and comings in, but thou have spent all
at the Alehouse.

6. Thou art contented with thy cannot; thou can not be holy, and thou art
contented not to be; thou can not crucify thy lust, and thou art contented
with this cannot; nay, thou would not be able -- my people love to have it
so, Jer. 5. 31, etc. A man can do more good then then he does, though not in a
gracious manner; yea, and there be degrees more or less in both matter and
manner: yea, and this cannot is the natural cannot of a broken will; Lot
preached to Sodom, and they repent not; Jonas preached to Nineveh, and they
repent, though not soundly; Christ a greater then Jonah preaches to the
Pharisees, and they repent neither soundly, nor any other way. Sure more might
be done in using of means, though not without some common grace: but so long as
wicked will has a nearest influence in all sinful omissions and
transgressions, there is no place left to this; O God give me no power, nor
habits, nor influences; but would ye have done all required to be done with
power, habits, and influences, by your poor wicked wills? Nay, there is a
wicked will not which is a pull-back, and a sinful obstruction to gracious
actings. But to say nothing of this more; may not believers so far command
influences of grace, as that they have in their power far off or near hand, in
potentia proxima vel remota, sufficient grace to believe and be saved? See
Cornelius Jansenius, tom. 3. de great. Chr. Salv. lib. 3. c. who cites Vasquez.
1 part disp. 97. Suarez, lib. 4. de praedest. c. 3. number. 19, 20. But it is
required that the party, non ponat obicem, lay not a block in the way of the
Lord calling him: and if he do not, God shall undoubtedly convert him, say
these men; For if God should deny sufficient help of grace, especially to
Infants upon an intention to damn them, (says Theo. Smizing. tom. 2. tract. 3.
disp. 6. de provid. number. 179.) such a denial should be against the Covenant,
that the Father has made with the Son, that he has accepted the death of the
Son for the reconciliation of all mankind, Schoolmen make conversion to Christ
the purchase of free will, the absurdity thereof.
and their redemption, none excepted; And therefore he should

1. Do a wrong to Christ. And 2. to all mankind, and sin against the justice
of his fidelity, if he should deny sufficient help of grace upon an intention
of damning them for original sin.

3. Such a sufficient grace is due to us, not of our selves, but in Christ;
yea, but by this Christ has merited sufficient grace to all; and why not
pardon of original sin to all? and life eternal to all? should it not be a
wrong to all, and a wrong to Jesus Christ, and a wrong to free will, if such a
meritorious purchase of grace be made to all? why are they called by nature the
heirs of wrath? for by this, all the Pagans, and Heathens by grace, are also
the reconciled heirs of glory, the ransomed of the Lord.

2. Why do not the Apostles first reveal the drawing and heartbreaking motive
of obedience? Christ has dyed for you all, and reconciled you to God from the
womb.

3. What news are these? you all are in that blessed Covenant, passed betwixt
the Father and the Son, and Christ has given a dear ransom of blood to
purchase grace to carry you either to Heaven or Hell: but he has purchased for
you no glory, except by the sweating of free will you make it your actual
purchase.

4. The Scripture tells us no where that Jesus Christ dyed to break the Decrees
of Election and Reprobation; and that Christ has obtained that no man should
be damned for Original sin, as many as die in Adam, Romans 5. as many are
justified and live in Christ, both the life of grace and of glory.

5. This is the far more wide and broad covenant of grace, that the Gospel if
men use the light of nature well, (who are, and ever has been in all ages
since the creation the greatest part of mankind) shall be sent to them, and all
shall be put in such a capacity to be saved by Christ and justified in him, as
Adam was in, to be justified and saved by the works of the Law.

6. Why does sin original brook the name of sin, of iniquity, transgression,
and a sin for which all die, as Psalm. 51. 5. Romans 5. Romans 7. Romans 8. Heb. 12.
etc. which indeed its no sin, but pardoned, taken away in all mankind, and
which brings damnation to no man; for in justice, none can be condemned to
death temporal more then to death eternal, for that which is no sin at all? and
such is sin original, say they.

7. Sin original must be pardoned to Pagans in Christ's blood, of which they
never heard, say Dominicans.
It is without all authority of Scripture, that the natural actings of Pagans
are so washed in the blood of Christ that they never heard of, that they are in
their actings meriting the Gospel either of congruity or decency, or of common
justice, or of free promise, or by some infallible connection betwixt the one
and the other, or by Christ's merits: True it is, the Gospel, and effectual
calling in the Gospel and faith, Dominicans gross as Jesuits in the matter of
grace and free will.
and all spiritual blessings are bestowed on the Elect in Christ Jesus Ephesians.
1. 3. 2 Pet. 1. 3.

2. God works in us what is well-pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ,
Heb. 13. 2.

3. Cumel. dico quinto, Deus quantum in se paratus est a^ dandum omnibus
gratiam suam, and ad vocandum omnes adultos juxta illud, Deus vult omnes
salf^eri: ac proinde dicitur communiter, quod in potestate cujusvis hominis est
salvari, quia potest habere per divinum auxilium, non quidem ex merito aut
dispositione sua, aut quia ex innatis viribus aut naturae conatibus ex lege
obligetur Deus ad danda auxilia gratiae and primam vocationem seu gratiam
proveni^^tem, sed ex liberali and magnisica largitione dei providentis, Mat.
11. venite ad me omnes. Ib. Qua-propter, si homo peccator ita se gereret and
vitamtra duceret, ut nullum novum impedimentum gratiae adhiberet, aut obicem,
nullumque obstaculum, tunc auxilium gratiae vere reciperet, ^on quidem ex
debito, sed ex dei largitione, qua ipse est ad omnium ostium and pulsat; unde
non ponenti obicem cernimus Deum dare gratiam. Conc. trid. sess. 6. 11. and 13.
Deus neminem deserit nisi prius deseratur ab ipso; sed per hoc nihil tribuitur
homini, sed tantum quod possit illam gratiam impedire per peccatum, vel quod
possit vitare peccatum contra legem naturae, quo possit illum impedire.
Grace and peace come from God the Father and from the Lord Jesus as the
meritorious cause, 1 Cor. 1. Gal. 1. Frans. Cumel. disp. 2. ar. in primam 2.
concl. 5. page 244. testifies that the best of them is like a sharp briar; for
he with others holds, that grace is given to them who lay no impediment in the
way of God's effectual calling, and he has it in his power to lay no
impediment, because he can eschew all sins against the Law of nature, and such
sins are the only impediments that hinder the effectual calling of God.

But 1. he makes no mention of Christ, his death and merit, which is the only
meritorious cause of effectual calling of the chosen. A spiritual soul loves
the strongly prevailing power of Christ's calling, the more strongly that it is
a work of saving grace, and of the grace of Christ, Romans 3. 14.

2. The man is equally Lord of heaven and hell who has salvation in his power
by this way, as men have by the Jesuits way; but all men by this way have in
their power this prevening grace: for if they do what in them is, and eschew
sins, against the law of nature, which Cumel says they may do, (for such sins
are the only impediment of grace) they may be saved; not by merit, as the
Jesuits say, but by free grace, as Dominicans say: but as to the matter Cumel
conspires with the Jesuits; call it merit, or give it another name, it is
against the Scriptures to teach that all the Americans, Brasilians and Heathen
have the prevening grace of God and salvation in their power.

And 2. That though all men may lay an impediment to the prevening grace of
God, yet they may fulfill the law of nature, and eschew all mortal sin, which if
they do, infallibly the Lord bestows prevening grace upon the Americans; for
the Scripture says, We are dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2. that we cannot
come to Christ except the Father draw us, Joh. 6. 44. that the wisdom of the
flesh is neither subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be, Romans 8. 7.
and that we by nature cannot understand the things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 13, 14.
Matthew. 16. 16, 17. nor think a good thought, 2 Cor. 3. as of our selves; nor
speak a good word, 1 Cor. 12. nor bring forth good fruit, do any good, more
then a branch can bring forth fruit being cut off the tree, John 15. 4, 5. or
thn men can gather wine-grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles, Matthew. 7. 16,
17, 18. Luke 6. 43, 44. and therefore far less can Heathens earn by their
sweating and laboring effectual calling and salvation: Sure then salvation and
prevening grace of God should be in him that wills and runs, and not in God
that shows mercy; and it is but an oyling of Arminians and Pelagians to tell
that salvation is not in him that runs by way of merit, yet it is in him, and
shall infallibly be given to the runner and willer, who by free will may
purchase both; and all Americans have in them to run and will. Dominicans
therefore in this darken free grace as much as Jesuits, when they tell us, men
are saved not by the merit of free will, yet it is in the power of the
free will of Heathens to purchase influences of saving grace; to put Heathens
and Indians, and all men safe at heavens gates, what is this but to say, The
King has made no covenant that all his Courtiers shall be made Kings, yet he
has passed his royal word that if they bring him a flowr in May (which they
may easily do) they shall, vere, truly receive a Kingdom? this is as great an
advancing of free will, and an abusing of free grace, as Pelagians ever dreamed
of. For Prosper said the same of the Massilienses, Vniversis hominibus
propitiationem, quae est in sanguine Christi, esse propositam, ut quicunque ad
fidem and ad Baptismum accedere voluerint, salvi esse possunt. 16. Pro universo
autem (dictitant Massilienses) humano genere mortuum esse, Prosper epist. ad
Aug. de Massiliensibus, vide Jansenium cap. 18. ib. lib. 12. just. c. 13. ad
capessenda tam magnifica tamque praecelsa paritatis and integritatis praemia,
quantuslibet jejuniorum, vigiliarum, lectionis, solitudinis ac remotionis labor
fuerit impensus, condignus esse non poterit, qui hoc industriae suae merito vel
laboris obtineat.
Dom. Nostrum Jesum Christum, and neminem prorsus a Redemptione sanguinis
ipsius exceptum, etiamsi omnem hanc vitam alienissima ab eo mente pertranseat;
quia ad homines pertineat divinae misericordiae sacramentum (Baptismus nempe)
ut recte Cornelius Jansenius, Tom. 1. de haeres. pelag. lib. 8. c. 3. etc.)
itaque quantum ad Deum pertinet omnibus paratam vitam aeternam. Et Faustus,
lib. 1. de gra. and lib. ar. cap. 16. Dominum Nostrum Jesum Christum aiunt
(diceret si vixisset nostris temporibus Calvinistae, sed contrarium Jesuitae
and Dominicani, Arminiani, Pelagiani, Sociniani) humanam carnem non pro omnibus
sumpsisse, nec pro omnibus mortuum esse. See Cornelius Jansenius, ib. to whose
writings Jesuits and Dominicans shall never answer. The Massilienses cared not
(as Corn. Janse. tom. 1. de haeres. pelag. l. 8. c. 17.) for the word of merit,
if man's will went before God's grace. Epist. Prosper and Hilar. Vt ideo quis
adjuvetur, quia voluit, non ideo quia adjuvatur, velit. And Cassianus denied
all merit of condignity, and said, that the labor of our fasting, watching,
etc. was not worthy of the grace of conversion and of salvation, Hilarious
Epist. dicunt hominem ad hanc gratiam, qua in Christo renascimur, pervenire
posse, per naturalem scilicet facultatem petendo, quaerndo, pulsando, ut ideo
accipiat, ideo inveniat, ideo introeat, quia bono naturae been usus ad ista^
salvante^ gratiam, initialis gratiae open meruerit per venire.
and yet he held the merit of congruity to be as needful to go before our
conversion. So Hilarious says, that Cassianus taught, that by seeking or
praying, and searching and knocking, we came to the grace of conversion; so
that the Massilienses and Augustine, while he followed their error, thought
faith not to be the gift of God, but that a merit of impetration, and of
knocking and praying went before conversion, and that men obtained conversion
and justification by prayer and faith, so that faith is not a gift of God, as
Augustine thought, when he did yet stick in the errors of the Massilienses,
hence under the name of an occasion or color they hide merit; for as Jansenius
says, God has by the good works and holy dispositions that go before grace,
aliquam occasionem sive colorem, cur non irrationabiliter, some occasion or
color by which, not without reason, and in no blind way, by a fatal decree
without consulting man's will, he gives grace to one rather then to another;
Corn. Jans. de haeres. pela. l. 8. c. 18. Item posse hominem exterrita and
supplici voluntate velle sanari; supplex enim illa voluntas nihil est aliud,
quam voluntas ex fide supplicans deo pro sanitate -- et siquid fides (non
justificatorum) petendo mereatur, impetrationis quam meriti potius rationem
habet, unde cum in errore Massiliensium haereret Augustinus, frequenter meriti
rationem, quam in fide and oratione collocabat, per impetrationem exponit,
putans ( inquit Augustinus lib. de praed. 5. 5. c 3.) fidem non esse donum dei
sed a nobis esse, in nobis, and per illam nos impetrare dei dona; item ut per
illam daretur quod posceremus utiliter.

Jansen. in Aug. tom. 1. lib. 8. c. 18. Vnde possit ratio reddi electorum and
rejectorum, sive cur unus prae alio assumatur, deo viz. sic habente occasionem
sive colorem, cur non irrationabiliter, ut Cassilianus (Coll. 13.) loquitur;
sive caeco quasi modo, irrefragabili aliqua constitutione, inconsulta hominis
voluntate gratiam salvantem uni prae aliis largiretur.

Hilarious in Epist. ad August. Prosp. Epist. ad August. Qui autem credituri
sunt, quive in ea fide quae deinceps per dei gratiam sit juvanda, mansuri sunt,
praestitisse ante mundi constitutionem.


and this is the Jesuits and Arminians way. God shall not be a wise and
rational agent, but act blindly (says Cassianus) and unjustly (say our
Arminians) if he give not saving grace, and influences of grace upon the
dominion and disposing of man's free will; now add to this, that the
Massilienses said, as Hilarious and Prosper witness, God did predestinate to
glory such only as he fore saw before the world was, should believe and
persevere to the end; and that God will have all and every one to be saved; and
that God bestows grace upon all and every man; and Pelagians and Jesuits shall
find a market for merits; and men shall be Lords and carvers of heaven and
hell, and stewards absolute, and sovereign of their own salvation and
damnation. What more can be said to blow up and make proud silly free will?

PART IV.
CHAP. I.
Of the impediments of heavenly influences upon the soul in general, and of
their cure. 2. There be much using of means and no influences. 3. Means would
be used in much humility. 4. We may mar influences of grace.

IT is not to be thought that influences, being acts of omnipotency, can
properly be hindered; but by way of promise and judicial threatening, he has
revealed in his word that he will give grace to the humble, and resist the
proud, James 4. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 5. and that he will guide and teach the meek and
lowly, Psalm 25. 9. he certainly promises influence of grace to the meek. Hence

1. Quest. Whether God gives ordinarily and always influences of grace, at or
in the using of means?

2. Whether men can hinder the holy influences of God?

3. What are the impediments in the soul in general, and their cures with them.

4. What are the impediments in special, and their cures.

As to the first of these four, the following conclusions may be considered.

1. Concl. Often God reveals himself. 1. To Moses waiting on his herding, Exodus
3. he appears to him in the bush: he reveals Christ to the Disciples while they
are mending their nets: the Angels declare to the shepherds the birth of
Christ while they attend their flocks, yet is there no necessary connection
between the one and the other. But could we in conscience, and in reference to
God, while we are yet in the state of unrenewed nature attend our callings, we
might lie nearer to the Son of righteousness and his influences of grace: a
sluggard spiritual may fear spiritual and judicial want of grace.

Ass. 2. There is sometime much seeking of Christ, There may be much seeking and
using of m^ans, and no influences.
and no finding, Cant. 3. 1, 2. for a time: Magdalen is early up in the
morning, and finds for the present, in lieu of Christ, an empty grave, and
grave-cloaths only; There is much crying to God, and for the time no hearing,
Psalm. 22. 2. Psalm. 69. 1, 2, 3. It Is here as in other means, early up, much
laboring, no bread, and the runner gets not the garland.

The Lord will have 1. free grace to shine above our sweating. 2. He will have
us not to sacrifice to the creature, and created diligence, and to painful
seeking, and will have us to learn our folly, who place our mercy and will have
our Heaven to stand in running and willing and not in his free compassion. Esa^
runs and hunts, and obtains not the blessing; Jacob stirs less and is blessed:
I speak it not to cry down means, but to cry up Christ and free grace. The Lord
seems to forbid Jacob to pray, Let me go, for the day dawneth: but he rather
encourages him to pray; but he teaches that God's hearing and blessing is
more then my tears and wrestling.

3. The Lord would have us to examine, Using of means would be in humility.
whether it be a humble and believing using of means that we go about, or not.
The repenting Thief, in three hours upon the Cross runs, and the same day gets
Paradise; and many have a fair wind and sail seventy years in a profession,
yea, hear much, and believe not, and the ship is broken, and the man perishes;
For Matthew. 8. 11. many shall come from the East, and the West, and sit down at
table with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: and the children of the Kingdom (who
were first called, and in before them) shall be cast into utter darkness. Do
not some sail much and promove nothing to the harbor? Read Romans 9. 31, 32. Ah,
tremble to see a man believed to have many thousands, and a great stock in
four, in seven ships, and yet the man goes a begging.

Ass. 3. Some means are cursed of God, and God sends judicial influences upon
them; Devils believe, and horror take hold on them; Felix hears, and trembles,
and shifts influences of believing.

Concl. Influences not entertained breed loath^ng of the Gospel.
4. Where common influences are not entertained, they produce loathing of, and
stumbling at the word in Capernaum: the day of grace in the Gospel to Capernaum
is the year of vengeance; despise not, if ye wonder, O dreadful, yea, wonder,
and despise and hate.

Concl. 5. The more spiritual the actings of God are, such as are
Gospel-influences leading to, 1. illumination and clear light; 2. to
astonishment and to wondering; 3. to strong conviction, they must be more
spiritual, especially above law-influences, upon Barbarians, and the more
direful effects they work: when the excellent element, air or water is made
contagious, it is the more pestilentious and corrupt; how do diseases, and
pests rage? were the element of water, which is so excellent and useful, turned
into blood, how unpleasant would it be to drink of it? Who knows what
influences of wrath follow the Pharisees hearing and hating of Christ and the
Gospel? the disposition of Children new born were good in hearing, and James
his word c. 1. 21. is very useful, that we receive the engrafted word (...) in
meekness; otherwise ill soil marrs the seed, and renders it unprofitable, and
the good seed makes the soil worse.

Concl. 6. We are so to use means, in godly trembling, in humility, in faith,
as to look that the Lord will send showrs upon his own husbandry; and malicious
hearers are to be afraid, that rain, dew, summer showrs shall cause the bad
earth cast up more abundantly briars, nettles, and the like.

As to the 2. Though the procuring of influences be above our reach, We may
ma^^e influences of grace.
except in the way spoken of, yet a small touch of an unskild man may mar the
work of an Horologue, that it cannot act; but much art is required to temper
it: it is in the power of a child, with little strength to put a small stone in
the wards of a lock, so it can neither open nor shut: we can mar our own
comfort, and the work of salvation, and then complain of God to God, as Matthew.
25. 25. and the damned in Hell complain that God gives not sufficient means,
who denies to send Preachers from the dead to them, and gives them a dry and
dead book of Moses and the Prophets to give them warning, Luke 16. 29, 30. No
husbandman can hinder the rain to fall, the corn to grow, nor the Sun to send
down beams and influences of heat and life upon the earth: nor can Saul in the
rage of his persecution hinder Christ to shoot his arrows at him, Acts 9. Such
as complain most of God, are really most naughty, and may sooner meet with the
Lord's wrathful rebuke, then with his softening and pitying mercy.

CHAP. II.
The Lord keeps an order in sending influences. 2. He makes short work on
some. 3. There is a confluence of influences at one time, and in one work. 4.
Despising of the Word. 5. Refusing of Ordinances. 6. Persecuting of the
Prophets. 7. Resisting of the operations of the spirit, do all obstruct
influences. 8. Praying and praising promove influences. 9. Hardening of the
heart, 10. Not profiting by means. 11. Remaining in nature. 12. Actings in
wrath, rancor, malice, bitterness, and inordinate passion, obstruct
influences. 13. Keep the oil of the spirit clean, if ye would have influences.
14. We are to act morally and physically with the spirit. 15. Prayers obstruct
not soveraigntys acting.

THe Lord's ordinary way of working is here to be observing; the spirit confers
not upon Peter's hearers, Acts 2. influences of faith, and of gladly receiving
of the word, v. 41. at the first, before he bestow influences to the pricking
of the heart for sin, v. 37. nor does the spirit act upon Saul, Acts, 9. and
the Jayler, Acts 16. for their rejoicing in the Holy Ghost and believing, and
applying Christ and the promises at the first, The order of the Lord in
conferring of influences.
until first a law-spirit humble and make the proud to tremble. Then the spirit
must use diverse instruments, and shoot arrows and influences of law and wrath,
and wound the heart with arrows of love: as the Artist, the Carpenter uses
sundry tools according to the diversity of timber that he works on, and the
Lord here accommodates his influences according to the nature of the soil. It Is
like Christ's spirit made shorter and more expedite work on the hearts of James
and John; for when Christ said unto them, Follow me, Matthew. 4. 19, 22. they
(...) straigthway or immediately leave their nets and their father, and follow
him. It Is as little time betwixt Christ's word to the man sick of the palsy,
Arise, take up thy bed and walk, and his walking Mark 2. 12. for immediately
(...) he took up his bed, and went forth before them all: It Is like Matthew's
conversion is of the same nature, Matthew. 9. 9. Luke 5. 27, 28. in which the
Lord gives proof, that as some Castles fall at the first shooting of the Canon,
so there is no standing out, nor resisting of Christ; for when he adds strength
of omnipotency, the work of humiliation, of conviction, of saving faith, or
repenting, are all quickly done: as if tilling, sowing, and harvest were all in
one day, or one hour.

2. We see also that gracious influences are threeded (as it were) upon
gracious influences; A confluence of heavenly influences at one time and in one
work.
every beating of the smiths hammer brings forth at once many sparkles of fire,
and a shour of rain is the falling of millions and hosts of drops of rain at
once. So in fervent prayer, there must be a cluster of gracious influences; in
every sigh and groan there is an acting of the spirit, Romans 8. 26. The work of
the spirit must be maimed, imperfect: if godly watching, 2. Prayer, 3 Fervent
desire, 4. Humble sense of unworthiness, 5. Faith on the promise, 6. Love to
our Father, have not every one their several influences of grace. When the
seven stars arise above the Horizon, if six ascend, the seventh must also
ascend; in all which, the poor sinner is far below the influences of grace,
they are sent out as sovereignty thinks fit; and here the Lord rains down
showrs of grace, and a shower is made up of a multitude of drops: yet in the
general may sinners counter-work and restrain as it were the influences of
grace; they may resist the word, Zech. 7. 12. They made their hearts like an
Adamant stone, lest they should hear the Law. Now the Lord cannot give
influences out with the preached word where men turn away their ears from the
Law, Resisting of the Word hinders not influences.
Prove. 28. 9. and Act. 7. 57. they stop their ears. Wicked men cannot be
avenged on the Spirit in his person, or in his several operations of saving
grace; yet they avenge themselves on the message, and break in pieces the
chariot that carries the Spirits operations, and trample upon his word; be in
love with the word to count it your heritage, Sweeter then the honey and the
honeycomb; and you as David upon suit, shall have influences to be kept from
presumptuous sins. Psalm. 19. 7, 8, 9. compared with v. 13. and Psalm 119. 40.
Behold, I have longed after thy precepts, therefore Quicken me in thy
righteousness.

2. Refusing of Ordinances h^nders not influences.
Men can refuse to come and partake of Ordinances and to be Baptized, as the
Pharisees do Luke 7. 29, 30. and so reject the counsel of God; and refusing to
be among the golden Candlesticks, and the Assembly of his Saints, comes near to
trampling on the blood of the Covenant, doing despite to the Spirit of grace,
Heb. 10. 25, 26, 29. Rejoice to stand within Jerusalem, Psalm. 122. for the
Church is his vineyard: love a room in his Church, for it lies near to the Sun,
and is under the watering and showers of grace. So Christ speaks to the Spirit,
Cant. 4. 16. Awake O North Wind, and come thou South, blow upon my garden, that
the spices thereof may flow out. So there is a commission given that the Spirit
in its efficacy blow upon the plants and flowers that grow there; the Church is
also his garden of red wine which he waters every moment, Isa. 27.

3. Acts 7. Despising and persecuting of the Prophets obstruct influences.
51. Ye do always resist the holy Ghost, then must they obstruct the gracious
actings of the holy Ghost: and this proves it to be true that Steven said, that
they resisted the holy Ghost: Which of the prophets have not your fathers
persecuted? and they have slain them which showed before of the coming of that
just one, of whom ye are murderers, (says he) they who cast down the lodging
they injure the indweller; the godly prophet is the house and lodging of the
holy Ghost. 2 Chro. 36. 12. Zedekiah humbled not himself before Jeremiah the
Prophet, (speaking) from the mouth of the Lord. Now the Spirit acted on the
Prophets when they spoke, 2 Pet. 1. 12. then esteem the feet of the messengers
of God to be pleasant upon the mountains, for they bring glad tidings of peace,
and that they only do who have these gifts of the Spirit to pray and believe,
Romans 10. 14, 15.

4. Resisting of the operations of the Spirit is ^o obstruct influenences.
The speaking against the manifest operations of the Spirit of the Lord, by
which Christ cast out devils, draws so deep as the sin against the holy Ghost,
Matthew. 12. and such are deprived of pardon, of faith to lay hold on pardon; and
such having done despite to the spirit of grace, must indite war against the
Spirit and all his operations; therefore cherish and obey the Spirits actings,
be willing to be led by him, close with the counsels and breathings of the
Spirit; speak to edification, that which ministers grace to the hearers,
Praying and praising promove the Spirits influences.
and that cherishes the sealing of the Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 29, 30. So singing
Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, with making melody in the heart to the
Lord, is a proclaiming that there is some fullness of the Spirit; if the Spirit
could speak in the Saints, the two native languages of the Spirit would be
praying (for that is the cry of the Spirit, Romans 8. 15, 23, 26.) and singing
praises, Ephesians. 5. 18, 19, 20. The way to have influences of the Spirit is to
pray continually and fervently, and to give thanks always for all things unto
God the father in the name of our Lord Jesus, Ephesians. 5. 20.

5. Hardening of the heart obstructs influences
A wicked hardening of the heart, is as if ye would cast water on a weakly
smoking fire of green timber, that cannot be a seat, an office-house to the
Spirit and his actings, such are interdited of the spiritual seeing, and of the
Spirits hearing of the Spirit. Romans 11. 8. God has given them the spirit of
slumber; eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear to
this day. It Is dreadful when Prophets preach some stark blind and dead: one of
the chief and noble operations of the Spirit, is illumination, and he is a
seeing, and an enlightening, and a hearing spirit.

1. Wink not before the shining beams of the Sun; yield heartily to the
convictions of the Spirit, John 16. 7. such as waste away the light of
conscience and the convictions of the Spirit, are not entrusted again with new
actings of the Spirits enlightening.

2. Be tender, and stand in awe of smaller sins: it speaks much of the spirit
in David, to be smitten with the renting of the lap of Readiness garment.

6. Not profiting by means obstructs influences.
Some make themselves incapable of the actings of the Spirit, who seeing great
temptations, signs and miracles, have plenty of means, yet remain blind and
hard-hearted, and dull of hearing, Deuteronomy. 29. 2, 3, 4. Heb. 5. 11, 12. Joh. 12.
37, 38, 39, 40. if we would improve the actings of the Spirit, and delight in
the Lords way, we should have new influences to walk in his paths, Psalm 119.
35. and God teaches David good judgments; for (says he) I have believed thy
commandments, v. 66. So are they-far from new influences who abuse so many
plagues and so many deliverances from these plagues, as Pharaoh did, and crush
the motions of a trembling conscience, as Felix did; a doubt it may be if ever
the like acting of a Law-spirit visit such men again.

7. Remaining in nature obstructs influences.
All such who remain in the state of unrenewed nature are incapable of the
actings of the Spirit: nor does the Spirit lodge in sensual and beastly men,
Jude v. 19. nor can the world receive the Spirit of truth, John 14. 17. no more
then the spirit and breathing of a horse can lodge in a^pismire. It Is true,
John Baptist was full of the holy Ghost from the womb. Luke 1 15. and the
Spirit acts him with joy, v. 41. when Mary saluted her; but John Baptists sin
Original was both then pardoned, as touching the damnation thereof, and subdued
as touching the dominion of it. Otherwise another spirit acts and works by
nature in the sons of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. and these two strong ones can
remain and dwell both in one castle; then seek translation, and to be with
Christ, if ye would have the Spirit and his influences; multitudes no more
complain of the want of the influences of the Spirit then a dead man's corpse
complains of cold, of hunger, of thirst, or of influences of life from the
living soul; nor complain they of sickness. Oh, it speaks life to be pained for
the wa^ of the Spirit and his influences: what wonder that ye cannot persuade a
sleeping man that he sleeps?

8. Actings of bitterness, wrath, malice, ^ancor, sadden the spirit.
Some actings of bitterness, wrath, clamor, anger and malice in the Saints may
sadden the Spirit of God, darken the evidence of the Spirits sealing unto the
day of redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30, 31. It must be a sort of suffering to the
Spirit, and a casting water on the fire, and a deadning to David, as touching
vigorous and lively operations, that he acted adultery and murder, which moves
him to pray for the restoring to him again the joy of the Lords salvation, and
to be upholden by the Lords free spirit, Psalm. 51. 12. Can a King dwell even in
a palace when it is burning and smoking about his ears? therefore holy
actings, teaching of sinners, praying, praising, Psalm 51. 13, 14. 15. to be
kind one to another, and tenderhearted, to forgive one another, as Christ did,
Ephesians. 4. 32. and to act as the Spirit, and to be holy and heavenly in one walk,
puts the Spirit in a sweet composed temper to act and breath abundantly in his
flowings of love and grace.

9. It would be observed that influences of the Spirit are contempered with the
actings of grace, with which they concur; Influences of the spirit are
contempered according to the habit of grace.
the spirit of adoption acts in the grammar of prayer, to cry Abba Father; and
he comes down to the language of children learning to speak, and to say Abba;
and the Spirit helps our infirmities. O, it must be great help that the Spirit
yields; it must be creating of new heavens, or removing of mountains, or
dividing of the sea, or something like (say some:) nay the Spirit helps us with
a groan; his influences come down to sigh and weep, and mourn like a dove in a
Saint, Romans 8. 26. Cant. 2. 14. Ezech. 7. 16. and if so, it is no wonder that
the Spirit breaths not on our wild fire anger. Well, does the Spirit breathe on
Christ's holy anger? he was angry and grieved, Mark 3. 5. and was saddened at
the offending of God. To be angry at the sin of offenders, and yet so as to
compassionate the soul of the offender, this is to fix a fit seat for the
influences of the spirit; nor can we receive the influences of that spirit who
applies and intimates pardon and forgiveness when our anger is such to these
who injure us as we cannot forgive them; and if anger lodge and take chamber in
the bosom and breast of a fool, can the Spirit breathe supplications in such a
breast? when the fountain is troubled and muddy with clay, it gives no
representation of the face and image to the beholder. Psalm 119. 135. Make thy
face to shine on thy servant: but the soul is a dusty and muddy glass most
unfit to receive the irradiations and beams of such a transcendent sun of
glory; Sorrow worldly obstruct influences.
yea, it is some way fitted, v. 136. rivers of water run down mine eyes, because
they keep not thy Law. Then a soul mourning for sin is fit to be shined upon by
the Lord: when the man Christ's soul is exceeding sorrowful, even to the death,
Matthew. 26. 38. then is his soul fit to receive dartings of the spirit, to pray
most humbly with his face on the ground, v. 39. most believingly, O my Father,
(...).
O my Father; most fervently with tripple praying, 44. more earnestly, Luke 22.
44. or more bendedly; then cannot a soul filled with hellish and divelish
sorrow, such as was the case of wakened Judas, receive influences of the Spirit
to see a pierced Lord, and to be in bitterness as one is for his only son,
Zech. 12. 10. but must despair, and receive influences of hell for hardness and
impenitency.

Obj. But we see the Church lament, 3. very unbelievingly quarrelling with God.
v. 8. When I shout and cry, he shuts out my prayer. 10. He was unto me as a
Bear lying in wait, and as a Lion in secret places: And v. 18. I said my
strength and my hope is perished from the Lord. Yet verse 24. The Lord is my
portion, says my soul, therefore will I hope in him: then does not unbelief
and sorrow of sad and half despairing, so incapacitate and deaden the soul to
receive influences of believing?

Answ. There is a far other consideration of a soul under prevailing
corruption, that is either yet not converted, and of a converted man under a
strong prevailing temptation: when two contrary champions, the flesh and the
spirit, We cannot expeditely change our spirit from carnal dispositions to
spiritual, but the Spirit can go and come with great celerity.
are standing in battle array in the fields, each one enemy attending the
motions of another, as in the former consideration: there is a great difference
betwixt green timber and dry and withered fuel, or betwixt dry firewood and
fuel, though dry, yet soaked some days in water; in this ease influences of
the spirit from heaven, and influences of the flesh from hell, do not so
quickly exchange lodgings, and go and come to and from diverse subjects; neither
an unrenewed man, nor a David under prevailing lust, are such fitly disposed
fields for showers of influences, as in a moment they can cast off deadness and
put on a spiritual disposition to receive influences of grace, though there be
an active celerity on the Spirits part, for he can go and come quickly, and
this is to be seen in a soul under spiritual exercise, even now there is a sad
complaining, I said in my haste, I am ^ast out from before thy face; and yet
with the same breath, nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my supplication.
Then under sense of being cast out of Gods favor, there are also influences to
pray, and to pray in faith, and when the Christian fainting says, My strength
and my hope is perished from the Lord, Lam. 3. 18. she also says, The Lord is
my portion, says my soul, v. 24. It Is clear then that fainting and feeling are
near to other, and so influences for the one and for the other are near to
other; the quickness and celerity of influences is evident in the sudden ups
and downs of the soul, as the shining of the Sun in March and the showring of
the clouds are so near to other, he comes in his shinings as a fire-flaught in
the midst of our sad louring and dumpish deadness, and when the Lord pleases
his visits are speedy and swift.

CHAP. III.
How the soul is under plenty of means and dispositions heavenly, and yet under
scarcity of influences. 2. Praying and love to the word, according to the will
of precept, all along through Psalm 119. 3. Delighting in the word, reading and
meditating thereon fetch heavenly influences. 4. Hence 18. obstructions of
influences. 1. Hardness and blindness. 2. Unbelief. 3. Deadness. 4. Security.
5. Irreligious profaneness and Atheism. 6. Inconstancy. 7. Deceitfulness. 8.
Pride. 9. Worldly-mindedness. 10. Fiery preposterous zeal. 11. Uncleanness. 12.
Malice and bitterness. 13. Worldly sorrow. 14. False joy. 15. Self-love. 16.
Wilful ignorance of the Gospel, and hatred of Christ. 17. Impatient fretting
against providence, the contraries of all which help to fetch heavenly
influences. Lasty, the Lords manner of contributing his influences makes us not
passive lumps and blocks; the word shows that God lays a holy necessity on our
will, so that we are most willing and free agents in spiritual actings. 18.
Vain and wanton thoughts obstruct influences.

THe heart, as including will and mind and affections, is the public Inn and
lodging that receives all influences.

1. How the soul is under plenty of means, and possibly sweet dispositions, and
yet under scarcity of influences.
There is a sweet proportion betwixt the influences of the spirit and the new
heart.

Quest. How is it then that the soul is under sweet dispositions and plenty of
means, and yet wants influences?

Answ. This is to show the absolute freedom of grace, as Cant. 1. the Spouse is
in a sweet condition, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for his
love is better then wine. 3. Because of the savor of thy good ointments, thy
name is ointment poured out, therefore do the virgins love thee. 4. The King
brought me into his chambers; yet she stands in need of a pull, draw me. v. 7.
Tell thou me (O thou whom my soul loves) where thou feedest, where thou make
thy flocks to rest at noonday. Here is a soul in love, longing to be embraced
and kissed, smelling Christ's precious ointments, taken in to the Kings chamber;
yet the prayer to be drawn, and to be instructed where to find him, teaches,
that some are at the wellhead, and yet thirsty, and in Christ's banqueting
house, and yet the praying of such to be drawn, speaks want of influences, and
hunger for more, except Christ intimately apply his influences to will and to
do. Cant. 2. 4. He brought me into his banqueting house, his banner over me was
love. 6. His left hand is under my head, and his right hand does embrace me.
What is here wanting? is not this paradise come down from heaven? but the
prayer, v. 5. Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples, for I am sick of
love, is a strong evidence that the Spouse, even in Christ's arms, and in his
house of wine, where are all the refreshments of heaven, is not sick only, but
fallen into a deep swoon, if Christ hold not up the head, and stay the soul
with quickening influences: what then could you make of heaven it self, and of
Christ's sweetest embracements, if he teach not how to improve the fullness of
this free love in sweetest actings of heavenly duties? When John is in heaven,
and sees heavens glory, yet if the present actings of the spirit go not betwixt
him and Angel-worship he roves; influences must then make Christ to be Christ,
and heaven to be heaven, and the Spirit must open and let out upon the withered
soul streams of the well of life, otherwise there is the banqueting house of
wine, and there is yet the hungry and swooning Spouse; there is heaven and
fullness of glory, and there is yet miscarrying John: grace must make it self
our grace, and he will have us to know to whom we owe the thanks, both of
Christ and of the outletting and emanations of free grace, and of the well of
life, and of the flowings and streamings of that fountain, and so the created
habit of grace is not to be rested on, but Christ acting in his free grace is
all in all.

2. These are together often praying, and actual influences, and d^ties and
influences: the former according to the Lord's will of precept, the latter
according to his will of pleasure, are interwoven all along, Psalm. 119.
The Lord gives influences according to his will of pleasure; but we must stir
and pray, and act according to his will of precept. Hence all along, Psalm. 119.
praying and influences of grace are woven through other, ver. 25. My soul
cleaves to the dust, that is a work of the Lords gracious will of pleasure;
Quicken me according to thy word, that is a duty of praying according to his
will of precept.

2. His gracious dealing of his will of pleasure, is brought in as an argument
to engage the heart to pray for grace to a duty of the holy will of command.
73. Thy hands have made me and fashioned me; give me understanding, that I may
learn thy Commandments. v. 10. With my whole heart have I sought thee, O let me
not wander from thy commandments.

3. The acting of a duty according to the gracious will of precept, is made an
argument why the Lord should bestow saving influences according to his will of
pleasure; to promote us in duties, Psalm. 119. 40. Behold I have longed after
thy precepts: quicken me in thy righteousness. 58. I entreated thy favor with
my whole heart: be merciful to me according to thy word. v. 176. I have gone
astray like a lost sheep, seek thy servant; for I do not forget thy
commandments.

4. Grace prayed for according to the will of pleasure kindles fire for an
engaged heart to do a duty according to the Lord's holy will in his word. 33.
Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes, and I shall keep it to the end. 34.
Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy Law: Yea I shall observe it with
my whole heart. That is, Lord lend me grace, and by that grace I shall repay
duty; borrowed grace makes the soul a debtor for duties. 32. I will run the
way of thy commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart.

5. It Is comfortable for strengthening of faith, to lay before the Lord the
victory of his grace, and the strength of the temptation, broken by going on a
duty. Hence a temptation; 23. Princes did sit and speak against me: but an
influence of grace to do the duty broke the temptation. But thy servant did
meditate in thy statutes. 69. The proud have forged a lie against me. A strong
temptation; but its broken: but I shall keep thy precepts with my whole heart.
81. My soul faints for thy salvation, but I hope in thy word.

So all along learn, Of the sweet nearness betwixt love of the word and the
word hid in the heart, Psalm 119. v. 11. and spiritual influences.
1. That our free and voluntary trading with grace brings home new ships of
gold; and there is no danger of miscarrying and shipwreck.

2. Being once by grace breathed on, we are to hold the wheels a going: grace
puts the believer in a holy circle; and running begets more running, and the
motion ends at us and begins at free grace.

3. The nearest purchaser of influences is prayer. ver. 35. Make me to go in
the path of thy Commandments. 36. Incline my heart unto thy testimonies.

4. Grace given is a strong argument to get more grace; as gold buys more gold.

5. Though grace begin and prevene us, yet the Lord having once given the
stock, spiritual want comes from spiritual sluggishnesse: we are willing to
lose the tide and complain without cause of the seas motion.

6. The ordinary chariot and ship that carries the influences of grace is the
Word of grace. David Psalm. 119. is sick of love with the Word, Law,
Testimonies. ver. 47. And I will delight my self in thy Commandments which I
have loved. 72. The law of thy mouth is better to me then thousands of silver
and gold. 97. O how love I thy law! it is my meditation all the day. 103. How
sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter then honey to my mouth. ver.
11, 20, 24, 46, 50, 52, 54, 70, 86, 92, 93, 96, 111, 113, 105, 159, 160, etc.
and in that Psalm the influences of the spirit go all along in every verse, in
a practical, loving, delightful, panting, lifting of the hands to the
Commandments. v. 32. I Will run the ways of thy commandments. 34. Give me
understanding, and I shall keep thy law: yea, I shall observe it with my whole
heart. 45. I will walk at liberty; for I seek thy precepts. 44. I Will keep thy
law continually. 60. I made have and delayed not to keep thy Commandments. 66.
I have believed thy Commandments. 74. I have hoped in thy Word. 77. Thy Law is
my delight. 81. My soul faints for thy salvation: but I hope in thy Word. 83.
I forget not thy statutes. 87. I forsook not thy precepts. 93. I will never
forget thy precepts; for with them thou have quickened me, etc. all which hold
forth, if you would have showrs of influences of grace, be in love with the
Word, and let it dwell plentifully in you; for look as influences of vigor and
life, and heat upon roses, flowrs, herbs, grass, apple trees, vines, corn, go
along with light and shining of the Sun, so do the influences of the spirit:
and the spirit in his lively actings delights to be carried in the chariot of
the Word, Cant. 4. 11. Thy lips, O my soul, drop as the honeycomb: honey and
milk are under thy tongue, in regard of the precious promises of the Gospel in
the sound ministry of the Church, and the savoury influences of the spirit that
go along therewith; therefore he adds, the smell of thy garments is like the
smell of Lebanon. Cant. 7. 9. And the roof of thy mouth is like the best wine,
for my beloved that goes down sweetly, causing the lips of those that are
asleep to speak; (influences of the spirit of grace must go along with
speaking) such as are ignorant of the Word, and loath the precious Gospel and
stumble at the Word, cannot receive influences of the spirit.

7. There is some admirable nearness of the word to influences, Psalm. 119. 11.
Thy word have I hid in my heart: that I might not sin against thee. The word in
the letter can keep no man from sinning against God.

For it is 1. Of the word hidden in the heart.
common to all, and if not received by says, convinces and condemns.

Nor 2. can the habit of grace in the heart prevent sinning, except sinning
unto death; but not such sinning as David might, or could, yea or did fall
unto, adultery and murder, of which he was most afraid.

Nor 3. can the literal memory of the word hinder sinning and yielding to
dreadful temptations, though it be treasured up in the memory.

Nor 4. speaks he of the spirit, and inward word of the Swenckefieldians,
Libertines, and the like, who forsake the rule of faith, the word, and depend
upon wicked inspirations: but by the word hidden in the heart, he must mean the
Word of God, and the engraven Law of God, Psalm. 40. 8. Jer. 31. 33. not simply,
but as it includes the word dwelling in the heart plentifully, Coloss. 3. 16.
loved, Psalm. 116. 97, 103. esteemed and prized highly, Psalm. 119. 72, 128. and
believed, 92, 42, 43. and so seldomeo ^never have any an high esteem, or an
habitual love and faith and hope in, and to the word: but influences to keep
from sin go along with that word so hidden in the heart, that look as the
heavens, clouds, sun, fail not to join their influences to the seed of
vine-trees, roses, plants of fig trees; and nature goes along with birds to
cherish and to warm eggs for the bringing forth of young birds: so, in some
infallible way, by promise, God concurs with the so hidden word to produce
faith, and love, and all acts of obedience: how much then does it concern these
that move the question, what shall we do to fetch the wind, and to purchase
influences of grace? to read, hear, consider, love, praise, believe and chose
the Word as a treasure.

8. Overcomed temptations have influences suitable to graces victory, Psalm. 119.
23. Princes also did sit and speak against me: but thy servant did meditate in
thy statutes, v. 83, 69, 161, 141.

9. Felt deliverance wants not influences.
Felt deliverances from the oppression of man, v. 134. sense of the loveliness
and excellency of God want not influences, v. 68, and 132, 133.

3 As the earth and the things that grow thereon receive the Sun's influences,
so does the heart qualified with the habit of grace lodge heavenly influences,
and the welltuned string of the Harp and Viol closes sweetly with the smiting
of the pulse, or hand of the Musician; but the mistuned string stricken on
makes discord, and receives no concord of music: the savoury and gracious
heart welcomes the breathings of God, when the Spirit can no more act by his
influences on a graceless spirit, then a Musician can play harmoniously on a
broken Harp, or a mistuned Reed.

Hence these evils of the heart obstruct the influences of grace.

1. Hardness and blindness. 2. Unbelief. 3. Deadness. 4. Security. 5.
Irreligious profaneness. and Atheism. 6. Inconstancy. 7. Deceitfulness. 8.
Pride. 9. Worldly-mindednesse. 10. Fiery zeal. 11. Uncleanness. 12. Malice
and hatred. 13. Worldly sorrow. 14. False joy. 15. Self-love. 16. Wilful
ignorance of the Gospel and hatred of Christ. 17. Impatient fretting against
Providence. 18. Disordered thoughts and ignorance of God in Christ.
1. Blindness and hardening of the heart, As the light of faith and softness
easily admits an influence of grace, so hardness^s and rockine^s hardly receive
any such impression.
and Pharaoh's not setting his heart, Exodus 7. 23. on the miracle of turning
the water of the river to blood; so that the fish in the river dyed, and the
river stank, hinders influences of obedience, to let the people go, Exodus 8. 1,
2, 3. Matthew. 13. 15. Their eyes have they closed, lest at any time they should
see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand with their
heart, and should be converted and I should heal them; as if they were afraid
for the saving influences of the saving grace of conversion: so men keep strong
forts, and imaginations against God besieging them by the preached Gospel, 2
Cor. 10. 5. 6. and will not have their thoughts led captives to the obedience
of Christ. Whereas softness and tenderness in Josiah 2 Kings 22. 19, 20.
brings stooping and self-humiliation, and receives influences for repenting,
weeping and renting the cloths before God; for what impressions of grace can
the stone or rock, (and such is the heart hardened, Ezech. 36. 26.) or the
Adamant receive, Zech. 7. 12? temptations, signs and wonders do nothing at all
to bring down the heart, Deuteronomy. 29. 3. keep thy heart in some softness and
tenderness, and then shall it receive smitings from God; for the very renting
of the lap of the garment of an enemy, the not despising of the cause of a
servant, whom the master may easily bear down; or the not warming of the loins
of the fatherless, with the fleece of the flock, Job 31. 13, 20. in David and
in Job have abundant influences of grace going along with them, and this seems
an innocent negative: and when such small fins (so they appear to men) leave an
impression of remorse, the heart is like melted wax that easily admits a figure
and the print of an image of a man or a Lion; Influences are some way due to
softness of heart as grace to the lowly, rain and dew to meadows in the valley,
Jam. 4. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 5. Psalm. 25. 9.

2. 2. Unbelief obstructs influences.
As the light of faith leads every thought captive to the obedience of Christ,
2 Cor. 10. 5, 6. so does unbelief dull the heart. The news of Christ risen
again are idle tales to the Apostles, Luke 24. 11. Unbelievers are men who
cannot be persuaded, (...); the Gospel leaves as little impression on the heart
as a ship on the Sea, or an Eagle in the Air, where the light of faith leaves
not a spiritual capacity for receiving the impressions of the Spirit of grace,
and where unbelief reigns: and since unbelief has conjoined softness and a
fainting at the face of great affliction, so as the heart is moved as the trees
of the wood, Isa. 7. 2. there is not a seat in it under such softness to
receive influences for the noble and high actings of the courage of faith in
withstanding Kings and Princes, Priests, Prophets, and People, in subduing of
Kingdoms, and in the believers godly hardening of himself as a wall of brass
and a fenced City against all these; yea, against death and the grave, Jer. 1.
18. Cant. 8. 6, 7. Ezech. 3. 8, 9. Romans 8. 35.

This is carefully to be observed, Influences of grace do no violence to the
rational power of nilling and willing.
that the influence of actual grace finds either in the habit of grace, or
frames and makes in the heart a gracious aptness and capacity to receive
actual influences suitable to the duties in hand, either of believing, patient
and joyful suffering for the Lord, and such like. As the Lord in his common
influences with the Sun rising and going down, the wind blowing, the Sea ebbing
and flowing straineth not, nor forces the nature of second causes, nor draws
them as passive lumps to act against the particular inclination of nature, but
carries along the natural active principles of the Sun, Wind, Sea, and such
like natural causes: so neither does the Spirit of grace, by his actual
influences, carry along the rational powers of knowing, believing, willing, as
mere dead and passive blocks, as the Carpenter hewing lifts an Axe and
shakes and moves the Saw: but the Lord makes the suitable active concurrences
of sinlesse nature and of grace stirring in its influences to join together and
accord friendly, connaturally, and without jarring, or violence done to nature,
and so carries on the supernatural and gracious actings of obedience. And
therefore as this point, with all getting get wisdom, Prove. 4. 5, 6. Prove. 2.
Incline the ear, apply the heart; cry, lift up the voice for knowledge, dig for
wisdom, as for silver and hid treasures: and then look for influences, v. 9.
then shall thou understand (by way of practice, which cannot want influences of
grace) righteousness, and judgment, and equity (yea) every good path. And
there is much in the walking by faith, the light of faith being the starlight
and the daylight ordering the motion; and beside, which no objective light can
do, it inclines and weighs the soul to spiritual acting, and the Spirit must
attend the stirring of saving light so inclining the heart with gracious
influences.

3. 3. Deadness hinders influences.
When we give way to deadness, and act literally, and carry on the bulk of
praying, hearing, as willing to get the body of the work over, and wrestle not
for life and power in praying, and blow not upon the dead heart, to stir up the
habit of grace, the Spirit withdraws and acts not on deadness, as the Sun
moves not vital spirits in a dead carrion, or dead corpse, for there are none in
it: the naked name of living professors in the Church of Sardis, when it was
but a name, is plagued with deadness, and so with withdrawing of influences,
Revel. 3. 1. the Cocks clapping with the wings adds strength to the crowing;
should we, if the iron be blunt, and the edge not whet, add and put too more
strength, Eccles. 10. 10. and seek life by stirring, as seamen, by sailing
about, seek and fetch wind, we should increase warmness of life, and hoised up
sails should receive wind; for humble sense of coldness and deadness and
missing of life is a good sign when it brings forth, Psalm. 119. the prayer so
frequent; Quicken me, Quicken me: prayers used as Matins and Vespers, and
wandering of heart, and whorish gadding of the thoughts in private praying
brings on deadness: and as a Smith blows not the bellows on cold iron and cold
fuel, where there is no sparkle of kindling of fire at all, neither does the
North or the South Wind in heavenly influences blow upon such hearts; Would ye
have God to be more serious in his influences, when you are formal and not
serious at all in the work?

4. 4. Security obstructs influences.
Security obstructs actings of grace: the Spouse sleeps, and Cant. 5. 2. the
Spirit withdraws influences to open to the beloved: the Disciples sleep, when
Matthew. 26. Christ exhorts them to watch and pray: and can the Spirit breath
upon a lying and sleeping sluggard? there is godly fear on the heart; but Peter
and the rest of the Disciples in their shameful flight and stumbling at the
sufferings of Christ, after their fearlesse and fleshly undertaking, saying
that they should rather die then forsake him, prove that the spirits
withdrawing, by which they fell in that sin, goes along with security: we would
watch and fear always; and the contrary of fearing always is hardening of the
heart, Prove. 28. 14. which infers a withdrawing of that enlightening and
softening grace. Where there is rising at midnight to praise, Psalm. 119. 62. a
preventing of the dawning of the morning to cry to God, Psalm. 119. 147. there
must be a continued shower of outlettings of influences of grace for the
lengthening out of hoping all the day long: as when Christ cannot sleep, but
watches and prays when others sleep, the life of this must hold forth a sea of
flowing in continued actings of grace in him.

5. 5. Atheism obstructs influences.
A profane heart, void of God, and filled with Atheism also obstructs the
flowings of the Spirit; so the wicked Psalm. 14. 4. call not upon the Lord;
there is not an owning of a God to be worshipped: Psalm. 14. 4. and the thing
that goes along with that, is oppression; they eat up my people as they eat
bread: and what gracious influences can there be there, especially when the
Lord complains, They are corrupt, they have done abominable works. 3. They are
all gone aside, they are altogether become filthy, etc. and the root is
Atheism: The fool has said in his heart, There is not a God. God breathes not
in his influences on such as deny there is a God, till he first blow away the
influences of Satan, who would darken and blot out the engraven notions of a
Godhead; because Satan cannot be an Atheist himself, he would make the world
speculative Atheists, (but because he cannot do this) he fills the world with
practical Atheists; it can neither be blotted out of the heart of damned men
nor devils, but a God and Judge there is; but men live without God, as if there
were not a God, and these two species of Atheism are dreadful,

(...).
Atheists without God creator. 1. When men laugh at a Godhead that created
all, and live by Policy, as State-Atheists. Or,

2. By Reason, as moral Atheists; or by Nature, as many Philosophers and some
Physicians; such are dead and dry rocks, never rained on by influences, seldom
while the skaddings of the river and streams of brimstone waken them are they
out of a sleep; for influences on the creature in all its operations,
especially in these of grace, are most proper actings of holy providence: he
who denies there is such a thing in the world as fire, or a Sun, must deny that
there is heat and light in the world. But the other sort of Atheists, without
Christ, God Immanuel, are more inexcusable; as a Gospel-Atheist is farther from
influences of grace then a Pagan-Atheist, as is clear from Matthew. 10. 15.
Matthew. 11. 22, 23, 24. Matthew. 12. 41, 42. because farther from salvation; how
few have been converted who were first temporary hypocrites, and long despisers
of the Gospel? 2. who have been long moral naturalists; and 3. long bitter and
virulent enemies to the Gospel and the godly, though otherways grave and civil?
Be much in believing that God is, Heb. 11. that leads the way to the noble
actings of faith in Abel, v. 4. Enoch, v. 5. Noah, v. 7. Abraham, v. 8. etc.
and the faith that God is, and rules, and is good to Israel, and that he
punishes wicked men though he make them rich, leads the Prophet to the faith
of God, his gracious providence in guiding the godly by his counsel, in holding
them by the right hand, Psam 73. 1, 2, 3, etc. 23, 24, 25.

6. The inconstancy of affections obstruct influences; even now Martha
believed, and then, Lord, he stinketh, for he has lain four days, John 11. 27,
39. The ebbing and flowing of the Sea, the waxing of the Moon, the full Moon,
the declining of it, the article of the change, have all diverse and contrary
influences on our bodies, on diseases, on living, dying, birth and health; and
so may we judge of influences from the sudden changes of the heart. As

1. It may be taken away, Hos. 4. 11. stolen away, 2 Samuel 15. 6. and as
movables can be stolen away and hid, though lands legally by fraud may be
stolen away, 6. The hearts unconstancy does much obstruct the influences of
God.
yet physically they cannot be hid; so the love and bensil of the heart may and
can be stolen away, and when hearts are from under the possession of the right
owner, the Lord our God, they are not under his influences, when they are not
in his world and Kingdom of grace, but in Satan's power; hearts benighted are
from under the influence of the Sun, and therefore cannot receive the rays and
beams of the Sun in the night.

2. Except the Lord pursue even renewed hearts, they are not the same to close
with influences now as they were the other hour.

3. The various words used by the Scripture, As

1. Bewitching of the hearts, and charming the Galatians from the sound
doctrine of Justification through faith only Gal. 3. 1. to Justification by
works, prove that influences that take yesterday will not take to day, for they
were hot in running, and then cold in sitting down, Gal. 5. 7. Deuteronomy. 19. 6.
while the avenger of blood, his heart is hot. The Galatians were willing to
pluck out their eyes of late for Paul, and now their affection to him being
soured, they look on him as an enemy, for he tells them the necessary and
lovely truth, Gal. 4. 15, 16.

2. The heart is a thing that may be bowed, 2 Samuel 19. 14. the metaphor is
known to the learned, it may be allured and enticed with fair words, 1 Cor. 2.
4. yea, the whole soul may be bought and sold, as Merchants goods, with fair
words. 2 Pet. 2. 3. False teachers, through covetousness, shall with feigned
well decked word, as exquisitely dressed as hair, make merchandise of you.

3. The heart may be turned as streams of a river drawn through this part of the
land, or this part, Prove. 21. 1. and from nilling to willing, as the Lord
thinks fit, according to Gods will of precept, is often the falling of the
Church of Ephesus sinfully from their first spiritual love, Revel. 2. 4. and
the turning from good to evil.

4. The heart may be engaged, Jer. 30. 21. glued and made to stick to such an
object, Psalm 119. 31. given up and delivered, Eccles. 2. 1, 2, 3. Eccles. 1.
13. 2 Chronicles. 20. 3. set and fixed to such a way, Judge. 13. 3. Judge. 5. 9.
touched and moved, 1 Samuel 10. 26. stirred to such a work, Ezech. 1. 1. and then
as the Sun in the Spring and Summer, coming near the earth, makes more
excellent effects on it then the Sun farther off in Winter; when the Lord comes
near, he works otherways on the heart then he does in his absence; all which
with diverse other words say it is not easy to lie under and receive the
influences of God; the gardens and meddows stir not out of their place, the
vine-trees, the corn and grass in mountains, valleys, vineyards, flee not away
from the falling of wind and dew, and the aspect and dartings of heat and beams
from Sun and Heavens: But ah, unstable hearts, which withdraw from under the
actings of the Spirit, and weary of prayer, hearing; whereas the establishing
of the heart with savoury dispositions, and delighting in the word fetch home
influences, as Psalm 119. clears.

7. The desperate wickedness and deceitfulness of the heart, 7.
Heart-deceitfulness obstructs influences.
Jer. 17. 9. puts the Prophet to speak to God, v. 13. O Lord, the hope of
Israel, all that forsake thee shall be ashamed. Influences then must be
withdrawn from deceitful workers; and if the heart be deceitful above all
things, then in some regard it is deceiful above Satan, as being a
heart-deceiving and murdering of our own souls, beyond the privity of Satan, we
boiling in the secret furnace of the heart many naughty thoughts that are
unknown to Satan; and who knows the hypocrisy of the heart? and what way God
plagues hypocrisy with farther hypocrisy, and by all sins?
heart-deceitfulness is within it self a rooting of it self: now this
deceitfulness being so contrary to sincere and singleness of heart must be
incapable of influences, for the upright and sincere heart, and truth in the
inward parts, Psalm 51. 6. is desired and loved, Psalm. 11. 7. Psalm. 146. 8.
exceedingly by the Lord, as most like himself. Psalm 11. 7. The righteous Lord
loves righteousness, his countenance does behold the upright. And so as every
thing loves its own, the hen warms and cherishes her chickens, and every bird
the young ones; so must the Lord follow with heavenly and quickening influences
sincerity of heart, when he particularly says to them, Psalm 32. 11. Be glad
in the Lord, and rejoice ye righteous, and shout for joy all ye that are
upright in heart. The Lord must then follow his own planting, (for the loving
of the Lord Jesus in sincerity, and the girdle of truth about the loins, is a
part of the armor of God, Ephesians. 6. 14.) with pruning, hedging, digging, and
showers from heaven, whereas upon the heart unrenewed and still deceitful,
there shall fall no rain; nor is a deceitful heart more capable of lively
influences, then thick gross misty air can admit of wind, or then a torch
steeped in mire and dirt is in capacity to receive light and flaming; and
suppose (which yet is not possible) God should send saving influences on an
unrenewed and deceitful heart, remaining such, yet could not such a poisoned
stem bud and bring forth acts of saving grace; as the thorn tree in the fattest
and choicest soil near the Sun, under influences of a warm heaven, benign
clouds, a sweet moderate air, could never bring forth delicious wine, grapes,
or pomegranates: prevaricators, hypocrites, and all double-minded halters
betwixt the Lord and Baal shall rot in their soil, and be as the heath in the
wilderness, and receive nothing of the actings of God; the Lord is far from
their reins, Jer. 12. 2. God is not in all their thoughts. Psalm 10. 4.
Salvation is far from the wicked: and what are then the influences of God on
them? for they seek not thy statutes, Psalm. 119. 155. but David, v. 156.
Quicken thou me according to thy judgments. 8. Pride obstructs influences,
humility capacitates to receive them.


8. Pride hinders not a little the outgoings of the Spirit; the proud soul
is the fallow ground, the unbroken and unplowed earth, and what can be hoped of
wheat or a barley harvest from rain and dew, and influences of Sun, air and
clouds, where the plough never broke the earth, and the Husbandman did sow
nothing? but as for the humble and humbled broken and meekned man, influences
are his by the promise of God (O that is a great and an unchangable thing)
Psalm. 25. 9. The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach
his way. None can be guided and taught practically to walk in the way of God,
but these who are acted by influences of grace; Christ thanks the Father
because he reveals the mysteries of the Kingdom to babes or young children,
Matthew. 11. 25. and James 4. 6. But he gives more grace, God resists the
proud, and gives grace (and so influences of grace, and more influences of
grace) to the humble. 1 Pet. 5. 5. And see

2. As the Lord and his servant nature has provided a providence more active
and careful in parents for suck and milk to infants, and for food to weaned
children, who are as passive as stones in providing for themselves; so does the
Lord rain in a more abundant providence influences of grace on the meekned and
broken spirit. Low valleys lying toward the Sun kindly receive dew and rain,
mountains not so.

3. If the bones be of new broken and hot, and the wound green, the tender hand
of Christ lovingly and compassionately binds up such broken ones. Isa. 61. 1.
Psalm. 147. 3. He heals the broken in heart, and binds up their wounds: and
bones easily know their own place of bones when his hand puts them in place.

4. Iron is the strongest and hardest of metals, yet being hot in the furnace
receives any impression or figure, and bones yield to the smiting of the
hammer, which it does not when it is cold and stiff: when the cross has
graciously melted and softened the soul, then it receives influences of grace,
and is ready to receive, as Saul, Act. 9. 6. trembling and a^tonished, said,
Lord, what will thou have me to do? The proud self arrogant spirit will not
receive nor lodge impressions of grace from heaven; be not then high-minded,
but fear, otherways there shall be no rain on you, and you shall not be
ingraffed in Christ.

9. Worldly mindedness and savouring of the things of the flesh keeps the soul
both under deadness and distance from God the light of glory, 9 Worldly
mindedness obstructs influences, and heavenly mindedness promoves it.
and the heart and conversation in heaven brings forth that which has a strong
influence of grace with it, Phil. 3. 20, 21. We look from heaven for our
Savior the Lord Jesus, who shall change our vile body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, when the soul is in heaven, and we all
(2 Cor. 3. 18.) with open face beholding, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord,
are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of
the Lord, we are near to the receiving of the aspects of the glorified
Redeemer; But such as mind earthly things, whose God is their belly, Phil. 3.
19. can no more receive influences of grace then earthworms, or the Serpent
that eats the dust; neither can heaven and the life to come have an
impression in the gracious influences of God upon a wretched man, who worships
clay and has no heaven but gold; how can influences of God be received in the
heart of an Idolater? Heavens glory upon the soul is so transparent, that bread
and hunger had no influence upon Moses for forty days, when he was in the mount
with God, and then rays and influences of glory could not but besweetly
received on the soul: it is clear in such as stand and live before the throne,
who are under the eternally shining summer Sun, and receive eternally
influences of glory, Rev. 7. 15. the Lamb leading them, they serve God night
and day in his Temple, v. 16. and see his face, Rev. 22. 4. and reign for ever
and ever, v. 5. and the Disciples forgot bread and garments, yea and houses for
themselves to dwell in (for the three tabernacles were for Christ, and Moses,
and Elias, not to shelter them from frosts and rain, and hail, for they feared
not the like injuries to glorified bodies) the Disciples say, It Is good for us
to be here; and so it is good for us to part with houses, with ships, with
fishing, with nets, with plucking of ears of corn, or buying of bread, yea it is
good to part with Ordinances, preaching to the Jews or Gentiles, with working
of miracles, healing the sick, or casting out of devils, influences of glory
were as connaturally received in the soul that is near God, and heavenly
minded, as the Moon and Stars receive light from the Sun, and dry fuel
receives fire where clay and the earthy and drosy, part of the Lords creation,
and his footstool, can receive no light at all; so if earthly mindedness have
fixed a seat in the affections, the spirit of grace and glory cannot shine
through gross and earthy hearts; give us corn, wine and oil, and the influences
of the lovely countenance of God say worldlings, we do little value; whereas it
is night and winter, and hell for a child of God, when the Lord withdraws
influences of faith and feeling, loving, rejoicing and near communion with God;
worshippers of God never miss gracious influences: when the soul is sick after
Christ, influences of God, for the high praise of Christ, abound, Cant. 5. 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, etc. and Psalm. 63. 1. when the soul thirsts for God, and the
heart and flesh cry out for the living God, Psalm. 88. 1, 2. and the soul
pants, as the heart for the water brooks, for God, Psalm. 42. 1. (which are
crying signs of a heart in heaven) then influences of grace, like an high
spring-tyde, and like a full river, flow most abundantly, even to the
satisfying of the soul as with marrow and fatness, and to the tongue praising
of God with joyful lips, and the remembering of God in the bed, in the
night-watches, Psalm. 63. 4, 5, 6. and to the extolling of the Lord as God and
King, Psalm. 88. 1, 2, 3. and the breaking of the heart and bones when God is
reproached, Psalm. 42. 3, 10.

10. 10. Fiery bastard zeal hinder influences.
Fiery zeal hinder influences; burn the Samaritans with fire from heaven, say
the Disciples. O Paul (say fiery followers of the Law) would destroy the Law of
God, and have Christ and grace all; but received ye the spirit (or his
influences) by the Law? ye know not the wildfire of revenge and the spirit of
anger that leads you, says Christ to the Disciples, even to the mild beloved
disciple John, Luke 9. 54. Come (says Jehu) and see my zeal for the Lord,
liar, come see my zeal for Jehu, and for Jehu his new Kingdom; but there were
here no influences of the spirit of grace, for 2 Kings 10. 31. Jehu took no
heed to walk in the Law of the Lord God of Israel with all his heart; for he
departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, which made Israel to sin. Therefore
Jehu his fire in killing Baal's priests, and Achab's seed, being from false
principles, carnal and self ends, and called by the holy Ghost. Hos. 1. 4.
bloodshed and murder to be avenged of God, must come from bastard influences.
And when our savior rights the fire of zeal in John and James, he condemns
the Spirit and the influences that made them so brutishly to startle, Luke 9.
55.

2. He reduces them to the faith and sound believing of his coming in the
world, which was to save men's lives, not to destroy them, v. 56. it is a notable
healing of the too hot blood, that is in fiery zeal to believe soundly the
meekness of Christ; therefore would hot and wildfire influences be well tried
whence they come, from Heaven or from Hell: for so some who kill the Lords
Apostles, judge then if sparkles of fire can come from heaven, John 16. 2. when
it is nothing so. Ophni and Phinehas are publicly zealous for the Lord; Moses
meek in the injury done to him by Miriam, and by Core and Dathan, and his, is
fiery against the golden calf in the Lords cause; hence influences from God set
them a work, and eat them up as zeal for the Lords house eat up David, Psalm
69. 9. Psalm 119. 139. and Christ, John 2. 17.

11. Fleshly uncleanness put them of Sodom to mock and persecute Lot a preacher
of righteousness, Genesis 19. 9. and their not hearing of Lot prove their
influences were not of God. The holy Ghost clears to us that David, 2 Samuel 11.
all along was carried by no saving influences, for there we find 1. His
idleness. 2. His sluggishness, in sleeping in day light, when the Ark and
people of God were in the fields. 11. An unclean heart cannot receive
influences of the Spirit.
3. His adultery. 4. His sending for Vriah to cover the matter. 5. His causing
Vriah to be drunk. 6. His bloody letter to Joab to kill Vriah. 7. His
bloodshed. 8. His Atheistical talking the state of the war. 9. Whereas David
mourned for the death of Saul and Abner his enemies, and his not looking with
godly trembling on works of divine justice in the Army, he passes this over
as a chance of war, in all which the spirit that led him in composing heavenly
Prayers and Psalms was now far away: What actings of the Spirit can swine and
dogs receive from God? 2 Pet. 2. 12. 22. O but a clean hearth-stone, and a
chaste, holy and clean house would be kept for the kindlings and flamings of
the holy Ghost. See Tit. 2. 3, 4. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 2, 3, 4. 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. let
the holy Ghost, his temple that he dwells in, be neat, pure, undefiled, for
influences are the breathings of the Spirit, and the holy Spirit breaths not on
brute beasts, and on slaves to the lust of the flesh.

12. 12. Malice and bitterness obstructs the influences of God.
Malice and hatred, called manslaughter, 1 John 3. 15. must bemist the soul,
and darken and benight, or overnight both conscience, mind, will, and
affections; and so as stones or rocks, or the sea sands can receive no
influences from Sun and clouds to bring forth wheat and barley, neither can the
heart stuffed with malice, for the very incapacity of the soil is the cause why
such ground cannot close with such impressions and influences of God. 2 Samuel
23. 1. The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, (there must be quickening influences)
his word was in my tongue. The man that rules in the fear of the Lord shall be
as the light of the morning when the Sun rises, a morning without a cloud, as
the tender grass springing out of the earth by clear shining after rain. The
just Prince and Ruler, full of love and mercy to the people of God, and full of
righteousness, is like a morning without a cloud, that has clear influences of
a shining Sun; the Lord quickening him with light of love, mercy and
righteousness to the people whom he feeds, that he is as the earth receiving
from the influence of the Sun, clouds and rain warmness that casts up tender
grass and corn. But v. 6. The sons of Belial shall be all of them as thorns
thrust away, because they cannot be taken with hands. 7. But the man that shall
touch them must be fenced with iron, and the staff of a spear, and they shall
be utterly burnt with fire in the same place. Then malice reigns so in wicked
men, that if a man touch them, and keep society with them in duties of love,
they bleed the hands of these that touch them as briars and thorns do, except
the hands be fenced with iron and steel. He notes the Nations to whom David and
Joshua offered peace, but they blood the people of God; and prepare war, as is
clear in the Ammonites to whom David sent a message of love, and they came
against him with the sword and war; now they are such thorns as are for the
fire, says David, and that they may be burnt, they require no influences of
Sun and rain. Prove. 4. 17. They eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine
of violence. Acts of hatred are their meat and drink, and what influences of
the spirit can their way, which is the way of darkness, v. 19. require? Romans 3.
15. Their feet are swift to shed blood -- for v. 17. the way of peace they have
not known, and there is no fear of God before their eyes. Be meek and gentle as
Christ, Isa. 42. 2, 3. Isa. 53. 7. a lamb dumb before the shearer, Luke 23. 34.
2 Cor. 10. 1. and that holy meek one lay near the Sun and the influences of the
Spirit. Isa. 11. 2. The Spirit of the Lord shall rest on him, the Spirit of
wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the Spirit of
knowledge and of the fear of the Lord, Joh. 3. 34. for God gives not the
Spirit by measure to him, neither acts the Holy Ghost in his sweet breathings
on bloody and cruel hearts of persecutors.

13. 13. Worldy sorrow obstructs influences.
Wordly sorrow counterworketh sound repentance and godly carfulness, holy
defenses, holy anger against our selves, godly fear, vehement desire, zeal for
God, revenge, such by which we are not to be satisfied with our selves, who
have committed such wickedness: now all these require influences of the
Spirit, 2 Cor. 7 9, 10, 11.

2. The Law-Spirit of bondage being hellish fear, Romans 8. 15. and must be
another spirit, then the witnessing spirit, and the influences of the one
different from the other: as good wheat, that comes of the plowing and sowing
of the husbandman, and wild corn that comes from no plowing or husbandry; but
such wild oats grow of their own accord in mountains and in the house-tops,
Romans 8. 15, 16, 17.

3. The hypocritical sorrow of Esau weeping for the blessing, and yet saying in
his heart, he would kill his brother, could have no influences of the Spirit,
Genes. 27. 38, 41. for heart-prophanness which was in Esau, Genes. 25. 32. Heb.
12. 16, 17. cannot consist with saving influences: and Malach. 2. 13. the
covering of the Altar with tears, crying and weeping to God was bastard sorrow,
for they married the daughter of a strange God: and compare David's godly
sorrow, Psalm. 51. wherein he seeks the new heart and the free Spirit to be
restored to him (there were there strong influences of the Spirit) with his
weeping and mourning for Absalom, when he was killed: and the difference is
clear; this latter seems to be but a wordly sorrow; such as mourn excessively
for their dead friends 1 These. 4. 13. banish the Spirit of faith and hope,
which cheareth the heart, with the comfort of the last resurrection. Much
sorrow spent on (it is a case of conscience to be remembered) the death of a
father, brother, husband, wife, children, loss of goods, argues a carnal mind,
and blunteth the stirrings of the Spirit: consider Martha her grief for her
dead brother, and her unbelief, in tying the not dying of her brother to
Christ's presence bodily as man, John 11. 21. and her sorrow well near drowns
her faith, ver. 39, 40.

14. 14. False joy obstructs influences.
False joy in corn, wine and oil, in full barns, Psalm 4. 7. Luke 12. 19. in
the pleasant things of a present world must not a little oppose the Spirit in
his influences, for where that joy is unrenewed, and full and extreme at only
that which is a worldly good thing, the spirit is yet carnal, and no saving
influences can be there; in the regenerate the affections are like two contrary
rivers, when the one river is full at the flowing in of the sea, the river in
the contrary coast is low and ebb; so joy, sorrow, love, desire, etc. as the
Spirit prevails, Romans 7. as the flesh prevails in its motion, so are they up in
their fleshly exorbitancies, and low in their motions and flowings toward God,
v. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. but the joy spiritual at the coming and
receiving of the Gospel, Acts 8. 5, 6, 7, 8. the joy of believing, Romans 15. 13.
the joy of the hope of glory, Romans 5. 2. Matthew. 5. 12. the Joy in the midest of
heaviness, if need be for a season, which is unspeakeable and full of glory, 1.
Pet. 1. 6, 7, 8. the joy in suffering under reproaches, and the spoiling of our
goods, Heb. 10. 33, 34. Acts 5. 41. 1 These. 3. 9. the Joyingin Christian
walking Phil. 4. 4. the joy of the holy Ghost Romans 14. 17. and the like, are
all fruits of the spirit, and have necessarily conjoined with them heavenly
influences to receive the Gospel, Acts 8. to believe with peace of mind, Romans
15. 13. to hope for glory, Romans 5. 2. Matthew. 5. 12. to be comforted under
heaviness, even to love the holy afflicter, 1 Pet. 1. 5, 8. to all patience in
suffering, Heb. 10. 33, 34. Acts 5. 41. to walk cheerfully in our Christian
course, Phil. 4. 4, 5. all which must be wanting in the false and bastard joy
of the world; and the like may be said of desire, the more men waste their
desires in worldly objects, the less of the Spirit have they; as these two are
excellently conjoined, Psalm 73. 24. Thou shall guide me by thy counsels, and
afterward receive me to glory. Influences in perseverance in the way of God, by
Gods counselling and leading, are here insinuated; and beside that a spiritual
desire, v. 25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and in the Earth (there is) none
I desire beside thee.

15. 15. Self-love obstructs influences.
Self-love is a note of Apostates in the last days, 2 Timothy 3. 2. and of men in
the state of nature, where self-love prevails above the love of God; (for
natural men make themselves the god of gods, and the god of their false gods,
Exodus 20. 4. Judge. 2. 19. Psalm 81. 8. Amos 5. 26. Hos. 13. 2.) there be men
who make themselves their last end, it is contrary to all true holiness and
sanctification, and so to all acts and influences of the Spirit; for it is the
proper work of the Spirit to make us holy, and he bears the name of the holy
Ghost, and of the spirit of sanctification upon that reason; and therefore
where self is the man's god, what room is left to holiness, and to the
influences of grace? and where the love of God is spread abroad in the heart by
the holy Ghost, which is given Romans 5. 5. and has a seat in the heart, John
21. 15. John 14. 15. Deuteronomy. 10. 12. Deuteronomy. 6. 4, 5, 6. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. as the
habitual fear of God has also; what doubt is there but the Lord shall join
actual influences of grace to his own spiritual habits? which should put us to
self-denial, and to be less wedded to the love of our selves, and more to love
the Lords Word, Law and Testimonies, Psalm 119. 11, 47, 72, 97, 127, 128, etc.
to love Jesus Christ, his cause and Gospel more then our own life, Matthew. 16.
25, 26. then houses, brethren, sisters, father, mother, wife, children or
lands, Matthew. 19. 29. Matthew. 10. 37. Luke 14. 26. and where this habit of love
prevailing in the heart is, the Lord denies not actual influences to his own
sincere followers, and strength of grace to seal his truth with their blood,
Rev. 12. 10, 11. Heb. 11. 33, 34, 35. Heb. 10. 32, 33, 34. and when
self-confidence and self-love, and carnal fear of losing life present prevails
by reason of a temptation; as is clear in Peter and the Disciples, who deny and
forsake Christ contrary to their undertaking, Matthew. 26. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, v.
56, 69, 70, 71, etc. the Lord justly withdraws the influences of his spirit.

16. The ignorance of the Gospel, and the loathing of Christ, 16. Ignorance of
the Gospel and hatred of Christ obstruct the influences of the Spirit.
renders all Pagans who hear the rumor of Christ but receive him not, and all
Reprobates within the visible Church in a worse condition then rocks and
deserts are in, for Sun, clouds and rain send influences in them, but the
malignity and dryness, and coldness of the soil is the cause why they do not
spring and blossom as the gardens and meddows; but though the Lord send common
helps to such Pagans and unbelievers, yet it is justice that the Spirit in his
influences should be a stranger to such as live strangers to the Son of God,
for the Son and Spirit go not contrary ways to their operations. Carnal
professors who study only a form of godliness, and aim not at the power of
godliness, and do but bear the bare letters and outward bulk of baptism, and
the sound of the word preached, and hate Christ, and persecute the godly that
are chosen by him out of the world, come under the name of the world, who
cannot receive the Spirit nor his influences, John 14. 17. and have a spirit of
their own, the spirit of the world, 1 Cor. 2. 12. this spirit is their tutor
and guide; and such as are out of Christ are led by the prince of the power of
the air, the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.
2. and are taken captive by him at his will, 2 Timothy 2. 26. Now can these two
spirits, the Spirit of God and the Devil lodge in one and the same dwelling,
and exercise their several operation on the same soul? No.

17. 17. Wrestling against providence obstruct the influences of God:
The sad freatings and wrestlings at the providence of God incapacitates men
for influences of grace: thrice Psalm 78. the people are said to tempt the
Lord, and especially in asking meat for their lust, v. 18. can he provide flesh
for his people? v. 20. and the Spirit of the Lord so tempted, lets not out his
sweet and saving influences upon such as wrestle with his holy dispensations;
was there more of the Spirit letten out to Israel for murmuring at the red sea
or less? yea less, Exodus 15. for after that they murmured again at Morat, Exodus
14. and in the wilderness of Sin, Exodus 16. 1. yea, forty years in the
wilderness, Psalm. 95. 9, 10. They tempted God, and did err in heart; and that
with their first murmuring in Egypt, was a provoking cause of Gods withdrawing
his Spirit: all these forty years is called v. 8. The day of temptation; for to
tempt God is a great wickedness; he who welcomes all dispensations with godly
submission, and can bow to his Lords will, and cashier and lay aside his own,
as the man Christ, nevertheless not my will, but thy will be done, Matthew. 26.
39. under the greatest suffering that possibly could be on created flesh, as he
who is most holily passive to suffer the will of God, is most holily capacitate
to receive the holy, spotless, active influences of grace, as was the holy
thing Jesus, a wide and capacious vessel, as the wisdom of Angels and men can
imagine, in whom was all fullness of grace: be then humble and submissively
flexible and bowable to the Lords will, in his decrees and revealed will, and
the Lord shall dwell with you, and look toward you, Isa. 57. 15. Isa. 66. 2.
But what are all these to fetch the wind of the Spirits breathings? for you
must have a wind to fetch this wind, a new predetermination and influence of
grace to all these duties of heavenly softness. 2. Faith. 3. Liveliness. 4.
Watchfulness, etc. opposite to hardness of heart. 2. To unbelief. 3. To
deadness. 4. To security, etc. and so we give (say the adversaries) nothing
that we can rest on for the acquiring and purchasing of influences of grace,
but we must lie dead as passive lumpes (say the Libertines and Calvinists what
they please on the contrary) that influences begin, and we follow is most
necessary,

For 1. The Lord bows, moves, draws, and then in the same moment of time the
will follows, runs, inclines it self, as Psalm 119. v. 36. compared with v.
112. Cant. 1. 4. draw me, we will run; it is here first the wind blows, and the
tide flows, and then we sail.

2. If grace prevene nature, and nature prevene not grace, so we must say.

3. If we pray for the influences of grace, as every page almost of Scripture
teaches us, so we must teach.

4. Otherways salvation and stirrings in the ways of God must begin at nature
and at us; so shall we say against all sense, the corn grows to the end the Sun
may shine and warm the earth, and the dew and the rain may fall on the grass
and corn, and the seamen sail to the end that the wind may blow? whereas the
contrary is true, the Sun must send influences that the corn may grow.

Answ. We shall be most unwilling to side with cursed Libertines, for what can
be in strength of reason said against us comes to this,

If God first, before we stir, must bow and predetermine our souls to good
before we can act and stir, then are all influences of grace above our reach
absolutely; and then fare well free will, for he who bows irresistibly our
free will, and firstly to that point of contradiction to willing rather then
nilling, chosing rather then refusing, he must domineer over free will, and
make it a mere passive lump.

Answ. If God first by order of nature, but in the same moment of time, must
stir and bow our souls to holy duties, before our souls can act and stir
themselves, then must God domineer over free will, and make it a mere passive
lump in acting it, it is palpably false; For first, by order of nature, though
together in order of time, prius tempore, simul natura, the Lord stirs and
determines the Sun to rise and go down, Psalm 104. 19, 20. Job 9. 7, 8. Send an
East Wind to blow in heaven, and by his power bring a South Wind, Psalm 78. 26.
Loose the bands of the wild Ass, and cause him to dwell in the barren
wilderness, Job 39. 5, 6. Causes the Hawke, by his wisdom, to stretch his
wings toward the North rather then the South, and commands the Eagle to mount
up at his command, God by his influences first acts, and we in the same moment
of time follow him, and act under him and no violence is here.
and make her nest in the rock, v. 27, 28. And say to the snow be thou on the
earth, Job 37. 6. and stir and determine all causes natural before they stir
themselves; yet the Sun in moving, the Wind in blowing, the Eagle in flying,
the Snow in falling on the earth, are not for that mere patients, or passive
lumps in acting, but have their own activity in their motion; the holy Lords
dominion over the operations of second causes natural or free, neither strains
nor does violence to the one sort of cause nor to the other, but it belongs
to the perfection of the Lords holy dominion, and perfect providence to master
and rule all causes and creatures in being and working.

2. Therefore as the Lords dominion determines the Sun to rise and move, rather
then not to rise, and the Hawke and Eagle to fly toward the North, rather then
not to fly toward the North; he destroys not the nature of necessary and
natural causes, so we must not bid farewell to the natural operation of the one
kind of causes rather then the other.

3. If God first, before we stir and bow our souls, as Ethical, moral, knowing,
and considering causes, must move, stir and determine our souls to good, then
are all influences of grace above our reach absolutely, and then farewell
free will; there is no necessity of the one connection more then the other, for
the Lords first bowing of our souls by order of nature, before our souls bow
themselves to good* the soul being a moral, knowing, and considering cause, as
not one, but many Scriptures, Psalm. 119. 59, 30, 55, 52, 92. Hag. 1. 5. Hos. 7.
2. Psalm 41. 1. Prove. 6. 6. Prove. 24. 32, etc. prove, shall never conclude
that, for the Lord so bows and determines our souls in all our moral actings,
as that he leaves the soul to judge, know, consider, esteem, ponder, and weigh
in the action, right and lawful, wrong and unlawful, what is acceptable to God,
what is displeasing to God, and what is the consequent of the action, whether
reward or punishment, Heaven or Hell; and if so, the soul has virtually, and
in the consequent, in its power the foregoing influences of grace, to have them
or want them willingly and delightfully.

4. If the Lord must stir and determine the soul to holy and free actings, so
as except he turn, move and incline the will, we can do nothing, Prove. 21. 1.
Ezech. 11. 19, 20. Isa. 44. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Ezech. 36. 26, 27. John 15. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6. Philip. 2. 13. And 2. if we must pray that God would effectually, by
his grace, draw the will and heart, Cant. 1. 4. incline it, Psalm 119. 36.
teach us, open our eyes, Psalm 119. 18, 33, 34, 29, 66. not lead us into
temptation, but quicken us, lead us in his way, Matthew. 6. 13. Psalm 25. 4, 5.
Psalm 5. 8. Psalm 86. 11. Psalm 143. 10. Psalm 119. 40, 88, 156. and that by
foregoing knowledge; then do we willingly run at the same time (though there
be an order of nature here) the ways of the Lords commandments, and that not
compelled, with joy and delight, without violence connaturally, as is clear
Cant. 1. 4. Psalm 119. 32, 60, 33, 34, 43, 44, 106. Psalm 122. 1. as infinite
Scriptures prove; now how Gods grace makes us both necessarily and willingly to
obey, the Scripture is clear, and though we cannot give a natural and
philosophic reason, no matter.

18. 18. Heavenly thoughts and spiritual consideration draw along heavenly
influences, as earthly and unclean thoughts extinguish influences.
If we should distinguish betwixt thoughts and conquering, and victorious
thoughts. 2. Betwixt fixed and wanton carelessly feeling thoughts. 3. Betwixt
guarded and well watched hearts, and masterless hearts; we should know that we
hinder and obstruct influences though Sovereignty dispense gracious influences
by sinful thoughts, the thoughts being the wings of the soul; can influences
have a seat on thoughts marred by us? surely no more then a bird can fly with
broken wings; and the God of nature does not join his influences with causes
impossible to act; he concurs not with the bird to fly when the wings are
broken; nor the running of a dead horse, though one should ride on a carrion,
and use spur and rod. But when the thoughts are seasoned with the heavenly
disposition of a renewed heart, as the buds and blossoms of the vine-tree are
in a nearest way to receive influences from the God of nature to become
excellent wine-berries, and the most refined earth near to be turned into gold,
and to receive influences for that effect; so a heart gratified with heavenly
dispositions must be a subject for heavenly thoughts, and if there be a holy
heart, heavenly meditations come out in the night, Psalm. 63. 6, 7. Psalm 139.
17. Phil. 3. 19, 20.

2. The Lord contempereth the actings of the spirit to the subject, being a
moral agent, and all our gracious actings run through the channel of a
spiritual judgment; as running the race in Christ came from known and well
considered joy set before him, All actings of grace go through the channel of a
sanctified judgment which wants not influences of grace.
Heb. 12. 1. Moses chose Saints suffering more then Court-honour, for heaven or
the recompense of reward, looked with another face and representation on the
understanding then a poor time Court of clay did; the superexcellent knowledge
of Jesus Christ is so praised by Paul, as his heavenly understanding looks on
it, as his all, yea, his only all, and his all things beside are stated to his
mind as loss and dung. So to Abraham's mind a tent that shepherds sleep in is
judged good enough, and the world a bottomless lodging, because there stands in
the eye of his mind a rightly considered City, that has a foundation whose
maker and builder is God, Heb. 11. 18. And the cause of Christ's bearing
patiently the cross was his sanctified judgment of injuries, and spitting
(...), he under-judged, and in his mind under-prised shame and reproach, Heb.
12. 2. as a-very shadow of a shadow and as nothing, and the glory of his
Father in a redeemed and ransomed people looked braid and fair, and great on
his understanding. Know and consider well, 1. God, an infinite, fair,
transcendent God, and the silly poor nothing and kindless nature. 2. Judge
rightly of time, and how nothing yesterday and the last year is, and weigh in
your understanding vast, high, and braid, and deep, and long eternity, if you
have balance with scales that can bear eternity. 3. Understand well obedience,
faith the weight of the love of Christ, never quenched with many floods, and
sin, hatred of Christ, and the horror thereof. 4. Take a right view of heaven,
how it lies in length and breadth, and a right impression of the fire that is
never quenched, and the habitual knowledge of the Lords name, wants not
influences for trusting in God, Psalm 9. 10. knowledge where to find God in
Christ, has actings of the Spirit to live and dwell with him, to hold him,
Cant. 1. 7. Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. Joh. 4. 10. to pray, to come to him, Joh. 6.
45. a so^l in darkness, and the gross ignorance of God is not capable of
influences of grace, as the center and bowels of the earth and deep pits
receive no Sun-light. We can draw on sinful dispositions, yea, we created these
dry clouds that are above our withered hearts, Our drawing on of sinful
dispositions.
by making our inordinate affections Stewards and Caterers to lay in provision
for our flesh, Romans 13. 14. 2. We can ask leave at our flesh to take a little
sleep, and excuse it, Prove. 6. 10. Yet a little flumber. 3. Under drowsiness
and security we can refuse to open and let Christ in, Cant. 5. 3. and that
brings on sad withdrawings of the actings of the Spirit, v. 6. 4. Violence done
to sweet dispositions, when they give warning of our debt, may draw to a
wronging of the holy Ghost, who is dreadfully jealous if we counter-work the
actings and breathings of the spirit, and react against the out-lettings and
flowings of the anointing, and of the well within springing up to eternal life;
he puts in his hand by the hole of the door, the Spouse is convinced that it is
Christ the beloveds voice, and his knock, and his very words, and no other; yet
he is not yielded unto, but resisted.

2. We keep not the oil clean, that it may shine more clearly in the lamp; Keep
the oil of the Spirit clean if you would have heavenly influences to fall on
the Spirit.
inky blackness defaces the beauty of the white rose and the lilly; the
dustiness and filth of lusts dimness darkens the precious stone, that it loses
luster and color: when a judicial darkness, even on a believer, it covers
the habit of grace, and darkens the spiritual strain, the sin of the spirit is
out of measure sinful; the spirit judicially sleeping, sees and hears less in
the Prophet Jonah, then carnal reason in the Heathen Mariners, for Jonah
sleeps, the Heathen men do wake and fear, when wrath from Heaven blows on their
ship: the lesser habit of grace that is young and green in the repenting theif,
does more in adhering to Christ, because actual breathing of the spirit is
stronger and more vigorous, then the more rooted and experienced habit of grace
in the Apostles, when it is now overwhelmed with the base fear of suffering,
for he confesses him to be a King on the Cross, the Disciples fleeing forsake
him: and the Lord preaches that we are more debtors to the Spirit of Christ
then to the habit of grace; praying, praising, believing, hoping, loving,
joying, as acts of kin to the Spirit, gladden the Spirit; what should we then
do to fetch the wind? grieve not the Spirit, but keep the fountain pure and
clean from the muddiness of lusts, for in the light of the Spirit you see your
own spots. 1 John 3. 3. He that has this hope in him, purifies himself, as he
also is pure.

2. Yield not to indispositions, complain of them to God, and pray them away,
as Psalm 61. 2. Psalm 31. 22. Psalm 102. 3, 4, 5. Lam. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. 22,
23.

Obj. We are to act both morally and physically with the Spirit.
But it is easy so to say, Be strong in the Lord, I am at huge distance from
the Lord?

Answ. 1. The Lord speaks to believers as to moral agents, the actings of faith
is in us both moral, and also physical or real (though moral acting in some
sense be real, and not imaginary) as the fowler with sweet songs works in a
manner morally, or by way of allurement upon the fancy of the bird, enticing
it to the net, and the bird also physically makes use of its wings, God joining
his influence; so would we, looking to the command and promise of God, be
induced to bring will and affections under the acting and breathing of the
spirit, and also physically act our faith in the mean time, relying upon God
for the flowings of his spirit.

3. If any thing be said, that Sovereignty does also hinder influences, for God
hides himself, will your faith and prayers conclude him that he shall not hide
himself but shine?

Answ. Sovereignty should counter work Sovereignty; P^ayers conclude not
Sovereignty.
if there were a law passed by the Lord, that ever when we pray in faith in
that same very nick and moment of time, he must take off the arrestment of
desertion, as if prayer were (to speak so) a sort of charming of holy
Sovereignty; But the law is, and the promise, that when we pray in faith for
shining influences, he shall remove our night of the hiding of his face, and
the Spirits sad withdrawing, not absolutely, but in the way of his own holy and
wise Sovereignty, and also the prayer of faith has some other effect then the
present removal of desertion; prayer keeps the soul under sufficient graces,
fresh showrings, and stays the burnt man under patient enduring of the fire in
condition of a refreshing, cooling and expelling of the heat. The man Christ
lies under forsaking; but influences of the Spirit, to pray, to believe, to
submit, to hope keeps him vigorous and green, that gloriously and triumphingly
he endures the Cross: for suffering pain in faith and joy is more excellent
then the removing of pain.

CHAP. IIII.
Of other impediments of influences in particular coming from the mind, will,
and some other considerable affections, and their cures. 1. False and heretical
light. 2. A corrupt will. 3 From hatred of Christ.

1. THe corrupt wisdom and the wicked learning of men, who are carnal and
destitute of the truth, can produce nothing, but doting about questions, and
strife of words; whereof comes envy, strife, railing, or blasphemys,
evil-surmisings, (...) perverse disputing: these are the genuine fruits of the
heretical spirit, 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5. and of the wisdom of men, Heretical light
hinders the spirits breathings.
which neither is subject to the law of God and his truth, (...), neither can
be subject, Romans 8. 7, etc. of the carnal man, who neither receives the things
of the Spirit of God, (...), neither can he know them: and observe that the
Holy Ghost in both places denies both the act and the possibility of the minds
subjection to the truth where the judgment is rotten. Now as we may well say,
the rock has no natural power to receive an influence from God, for the
growing of wheat on it; nor a thorn-tree to bring forth wine grapes, as our
Savior speaks, Matthew. 7. 16. so neither can the corrupt, and heretical mind
produce sound truths; nor can the Lord give influences, in a natural way, to a
thistle to bring forth figs: indeed by a miracle, the Lord caused Aaron's dead
withered rod to blossom and bring forth almonds: And Caiphas (I say not by a
miracle) but in an extraordinary way, (...), John 11. 51. not of himself, but
by the Spirit, prophesied: and so did Balaam. But they did not spiritually, and
with the light of faith, know what they prophesied; yea, I would crave leave to
doubt, whether they literally knew that Christ God-man was the star of Jacob,
the light of the Gentiles, and to die for the Elect: as many Heretics, yea,
and the Devils literally know and believe these things with an Historical
faith. If you would have breathings of the Spirit to know savingly and to
assent to divine truths, motes and dirt and scales must be removed, and the
mind renewed: then divine illumination is absolutely needful.

2. Nor acts the Spirit in the polluted mind, and conscience of the world,
which cannot receive the Spirit. Now that power of receiving the Spirit, denied
of the world, John 14. 17. must be both a power natural, and a power acquired
by wicked actings; for the elect and redeemed world by a natural power cannot
receive the Spirit of truth.

2. A corrupt will hinders the spirits breathings.
If the will be corrupt, that it will not come to Christ, John 5. 40. and will
not have Christ to reign, Luke 19. 14. the man cannot lend a seat to the Spirit
and his actings to obey and follow God, until the fallow-ground of the rocky
will be plowed and broken, otherwise the man sows among thorns, and labors a
husbandry to the flesh, and not to the Spirit; as Paul speaks Gal. 6. 8. and
the harvest must be corruption and rotten fruit; judge then if the Spirit
labors and tills a plot of ground to the flesh; and if the Spirit from on high
can send down influences and divine impressions of dew and warm sunbeams upon
the fleshes plowed earth: or if nature intend that rain and Sun-heat shall make
the rocks bring forth wheat. O how needful is a denied will, when Saul speaks
of no will, but Christ's, and commits all to Christ's will, as if his own will
were annil^ilated, though it was perfected, Acts 9. the man is fallen to the
earth; And he trembling, and astonished, says, (...)* Lord, what will thou
have me to do? There is a strong Emphasis in Lord, and in the word will; His
own wicked will was playing the King or the Tyrant over the Saints; and when
his will is down, and the will of Christ up, and the man has been three days
in this condition fasting and praying, then comes the spirit to take his own
chop and to act in Panl. v. 17. Ananias says, Brother Saul, the Lord (even
Jesus that appeared to thee in the way, as thou came) has sent me to thee,
that thou may receive thy sight, and be filed mith the holy Ghost; a humble
broken will, deadned to self, and to all things shall be rained on, and such as
is rebellious shall be a land of drought, Zech. 14. 16. And it shall come to
pass that who so will not come up, of all the familys of the earth unto
Jerusalem, to worship the king the Lord of hosts, even upon them shall be no
rain.

3. There be strong impediments that obstruct influences of the spirit of grace
from all the affections, if the heart be not with all watching watched over.

1. Hating of grace and of Christ hinders influences.
The world that hates Christ, John 15. 18, 20. and persecutes him and his
servants is the same world which cannot receive the spirit of truth, John 14.
17. if ye hate Christ and the Godly, no influences of grace for you. Ye shall
hew all your days, be ye minister, or professor, upon hard timber without the
Spirits tools; ye shall pray, preach, profess, hear, sing, praise in the
letter, with out the Spirit and his influences; for ye can not receive the
Spirit of truth, John 14. 17. and then must you be dry and withered in all your
actings: whereas influences, and manifestations are promised to the lovers of
Christ. Joh. 14. 21. he that has my commandments, and keeps them; he it is
that loves me, and he that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will
love him, and manifest my self to him.

These sure are the revelations and manifestations of the Spirit. John 15. 24.

Christ puts a strong wall of difference between the hating world and the
disciples, v. 24. now they have both seen and hated both me, and my Father,
but not so ye, v. 26. when the comforter is come, whom J will send unto you
from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceeds from the Father, he
shall testify of me. v. 27. and ye also shall bear witness, because ye have
been with me from the beginning. Here are actings of the spirit in the
disciples who love the father, and Christ, that the spirit acts them to bear
witness of him to the world upon all hazards, Diverse actings of the spirit in
the spouse sick of love for Christ in Solomon's song of songs, speak and hold
forth influences of the spirit.
even to death and torment. We see what works and actings of the spirit is in
the Spouse sick of love for Christ, which are in that song of songs to be seen,
comparing, Cant. 2. 5. Cant. 5. 8. with other places of the song: these works
of the spirit are seen,

1. A desire to be kissed with the kisses of his mouth, Cant. 1. 2.

2. A spiritual smelling of his good ointments, Cant. 13.

3. A prayer to be drawn, and a vow to run being drawn, Cant. 1. 4.

4. A resolution to rejoice in his love, with all the virgins and chaste
followers of Christ, Cant. 1. 4. to rejoice more in his love then in wine.

5. A desire to be where Christ dwells in the tents of the Shepherds, a sound
Ministry, Cant. 1. 7.

6. A profession of intimate love to Christ, so as he lies as a bundle of
myrrh betwixt her breasts all the night, Cant. 1. 13, 16. an extolling of
Christ as the apple tree among all the trees of the forest, Cant. 2. 3. and a
delighting to taste the fruits of his love.

7. A spiritual feeling in being taken into his celler-house of wine, Cant. 2.
4. a desire to be refreshed and established with the promises and comforts of
the preached Gospel. Cant. 2. 5. Stay me with flagons, and comfort me with
apples, for I am sick of love.

8. The feeling of his love-imbracements when they are on, v. 6. His left hand
is under my head, and his right hand embraces me.

9. Because the whole song is a song of love, there is a charge given not to
offend Christ, v. 7.

10. An eying of him by faith, in his approaches in the delivery of his people
in his coming in the flesh to save the world in the preached Gospel, in all
which his coming, leaping over the mountains, and skipping over the hills,
says, That no impediment of the enemies, and the powers of hell, and no evil
deserving of sin can obstruct his gracious motions to save and comfort his own,
v. 8, 9.

11. The discerning of Christ's calling us in the Gospel, v. 10, 11, 12. My
Beloved spoke and said unto me, Rise up my love, my fair one, and come away.

12. The discerning of his desire of our worship of the Churches praying,
doctrine and discipline, v. 14, 15. O my dove -- let me see thy countenance,
let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy vice, etc.

13. The Churches claiming of interest mutual betwixt Christ and his Spouse, v.
16. My Beloved is mine, and I am his.

14. The observing where Christ is, his feeding among the lillies in his
Church, which is clean and comely by his beauty. 16. He feeds among the
lillies, 17. until the day break, etc.

15. The Spouses desire of his company, v. 17. Turn my Beloved, and be thou
like a Roe or a young Heart upon the mountains of Bether: a desire of being with
him for ever in glory, as Rev. 22. v. 17, 20.

16. The Spouses careful seeking of Christ, and spiritual restlesness till she
find him. Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. I sought him whom my soul loved, I sought him,
but I found him not, etc.

17. The sweet spiritual smell of the so loved Church, v. 6, etc.

18. Chap. 5. The Spouses discerning of his knock and voice though she sleep.
2. The acknowledging of her sinful denying to let him in. 3. The Spirit of
Christ's acting upon her heart, till the bowels of love were stirred in her, v.
4. 4. The opening to him. 5. The smell of her obedience, which she felt, like
dropping myrrh, v. 5.

19. The Spouses swooning and falling dead at his departure.

20. The Spouses praying and seeking him, when now he had withdrawn himself,
and the missing of the sweet actings of the spirit to her sense, v. 6.

21. Her seeking of him at the watchmen, 1, 6, 7.

22. Her desire that other professors, the daughters of Jerusalem, may in
prayer hold forth to Christ her spiritual state of love-sickness, v. 8.

23. Her preferring of Christ to all other beloveds in Heaven or Earth, v. 9.

14. The Spouses high exalting of Christ in all his parts, endowments, graces
and lowliness, My Beloved is white and ruddy, v. 10, 11, 12, etc. all these,
and many others the like teach that the spirit in such excellent operations and
graces, has his dwelling and seat in an heart strongly filled with the love of
Christ.

But who hates Christ?

1. Hating of Christ.
All persecuters of his members. John 15. 18. If the world hate you, ye know
that it hated me before you; And it is exponed v. 20. If they have persecuted
me, they will also persecute you. And whoever loves not the Brethren are not
translated, 1 John 3. 14. and they who love them not hate them, 1 John 3. 14.
compared with v. 15. how carnal lust and the love of glory from men hinders
influences of the Spirit to love Christ; See John 8. 42. If God were your
father, ye would love me. 44. Ye are of your father the Devil, the lusts of
your father (...) ye will do; he was a murderer from the beginning, v. 50. I
seek not mine own glory. The strong love of Christ in the heart is a chamber
and a house for the Spirit to act in.

2. Not desiring of God, but an abhorring, or a soul abhorring of God hinders
influences of the Spirit.

1. Are there any who abhor God? such a sad word is spoken of the Jews,
Soul-loathing of God obstructs influences.
Zech. 11. 8. Three Shepherds also I cut off in one month, and my soul loathed
them, and their soul also abhorred me. Departing from God, as a whorish woman
forsakes her huband, is charged upon the confederat people, harlotry upon every
high hill, and under every green tree, Jer. 2. 20. even when they said, We will
not transgress. Hos. 4. 12. The spirit of whoredom has caused them to err,
and they have gone a whoring from under their God, 13. And can the holy spirit
of the Lord, the husband act in a whorish spouse, who grieves that spirit? See
Psalm 106. 39. Can refreshings come from the fountain of living waters, to such
as Jer. 2. 13. forsake the fountain, and hew them out cisterns, broken cisterns
that can hold no waters? or can the Spirit dwell and act in that soul which
abhors God and the spirit of God and his operations? no man will lodge in an
Inn in which he knows they lie in wait for his life. Isa. 63. 10. They
rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit.

2. There are who say, Job 21. 14. to God, Depart from us, for we desire not
the knowledge of thy ways; and who Prove. 1. 29. The Spirit gives influences
where there is no knowledge.
hate knowledge. Now the spirit of the Lord is a spirit of knowledge, and needs
none to counsel him and teach him knowledge, Isa. 40. 13, 40. And to one is
given by the same spirit (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 8.) the word of
wisdom, to another a word of knowledge by the same spirit; and he is, Ephesians.
1. 17. the spirit of wisdom and revelation, who gives the knowledge of Christ;
the Spirit then will not be a teacher to such as hate the master teacher and
all his instructions. Will a man be an instructor to a Disciple or Apprentice,
who (to his knowledge) hates and flies from him, and abhors him? who abhors,
mocks, and does despite to the Spirit? and will the Spirits going forth be as
the pleasant morning in such a man? sure the Spirit teaches not, convinces
not, guides not in all truth any, John 14. 26. John 16. 7, 13. but such only
as Christ sends him unto, John 14. 16, 17. and 16. 7. I will send him unto
you, v. 13. He shall guide you -- He shall show you things to come, John 15.
26. And therefore he comes to this, Psalm 73. 25. Whom have I in heaven but
thee? and (there is) none upon earth that I desire besides thee. What is such a
man? how is he known by another? There be three notes by which he is known, v.
23. 1. Nevertheless (though I be a beast and a tempted fool doubting of a
providence) I am continually with thee. O blessed company! Then follow two
observable actings and influences of the Spirit. 1. The confirming and
upholding influence, the supernatural manutenentia, upholding of the Spirit,
Thou will hold me fast by my right hand. 2. There is the guiding, John 16. 13.
and leading of the Spirit, Psalm. 143. 10. Psalm. 73. 14. Thou shall guide me by
thy counsel. So every element acts and moves most connaturally in its own
place; Influences of the spirit are connatural to the spiritual man.
the river moves most connaturally within its own channel; it is violent in its
motion when it runs above and without its own banks: the wind moves naturally
in the air, but most violently and unkindly in the bowels of the earth, for
there it causes earthquakes, and swallows up houses and Cities. The Spirit of
the Lord acts and breaths sweetly in a believer; but the spirit that moves in a
possessed man, is proven to be the spirit of the Devil not of God, because he
moves most connaturally, and casts the possessed one, who is his house, in
fire and water, Where there is soul-desiring of God there be many influences.
Mark 9. he is not a gracious guest who sets on fire his own lodging. Isa. 26.
9. With my soul I have desired thee in the night; yea, with my spirit within me
early will I seek thee: and that is a work of the spirit to learn
righteousness, when the Lords judgments are on the earth. v. 12. Lord, thou will ordain peace for us; for thou also have wrought all our works in us. The
Spirit refers all acting on earth to God, for the good of his Church; and there
follow many expressions of faith and liveliness to the end of the Chapter. v.
13, 14. the Lords that ruled over us beside thee are dead: the people (v. 16.)
prayed to thee in trouble. v. 19. Our dead men buried in Babylon shall live and
be delivered: Could we desire and thirst after God, the Spirit should act more
abundantly in us.

3. Sensuality and influences of the spirit cannot be together.
From our joy or delight, and our sadness and sorrow, arise impediments of
spiritual influences. As

1. Carnal sensual delights and the Spirit cannot be together, Jude v. 19.
sensual, not having the spirit. The more men are drowned in sensual lusts, the
less of the Spirit they have, or nothing at all. The Apostle, Phil 3. makes an
opposition betwixt such whose God is their belly, and mind earthly things,
corn, wine, and oil, and mind not spiritual things, and so benow nothing of the
Spirit; and himself and sound believers, who have their conversation in heaven,
which must speak much spiritual mindedness, and mighty influences of the
Spirit, by which the mind, the apprehensions and thoughts, the affections,
hope, faith, love, delight, haunt heaven and eternity much. The Scripture calls
some swine, 2 Pet. 2. 22. some other dogs, Rev. 22. 15. Does the holy Spirit
dwell and breath in and through a profane and unclean man, such as are swine
and dogs? It Is strange that the preaching of the Gospel and Satan lodge
together in Judas; Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil?
John 6. 7. Matthew. 10. 1. And when he had called the twelve disciples, he gave
them power against unclean Spirits to cast them out, and to heal all manner of
sickness. v. 7. Go and preach.

2. Influences of grace, spiritual joy, persevering to the end, can no more
find good soil to grow in a rocky, stony, proud, and graceless heart, then corn
can grow on stones and rocks, Matthew. 13. 20, 21. though there be a receiving of
the word with joy and delight, that joy is but false metal. The only cure of
this is, if we would have our spiritual desires as touching grace, and glory,
and other things annexed to this, is to listen to that Psalm 37. 4. Delight thy
self also in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thy heart. What
was spoken of love-sickness after Christ, the same is true of soul-delighting
in Christ, that in any precious actings of the Spirit goes along with both,
Psalm 63. 7. The souls following hard after God Psalm 63. is a fruit of the
other v. 6. When I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the
night-watches, then v. 5. My soul shall be satisfied with marrow and fatness;
my soul shall praise thee with joyful lips. Psalm. 51. 11. Take not thy spirit
of holiness from me. Why? what special fruit of that spirit does he seek, v.
12. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and firmly sustain me with (thy)
free spirit, a willing, a princely ruling spirit.

Joy has a strong impulsion, Spiritual joy speaks strong influences.
and has vehement expressions; as clapping of the hands, Psalm 47. 1.
Shouting, Psalm. 63. 7. In the shadow of thy wings I rejoiced. Heb. I shouted.
And Matthew. 5. 12. Rejoice, (...), rejoice and leap for joy, as in a dance. It Is
excellent to strong impulsions of the Spirit, to join strong and vehement
actings of ours. High-bended and fervent acts of obedience come not but from
strong habits of grace; but here I speak of mighty stirrings of influences;
here we would beware of straining affectation of shouting, and expression of
delight; Literal crying should not exceed the impulsion of the spirit within.
some bring more out then is within, when literal crying and shouting does
exceed the inward impulsion of the Spirit; it is dreadful to lie of the Holy
Ghost, and of his impulsions: but to the point. Our actings would be
proportioned to the Spirits stirring: Mighty rivers come from a huge arm of the
Sea: some streams flowing from little small fountains run scarce the fourth
part of a mile. 1 Cor. 15. 10. Strong laboring c^mes from strong and abundant
grace. I labored more abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the grace of
God which was with me. A strong influence of the Spirit calls for a strong
virtual consent, especially when the Spirits impulsion of joy is strong, Cant.
1. 12. While the King sits at his table, and feasts the Spouse with
quickening influences, and satisfies her soul as with marrow and fatness, my
spikenard sends forth the smell thereof. The spikenard is here the precious
oil or ointment of spikenard, John 12. 1, 2, 3. that is, the smell of her
actings of joy, delight, love, were strong and exceeding savoury, as his table
was a Kings table and fat, and the actings of his spirit strong, then follows
a suitable strong expression of delight, v. 13. A bundle of myrrh is my
beloved unto me, he shall lie (or lodge) all night betwixt my breasts. And
Cant. 2. 4. the King brought me into his house of wine, that is, into the
chamber of the most spiritual and soul-delighting consolations of the Gospel,
that rejoice and cheer the heart as excellent wine does one that is fainting,
as Psalm. 104. 15. Prove. 31. 6, 7. compared with 2 Cor. 1. 6. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 18,
19. And the Spouse joins to this a most vehement disposition of soul-sickness
of love for Christ, v. 5. Stay me with flagons, and comfort me with apples, for
I am sick of love. As also godly sorrow for sin, 2 Cor. 7. 10, 11, 15. a
special work of the Spirit, and princely and kingly gift of his Spirit who was
raised from the dead to act this sorrow in us, Acts 5. 31. as also swoooning
and dying at the absence and withdrawing of Christ the beloved, Godly sorrow
may help influences.
Cant. 5. 6. is a fruit of the Spirit; and to sleep, and eat, and drink, and
rejoice when the holy Spirit is sa^ned, and when he withdraws his actings, is a
dismal and sad token, though there may some influence of corruption be in
sorrowing, because the Spirits actings are suspended as they are our comforts
or apples to delight children, and not as duties that we owe for Christ's love
to us, and conscience of his command, which says Phil. 4. 4. Rejoice always
in the Lord, etc. and here we would beware of worldly sorrow that causes
death. Sorrow and heartbreaking because of the breaking of created comforts,
as if God were not the souls portion and the Saints all in all, should be
eschewed, this sorrow blunts and deadens the soul from drinking in influences
of glory as far, Luke 9. v. 32. also Law-sadness, dumpish servile down-casting,
because it deadens and kills as the Law does, must be eschewed: indeed sadness
that Evangelically mortifies and deadens to created spiritual comforts, may
quicken the believer to a more vigorous delighting in Christ himself, who is
more then comfort, Psalm. 119. My soul droppeth away for heaviness; and that
puts fire in the soul to pray. Strengthen thou me according to thy word. It
appears to be spiritual sorrow that breaks out in prayer, Matthew. 26. 38, 39.
Psalm. 18. 4, 5, 6. Psalm. 61. 2. Psalm. 102.

4. How hope and audacity promove or hinder influences.
There are in the fourth Class two affections, hope and audacity, or
fool-hardiness, which would be taken heed unto.

Now with hope, which looks to good to come and hardly attained, we must take
in faith, one of the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22. Sometimes one affection
in its carnality will counterwork another, Luke 24. 41. The disciples believe
not for joy and wondering. But the special ground is unbelief: the wide desire
of unbelief thinks God cannot be so abundantly good as to restore to them
Christ from the dead, and the carnal reasoning of wondering contradicts a
possibility of the resurrection; over-acting of one affection, to wit, of joy,
when it is literal, counter-works the actings of the Spirit in the faith of the
promises. Hence must Christ soften the heart with swasory actings, before the
man believe and consider what Christ does morally, Luke 24. One affection
counter-works another, and hinders faith.
He opens the Scriptures to the two disciples, Luke 24. 27. He rebukes their
unbelief, v. 25. and as to his own disciples, he sent them word with
eyewitnesses who saw him, that he was risen again, but their words seem idle
tales to them, Luke 24. 11. And he upbraided them for their unbelief and
hardness of heart, Mark 16. 14. 3. He appeared and spoke to them. 4. He made
their senses witnesses, by causing them see and touch his hands and feet. 5. He
did eat with them, which was an action of life. 6. He wrought a miracle, of
bringing multitudes of fish to their net, but all is to little purpose until he
take a real and effectual way, by the working of the Spirit, Luke 24. 45. Then
opened he their understanding, Moral acting cannot avail us without real
influences of the spirit.
that they might understand the Scriptures. Then the opening of the Scriptures,
though in the mouth of Christ, avail little to faith, except the Spirit of
Christ open another lock, even the heart. This is one of the first works of the
Spirit, to convincethe conscience of unbelief, John 16. 8, 9. and when the
Spirit has taken that castle, and brought the soul to be sensible of unbelief,
he can easily take in the rest of the works; frequent casting to of new oil to
the lamp, keeps it shining, and new fuel causes the fire to flame. Frequent
repeated acts of believing bring the disciples to get the grace to do greater
works then Christ did, Frequent acts of faith promove influences of the spirit.
because Christ went to the Father, John 14. 14. Believe influences of grace,
and have influences of grace abundantly furnished to you: ask the Spirit in
faith, and the Father is as willing to give the Spirit, as a Father is to give
bread to his hungry child; so here faith makes a fair wind, Luke 11. 9, 10, 11,
12, 13. It is not so in nature, the husbandmans natural faith, that it shall be
a sweet, warm, fruitful Summer, makes not a fruitful Summer: The Sea-mans
natural faith, believing fair winds, and no storms at all, makes it not to be
so; for often faith here is but fancy, but faith acting daily upon the precious
promises of the word, brings strong gales, and summer-influences of heart
warmness of the Spirit, and in a manner creates new blowings of the North and
South Wind, fainting under the breathings and knockings of the Spirit of
Christ, makes him withdraw, Cant. 5. 2, 6. Here unbelief binds up the wind and
breathings of the spirit, as it does the mighty actings of Christ, Mat. 13. An
unbeliever, as touching his state is a Pagan, and does the holy spirit dwell in
an Heathen? Lively hope (for there is a dead and withered hope) is no less a
fruit of the spirit then faith. This is a specific difference between an
unconverted Pagan who wants the spirit, and a convert who has the spirit. The
former is one who has no hope, and so is without God, and without Christ, and
without the Spirit of God in the world, and so is not capable of influences,
Ephesians. 2. 12, 13, 14. and one whom the Lord according to his abundant mercy
has begotten again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the dead, 1 Pet. 1. 3. For in such a man there be many actings of the Spirit.
As Faith. 2. Perseverance therein, v. 4, 5. Rejoicing in God, v. 6. Patient
believing in the furnace, v. 7. Love, v. 8. all which are fruits of the spirit,
Hope promoves influences.
Gal. 5. 22. And hope under deadness spreads abroad the sails, and hoises them
up to receive and gather in the wind: it brings home influences of grace to lie
at the tide and wait until the wind blow sweetly and fairly from the Spirits
earth. Hope is the onwaiter, expecting showrs of influences in the conscionable
using of the means. The hope of him who purifies not himself, 1 John 3. 3.
shall wither; hope to the end still flourishing, grows on the right tree, and
speaks a communion with the spirit, which has conjoined with it the obedience
of children, the not fashioning our selves to former lusts, and holiness like
unto God who has called us, 1 Pet. 1. 13, 14, 15, 16. otherwise the hope shall
be a broken tree, and has nothing to do with the Spirit. Many say they hope
well, and it is good to hope well, and live upon thoughts that they shall be
saved, yet are profane and godless, Sinful boldness obstructs influences.
walking after their lusts; this is sinful boldness, and the spirit dwells in
none such. There is a boldness of faith in access to God, and in approaching to
the throne of grace, Romans 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. Heb. 4. 16. by which David's soul makes
her boast in the Lord, Psalm 34. 2. It has these undoubted graces of the
spirit, faith, praying, glorying in tribulation, patience, the love of God
spread abroad in the heart by the holy Ghost, which is given to us, Romans 5. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5.

5. The fifth Class of impediments come from these two. 1. Despair and anger.

What workings and saving impulsions in the spirit can be in Cain, Saul, and
Judas, is not conceivable. Hope that makes not ashamed, Romans 5. as is said,
dwells sweetly with the spirit.

2. The violence of the passion of anger overclouds the soul, Anger hinders
influences.
so that Elisha is not capable to receive prophetical influences, and to
prophecy, he was so incensed against wicked Jehoram, 2 Kings 3. But when the
min^^rel played, the hand of the Lord came upon him, and he prophesied.
Theodoret says, with the sweetness of the harmony of the Psalms the mind of
Elisha was calmed and composed from the storm of anger. How Elisha could not
prophecy by reason of anger.
The sound of music (says Cajetan) makes an inward contracting and gathering
together of the actings of the mind, and so an elevating of the heart to God.
Here it is, as when blood runs out at mouth or nose, the cutting of a vein in
the arm makes a diversion of the blood, and causes it run in its right channel.
The sweetness of music draws the soul to a bended attention to consider the
harmony, that it may the more greedily drink in delectation. Peter Martyr on
the place says, As David by singing a spiritual song chased away the evil
spirit from Saul, so would Elisha waken up the good spirit by heavenly Psalms,
as the sounding of a Trumpet has influences upon the mind of soldiers to
valorous and heroic acts in war. Now music spiritual, the matter being
Psalms to God (and it is like Elisha called for some of the Levites who could
sing psalms on the harp, as they were used in public worship) can withdraw
the soul in anger from acts of revenge to acts of spiritual attention^ music.

2. That being done, the soul is settled, and the blood; for the Physical
definition of anger is a kindling of the blood about the heart, the moral
description of it being a desire of revenge to hold off a contrary, and to
preserve nature; and when the blood is settled and fallen from the heart, the
organs of prophesying are in a little better frame then when the soul and heart
is boiling like a pot in heat and flaming of anger.

3. By bending of the mind to a spiritual object the sweet music in praising
of God, the some of anger is removed, and a spiritual disposition to praise,
which is nearer by nature to spiritual prophetical influences, then the
flamings of sinful carnal anger, as aer insitus, the air that is within in the
ear fits the organs to receive the sound, and lumen insitum fitteth the eye to
receive the species and images of colors, and so to see by the contrary the
foming of anger within hinders the incoming of prophetical influences; as a
contrary holds out a contrary. Intus apparens prohibet extraneum. So the
Apostles wills us to put away anger if we would pray rightly, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 8. I
will therefore that men pray every where lifting up holy hands, (...), without
wrath and doubting or contending. Anger drowns the soul, and renders it like
green wet timber, unfit to receive the flaming and soulwarming influences of
the spirit of adoption.

2. A meek spirit is a fit workhouse of influences instanced in the man Christ,
in Meses, John.
A meek quiet spirit, like that of Christ's, is the fittest workhouse of
heavenly influences. Christ the most lovely and meek of men, and an infallible
copy thereof, Mat. 11. 29. Isa. 53. 6. Isa. 40. 11. Isa. 42. 2, 3. had the most
frequent influences of the in-dwelling Godhead, as Isa. 61. 1, 2 Psalm 45. 7.
John 3. 34.

2. Moses was the meekest man on the earth, and much of the actings of the
spirit were on his soul, and he had the most near manifestations of God: The
Lord spoke to him mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches, he
beheld the similitude of the Lord, Numb. 12. 8. Deuteronomy. 34. 10. Exodus 34. 5, 6.

Q. What Prophet was forty days in the mount with the Lord, and eat not, but
Moses? Exodus 33. 11. There arose not a Prophet like unto Moses, etc.

3. John the disciple of love, called the beloved disciple, gets the name of
divine, and he saw more glory and more of the visions of God then Peter, who is
the pretended Vicar of Christ, and Head of the Catholic Church (so do Papists
dream of an Head-ship.) For John saw Christ in his glory, Revel. 1. which made
him fall dead at his feet. He saw a throne set in heaven, and one sat on the
throne, and he that sat, was to look upon, like a Jasper and a Sardine-stone,
and there was a rainbow round about the throne, and four and twenty seats round
about the throne, and four and twenty Elders, who cast down their crowns before
him that sat upon the throne, c. 4. and the armies in heaven, in earth, and
under the earth praising him. He saw in the visions of God the seven Angels
which poured the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth. He saw Babylons
fall, the vision of the last Judgment, the Bride the Lambs wife adorned with
the glory of God. He saw the new Jerusalem, the golden structure of it, the
street of gold, the twelve ports, the wall, the foundation of precious stones,
the river of water of life, the tree of life. Moses never saw such glory.

3. Hence see we that there may be a sinful incapacity on our part, and that
the pure in spirit see God, Mat. 5. and that grace keeps the soul like a calm
sea, without storm and wind; and that if we would be near God, we would keep
the heart clean and pure. We are to beware of grudging, and act these three
duties. 1. Trust in the Lord. 2. Delight in the Lord. 3. Hope patiently for
him, Psalm 37. 1, 2, 3, 4. There may be an earthquake in the zeal of a meekned
Elias; there was no godly men on earth left but himself, as his angry zeal said
to him, and the Lord knew 7000. besides him.

The Lords way of appearing to Elias, 1 Kin. 19. taught him some other thing;
for the Lord was neither in the strong wind that brake in pieces mountains and
rocks, nor in the earthquake, nor in the fire, but in the still small voice, v.
11, 12. The Spirit was not of God which would call for fire from heaven in the
disciples to burn villages, and men women and children quick, because they
refuse lodging to Christ and his disciples: for therefore meekly, says Christ,
and gravely, Luke 9. 55. Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of. 56. For
the Son of man came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them. You know not
that these flamings of the fleshes wildfire came not from heaven; for they
smell not of the meek Son of man, nor savor they of his saving message. No
doubt the disciples thought their sparks were kindled at a fire from heaven;
but that fire came not from God: seldom does the Lords Spirit dwell and act in
his saving influences in an angry fiery spirit: grace meekens hell and hellish
passions in the renewed Saints. There are no passions in the glorified and
perfectly meekned ones, who stand before the throne, but such as are pure and
unmixed fire for the everlasting praises of God. Hence showers of influences
eternally rain on them night and day without ceasing, Isa. 6. 2, 3, 4 Rev. 4. 8.

The 6th. impediment of heavenly influences is from fear, 2 Timothy 1. 7. We are
to stir up the grace of God in us, and his gifts not from a legal fear: For God
has not given us the spirit of fear, but of power, of love, and of a sound
mind, 2 Timothy 1. 7. Then we take up the Spirit of law-bondage and law-fear of
our own will: that spirit of fear is not of Gods giving or choosing, but it is
of our choosing, Romans 8. Such as are led by the spirit of God are willing
followers, Unbelieving fear an impediment of influences.
v. 15. For we have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but we
have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. It Is like
the devils are incapable of influences of grace, because of the horror and
slavish trembling fear that is upon their conscience: they be ever under the
law of works, never under grace, no not so much as in offer, Matthew. 8. 29. Jam.
2. 19. Faith and the spirit of adoption to pray, to believe, influences of
grace is the remedy of this. So are we to believe perseverance, and that God
shall give influences of grace to the end, Psalm 23. We shall have waterings,
and the believers well shall never run dry, Psalm. 104. 33. I will sing unto the
Lord as long as I live, Psalm. 104. 33. Psalm. 146. 1. Psalm. 52. 8, 9. Then he
knew of a stock and a new furniture in heaven, suppose his own well should go
dry.

CHAP. V.
Some properties of Influences of grace. 1. That they are invincible and
irresistible. 2. Of free grace* 3. Done by the Lord with a principality of
causality. 4. Immediately, both by the immediation of virtue, and of the Lords
own presence.

Influences are considered. 1. In the first moment of conversion. 2. In
perseverance. 2. God seeks not our consent to our first conversion. 3. We are
married to Christ before we consent to the marriage. 4. How the Lord determines
free will without offering violence to free* will. 5. Gods dominion is equally
over free will and all natural causes. 6. God acts in all, both by the immediate
influence of his power, and also of his person. 7. The Lord most particularly
leads his own. 8. What is the right missing of Influences. 9. We are more our
own by the Law, and less our own by the Gospel. 10. Christ's care, and the
members care.

IT is easier here to know what is not to be said, as touching the
irresistibility and strength of gracious influences above our free will, then
what to say.

But Influences are considered two ways. 1. Moral'y, 2. Physically.

1. As they are common to all who hear the word in the visible Church.

2. As influences are peculiar to the elect in the business of conversion.

Assert. 1. Common moral influences that goes along with the word preached may
be resisted; for the Jews always resisted the holy Ghost, speaking in the
Prophets, Acts 7. 51, 52. Zech. 7. 11. But they refused to hearken, and pulled
away the shoulder, and stopped the ear, that they should not hear. 12. Yea they
made their hearts as an adamantstone, lest they should hear the Law, and-the
words which the Lord of hosts has sent in his Spirit to the former Prophets.
Then the reprobate may and do resist the immediately inspiring spirit in the
men of God writing and speaking that word, 1 Pet. 1. 20, 21. and the assisting
spirit also in the Pastors. It Is dreadful in the lower actings of God in the
word to despise the Spirit, and to give him battle in his first approaches. I
called, and ye refused, Prove. 1. 24. Isa. 65. 1, 2, 3. A contradicting of, and
a warring against the Spirit at the first face is much to be feared. O tremble
to speak against, or to counter-work the Spirit at all.

2. Influences proper to the Elect, are so also to be looked on.

1. In the first moment of conversion. 2. In the work of perseverance.
In the first moment of conversion the sinner prevents not Christ: none dead in
sins and trespasses ever sent, or could send to heaven for the spirit, and the
influences of grace. The Lord comes unsent for, and here is found of them who
never sought him, Isa. 65. 1.

For as touching the Lords first love-visit, when he comes upon the sinner
dying in his blood, in the infusion of the life of Christ, there is no treaty,
no communing betwixt the foundling dying in the open field and Christ. For

1. Our consent is not sought to the first Creation, nor yet to the second, the
Lord does not (as it were) parley, nor ask the question at the thirsty
wilderness, Shall I pour water on thee, and floods of rain? house of David,
will ye yield your consent and good will, The Lord seek^ not our consent to the
first infusion of a new heart.
that I pour upon you the spirit of grace and of supplication? For the formal
infusion of a new heart is not done by moral acting in that point of
dispensation.

2. Our Divines on strong grounds, teach that the sinner is a mere patient
habet se passive in the formal moment of the Lords infusing of a new herat, as
the wildeness is a patient in receiving rain, Isa. 44. 4, 5. the dead man a
patient in receiving influences of life, Ephesians. 2. 1. And you has be quickened,
who were dead in trespasses and sins. John 5. 25. The man is a passive subject
under a creating power, 2 Cor. 4. 6. Ephesians. 2. 10. So Ezekiel. 36. 26. Ezekiel. 11. 19.
Zech. 12. 10. Yea if adversaries of grace yield an infusion of a new grace, and
natural and supernatural power to believe (be that a remote or farther-off
power) in all and every man, member of the Visible Church, or Indian, or
Brasilian. 1. They must prove it by Scripture. 2. They must show some covenant
and promise like to that Jer. 31. 33. Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20. betwixt Christ and the
Americans, and show whether the offer be moral or not, as well as we. Or 3.
they must say with Pelagians, the power of believing was neither broken, nor
hurt, nor taken away by the fall. But we may see and read free grace here:
Christ leaves no room to our fencing and digladiation. He said not to the
foundling, Will thou live? or will thou not live? but I said positively unto
thee, when thou wast in thy blood, live. And to make it sure, Yea I said unto
thee when thou wast in thy blood, live. Ezekiel. 16. 6. Nor said he to the dry
bone^, Shall I open your graves, and bring you out loving and believing? John
5. 25. Send me your hand-writ and consent out of the graves, else I Will not
enlive you. Nay he did the work first, and first gave us life, and then sought
and obtained our after-consent. As a Prince, who by strong hand conquers a
people, never treats with them whether he shall be their King or not, till he
first subdue them, take their forts and castles, disarm the inhabitants, and
then he offers them good conditions, and gains their after-good will that he
rule over them. And we are translated and in Christ's bounds, and have laid
down arms, before ever we yield a spiritual, vital, lively, and sincere amen
and closing with Christ, that he, and none but he only shall reign over us.
And it is admirable what branches of freedom are here. As

1. No husbandman can help the clouds; no art of navigators can create fair
winds, nor can our seeking create influences of sensible and feeling finding of
him whom the soul loves, Cant. 1.

2. No excellency of means, were it an Angel, and the man Christ preaching, so
as all bear him witness, and are astonished at the gracious words that proceed
out of his mouth, Luke 4. 22. can create saving influences; but by the
contrary, influences of hell fill them with wrath, that they would cast Christ
over the hill, and break his bones, Luke 4. 28, 29.

3. Fectless objects fetch influences from hell: as King Herod and all
Jerusalem with him are quaking for fear, at the birth of a weeping babe in
cradle. Can an infant rise out of his swaddling clothes and cut the Kings
throat, Matthew. 2. 9. and with fire and sword destroy all Jerusalem? or can a
dead corpse in the grave rise and slay the soldiers? Mat. 28.

4. For the external calling, many are called, and hear 40, 50, 60, 70. years,
and yet no influences of grace fall on them, as if men (ah if it were not so)
were the cursed ground and blasted fig tree: yea contrary to influences, he
blasts the roses by withdrawing sap from them, burns the earth, and turns
hearts into iron, by forbidding the clouds to rain on them.

5. In a moment he sends flowing showrs upon the thief crucified with Christ,
and he preaches Christ a King on the cross.

6. Who knows not the celerity and swiftness of the love-visits of Christ,
coming leaping over the mountains, and skipping over the hills? When the man
is going down to the pit, the influence that a found ransom it accepted for
him, makes him revive so that his flesh shall be fresher then a child's, Job 33.
23, 24, 25. and v. 26. He shall pray unto God, and he will be favorable unto
him, says Elihu.

6. There is a great difference here betwixt Sun-influences and the influences
of grace. The apple on the same tree which are nearest to the Suns shining, are
most cordial and delicious; they are rawer and sourer, though upon the same
stock, that are long in the morning ere the Sun-influences fall on them, and
are soon under the afternoon-shadow; but the disciples, shined upon by the
influences of the glory of the transfiguration near Christ, and Moses, and
Elias, spoke they knew not what, and that carnally, Mark 9. 5, 6. And who can
think there is heterodox Divinity so near heaven as now the Apostles were? So
does John fall dead at the feet of Christ when he is in the Spirit, Revel. 1.
10, 13, 17. The well is damned at the head of the fountain.

2. We are married to Christ before we c^^sent to the marriage.
Hence the second Property is clear of it self; it is of free grace we are
married here before we spiritually yield that Christ be our husband. We are
created of new to be his holy frame and workmanship, and then hardly can we but
consent; nor bought we his love-influences. Yea nor is the Lord obliged to give
the Sun-influences for shining and moving, nor the fire for casting out heat:
He has interposed his Sovereignty in the contrary when he pleased, Josh. 10.
13. Isa. 38. 8. Dan. 3. 27. to teach that Heaven and Earth have their Charters
and their Writs of both being and working, from the free goodness and
sovereignty of God.

3. For the third Consideration, the Lord is the cause of his own influences.
Of our actings. 2. The efficacious, domineering, insuperable cause. 3. How the
effects are ascribed to him principally. To prove the first I need not go back
to prove the necessity of divine influences, and that he works all our works in
us. The second is more dubious, but it is spoken to before, Christ is such a
cause.

1. His strong decree of Predestination must carry him to it.

2. The same power of God that raised Christ from the dead acts here. Elsewhere
this is proved by famous D. Tuisse, by Learned Amesius, and many of our worthy
Divines.

Obj. The Lord determines free will, and does no violence to it.
He who gives an insuperable influence to a free and contingent effect, must
render that effect necessary, and not free. 2. He who with man's free will does
insuperably produce the effect, must do violence to man's free will.

Answ. He who with man's free will does insuperably produce the effect by his
alone and only physical and real motion, and no other way, as the Lord causes
the Sun to rise and go down, and the fire to give heat, ^e does or must do
violence to man's free will. True. But now the Assumption is false; for the Lord
does not so and by such an only physical motion insuperably produce the effect.

He who with man's free will does insuperably produce the effect, with both an
insuperable, physical, and real motion, and also with a moral, persuasive, and
legal motion, flowing from a command, he must do violence to man's free will.

This is most untrue; for the physical and moral influences of God, though both
be insuperable, yet neither the one exceeds the other in degrees of necessity,
nor do they both jointly exceed the necessity which free will will impose on
itself.

If any object, He who insuperably moves free will to act, he does infer
violence to free will: But God does insuperably move free will. Therefore

Answ. The proposition is false. 1. The Lord by casting an ague of
love-sickness in the soul, moves the free will of the Spouse, and of the Martyrs
to die for Christ, rather then deny him, because love of it self considered as
separated from the Lords physical motions on the soul, works upon the will more
strongly and insuperably, then many floods upon a fire, and is hard (...) as
hell, or the place of the dead, and marriage-love is cruel as the grave, Cant.
8. 6. yet love infers no violence to the will.

2. Commands the Sun and it rises not, Job 9. 7. and commands the Sun and it
rises, Psalm 104. 19, 22. And the Sun cannot but obey him; for all creatures
are his servants, Psalm. 119. 91. and he moves all natural causes to act, and so
to act insuperably, and yet he does no violence to the natures of Sun, fire,
and second causes, in moving them.

He who contributes an insuperable influence with free will. if that influence
be contemperated and sweetly accommodate to the nature, and elective, and
rational way of working of free will acting out of judgment, as our free will
acts here.

He is not a cause inferring violence to free will. Should he indeed over-drive
and over-act the free inclination, contrary to the reason, light, and judgment
of the mind, and to the moral and free elective inclination of the will, he
should constrain and force free will: But this he does not, but inclines the
heart of David to the Lords testimonies sweetly, strongly, insuperably; and
this David prays for, Psalm 119. Psalm 5. Psalm 19. and the Saints in many
places; and neither David nor the Saints in such prayers suit of God to destroy
free will: also the Lords command, and not the Lords influence, is our rule of
obedience. But since we know not the Lords actual denying of his influence,
because we are willing he should deny it, our sinful non-acting is no less our
guiltiness, then if we had the dominion and commandment of the Lords influences
in our power. A Master commands his servant to come to such a place where his
Master uses to be, yet neither is the Master obliged to be in the place hic
and nunc, neither passes he any promise to be there: if the servant come not to
that place, and willingly absent himself, and willingly consent that the Master
be not in the place, the servants not coming is a manifest contravening of his
Masters command. So the Lord commanding me to pray, though he concur not by his
Spirit interceding to help me as he uses to do, my not praying is a
contravening of his command, who calls to me, pray hic and nunc under this
trouble: For,

1. The Spirits helping, or not helping me to pray is not my rule, but the
commandment is my rule.

2. The Spirit is not obliged hic and nunc.

3. I pray not.

4. We are inexcusable in not doing our duty, though the Lord deny his
necessary influence.
My willing not praying is a sinful virtual consent to want the help of the
Spirit.

Obj. Then should the Suns not moving, but standing still in the firmament, be
a contravening of the command of God given in the Creation, when he gave to the
Sun a power to move.

Answ. No ropes of Logic can draw the conclusion and antecedent together: The
Lords command to the Sun is not moral, but natural.

2. It Is not absolute. The power of moving in the Sun is not to be acted, but
according to the sovereignty of God, concurring or not concurring with the Sun,
so as the Sun is under only (to speak so) a physical mandate of omnipotency,
not under an Ethical, Moral, Legal, or obediential commandment, to move, or to
shine, under peril of sin and punishment, as man is, by the holy moral mandate
and commandment of God.

Obj. A free cause has more liberty not to act, or to act, then the Sun has
to give light, and the fire to give heat: Therefore the Lord must have given to
free will a power of nilling and willing, and must tie his influences to await
and be ready, concur or not concur, as free will shall think fit.

Answ. The free will of Angels or men has no more freedom and exemption from
the dominion of providence, then the Sun or the fire has, but all causes
natural or free, are equally under the Lords dominion.

2. Free will has no more a dominion over the Lords dominion and his
influences, that are given out, or withdrawn according to this sovereign
dominion, then the Sun or the pismire. Yea free will is under his dominion, and
also Prove. 21. 1. all the free actings of the creature, as well as the
necessary actings of Sun and fire, as is proved. Free Will has indeed a more
dominion over its own acts, being a rational and free agent, then the Sun over
its acts.

3. This is considerably comfortable, that the Lord is chief Master of work:
Not ye, but your Fathers Spirit speaks in you, Matthew. 10. 19. Not I, but the
grace of God in me, 1 Cor. 15. 10. I live not, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2.
20. And yet Paul lives, Paul labors, but let God reign in us.

4. The actings of God in all created effects, especially his influences of
grace are letten out immediately, God acts in all both by the immediate
influence of his power, and of his person.
both immediatione virtutis, and immediatione suppositi, by immeate concurring
of his power and virtue, and by the personal (as it were) concurrence of
himself, so the Lord works not in us to will and to do by a Deputy or
Lieutenant, as a King rules and governs another Kingdom, not by himself in
person, but by a Deputy, who represents his person; and Princes being far
distant, the sea intervening, transact matters of peace and war with other
Princes and States, by their Ambassadors and Legates whom they send.

For God is said to be with Moses mouth, not only giving him eloquence, and a
tongue, but the Lord spoke in him to Pharaoh, Exodus 4. 15. I will be with thy
mouth, and with Aarons mouth, and teach you what to do. Genesis 46. 4. Fear not,
Jacob, to go down to Egypt, I will go down with thee into Egypt: And I will
surely bring thee up again; my power shall be with thee to protect thee, my
wisdom to lead thee (this had been much) but he meets with Jacobs fear, ah, I
goedown to Egypt, God is not in that Idolatrous Land. Fear not (says he) I the
Lord in person shall go with thee, to bless thee, to act in thee. Jer. 1. 19.
They shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee. Why?
For I am with thee to deliver thee. Immediatione suppositi. God was Jeremiah's
immediate deliverer; for v. 18. he had promised before to be with Jeremiah by
the immediation of his power and grace: For behold I have made thee this day a
defenced city, an iron pillar, and brazen walls against the whole Land, etc.
The Lord is present by the gracious metal of zeal, faith, invincible courage
he put in his Prophet. So Christ, Luke 24. 49. Behold I send the promise of my
Father unto you. What, will he be away himself then? No: for he says Matthew.
28. 29. to the same disciples, Lo, (...) I am with you always, even unto the
end of the world.

2. The Spirit acts in his own, John 14. 17. He dwells with you, and shall be in
you. v. 26. He shall teach you all things. John 16. 13. He will guide you in
all truth.

3. Psalm. 73. 24. Thou will guide me with thy counsel. He may do that though
absent, by infusing into the Prophet the habit of wisdom: nay he is nearer
hand, v. 2. Nevertheless I am continually with thee, thou have holden me by my
right hand. That is more then power.

4. The action of leading that is ascribed to God, is his only action. Deuteronomy.
32. 12. So the Lord alone led Jacob, and there was no strange God with him. Now
the eyes, legs, wisdom and will of the guide and leader are the travelers:
It Is true, The Lord particularly leads his own.
he led them by right hand of Moses, but who then shall lead Moses? for Moses
needed a guide as they, Isa. 63. 12. Yea but he was leader in person himself.
He led them through the deep as an horse in the wilderness, that they should
not ^^umble. Now a horse is not led, by giving him power to guide himself, but
the leader holds the bridle, and directs the way to the horse. So the Lords
Christ's gentle driving of the ewes with lamb, and Christ's carrying the lambs
in his bosom, Isa. 40. 11. is an action immediate of Christ and his Spirit.
The warmness of life that comes from Christ's own bosom, and from the Spirit
spreading warm love abroad in the heart, speaks the personal acting of the Son
and Spirit. So drawing, John 6. 44. Cant. 1. 4. speaks the nearness of the
Father of Christ, and of Christ in his acting.

5. This is to be considered. There are two sorts of causes: Two sorts of
causes, one in fieri, for the producing of, and giving being to a thing,
another in facto esse, for the preserving of the same thing in being. God is
both ways the cause of gracious actings.
on in fieri, another in facto esse. The Creator in a manner is but half a
cause: the father begets a son: the carpenter builds a ship: the Mason raises
up the frame of a goodly house: But the son lives when the father is dead; the
ship sails thousands of miles; and the house stands hundreds of years, when
the carpenter and the mason are far from them: for they are causes in fieri,
only the making of houses and ships.

But there are some causes do more. The soul is a cause of the living man; and
when the soul is removed, the man dies: the face looking on the glass is the
cause of the image, both in its production and conservation: remove the face,
and the image vanishes away: the Sun is the cause of daylight, which is
transfused through the air, from the East to the West. When the Sun goes down
to another Horizon, daylight vanishes away, because the Sun not by a deputy,
and by virtue communicated to another, is the cause of the aires enlightening,
but is the cause of daylight, both as touching the creating of it in fieri,
and as touching the preserving of it, or in conservari and facto esse. So is
God the cause of all creatures, both as touching being, and continuation being;
the Lord made all things, and when they are made, the house of heaven and earth
should return to nothing, if the Lord should withdraw his causative influence.
But in a special manner the Lord is every wa^ the cause of grace, of our
spiritual life, and of all our actings of grace. The new life should turn to
nothing, if Christ withdraw his gracious influence, and it is that our poor
little image and spiritual breaths are in his hand, both touching production
and conservation by his graces breathing. Hence if the Angel of his presence
go with us, his hand in our right hand, Psalm. 73. 23. let us say, 1. As Moses
after the Lord had promised, Exodus 33. 15. If thy presence go not (with me)
carry me not hence. Ah, who refuse a journey except God go with him, and be at
his right hand, and fixes the mind on this, I will not go to the pulpit as a
Minister, nor to the bench as a Judge, nor to the field as a soldier, except
the Lord lead me, and hold me by his right hand? Do ye miss influences of
grace, and the leading of the Spirit in a spiritual way of eating, The right
missing of influences is to miss influences special.
sleeping, waking, buying, journeying? It is good.

Obj. I cannot stir without God and his influences, that I know.

Answ. The sparrow and the raven, the lion and the wolf, cannot stir without
Gods influences of nature. Ah, that is poor and hungry. Many have no more help
of God to be lead in eating and drinking for God, then the raven and the lion.

Obj. I cannot pray nor hear without the influences of God.

Answ. Ah, you miss influences of God, as concurring with a gift; but ye miss
not his gracious and saving influence to pray and hear in faith and feeling to
concur with the Spirit of grace.

2. Judas the traitor cannot preach and cast out devils, without a common
influence of a God with his gift; and that is all your missing. The renewed man
misses that which (in a manner is his due) as a renewed man; and that is the
presence of the spirit of grace in his acting. If a horse want a leg, he shall
soon miss it when he comes to running,; for four legs are due to him by nature,
but the horse in running misseth not the wings of an eagle; for wings are not
due to him. Gracious influences are not due to a Judas, nor such a guide as the
Spirit to any reprobate man; therefore they cannot miss such a gracious guide.

2. It teaches us to be willing to be led as to 1. Deny our will and wisdom;
as the blind man should not contend with his leader and guide, as if he did see
better then his guide. Slack your high-bended will, and deny it, and cavil not
with the Spirit, this way I must go whether my guide will or not: Let your
will be as dead, and no will at all; and let the Spirit in his will and
wisdom reign in you.

2. The giving of the heart to God.
Spread out the sails and give them to the wind; resign the heart to the
Spirit: obey that, My son, give me thy heart. Give Christ your loves, as Cant.
7. 12. Keep none of your heart or love to your self, but quit fully both to the
leading Spirit of Jesus. Your love and your heart, according to the
Gospel Dispensation, is not your own, or at your disposing, whatever property
natural by law you have over your self; We are more our own by law, and less
our own by the Gospel.
for the law buys you not. We are less our own, and more Christ's by the
Gospel, and more our own by the Law.

Many profess themselves sons, and so to be led by the Spirit, yet they have
not given eyes, wisdom, will and love to the Spirit: they keep a great piece
of their heart and their love to themselves, and have an inward reluctance and
wrestling against the ways of the Spirit, as yet remaining debtors to the
flesh, to pay the debt of service to the flesh, Romans 8. 12, 13, 14.

5. This is comfortable, that Christ makes it the travail of his soul, Isa. 53.
11. and his soul-satisfaction to see his seed, and to bring many children to
glory, Heb. 2. 10. So his souls work is upon keeping such as are given to him,
and guiding on his flock, John 10. 3, 4. in going before his own sheep, in
calling them by name, and in leading them.

2. He keeps such as come, and raises them up at the last day, John 6. 37, 40.

3. He guides them with prayers, John 14. 16. intercedes for them, to reduce
them when they go out of the way, Heb. 5. 1, 2. and all this with
soul-satisfaction and delight, to get all his offspring and children which the
Lord has given to him, fairly landed, and set in the other side of the sea,
beyond temptations and hazards, beyond sin and death, as he has a
fellow-feeling and compassion, his bowels being moved, even now, in heaven with
our infirmities, Heb. 4. 14, 15. so far as is suitable to his glorified state,
as our great High Priest, which has passed into the heavens. So his other
affections of desire, as our head, and natural and kindly care to have all his
members guided safe in at the gates of heaven: and he must have much soul
delight and satisfaction, that his own be led with his holy arm, and gathered
in, Isa. 40. 10, 11.

We have a loose faith, the head shall care and watch for us, though we sleep;
that is, Christ is graciously careful to give influences, whether we sleep or
wake, pray or pray not: Christ cares more for his own body, then the members
care for themselves.
our care can add nothing to his care; if he will fail in his trust, and
sleep, and let us perish, let him see to his own glory; two cares, one in the
head, and another in the members, are needless: nay, but his love and care, as
head, sends down influences of godly fear and trembling to the members, that
they may work with him, Jer. 32. 40.

2. Our weakness of faith errs in the other extremity. Ah, can my deadness and
hardness be ever subdued! If Christ once sighed for the hardness of sinners
hearts, Christ's care is now rather more when he is glorified, then less.
and wept over the slain of Jerusalem, and counted it meat and drink to bring
in the Samaritans to the Gospel, John 4. 34. Now when Christ is glorified, and
the affections of love, compassion, care, are perfected in glory not destroyed,
should our unbelief say he now cares not for the hard heart and obstinacy of
his redeemed ones? If thy unbelief must take all the care off Christ, and our
unbelieving care must do all, let Christ sleep.

3. There is a proportion betwixt head and members, the soul-travel of the head
in heaven, and the soul-travel of the members on earth in the use of all
means, hearing, pra^ing, praising, go together. Awaking head and sleeping
members are unsuitable. He watches prays, and watch ye with him, and pray.

FINIS.

