JOY of ANGELS.

Delivered in a SERMON Before the HONORABLE SOCIETY OF GRAYES-INNE, On the
last Day of JUNE, 1656.

BY JA: RUTHERFORD D. D.

LONDON: Printed by J.G. for Henry Seile, and are to be sold at his shop in the
Bulwark near the Tower. MDCLVIII.

crown surmounting French fleur-de-lis with crown surmounting Tudor rose and
Scottish thistle on either side
S. LUKE 15.10. Likewise I say unto you, There is Joy in the presence of the
Angels of God, over one sinner that repents.


Man's Life upon earth is a Compound of cross Ingredients, Gall and Honey,
bitter and sweet, sorrow and joy. The adventurous Mariner is resisted with
adverse Winds, assisted with prosperous Gales; the laborious Husbandman does
reap his Corn nipt with the austerity of a gloomy Winter, cherished with
influences of the benign Sun: Nor indeed is there any man so abandoned unto
storms, that has not had some share or hopes of better times. Were the whole
life of man a texture of never-intermitted woes, none would desire to live; and
if it were a continued Festivity, none would wish to die.

Whether our Adversities are more abated by others fellow-mourning, or our
Felicities more improved by the co-rejoycing of others, is a question, yet
without all question. The sympathy of others makes a sad estate less heavy, and
a joyful more happy. Our Savior prophetically proclaims his Solitude in the
Garden, when his sweat was as drops of blood running down upon the earth, an
aggravation of his grief. I have trod the wine press alone, and of all the
people there was none with me, Isa. 63.3. And the ministration of a
strengthening Angel was forthwith ordered, to alleviate the apprehensions of his
incumbent and impendent sufferings, S. Luke 22.43.

At his death upon the Cross, ye know he cried out, to the astonishment of
Heaven it self, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Matthew. 27.46. whilst
men past by, not considering the greatness of his grief, God afflicting him in
the day of the fierceness of his wrath for the sins of Mankind; the Sun was
eclipsed, the Earth trembled, the Rocks rent, the Graves opened, These were his
Mourners; and so ferious Mourners, as never were, nor shall the like be any
more. And having drank of the Brook in the way, the third day he lifted up the
head victoriously; the joy whereof is not terminated in himself, or imparted to
the Saints only, but it is proclaimed by Angels, exhilarated Angels, no small
accession to our Saviors glory. Add we his Ascension by the natural power of
his Godhead, and supernatural power of his then-glorified Manhood, lifting up
his Body from the Mount of olives far above all Heavens, to wit, aspectable
Heavens, really, visibly, locally attended with rejoicing Angels, not as
Partners, but Preachers of his Celestial Triumph, Act. 1.10.

But as the misery of man stands principally in sin, so the war and
opposition of the Creatures in the state of separation from his God, is no
petit additional unto his wretched being; none of the creatures truly touched
with a pity of him, that will have no pity toward his own Soul: But
Repentance, the grace of Repentance, breaks down the partition wall, from
whence arises not only a league betwixt the Creature and the Convert, but the
Blessed Angels also, whose residence is mostly above, needless of
Self-conversion, yet are they very liberal of their gratulations.

A Gregarian or Common Soldier, who behaves himself in battle with prudent
valor of signal eminency, receives not only a Guerdon from his Commander in
Chief, but Laurels of Applauses from spectators of the fight. No otherwise man,
coming home by true Repentance to his God, finds not only acceptance at his
hand, who as he lives does desire a sinner should live; from whence resulteth
joy, exceeding joy, but the Loyal Angels also break forth in sacred
Jubilations, Likewise I say unto you, There is etc.

CONNECTION.
Our blessed Lord and Savior having laid aside his Eternal Majesty, wherewith
he was clothed as with a garment, and put on the sordid Rags of our Mortality,
wherein he must satisfy the violated Justice of God, and purchase Eternal
Redemption unto man, met with much opposition from Men and Devils. Whereof,
though the whole Evangelical Compilement bears ample record, yet shall it
suffice to survey this Chapter, from whence the Text does issue.

Publicans and Sinners repair to Christ, Scribes and Pharisees repine at that;
the first came to hear him, but when the other heard that, they murmured. And
as the malignant Spider sucketh poison from the fragrant Rose; no otherwise,
they start an accusation against Christ, being in the very act for which he
came into the world: He receives sinners, and eats with them, ver. 2. The
Charge was grievous, for it comprehends Impiety and Intemperancy, Profaneness
and Gluttony; the Accusers great, Scribes and Pharisees, the most admired for
their Learning and Devotion, Knowledge and Practice. Though every false Report
is not to be answered with too much diligence; yet Criminations of an high
nature, darted from an high hand, are not to be neglected with a Stoical
Apathy: The first being in it self not weighty, and supported with feeble
Props, will quickly fall to the ground; but the other, when disregarded, is
diffused even unto overflowing prejudice. Our Savior therefore laboriously
confutes their malicious slander, and defends his own act, To receive sinners,
penitent sinners, is not sin.

Shall the solicitous Shepherd, who with diligence has sought, with patience
found, and with great compassion brought home the stray sheep unto its fold, be
rewarded with obloquie?

Shall the frugal Houswife be rudely accused for her painful Exploration of her
piece of Money that was lost, or for her joy, it being found?

And who will blame a father for his transported joy at the hearty reformation
of his Son, whom he had deemed to be incorrigible?

Wolves they are, and not Sheep, who rejoice not at the reduction of the
wandering Sheep.

Neighbors they may be in place, but Strangers in affection, who are not
gladsomely touched with the successful search of the thrifty woman for her
amitted coin.

And howsoever they pretend long and duteous attendances upon the just commands
of their aged father, yet the truth is, they are children of Morosity, by
peevish discontent to cloud the reviving joys of their tender Sire, at the
true amendment of his debauched Son. Now look as Jonathan proclaimed the unjust
wroth of his enraged father, and his own unchangeable love to Religious David,
by shooting of three arrows, 1 Samuel 20. even so does our Savior vindicate his
own Piety in receiving true Converts, and charge through and through the
Impiety of those glorious Hypocrites, by those three Parables; the first, of
the lost Sheep, from the third to the eighth Verse; of the lost Piece, from
thence to the eleventh; from which Verse to the end of the Chapter, the Parable
of the lost Son is most amply deduced. My Meditations are directed upon the
second; wherein we have, as in the other two, two general parts, Protasis, and
Antapodosis. First, we have the Parable propounded in the second Verse
immediately preceding the Text, What woman having ten pieces of money, if she
lose one piece, does not light the candle, and sweep the house, and seek
diligently till she find it? and when she has found it, she calls her
friends and neighbors, saying, Rejoice with me, for I have found the piece of
money that was lost: And then we have it applied in the words of the Text it
self, Likewise I say unto you, There is joy in the presence of the Angels of
God over one sinner that repents.

Which to take a pieces (and to take a pieces is an easy piece) we have three
particulars: The duty of a sinner; The benignity of Gods Angels; The certainty
of both. The first, is to repent; the second, Gods Angels rejoice at the
conversion of a sinner; the certainty of both, Likewise I say unto you. The
faithful witness in Heaven, then on Earth, has spoken it: Contradiction must
be silent, Hesitation must be satisfied.

Thus the Text lies before you in its scattered pieces, which collected
together, raise up this Frame or Proposition:

The unfeigned conversion of a sinner is the undoubted gratulation of Gods
Angels. In the handling whereof, this shall be our easy method. 1. We shall
unfold the terms of the Proposition. Next, we shall assign the Reasons of the
same. 3. We shall subjoyn two Questions of tendency to the further clearing of
the point in hand: (Which is not the Doctrine of Repentance, nor the nature of
Angels, nor the infallibility of Christ's sayings; all these have their proper
places elsewhere, the joint of this Text lies in the Joy of Angels at the
conversion of a sinner.) And last of all, omitting many consectaries and
inferences Incidental, we shall conclude this short Exercise with an
Exhortation Intentional. I begin with the terms, and they are three,
Conversion, Angels, Joy.

CONVERSION.
In general is a change or turning. Now all men know, that in all turnings
there is somewhat from whence we turn, and somewhat to which we turn our
selves. No otherwise in this conversion, Spiritual conversion: The Negative is
the Kingdom of Sin and Satan; the Positive is the Kingdom of Christ, and his
Righteousness. In regard of the first, a turning from the evil and error of
our ways: In regard of the second, a turning to the God of Israel, in the
language of the Old Testament, frequently: Both which our Savior has knit
together in that of the New, to turn them from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God, Act. 26.18. And though the whole nature of Conversion
or Repentance (for I shall take the freedom to use them promiscuously; though
I am not ignorant, that in exactness and accuracy of speech, there is some
difference betwixt them) stands principally in these two acts: yet more
distinctly they must be attended with their several Properties. Sorrow for sin
committed, is ever previous unto sin repented. This is that breaking up of the
fallow ground, in the Old Testament; Compunction, in the New; and Contrition,
in the language of the Schools. And Conversion unto God (even in its dawnings)
is never without hope of pardon through Christ, that the destructive precipices
of sin being abandoned, there is made some progress in the ways of New
Obedience, which only lead unto eternal life: for, A true penitent mourns
for his sins, and rejoices for his mourning. So much for the first word,
Conversion, unfeigned Conversion, unfeigned Conversion of a sinner; for sinners
only are the subjects of Conversion.

ANGELS.
Spiritual Subsistences, endued with sublime understanding, great freedom of
will, and eximious strength above all creatures whatsoever; of which, some kept
not their first estate, but left their own habitation, and are now reserved
under everlasting chains of darkness, until the judgment of the great Day, S.
Jude ver. 6. Angels of Darkness, Evil Angels, Angels of Satan, in the
Scripture. Others persisted in their primitive obedience, and are now confirmed
in that estate (against the Skepticism of Arminius be it spoken) without any
possibility of falling, either from their holiness or happiness. In Scripture,
Angels of Light, Elect Angels, Holy Angels; and in the Text, Angels of God,
whose affection is Joy, the last and darkest word to be explained.

JOY.
Amongst the sinful dotages of the Fathers in the second Council of Nice, we
read, That in the fifth action thereof, John Bishop of Thessalonica
maintained, That Angels were substantially corporeal: no wonder then, if they
entertained rude and gross thoughts of their affections, and particularly of
their Joy. But we have not so learned to speak of Angels, whose nature, as we
conceive to be spiritual, so their joy Inorganical. We have inward and outward
Organs or Instruments of letation; the like whereof to ascribe unto those high
Spirits, were erroneous in it self, injurious unto them: yet are they perfused
with such a Joy at the Repentance of a sinner, as does not derogare from the
sublimity of their Natures. The mouth of the Lord has spoken it in the Text,
and therefore I said in the Doctrine, their gratulation was undoubted;
Undoubted in it self, though the manner is unknown to us, and so shall be
until that time, that Time shall be no more with us, when we shall be
translated from these Rudimental forms below, unto the highest form, then
fellow-scholars with the Angels. Then we who in this estate believe the
Jubilation of these Spirits at our unfeigned Repentance, shall distinctly know
the manner thereof in the life to come, when their nature shall be unveiled to
us: then the proposition of the Text, with all the Mysteries of that Kingdom,
shall not escape our comprehension: The unfeigned conversion of a sinner, is
the undoubted gratulation of Angels.

REASONS.
The Reasons whereof, are taken either from their relations to God or Man. In
the Text, they are his Angels, not only by Creation, but Mission; for, Angel
is not a Name of their Nature, but Employment, and signifies Messenger. Now
it is the glory of a saithful Messenger, to give his own will to be swallowed up
in the wise and powerful will of his Lord that sends him. And what Gods will is
as to the Repentance of a sinner, we read in that eminent place, Ezekiel. 33.11.
As I live, I desire not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should
repent, and live. There Is his Protestation. Cast away all your iniquities by
which ye have transgressed, lest iniquity be your ruin: Why will ye die, O
house of Israel? Ezekiel 18.30, 31. there is his Obtestation, Thus because God
wills, and so earnestly wills the Repentance of a sinner, these Messengers,
Nuncio's, Legates, Ambassadors, even Angels of God, rejoice over man converted.

Nor does their employment from God only, in a duteous compliance with his
will, produce this joy in them, but their relations to Man also considered, do
quicken them to this affection, demonstrable in four particulars; In Proximity
of Kindred; Family-relations; School-acquaintance; and fourthly, in Society of
Arms. The first I call Natural, the second, Oeconomical; the third,
Paedagogical; and the last, Martial. Of which perspicuously and succinctly in
their order; and first, of the first ground Natural, or Proximity of Kindred.

Holy Angels are called The Sons of God, Job 1.6. and true Converts enrobed
with the same Title. Now we are the Sons of God, 1 John 3.2. they Sons, and we
Sons of one God and Father; therefore Brethren, therefore near in Kindred.
Jacobs youngest Son was Benjamin, the son of his right hand; but the eldest was
Reuben, unstable as water. But in the filiations now in hand, it is quite
otherwise; the confirmed Angels are Gods Benjamins; and converted sinners,
whilst they walk by faith, and not by sight, are as Reuben. And though they are
the elder brethren, yet their Seniority is not such as Origin fancied, created
long before this visible world; for by these words, Before the foundation of
the world, Scripture denotes Eternity, Ephesians. 1.4. yea, Moses celebrates the
Eternity of God, in that He was before the Mountains were brought forth, ere
ever he formed the earth and the world, Psalm. 90.2. Nor yet with others, do we
think they were created the sixth day, that is to make us Twins, even the
productions of one birth: but we hold it most consentaneous unto truth, That
together with the supreme Heavens, they were created the first day, so that
they were five days elder than Adam, who is called the Son of God, S. Luke 3.
ult. To which filiation (having sinned) we are not restored but by Repentance,
and then brethren of Angels, they by Creation, we by Conversion, both by
Adoption.

Ah silly Cosroes, though the great Monarch of Persia, it was thy debasement to
instyle thy self Brother to the Sun and Moon!

Ah ridiculous hypocrite, Francis of Assise, in calling the Wolf thy Brother,
the Fire thy Brother! We need not emendicate thoughts of humility from such
servile prostitutions of our Nature; nor need we court those great Luminaries
of Heaven to own us in a Brotherhood: We are exalted unto a Fraternity with the
Angels, by our Repentance from dead works, to serve the living God; the first
Motive of their Joy, and that Natural.

I add a second, taken from Family-relations; they servants, and we servants
of the great King: I am thy fellow servants, and of the Prophets thy brethren,
and of them that keep the words of this book, says the Angel, Rev. 22.9. It Is
true, S. John was an Apostle of the greatest Magnitude; yet was it no small
dignation in the Angel who was perfect, to call him Brother, tending to
perfection. Sure I am, it was much greater when the Angel professed himself a
fellow servants to the Prophets, men separated to the Ministry, but not assumed
to the height of Apostolical Function. And yet he does not stick there, he
comes lower, and of them that keep the sayings of this book, even the meanest
of Christ's Menial servants.

The difference betwixt a Subject and a Servant is known to every one. All the
people of Spain are the Subjects of their King, but they only that are
enrolled in the Houshold-book are properly his Servants. Amongst whom, some are
of his Bedchamber, others of his Presence Chamber, in near and dear relations
above stairs, yet disdain they not to call them of the Household which are below
stairs, their fellow servants. Angels, Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets,
Martyrs, Virgins, Confessors, even all the Saints departed, are Servants of the
King of kings, and their attendance is above stairs, I mean, in Heaven (all in
Heaven for quality, not equality of Glory) and yet the most immediate and
eminent Officers, to wit, Angels, do not scorn to call us penitents below
stairs, far removed from the Beatifical Presence of our God, their
fellow servants. It Is frequent in the Courts of Princes, some Servant to start
up, and plausibly to persuade his Lord to retrench his family; yet such
specious counsels are often forged upon the Anvile of Self-interest: but that
Servant to whom the honor of his Lord is dear and sacred, delights to see him
numerously attended. Good Angels (for of them only we speak all this while)
are most zealous of Gods glory, which is most sweetly manifested in the great
Court of Converts, who being called out of the state of Subjects at large, to
be properly of the Household of God, those ancient Courtiers, those prime
Servants the Angels, are therewith gladsomely affected. Which is the second
ground, viz. Occonomical.

3. They instruct, and men do learn. The Angel Gabriel does expound the vision
of the four Beasts unto the Prophet Dan. 6.16. informs him of the 70 weeks,
cap. 9. ver. 21. unto the end; yea, reveals many other great mysteries unto
him, in the 10, 11 and 12 Chapters of that book. So in the Old. In the New
Testament, the very same Angel does annunciate to the holy Virgin the
Incarnation of the Son of God, in her, of her, Luke 1.26. Angels acquaint the
Shepherds with the joyful news of his Nativity; the Resurrection of Christ
declared by an Angel to the women, Matthew. 28.5. the Apostles themselves are
instructed in his Ascension, and his return to Judgment, by two Angels, Act.
1.11. yea, the future estate of the Church, until the day of the restitution of
all things, is revealed by an Angel, I Jesus have sent mine Angel to testify
these things unto you in the Churches, Rev. 22.16.

Some Arminians do teach, That at this day God uses the visible Ministry of
Angels for the conversion of Pagans, to whom Christian Pastors are totally
wanting: Of which I will say no more, than what Gabriel Biel has long ago
(following S. Hierom) concluded of such speculations, Whatsoever is not founded
upon sacred Scripture, either expressly, or by just consequence, (and neither
way, in my opinion, is this opinion) is with the same facility rejected as
affirmed. When the Gospel of Christ lay hid in a Mystery, when the foundations
of the Christian Church were not laid, when the Canon of the sacred Oracles was
not completed, it seemed good to the wisdom of God, to relieve the infirmity of
man, by sensible and exterior Revelations of Angels. But now that the light of
the Gospel is so clear in it self, and so clearly sealed up and confirmed, such
vocal and outward Ministrations under sensible and assumed shapes are not to be
expected; and yet well are not they, who deny all power to the holy Angels to
act upon the inward senses of man. For my part, (with the good leave of my
Religious and Learned Brethren be it spoken) I doubt not but good Angels
suggest good counsels, tender holy motions, offer pious thoughts, yea refresh
the often parched spirits of gracious men with inward joy. Shall wicked Angels
steal the Word that was sown in the hearts of men, lest they should believe and
be saved, Luke 8.12? Shall the Devil work in the children of disobedience, Ephesians
2.2? Enormously disquiet the affections, 1 Samuel 16.15? yea, inject wicked
thoughts with success in godly men, 1 Chronicles. 21.1? Tell me, if any man can tell
me, with what shadow of truth can the Angels of God be excluded from all
actings and operations upon the inward senses of man. To conclude this third
Incentive: If Aristotle broke forth in joy, when he did read the learned
Epistles of his Scholar Alexander; If it be a Crown of rejoicing to the man of
God, to see the people of his charge not children, but men in understanding:
How enlarged are the gratulations of Angels, when their motions are attended,
and their monitions obeyed, to our further progress in the School of Grace, in
which we are admitted, and matriculated by Repentance? This ground is
Paedagogical. There remains one, and but one, taken from Society of Arms,
which I called Martial.

Humane Stories tell us, That the scarce numerable Army of Xerxes, conducted
against Greece, was so defeated by Sea and Land, that very few of them returned
home: but that was a continued overthrow of many days. Aetius the Proconsul,
that prodigy of valor, killed 20000 Barbarians, led by Attilas the scourge of
God, in one day. The like destruction is reported to have fallen upon the Moors
and Saracens, by the wise Conduct of Charles Martel, in one day. Yet more, five
hundred thousand chosen men of Israel fell by the sword of Abijah and his loyal
Subjects, in one day. But thousands of thousands, millions of millions, myriads
of myriads of Angels fell in one hour. When a battle proves more than
desperate, by the taking of the Royal Standard, the surprizal of the Canons and
Magazine, the destruction of a great part of their Army, yea the death of the
General added, What joy is it to the broken limb of that dispersed Army, to see
it self vigorously recruited? God has numbered unto himself an Army, like unto
the Army that he had lost, (or rather and indeed only so, that had wilfully
lost it self) hoses for horses, chariots for chariots; The Ranks and Files of
lapsed Angels, are filled up with new Recruits, men and women penitent for
their sins; matter of joy, extatical joy unto the holy Angels. And thus they
who own us in the womb of the Church Brethren, in the house of God
Fellow Servants, in the school of Christ our Monitors, in the field of the
Church perform many Military services for us. I will name but two:

1. They are watchful Sentinels, in destroying the devices of the enemy, and
giving a timely alarm to the happy frustration of the same; Arise and take the
babe and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be there until I bring thee word,
for Herod will seek the babe to destroy him, S. Mat. 2.13.

2. They are faithful Life-guards: He shall give his Angels charge over thee in
all thy ways, Psalm. 91.11. Jacob had experience hereof, whose Convoy they were
into the Land of Canaan; This is Gods Host, Genesis 32.2. Such was their diligent
custody of Elisha, when the Syrian Army came to take him, who in contemplation
of his guard, broke forth into that expression of high confidence, They that
are with us, are more than they that are with them, 2 Kings 6.16. And hitherto
of the Reasons, the two Reasons of this Proposition, The unfeigned conversion
of a sinner, is the undoubted rejoicing of Angels; to wit, their relations unto
God, whose Angels they are, and their relations unto Man, discoursed unto you
to be Natural, Paedagogical, Oeconomical, and Martial. It remains we come to
the Questions, which are two.

The former, How come the Angels of Heaven to know the conversion of a sinner
upon earth?

I answer, Conversion is either passive or active. This distinction is
necessarily to be maintained against the Flatterers of Nature, Enemies of
Grace: The former I call Conversion in the heart, the latter Conversion of the
heart. The first is the immediate act of God, hid from the Lyncean eyes of
those Spirits, but hid a very little while, Gods act being infrustrably
followed with our actings, which makes conversion of the heart; from which
effect the Eagle-sighted Angel concludes the antecedent cause, to wit,
Conversion in the heart.

2 Quest. Is the conversion of every particular sinner made known unto all the
Angels of God?

I answer, Whatsoever is of the essential beatitude of Angels, is known unto
them all: Now their knowledge of thy repentance, or my conversion, is
accidental, not essential to their bliss. It is enough that some Angels do know
it, and rejoice therein: As for other Angels far removed, at least not
definitively present in that Ubi, where the new convert is, when they come to
know this holy change, it is either by revelation from God, or he approving it,
by communication of the circumstant or concerned Angel, one or more.

Briefly, though the wisdom of Angels is exceeding great, yet it is finite;
very large, yet limited: for neither by their Matutine or Vespertine knowledge
in the language of the Schools, borrowed from S. Austine; neither by their
natural or experimental, infused or acquired knowledge in the expression of
Moderns, have they a distinct and intuitive inspection of future contingencies,
depending upon the singular providence of God, or mutability and
indeterminateness of man's will, without particular revelation from God; and
consequently, read not the inmost thoughts of men, but when they are rendered
legible by omanations and signs; for, God only knows the thoughts of the
hearts of all the children of men, as it is in the dedication-prayer of
Solomon, 1 King. 8.39. In a word, God sees our thoughts afar off, even before
they are formed; Angels, near at hand, when they are performed, which is
abundant matter of their joy at the conversion of a sinner: Likewise I say unto
you, There is joy in the presence, etc. And now suffer the word of Exhortation.

Man is a Creature, not more remarkable for Invention, than Imitation; of
things worthy, very seldom; but of things to be abhorred, too often. Natural
deformities in the body, have been copied out as singular beauties, and Moral
infirmities of the soul of some, have past into vices, National and Epidemical.
Have we not read and seen unsound Opinions only sipt by great ones, taken down
in great draughts by the injudicious multitude? The calumniating
superciliousness of those Demagogues, Scribes and Pharisees, had empoysoned the
fillier people, had not our Savior prepared this Antidote; and the iron-like
austerity of the Novatians denying Repentance to such as sinned after Baptism,
and excluding all relapsers, how penitent soever, from Church Communion, had
over-spred the Primitive Church, even unto precipitating desperation, had not
the holy Fathers, burning with the zeal of Christ's truth, maturely and
vigorously opposed the same. These certainly are not for us to imitate, unless
we choose rather to contesserate with Heretics, than Orthodox Professors: All
the Reformed Churches, and that of Rome also, condemning, as those painted
Perfectionists of old, so them likewise who tread in their steps at this day.
What, did I mention the Reformed, the Roman Churches? To congratulate the
salvation of the Gentiles, was the practice of the Christian Church of the
Jews; for when they heard Peter's Apology, they held their peace, and glorified
God, saying, Then has God also given unto the Gentiles repentance unto life,
Act. 11.18. It Is the peculiar character of good Angels in the Text.

Nay, yet higher, this sacred affection is in God the Father, under the
tegument of the Prodigals father; in God the Son, under the emblem of a
Shepherd; and who can doubt at the delight of the holy Ghost herein, since
Repentance of a sinner is signally his work?

But will not you, the Angels of the Churches, lawful Ministers of the Word and
Sacraments, upbraid us with our aberration, if we return unto the Truth, from
whence in wandering we have even wearied our selves? Far be it from us: fear it
not, that meek man having found the lost Sheep, does not spurn it with his
disdainful foot, nor bruise it with his weighty staff, nor rend it with his
cruel dogs, but lays it upon his shoulders with rejoicing. This affection is
in us, the Angels of the Churches. The compassionate father hearing of his
Prodigals return, does not permit the surly Porter for to shut the gate against
him, nor the hired Servants to arm themselves, opposing his admittance; but he
comes forth and meets his Son, whom he observed to be reformed; he runs to him,
falls upon his neck, and kisseth him; Necessaries, shoes for his feet, clothes
for his back; Ornaments, the best Robe, and a Gold Ring, frankly, freely
bestowed; yea, the fatted Calf is killed; and the harmonious Music proclaims
aloud his hearty welcome to his fathers house: No objecting his former ways,
no twitting him by his father with his foregoing courses. This affection is in
us, the Angels of the Churches. The diligent woman, who having lighted a
candle, and swept the house, and gave not over seeking, till she had found the
piece of Money which was lost, does not discharge her enflamed choler upon it;
nor does she take it up with wrathful chafing, saying, Thou art an unfortunate
piece, which has brought me more trouble in thy quest, than I shall have
comfort in thy use: No, but having found it, she calls her neighbors and
friends together, saying, Rejoice with me, for I have found the piece of money
that was lost. Likewise I say unto you, There is joy in the presence of the
Angels of God over one sinner that repents.

FINIS.
These Books following, are Printed for Francis Smith, and are to be sold at
his Shop, in Flying-Horse-Court, in Fleetstreet, near Chancery Lane end..
Christianismus Redivivus, Christendom both Unchristen'd, and new Christened;
or that good old way of Dipping and Inchurching of Men and Women after Faith
and Repentance, vindicated; Also the Writings of Mr. Baxter, Dr. Featley, Dr.
Holms, Mr. Marshall, Mr. Blake, Mr. Cook, Mr. Cotton, Answered; with a
Vindication of Ordinances till Christ's personal Coming, against Ranters and
Quakers, proved, in Follio.

Truth prevailing against the fieircest Opposition, or an answer to Mr. John
Goodwins Water Dipping, no firm footing for Church Communion, in quarto.

The Damnable Heresies, horrid Blasphemies, Mockings, Railings, Deceit and
Dishonesty of the Quaker laid open, in 4to.

The Free Grace of God to all the Sons of Adam, vindicated; with 20. Queries to
all men concerned, 4to.

The true Tything of the Gospel Ministers, proving that Tyths is not to be
enforced upon Members of true Churches, neither by Gods Law nor Man's; and that
Christ as King in the heart is to make Laws for it, 4to.

A Contention for Truth in two public Disputations before thousands of people,
touching the Baptism of Infants, whether Lawful or Unlawful, in 4to.

A Glass of Justification, or the Work of Faith with power; published on
purpose to rectify some dangerous, other damning mistakes of men about their
Faith, 4to

Sions Redemption discovered, wherein the manner of the rise of the Man of Sin,
called the vile Person, is proved not to be the Romish Babylon; Together with a
description of Christ's personal Reign upon earth 100. years, in 10 particulars
discovered, in 8to.

Also a discovery of the Latitude of the loss of the earthly Paradise by
Original Sin, in 8to.

The true Gospel Faith, in 30. Articles, manifested.

A Voice from the Word of God to the Quakers, in 8to.

Laying on of Hands asserted, under those several considerations minded in the
New Testament; 1. Upon persons for Healing, by Anointing with Oil: 2. Upon
persons to Office: 3. Upon Believers Baptized as such, in 12 s.

Dagons Downfall before the Ark of the Lord; Wherein are discovered the two
Covenants that God made with Abraham and his two Seeds, in 8to.

Laying on of Hands on Baptized Believers as such, tried by the Touchstone and
found Gold.


