The sad Suffering CASE Of Major General ROB. OVERTON, Prisoner In the Isle of
JERSEY, STATED, AND Presented to the serious Consideration of Those who are
either of a Pious or Public Spirit.

By J. R.

Is Israel a servant? Is he a home-born slave? Why is he spoiled?

Jer. 2.14. When the Righteous are in authority, the People rejoice: but when
the Wicked bears rule, the People mourn, Prove. 29.2.

LONDON: Printed for L. Chapman at the Crown in Popes-Head-Ally, 1659.

The sad and Suffering Case Of Major General OVERTON, Prisoner In the Isle of
Jersey, etc.
SLavery and Servitude is not a greater suffering to a Noble and ingenuous
Spirit, then sencelesness therein, and succumbencie thereunto, is a sin in such
as have deeply dyed their rescue out of bondage in Blood: and yet for some
years past, after the Lord had signally saved us from those inundations which
seemed to threaten the ruin of all our Rights and Liberties, how meanly and
servily have we since truckled under far worse incursions upon the Privileges
both of Parliament and People, and suffered our selves to be cozened out of
that by fraud, which we had conquered by force? insomuch that those who some
years since could not countenance the least oppression, can now comply with the
greatest, and justify that under one, which they condemned in another: Those
who formerly were rather ready to run into a Civil War then permit a few
Members to be pulled out of Parliament, have since silently seen whole
Parliaments turned out at pleasure; and have been more afraid of the frowns of
one man, then formerly of the force of another; such as lowdly lifted up their
voices against the imprisoning of persons without just cause, are now silent
under the sufferings of some without any cause; and can stand by and behold as
unconcerned (and yet know not how soon it may be their own Case) the barbarous
bondage and banishment of those who have lost their Blood, and hazarded their
lives for them in the very same things, for which they now suffer: and
therefore if the Lord should punish our Persons and Posterities with slavery
and servitude, for the slavishness and servileness of our Spirits, it will be a
most righteous judgment, and we cannot but confess, that we have justly
deserved the same.

But however this is too generally and truly the Spirit and temper of most, yet
the Lord has reserved unto himself some, who retain a public Spirit, and
have with Noble Heathen Cato (in a manly sense) chosen rather to be their
Countries Sacrifice, then any Caesar's slave; and upon a Christian and Religious
account, have thought it much better for them to be of an humble Spirit with
the lowly, then to divide the spoil with the proud. These are the Salt of our
English Earth, which has not lost its savor; and indeed, had it not been for
such, we might before now have been more then equally exemplar with Sodom in
punishment, as we have exceeded that place in sin: and yet how shamefully
ungrateful are we to some of these public Patriots, when notwithstanding all
their past services, and present sufferings in the Cause of their Country, we
are like dumb Dogs that cannot bark on their behalf; being rather ready (as
were the Jews in the Case of the Lord of life) to cry, Hang and Head those who
would have us saved from slavery, then we are any ways sympathizers with their
sorrows and sufferings for our sakes. And therefore seeing that faithful
servant and sufferer for his Country, Major General Overton, bears above four
years bonds and banishment, with so much patience and silence, under many and
unparalled oppressions, and none on his behalf breathing out those cries and
complaints, which his Case deservedly commands from every true Englishman: I
was weary with forbearing, and resolved (cost what it may) to present his Case
to public view, for a witness against those, who contrary to all Law, Reason,
Religion or Custom of either Turks or Heathens, most arbitrarily have punished
him both in Person and Estate, without ever exhibiting the least Charge or
Crime, or bringing him to any Trial or Examination; but have persecuted him for
this very Cause, and no other (whatever any Time-serving Trapanners may
pretend) that he yet remains faithful to the Good old Cause, when others have
revolted from it: yea, could it be but comprehended in any convenient room, it
might be made manifest to the World, that he was so far from managing any
design against the late Protector in Scotland, that some who either employed
themselves, or were set on work by others (as is most likely) had designed
drawing of him into that which would have given them opportunity to have
destroyed him with a color of Justice: and therefore he was represented as
guilty in Scotland, as the Plot hatched in England would have rendered him, if
it had proved successful; but the Lord delivered him out of that snare, and
other Trapanning tricks laid for him in the Tower, by those who were soon
fetched forth, or rather removed themselves out of that place, when they could
fasten nothing upon him. These things here only hinted, may in due time be so
circumstantiated, that any observing eye may easily read, how some had designed
his ruin: But because I intend to confine my self to a short Breviate of his
Case, I shall accordingly proceed.

It is not unknown to many who have had any judicious inspection into the late
public transactions of these times, how that this Noble Spirited Man, being
before the Wars a Captain of the Trayn'd-Bands in his Country, was in judgment
and Conscience (for defense of this Nation from those incursions that were
ready to break in upon the Freedoms and Liberties of Englishmen) so conjured
by an Order of the House of Commons, that he was engaged at Hull in the
Forlorn-Hope of these late Wars, to the great hazard both of Person and Estate,
the Parliament having then no considerable Force on foot. What faithful and
significant services he performed during the late Wars both in England and
Scotland, especially in that never to be forgotten expedition into Fife, let
his greatest Enemies speak for him: and how he opposed the very peeping forth
of any private interest against the public prosecution of the Good old Cause,
remains yet fresh in the memories of many: but this being sufficient for his
Services, I shall proceed to his Sufferings.

When the little Parliament was dissolved, and the late General had taken upon
him the Chief Magistracy of these Nations, under the Title of Lord Protector;
there came down to him at Hull, where he was then Governor, the form of an
Address, with a Letter, enjoining him, the Officers and Soldiers of that
place, to subscribe the same; but conceiving it oppugnant to the designs and
end of the late Wars, and contrary to those Oaths and Engagements he was
concerned in, he opposed and declined it, and immediately came up to London,
and declared his dissatisfaction to the late Protector; who having several
times debated the Case with him, but unable thoroughly to convince him of the
reality of the necessities alleged; after a most tedious attendance under
suspense, he accepted of a Commission for Scotland, upon this consideration,
that he was free to engage against the Common Enemy; informing the said
Protector, that if he prosecuted the public good of these Nations, he would
serve him with his life and fortune; but in case it should otherwise appear,
that he had designed propagating of his own interest upon the ruins of the
Rights and Liberties of the People of England, he could not, nor would not set
one foot before another to serve him: wherewith the Protector seemed so well
pleased, that he told him, he was a Knave if he did otherwise.

2. After he was gone into Scotland, and had discharged those intrustments
committed to him, upon information of the Recognition imposed upon the first
Parliament succeeding that change of Government, his dissatisfaction was so
revived, that he was upon a return for England, to have resigned up his
Commission; but (some being unwilling to part with him so peaceably) a design
was so laid against him (as in time may be made more manifest) that before he
could put that resolution in practice, he was secured and sent away by Sea to
the Tower, upon pretense of endeavoring to divide the Army; occasioned only by
an inoffensive procedure of some few Oficers toward an Address they had
proposed to present to the then Protector. I say, the pretense only, was
palliated by that procedure. For it may be made manifest by several
particulars, that Orders and preparations for securing him, preceded that which
was pretended the great plot.

3. After he had been two days in the Tower, there came an Order for his close
confinement; which continued with much force and violence upon him, until he
was banished out of that bondage: during all which time, being full three
years, he was (notwithstanding all his former faithful Services) more strictly
dealt with, then any Prisoner in that place; his Wife and Children for a long
time not being suffered to see him, his friends from time to time denied also
that liberty; some affronted by Gaolers, Warders, and Officers and Soldiers,
and others very uncivilly used and treated, for endeavoring to see him:
sometimes he has been so close confined, that he had contracted such
distempers, as had almost ruined his Body; and when the same was signified to
the Lieutenant of the Tower, yet he positively refused liberty for his walking.

To enumerate all those passages of oppression and persecution, which he
encountered in those three years bondage, would be too tedious: only this in
general, I will assert, that not one stone was left unturned by Trapanning
tricks and dvices, and other inventions of some, who are only ingenious that
way, which could conduce to the breaking of his Spirit, under the heavy yoaks
laid upon him; that so he might either have been tired forth of his integrity,
or engaged into some such procedure, as might have given his Enemies
opportunity of revenge.

Again, fourthly. At his first coming into the Tower, he did by several
Letters importune the deceased Portector for a Trial; which has been often since
seconded by Relations and friends, but could never be granted.

5. The said Protector by his own private Order, contrary to all Law and
Justice, dispossessed the said Major General Overton, before he was prisoner, of
400 l. per annum given him by Act of Parliament, and assigned him forth of the
Earl of Levens Estate: and having after that given order for provision to be
made him out of some other Estate, has since his imprisonment, by another
Order required the Commissioners for that affair in Scotland to forbear either
the paying him money, or assigning him land. If such practices as these have
either the Authority of Law, Reason, or Religion, let all the world judge: for
punishment before conviction, where there is the greatest plea of crime, is by
our Laws and the very Heathens accounted a most high injury. What injustice is
it then to continue a faithful servant to his Country, under a close and cruel
confinement for above four years, and take away his Estate from him without any
color of crime, or other Cause, then a necessity to make good this Atheistical
Maxim, of expiating lesser evils by committing greater? so that he must be
continued upon the pretense of a Cause, because he was first committed without
a Cause: and thus the reputation of a State or Person in Power, must be
preserved out of the ruins of those whom they either persecute out of hatred,
or prosecute upon mistaken grounds; which is such Reason of State as no
Religion but Machiavel's will subscribe to.

6. After he had continued three years close prisoner, and had contracted such
weakness of body, that a violent remove out of one extreme into another, could
promise nothing but present death in all probability; yet was he hurried away
(without any convenient notice for preparation) from a close confinement in the
Tower (not knowing whither) to the Downs by Deal Castle, and from thence to the
Isle of Jersey (one of the most dangerous winter voyages in the world, in the
great snowy and frosty season in January 1657. where he was confined to such an
old rotten windy room, that he could not that winter (and so I believe this) be
kept warm in his bed, but continually cried out, and complained in the night of
aches in his limbs and wounds; which so disabled him from using his legs, that
he could not a few months ago, walk in his chamber without a stick in his hand;
and yet before this his cruel confinement, he was known to be as active and
able bodied a man, and free from any distemper, as most.

7. That this tedious imprisonment has exposed him to such extraordinary
charges and other disadvantages, and this banishment at so great a distance
from his concernments and Relations (his wife being necessitated, because of
his weakness, to be with him; by which means his Family of small children are
left Fatherless and Motherless) so drives him down the hill, that he is much
more damnified in his Estate by this causless confinement (besides the
deteinure of his Donative in Scotland) then he was by the Cavaleer Enemy, who
plundered him in the time of Wars of above 2000 l.

8. That although several applications have been made to this Protector and his
Council by the Prisoners Sister, and his Case so laid before them, both in her
public Addresses and other private informations, that she has professed (as
well she might) that she knew not whether she petitioned for a dead or living
Brother; Yet most seem to be so far from Bowels of compassion (though this
Protector himself discovered some sense of the oppresseds sufferings to his
Sister, when she personally addressed her self to him) and some are so filled
with malignity and enmity, that notwithstanding they had seemed really resolved
to release him, and continually so encouraged his Sister and others to believe
it, that his friends have declined making provision for him and his wife; which
is likely to be of very great damage to them; yet no relief or justice can be
had at their hands, but they seem resolved to ruin both him and his, and yet
there is not one of ten of the Court, but will confess, that he has had very
hard measure; yea, those who would in every thing plead for the integrity of
the deceased Protector, condemned him in this Case of Major General Overton.

And now to come to a Conclusion, I do hereby in his name, and on his behalf,
appeal to the Consciences of all the Court, or any his greatest Enemies;
Whether they are not ere this time convinced and satisfied that the Jealousies
or pretenses against him in Scotland, have proved upon the strictest
examinations to be Clouds without the least water, and high swelling
appearances of nothing. But whether they will acknowledge so much or no, yet I
will seal the truth of this with my blood, if the Lord shall call me to it; and
be able to demonstrate to any unbyassed judgment, that he did not in the least,
either directly or indirectly, design, endeavor, or propagate any thing, that
either naturally in it self, or intentionally in him (whatever ends others
might have had by a Trapanning influence upon them) that tended to divide the
Army into any mutinous attempts or procedures, either there or elsewhere. Nay,
we call upon those who have a notable faculty (besides their tittle-tatling in
private) in extracting, or rather extorting informations against those whose
ruins they are reaching after, to produce whatever they have collected by
their most industrious inquisitions. And let all the time-serving Trapanners of
this Treacherous day (whom the great God of Heaven and Earth, notwithstanding
all their Atheism, will in his time judge) bring in likewise the Auxiliaries of
their cauterized Consciences (to speak as soberly of such a generation of men
as I can) that so the most curious Critics of the Court may conjure up the
life and Soul of the sense of all they can heap up together, and we shall defy
its signifying any thing more then dissatisfaction; and then let his Text be
judge in the Case, wherein the Prophet Esaias speaking of the downfall of
Tyrants, says, That the terrible one is brought to naught, and the scorner is
consumed, that make a man an offender for a word, and lay snares for him that
reproves in the gate.

FINIS.

