THE SPIRIT OF GOD in MAN, Making manifest the hidden things of DARKNESS to MAN.

Being divine Teachings, whereby the Lord alone is exalted, and the pride of
fleshly glory discovered, by the shining light of Christ in and through RICHARD
RVSSEL.

1 John 1.3. That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye
also may have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father
and the Son Jesus Christ.

Isai. 60.1: Arise and shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord
is risen. Blow ye the Trumpet in Sion, and sound an alarms in my holy Moutain;
let all the Inhabitants of the Land tremble, for the day of the Lord comes,
for it is nigh at hand.

LONDON, Printed by T. Lock, living in Seacole-Lane near the Sign of the
George. 1654.

The Epistle to the READER.
BEloved Brethren; Spiritual things are given by Divine Inspiration, not by the
will of Man, but by the will of God, who manifests himself, when he pleases, and
to whom he pleases: And know this that Gods works are not like man's works, he
does not always take the wise of this world, and learned and rich of this
world, to manifest himself in and through, but be chooses the despised, and
the poor and weak of this world, who are of a sincere mind zealous for God,
and God is pleased to fill them with the good things of himself, when as the
other seek him in darkness, in the wisdom of man, and by the Law, as did Israel
of old, who sought earnestly, but attained not to the true Vision and Kingdom
of righteousness, but went empty away; therefore quench not the smoking flax,
but rather wait until it be set on flame, that it may kindle your spark, so
that there may be light in your house, for there is a wonderful time coming;
but because it begins in the night, there are many that shall not see it by
reason of their sleep and great darkness; yet the Son will shine to the Children
at midnight; happy are they whose eyes are open to see the Son of GOD when he
comes in the clouds, then every one that has a single eye shall see the
pleasant showers fall upon the tender plants, that they may also have virtue in
them to abide the heat of the day, when the Son shall shine forth in its beauty
to scorch the glory of all flesh; therefore let every one that glories, glory
only in the Lord, for he that truly knows the Lord will do so, for the
knowledge of the Lord teaches us wisdom, and so says the Prophet Isaiah, The
Lord is my God therefore will I praise him; for he knew God by his spirit, which
did set forth his praise in him: therefore as thou read, herein consider,
whether thou have the spirit of understanding, without which thou can not
understand aright the things that belong unto thy peace. So I commit thee unto
the Lord, who is able to guide thee unto the peace that passes all
understanding.

THE SPIRIT OF GOD in MAN.
Epistle I. Concerning what Man was, and by Creation is, and how he fell; and
also a word of the Divine Mystery.
GOD which was, is, and for ever shall be, a being in himself, has been pleased
to declare the same in Creation, of which Creation man is a chief part; but
before the Creation there was nothing but God, no appearances were brought
forth out of the one, only infinite, and entire being, who knows how
harmoniously and sweetly with an entire love -- and oneness we tumbled together
with, in the womb of Eternity, when all things were in union with their
Original Center.

Now when God was to create the world, and all things therein, he had no other
materials (or matter) to make it of, but his own being; therefore God is the
Essence of all Essences, for all is generated or born, created and proceeded
from him, and all things take their first beginning in God, as the Scripture
witnesses, saying, Through him, and in him are all things, and all things were
created by him and for him, and by him all things consist.

Consider, That God is a Spirit that is incomprehensible, and was before
appearances were brought forth, by or in his essential Word, and has neither
beginning nor end, and his greatness and depth is all.

The whole Creation is but his unfolding of himself in his varieties, and his
clothing himself in the creature in their created estate; so that since this
great fabric of heaven and earth has bin made to appear, God has ever been
hiding himself, hiding himself in his life, being motions and operations, so
that no eye can see him, or know what he does, or what he means, but that eye
which is with him where he is.

This consider, That every spirit sees no further then into its Mother (or
Nature) out of which it has its Original, and wherein it stands; for it is
impossible for any spirit, below the spirit of God, in its own natural power,
to look into another principle, and behold it, except it be regenerated
therein, or brought forth anew.

Heaven and Earth at their first coming forth were but a vail, behind which
God intended to hide himself, and did hide himself, even from Adam, in his
highest and purest estate; God indeed showed himself to Adam, as he appeared in
the creature, as he shined through the vail, but hid himself as he was in
himself, so that Adam could in no wise reach to the true vision, but only to
such an appearance as God pleased to dart forth of himself through the vail.

Now confider, when the breath of Lise was breathed into man, (or elementary
birth) it was out of Gods first principle, then Man was a living soul in the
heavenly Paradise, wherein there was a state of Innocence, being the morning
time of man, wherein was planted paradisical fruit, which the garden [Man]
should bring forth, for God did make him a garden for his own delight to walk
in, and that the creature should delight in him, and to acknowledge God to be
his Maker, and his all, his life and only being, to whose command he was to
subject himself, in all obedience, meekness, thankfulness, love, humility, and
mercy, and so represent the glory of the Lord, and to be like him; if these
things be in you, and abound, you shall not be unfruitful, therefore let these
things be applied to every one of our hearts in particular, these prophesying
times.

Again, observe this, that God foreknew that all created things are changeable,
therefore God made a Law to man, forbidding him of eating of the Tree of
Knowledge of good and evil, which is in the midst of the garden; for in the day
thou eatest thereof thou shall surely dye; and this is the Law and Covenant
that I have made between me and thee, that have a being in creation by me.

This consider, that man was made upright, but he being let stand did putrify,
-- and so sought out many inventions, Eecles. 7.29. so that there aspited up in
the midst of the garden (the heart of man) pride and covetousness, being not
contnted with that estate that God had put him in by Creation, but did covet
another estate, to exalt it self, to be more knowing than God had made him;
which self-aspiring the creature delighted in, and so eating or satisfying
himself in his own fruit, broke the Law and Covenant, and died, according to
the words of his Maker, and so fell from a pure estate to be rebellious, and to
delight in his own ways, so that the root of man's fall, as he is a creature,
sprung in his heart, there lies the mystery of iniquity; therefore consider
what is the forbidden fruit, which him that eats thereof does advance
himself, and denies God, which is the creatures death, loss and shame, and ever
since the fall of man, this selfish aspiring spirit of pride leads the humane
nature to disobey God, and leads every man and woman captive at his will, and
inslaves them in the prison of bondage and darkness, to walk in ways directly
contrary to the God of Truth and Light, and yet many times persuades them that
they do God good service: let a man read, hear, study, preach, pray, and
perform actions of justice, yet if God be not merciful to the man, this power
of darkness will deceive him, making him conceit or think he pleases God, when
the truth is, he serves but himself all that time, if the Spirit of God be not
their counselor and support, it is so full of secret strong delusions,
therefore this is called the crooked Serpent, because it winds it self into
every creature, and into every faculty, and twists it self about the Tree,
(Mankind) so that the humane nature is defiled, and is a seat wherein the Beast
and false Prophet sits, and therein predominate, whereby Satan's Kingdom is
set up, and a worldlike power maintained, who serves by the brain for worldlike
gain.

Epist. II. Concerning our Restitution, Captivity, Sanctification, Ascension
and Union.
BEginning with that in Ephesians. 1.9, 10. That in the dispensation of the fullness
of time, he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are
in heaven and which are on earth, even in him.

There is a time for all purposes that are decreed by the Father, to be
fulfilled in their times and seasons; a day for to fall, a day to reign as
Kings, one hour with the Beast in his fall, a day for to be sensible of his
fall: a day to be senfible of the terrors and punishments by his fall, and a
day to be sensible of his loss of Gods presence and communion with him, and a
day to abide the trial of the fire, which shall search the heart, and try the
reins of man: a day for all fleshly glory to fall before the presence of the
Lord: a day to mourn for these changes: a day for to go through the fiery
trial, and to be refined again: and again, a day to behold the manifestation of
God to be like Flames of Fire, to kindle every where, where it comes; then
shall the smoking flax be set on fire, then will the Lord say unto the Sons of
men, Arise and shine, for your light is come; then shall you arise from the
dead, and Christ shall give you life, then am I come says he, that you may have
life, and that you may have it more abundantly, and you who were absent from
me, shall return to your fathers house, like the prodigal, and be present with
me where I am. And then you that seed upon husks, and were wanderers and
strangers to the Land of Promise, the Land of the Living, thus being refined,
Christ will present you unblameable and unrebukable, without spot or blemish
before the Throne of God, and you shall be unto him a sweet savor, a saerifice
which he is well pleased with; then says he, Come my own delight, come my own
children, which are near and dear unto me, who issued out of my own bowels,
which my womb brought forth, to the glory and praise of my own name, even so
shall it be by my gathering those that are afar off, and those that are nigh,
into my glory, then is the time come, that the Father will glorify us, that we
may glorify him, then shall we know the time that the Lord does gather in his
sewels, which shall shine most gloriously in their Cabinets, then shall they who
have the single eye, behold and see that Christ is come the second time without
sin unto salvation, Heb. 9.28. Therefore Lift up your heads, O ye gates, even
lift them up, ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in, Psalm
24.9. Consider, that Christ is the head of every Saint, and to be a Saint is to
be sanctified and drawn up into union with Christ; for he that sanctifies, and
they that are sanctified are all of one, Heb. 2.11. which makes them gates to
show forth his praise, and to exalt their head, then shall we know, that he that
descended is the same also that asoended, and know this, that there is a
descending, before there is an ascending, and that which does descend must also
ascend, so every thing shall return into its Center, if you are spiritual you
must ascend into the internal Court, and the heavens shall be bowed down at the
presence of the Lord, for the rising up of all Saints into union with him, when
the day of remptation is upon all the world; for there is no approach, no
converse, no sweet intercourse between God and the Creature, but in him, by
him, and through him; and this consider, if you are not risen with Christ, ye
are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God, and these things are hid
from your eyes and present enjoyment likewise; therefore let every one examine
his own heart, and consider what an estate he is in, whether it be in darkness
or in light, or whether the day of the Lord has been upon thee, that thou art
changed thereby from death to life, and so from glory to glory, and to be
gathered out of all things below God whatsoever, that thou can truly say,
that Christ who is our life, has appeared, and we appear with him in glory,
then thou art able to dwell with consuming fire, and to live in dispensations,
anda life a to appear where the Lord appears, and not to smite at thy poor
brethren, who Christ died for.

This consider, That all Nations are made of one blood, and have all life and
breath by one God, Act. 7.26. yet this great lump being brought forth, though
they are all the same, all of one blood, yet they are cut out into two parcels,
Jews and Gentiles, and they are as distinct as may be, both in their ways, and
in their God, in their Laws, Ordinances, desires, ends and hopes; the Jews must
not be like the Gentiles in any thing, the Gentiles will not be like the Jews
in any thing; Oh how diverse and distinct, and contrary are they! but this
distinction must not always last, for when Christ comes forth to give up that
principle of life in himself, and to slay it in them, whereby they have thus
lived, the leaves and fruit of variety and distinction will soon wither, and
they will all return back into union and harmony again, then shall the earth
diselose her blood, so Christ brings them both into one, and takes them both,
with all their differences, into his own Body, and destroys all their
differences, and offers up all that God dislikes in them, in his own Body on
the Cross, and so sweetly heals up the differences between God and the
Creatures by his entire love unto them.

Epist. III. Concerning seven dispensations, which has, and shall be fulfilled
in their end of time.
THe first dispensation was, when God gave the Law to Adam as soon as he had
made him, as, In the day thou eatest, thou shall die. Now this Law it was holy,
just, and good, yet it was a killing word, (or the killing letter) for it took
hold on Adams disobedience, and slew him, so all Flesh died, for all Flesh
broke the Covenant in Adam, and so all Humane Flesh was cast under that
dispensation of death; so every opposite estate will seek to advance it self.

The second dispensation, is in the first Promise, or Manifestation of the Love
of God to the creature, and the Curse to the Serpent, in these words, The seed
of the woman shall bruise the Scrpents head, Genesis 3.15. and 22.18. and this
continued from Adam til Abraham.

Then the third dispensation or discovery of God is more clear, than the
former, for unto Abraham he speaks more particularly, he does not still say in
general terms, the seed of the woman, -- but in thy seed Abraham (all Nations
of the earth) shall be blessed, and so points out more directly in what lineage
and generation of Mankind, God would first appear in, to bruise the Serpents
head, and this dispensation continued from Abraham to Moses, and they embraced
the promises.

The fourth dispensation is from Moses till God manifested himself in the
Flesh, or till Jesus Christ was born of Mary, who was one of the house of
David, and of the lineage of Abraham, and this dispensation is more clear than
the former, for God by Types, and Figures, and Ceremonies and Shadows, did
manifest his love to his creatures, and his wrath to the Serpent, as we may
understand, when God appears in John's Baptism, or the Water Baptism, which did
much type forth the Baptism of the Spirit by Fire and the Holy Ghost, which
should refine and purify them, and says John I must decrease (or that
administration I lived in) but he that comes after me, which is Christ, shall
increase, and shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and also God did manifestly
set forth his love by the Prophets in that dispensation, for then was the
shadow of the Law of Moses falling, and Gospel Truths rising, whereby they
should be the more ceasing from Man, whose breath is in his Nostrils; and so
likewise the love of God did much appear when the sacrifice was slain and
offered, then God received an atonement, it being a type of Gods in-dwelling in
the Flesh, or a shadow of Christ the Lamb, the substances of all those
sacrifices, -- and I pray you consider those things which are spoken
allegorically concerning Achan, Josh. 7.26. where it appears, that when Achan
that troubled Israel was put to death in the valley of Achor, the fierceness of
Gods wrath was turned away. And in Hosea, ch: 2. v: 14, 15. where he says, I
will give the valley of Acher for a door of hope, which was the place of Achans
death; so when the Serpent who is our trouble, is subdued and killed in the
valley of human flesh, then the dispensation of mods anger is turned away.

The fifth dispensation, is from the time that God was manifested in the flesh,
in the person of Jesus Christ, to the time that he appeared in the flesh and
person of his Saints; likewise this also is more clear then the former, for
Jesus the anointed, was the substance of all those types and shadows of the
Mosaical Law, for now God does manifestly appear to dwell in the flesh, and by a
manifest being, to set the Creature free from bonbage, and by Immortal life to
swallow mort I beings into himself.

The sixth dispensation is from the time that God appeared in the flesh of the
Saints, till the perfect gathering up of the Elect, which is the work of that
dispensation -- which is called a Referrection day, or a great day of Judgment,
for so long as the Judge sits upon the Judgment seat it is the day of Judgment,
which he does in every dispensation, until the time of the Restitution of all
things, both which are in heaven and which are on earth, even in Christ, Ephesians.
1.10. Rev 10.7. but in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, when he
shall begin to sound, the mystery of God should be finished, as he has declared
to his servants the Prophets, so Gor. i. 15.24. then comes the end when he
that is Christ shall have delivered up his Kingdom to God even the Father,
compared with Acts 3.21: -- and this also is more clear then the former, as God
appeared in Christ who is the root of the creation, it was a sign of God the
father appearing in the whole body; for says Christ, I and the children that
thou have gave me for signs and wonders: and according to his promise by Joel,
chapter 2. v. 28. I will power out my spirit upon all Flesh, etc. the Apostles also
finding the same in them selves, bare witness to it, Acts 2.16.

And thus I give you a hint of the seventh dispensation, when the Gospels
declaration shall be fulfilled, and we to be transformed and changed into the
Heavenly Image whereby all things may be restored into the Indissolable band,
into the unity and peace of God which passes all understanding of man, and all
wars to cease; for so long as dispensations last and we under them, we are at
warts among our selves, and with God also in one sense, and a rechangable while
we are under dispensations, and are to be changed from glory to glory, and as
God does in Scripture declare seven great dispensations, or discoveries of his
counsel and will; each one clearer then other, yet in every one of these, God
does send forth several other dispensations by the hand of Angels, for the
carrying on of the work, of that time and season, which are discoveries of his
glory, for whatsoever comes from God is a spiritual power, and it may be said
to be declared by angels, as when God appeared in discoveries to his peopel, an
angel is said to appear unto them, as to Joseph in a dream, Zachariah in a
vision; unto Araham and Lot it is said Angels appeared, and likewise he shall
send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together
his Elect from four winds, from one end of heaven to the other, Math. 24.30,
31. then shall all the holy seed be gathered in, and appear in its glory, then
the tribes of the earth shall mourn, because of the desolation of their Kingdom,
-- then I. is taken, and I. is left.

Epist. IV. A discovery of the Reign of the Beast of Babylons City, which has
made the nations drunk with wine of her fornication.
I Shall begid with that of Daniel, chapter 8. v. 23.24, 25. and in the later time
of their Kingdom, when the transgressors are come to the full, a King of
fierce countenance, and understanding, dark sentences, and his power shall be
mighty, but not by his own power, and he shall destroy wonderfully, and shall
prosper and practice, and shall destroy the mighty, and the holy people, and
through his policy also, he shall cause craft to prosper in his hand, and he
shall magnify himself in his heart, and by peace shall destroy many, he shall
also stand up against the Prince of Princes, but he shall be broken down without
hand.

And all this time, that God is gathering together the Elect -- he has given a
time, times and half a time, to the Serpent, which in these threefold shapes
and a half, or in these three days and a half, he is called the Beast Ruling in
the Whore, and this time is given him to make war, and to fight against the
Prince of Princes and his Saints, and to overcome then, and to waste and
destroy the holy People mightily, and this appointed time, is the year or
season wherein the Beast lives, and God gives all advantages to the Beast, as
riches, ontward liberty, -- worldy power, and generally human authority into
his hand, whereby he reigns, and is the Idol. God of this world -- and has put
no weapons into the hands of the Saints, -- but the anointing and sword of the
Spirit of the Lord, to fight against the reproaches, slanders, opprssions,
poverties, weaknsse, wickedness, Prisons, and the multitude of temptations,
which the Beast through her wit, malice, police, and power, does cast upon the
Saints, like a flood of water to drown, and destroy, and over come the work
of God, in his coming forth in the Spirit, -- if it were possible, -- likewise,
the Serpent stirs up some whom he discerns to be seeming professors, outwardly
religious, having a form of Godliness, but through hypocrisy, pride, and
selfishness, deny the power, and dishonor God, and discourage the tender Lambs
of Christ, and cast an ill reproach upon the ways of God; and hence it is,
that Isarel of old were trampled upon -- by the Gentiles in the Flesh that were
not in Covenant with them, but were under the condemning law, who have trod
under foot the blood of the new covenant, and hence it is, that the Beast must
tread the holy City underfoot two and forty months, which signifies his Reign
is but for a short space of time, but now in these latter days, when the time,
times and half, draw to an end -- then God sends forth several dispensations,
and Angels, assisting to the sixth and great dispensation, wherein the Lords
appearance will blast all the glory of the Beast, and Immaginary part of man;
therefore ye that adorn your selves with Babylons painting, fair outsides of
several colors, and dresses of Edoms die, behold the Lord is coming to execute
Judgment upon his adversaries and our oppressors, and to pour out Vials of
wrath upon all the glory of the Beast, and to stain the pride of all flesh,
whereby he curses all their glory by seven degrees, by the voice of God,
through Angels and Saints, sounding forth seven Trumpets of glory to God one
after another, which is perfection of glory to the Saints, or Church of the
first borne, -- which implies perfection, of ruin upon every particular of the
Beast, blasting, cursing or the downfall of their Kingdom, -- Oh! that all
professors had a zeal of God according to knoledg, that they may not be like
the wild sigrree that Christ cursed, which was sul of leaves, but no fruit,
for iniquity abounds, and the love of many, in whom the Serpent rules, waxes
cold, and extreme' bitter, and mad against the Saints, in whom the anointed
rules, so that they gnash their tongues with vexation of spirit, and the smoke
of their torment ascends upward, and so they have no rest day nor night, who
worship the Beast and his Image, and whosoever receives the Mark of his Name;
and thus consider, while God suffers the Beast co Reign, it is called the day
of the Beast, and God has given him three days and a half, to tread the holy
City underfoot, or the space of two and forty months, which is three shapes,
three discoveries of the Reign of the Beast, or three degrees and a half, of
the Serpents Reformation, from bad to worse, from open profaneness, to close
hypocrisy; Rev. 17.4. therefore let error, sin, devil and darkness come forth
in their power, it is the will of God they should do so, that it may appear to
be more then what it is, -- and that old Herod may be discovered which seeks
the life of the child Jesus as soon as he is borne of any Virgin Spirit; also
that Pharaoh should rise unto his full greatness, -- that God may appear to be
above, and to get himself honor upon him, for he will be glorified by both,
vessels of honor and vessels of dishonor; Antichrist is now getting up upon his
last legs, whose legs are Iron, and feet clay: there is life no where but in
his stump, which often has been lap't, but yet the root remains alive which is
not enough to quicken -- thoroughly in this his last Image and form in which he
is coming forth like unto an Angel of light; but how soon was he thrown down in
his last appearance and rising among us? even before he could bite, his teeth
were broken; god smote him on the cheek-bone, before the thorns were grown
hard to prick, the fire took hold of them, which fire is kindling the smoke
sparkles, to burn down the tall Cedars, and God is finishing the work apace
and cutting it short in righteousness, even to the utter consumption and
destruction of his enemies by the brightness of his coming; Jacob shall be a
Fire, and Esau for stubble, God will be a swift witness against this Sorcery,
for so are all the dealings of natural men in things of god, and by terrible
things will he answer them: and this consider, that the foundation that some
professors are laying, in several ways or opinions shutted to their eyes,
which will appear to be the abomination of desolation spoken of by Danel the
prophet, all the rising and puttings forth of Antichrist are fair and well
looking, but God does pronounce the final Curse against it, which was a fruit
that sprung up in the created being, and acted both inwardly and outwardly, but
Gods design is to weed out the tares from the good of the corn, but the
husbandmen think that by this husbandry, the wheat will be pulled up with the
tares, nay they think the wheat will be destroyed, and the tares nourished,
because they are unskilful of the work, but the Lord is now resolved that the
wheat shall spread and flourish, and he will come and sever the tares from the
wheat, and throw out those husbandmen with them into the Fire, which beat his
Servants and would have killed the Heir, therefore their vineyard shall be taken
away and given to another people, -- therefore let all Flesh be silent before
the Lord, for he is raised up to make known his power for the proclaiming of
Isreal's return, and the captivity of his people, Zach. 2.13. for the Lord will
build her again that has been trodden down, and plant her in the magnificents
beauty of beauties, in royal and adorative glory: O my beloved! my soul is
ravished with the delightful delight, defiring you may be gathered into union
in the celestial center, in the bosom of the Father.

Epist: V. Concerning a further discovery of Antichrist in man, and of the
Spirit of God in man, discovering that Antichrist what he is, and where he
rules.
ANd every spirit that confesses not, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh,
is not of God; and this is that spirit of Antichrist, whereof you have heard
that it should come, and even now already is in the world, 1 Ioh. 4.3.

Who has known the mind of God? the spiritual man, that cannot but confess,
that Christ is come in the Flesh, by his union that he has with him in the
spirit, and is enlightened by the Resurrection from the dead, whereby his works
declare him that they are of the Father, not only in word, but in power and
demonstration of the Spirit, whereby they abound in all goodness; for so are
the fruits of the Spirit, as love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, against such there is no Law, Gal. 5.23.

Now who are they that confesses not that Christ is come in the Flesh? even
they in whom the Spirit of Antichrft rules and is predominate in them, whereby
they bring forth the fruits of wickedness by their own Beastial reason; now
who is an Antichrist? even he that denies the Father and the Son, 1. John. 2,
22. and all that obey not the command of Christ, which does bring us unto God;
then Antichrist must be the unbeleeving Spirit, that cannot confess Christ by
the fruits of the Spirit of God, and by his mercies held forth in lesus Christ
unto him in his creaturely estate: this know, whilst thou art in this dark,
ignorant, polluted, defild, estate, thou have an Antichrist Devil, false
Prophet within thee, as it does appear by Peter, when Christ said unto him, Got
the dehinde me Satan, for thou savorest not the things of God, but of man;
then look no more for Antichrist abroad or at Rome, but at home, and do not
thrust it off from one unto another, and one country unto another Nation, when
indeed it is Antichrist his trade to keep our eyes without, lest we should see
his deceit within; Antichrist is also the whore that holds forth ber Golden Cup
full of abomination and filthiness of her fornication, Rev. 17.4, which
deceives the nations and wipes her mouth, and said I have done no wrong, when
she has acted what she can; therefore tremble, tremble, tremble, for the day
of the Lord will renounce the hidden things of dishonesty, and the secrets of
your hearts shall be laid open, and you shall be as stubble for the Fire in that
day, then shall he shake every strong hold, and your fortified places, and your
high towers; yea, he will shake both heaven and earth, both inwardly and
outwardly, so that there will be no safety no where but in the Lord, for he shall
be the hiding place, until the indignation of the Lord be overpast, that those
things which cannot be shaken (being himself) may remain, when he shall turn
upside down, and overturn all things that are not according to truth, and
strength, and knowledge, wisdom and power of Christ Jesus; therefore weight
diligently upon the Lord, that hou may be found in him, not having thine own
righteousness, but the righteousness of Christ, even the Lord our righteousness;
therefore behold there is a wild Figtree, that was a show of a goodly good tree
afar off to dark eyes, but to com close to the Figtree, and you my brethren
after the flesh, which vaunt your selves in human learning and brainwit, then like
the Fgtree are ye, and are full of beauteous leaves (without) of expressions,
but to come to the fruit, ye are carnal, and devilish in action; by the fruit
ye shall know them, if you are able to distinguish of fruits, by the Spirit of
God, which shall try the spirits and the works of man of what sort they are: Now
there is but light and darkness in which man works in, either light or
darkness, and this is the definition, God is light, and that light is love; now
Man in that love is in light, and that only light is Christ; now as God is
light, the Devil is but darkness to that light, now in darkness is hatred,
malice, envy, covetousness, and the root of all bitterness, which is the Devil;
therefore you that would be holy, depart from these evils, for it is the
highway of the righteous to depart from iniquity.

Epist. VI. Of an heavenly estate of things in the new Jerusalem, in man, and
of the death of the Creature in an estate below God.
TO come close to the matter: In a word, it is this hell is called death, or a
conditon below life, and this is twofold, either a death far below the nature
of God, or a death of sorrows, which is a condition far below the comforts and
enjoyments of God; now every man and woman as they are branches of Adam in the
fall, they have no purity in themselves, and therefore in a hell far below the
life and nature of God, and likewise they are unavoydably subject to the
sorrows of that death, and have no power to deliver themselves out of that
bondage, for God is only our Redeemer and Deliverer, therefore he sent his Son
not to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved, Joh.
3.17. Therefore it follows clear, that if men were capable of so much mercy,
being Gods creatures, as to be delivered from the guilt of Sin and of Death,
which is one part of Hell, or a condition below life eternal, then will they be
capable to be delivered through the mercy of the same God, from the sorrows
and pains that follows sin, both which God in his time will deliver his
Creation from,

Secondly, the heavenly estate is to live unto God with the life of Christ in
the knowledge thereof of his power; and to know God to be his all in all, -- to
love his Enemies, to do good to them that hate you, and persecute you, to be
all in love, to enjoy God in time of trouble, or at all times, and to be with
him in Spirit where he is; this is an Heavenly estate, to see the invisible
appear in the visible, and to swallow it up in it self, in love -- as Enech
that walked with God and was not, but there is such a way for Saints to go,
before they come to enjoy their Kingdom, or to enter into their glory, as
follows, as Jesus Christ has showed us, in that which is called the Lords
Supper and Baptism, that no Flesh will endure it, as will appear, First, from
those words of Christ in Mat. 20.19.20.21. for when he was defired by the
mother of Zebedees children, that her two sons might sit the one at his right
hand and the other at his left, in his kingdom, his answer was, You know not
what you ask; for, says he, Are ye able to drink of the Cup that I shall drink
of, and to be Baptized with the Baptism what Jam Baptized withal? As if he
should say, the way that leads to my kindome, is a Crucifying way, even from
the beginning, to the end, as it was with me, who was persecuted, from my birth
to my death: it is a way sprinkled with blood, and burning with Fire, very
sharp and bitter, and no sweetness in it; for many storms and tempests will
arise and fall upon your travel to Canaan, you must be crowned with thorts, and
you must be tempted with the Serpent, buffeted with Satan, and persecuted with
Herod, and how are you able to endure this? says they, we are able; then says
Christ again, you stall indeed drink of the Cup that J drink of, and be
baptized with the baptism that J am baptized with, but to sit on my right
hand, and on my left is not mine to give, but it shall be given to chem for
whom it is prepared of my Father: which is as much as to say, you must suffer
the loss of all things below, or besides me, and the way which I have gone you
shall go, the death which I have suffered, you shall in some measure suffer,
and then having gone the way, and suffered the death, you will say, Father
Glorify thy Son, that thy Son may Glorify thee, then will he give you a crown
of life, which is laid up for you in the kingdom of heaven, and as Paul says,
J have run the race, and obtained the price in Jesus Christ, J have finished my
cross, henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of glory, even the Lord; and Christ
himself says, that for the glory which was set before him, he endured the
cross, and despised the shame, drunk his cup and received his Baptism, and
after entered into his glory: And thus he went before us as a pattern, or an
example for us, but when we have obtained the Kingdom, and received the Crown,
the kingdom being delivered up to the father, we are not, -- Christ is all, --
unto God the only one, for we then are not our own, but we are Christ's, and
Christ is Gods, and so an union betwixt Christ and us, and an union betwixt God
and Christ into one, -- entire and alone essence, then is the Kingdom deliverd
up unto God by Christ, and then God the Father is as he was, that is, all in
all -- and out of that all -- all came forth, -- and into that all -- shall all
be through Christ, (who is the strength of God) be reduced into God, and yet a
visible appearance -- through the invisible, and in him to appear; this is one
glimps of the mystery of the Divine Deity operative, acting through it self in
the illustration of it self, -- which is wisdoms work and the Spirits teaching;
therefore, let all flesh be silent before tke Lord, for it is not he that
hears my words, Says Christ, but he that does my will, he it is that is my
disciple, blessed for ever in the name of the Father.

Epist. VII. Concerning a word of exhortation to Christians to support the
bruised Reed, that the smoking flax may be set on fire in these Gospel Times.
O How good a thing it is for Christians to walk close with God in that
dispensation wherein he appears unto them in; for no one can truly serve God
out of that dispensation wherein he appears unto them; therefore then to walk
up to what they know, and to judge others that are not under the same, though
there be several dispensations or administrations, yet the same Lord, though
they may be severally acted, yet all by one spirit, if they be sincere and
upright in heart, and of a meek and quiet spirit, who dwells in love, otherwise
they are but the world; a Saint is known by one of the same spirit, and
disowned by the world, for they love their own, and the proof of a Saint is to
show his strength in time of need, that is, to own all things that is of God,
and to bear with the weak brethren, and to cherish that in them which is to be
cherished, and to offer up that to the fire which is to be burnt: But how prone
is man to be judging and condemning! Man has an eye and light in his day, and
he cannot forbear passing his judgment there upon things or persons: the
natural man will be judging natural things, and the spiritual man will be judging
spiritual things, men will be judging men, Christians will be judging Christians,
yea both will be judging: there is a day of man, and the day of God, man is
judging in his day, if there be not so much light as to make the day of the
Lord appear in man, it is but man's day and so the worthlesness of his judgment
appears in Paul's account for says he, it is with me avery small thing that I
should be judged of you, or of man's judgment; man cannot be more forward to
judge me, then I am to slight him in that action, for man's judgment is too
shallow to judge in spiritual things: judge not (says Christ) and he himself
forbear judging: I judge no man, Job 8, 15. though if he had judged, his
judgment had been true, verse. 16. yet being not his time to judge, though he was
judge, he could for bear his sentence, until the proper season of it, therefore
says Paul, judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who will both
bring to light the hidden things of darkuess, and will make manifest the
counsels of the heart, therefore, says Paul, With me it is a very small thing
that J should be judged of you or of man's judgment, yea I judge not mine own
self, 1 Cor. 4.3. Who art thou that indgest another man's servant to his own
master? he stands or falls: or wherein thou iudgest another, thou
condemnest thy self, it belongs to the Lord to be judge, for thou, O man, have
no more right to judge thy fellow servant, then he has to judge thee: therefore
judge nothing before the time in the things of God, for he has kept his own
light for his own day, which shall lay open the secrets of every man's heat:
therefore he that is under one discovery, let him not judge another that is
under another discovery, and let not them who serve God in dispensations, judge
them in whom he will be served above dispensations, and so to limit and confine
God how or where he shall appear, or be served: but as every one has received
of the gift of God, so let them minister the same as good stewards of his
manifold grace, 1 Pet. 4.10. therefore note it is a gift which cannot be
purchased by money as human learning is, which servs but for external things,
and cannot look into the internal, as can the gift which is given, even the
spirit of truth, which needs not to be supported by human learning, for it is
supported by he that gives; but human learning is made a cloak to cover
ignorance and hypocrifie, and to deceive the simple, but when it is grown to
the full height, it shall fall, and then great Babylon shall fall, and her mourners
shall be many: Therefore I pray you set no greater a price of it, then what it
is worth, for when God called for Preachers he called Fishermen, as was Peter,
and Shepherds as was Moses and David, and Herdsmen, as Amos, and Elisha a
Plowman, Christ himself was called a Carpenter, Paul a Tentmaker, but he could
speak Tongues being brought up at the feet of Gamaliel: but for althat, he was
a persecutor of the church before his conversion, therefore let not one sort of
people have any prejudice against another, for God will call whom he pleases,
and will be honored where he pleases, and can take of al sorts some to manifest
his glory; therefore be waiting upon God, and ceasing from man, whose breath is
in his nostrils, and so fulfill the commands of Christ, see that you love one
another, love al men, even your enemies, do good to them that hate you, and the
God of love will cover you when the storm shall fall upon the wicked: O beloved!
did you but know how lovely you are being in love, for love shows the
deformity in all that is not in love, -- but it is not seen but by loves own
eye, what an oneness there is in your selves being in love, and what an oneness
in multiplicities being in love, which will set the smoking Flax on a bright
Flame, and will kindle every little spark where it comes; Love is that which
ties all the Brethren in a knot, God is love, and he that dwells in that love
dwells in God, and God in him; Herein is our love made perfect, that we may
have boldness in the day of Judgment, because as he is, so are we in this
world. 1 John 4.16.17.

FINIS.
If you our land would know wherein we overflow,
It is Canaan wherein the pleasant plants do grow.
Which from the root they yield their fruit now
Of heavenly glory forth to show:
Not in notion, but our portion, which satisfits us
Yea, the Sun which is so transparent bright
With its sarafic al light,
Power strength and might;
Which turns all the beholders into its right,
And puts an end to war and strife,
Which in Religions fight.
But in darkness, not in light,
Wherein their actions attend to strife,
Which fruit does show where it does grow,
In human nature far below,
Which is a Hell to the creatures woe
When the vials come where that does grow:
Which shall scorch and blast
That which man does hold so fast:
Then man's teaching that shall fall,
Which has long time stood like a wall,
Then Melchisedec a Preacher unto us shall be, partition wall,
Jn perfect unity.
So God who is our all, by breaking down the
Will deliver Israel all from bondage and from thral.
So shall the light which is so bright,
Shine both far and near,
Then perfect love shall cast out fear,
That we in heaven may appear
With our glory in the Sphere,
Then for to be what at first we were,
Before in Creation we did appear,
That Christ in one may all then be,
Unto eternity.
Then the pathment of our God in glory bright,
Always a day, there is no night.
From that Imperial Throne
Declares the glory of union.
Finis.

