A TRUE RELATION Of Disbanding The Supernumerary Forces IN The several Counties
of this Kingdom, and the Dominion of Wales, Amounting to Twenty thousand Horse
and Foot;

TO The great ease of the Kingdom, and taking off Free Quarter from the Subject.

Published for Satisfaction of the Three Kingdoms.

LONDON: Printed for Laurence Chapman, Feb. 28. 1647.

SIR,
BEing a little diligent this week to employ my endeavors to know the truth of
disbanding the Supernumerary Forces of this Kingdom, who as I am informed, are
near upon Twenty thousand Horse and Foot, I addressed my self to some Agents
and others, employed in the said Service; and I have conferred with diverse
Gentlemen that received Letters from several parts of this Kingdom, by the
several Posts of this week, and of the last week; Out of all which I have
collected the particulars ensuing, whereby I find, That the industry and care
of the Committee of the Army has been very great, not only in procuring the
speedy bringing in of the Assessments to pay the two Months pay for the
disbanding of so great Forces in so short a time, and for easing the Kingdom of
all Free quarter taken by the said Supernumerary Forces of Horse and Foot both
in England and Wales, but also have paid the rest of the Forces their constant
pay ever since the 15. of January last; which I have written, worthy Sir, for
your satisfaction, and shall ever rest,

22 Febr. 1647. Your Friend and Servant, J. R.


THe Letters this week by the Post, brings good News concerning the Disbanding
of the Supernumerary Forces in several parts of England and Wales; who for a
very great space of time have lain in several counties upon Freequarter; and in
particular the Letters out of Somersetshire certify, that there is disbanded
in that county all that Regiment of Foot under the command of Colonel William
Herbert, being Five hundred; and also one Troop of Horse consisting of about
Seventy Horse. There is likewise disbanded in Glocestershire, and in the city
of Gloucester, Colonel Morgans Regiment of Foot, consisting of Nine Companies,
with Officers and Soldiers; and another Regiment of Foot of Col: Kempson's,
both Officers and Soldiers; and also one Troop of Horse which was raised by the
Committee of Gloucester; with the other Supernumerary Forces residing in that
county, to the very great ease and comfort of those parts, who have, during all
the late Wars, lain under very great burdens and Free quarter.

The Letters also from Herefordshire do certify, That the Commissioners there
have by the blessing of God, disbanded all Col: Humphreys Regiment of Foot, who
were 1000. in number at the least; and that 300. private Soldiers of that
Regiment, with some of their Officers, have listed themselves to serve for the
King of France; and are upon their march to be transported out of this Kingdom
into France: And now in Herefordshire they are upon disbanding Col: Hoptons
Regiment of Horse, which are near 500. good horse, and do all of them most
willingly submit to their dibanding, according to the Ordinances of Parliament
in that behalf; and the strong Castle of Hereford is Garisoned by three
Companies of Foot of Sir William Constables Regiment: so that that county, who
had so great Forces in the bowels thereof upon Freequarter, by this means will
enjoy a breathing space from those great inconveniences which formerly they
miserably languished under: That the two Regiments of Foot in Wilts and
Worcestershire are disbanding, their Accounts being stated, and sent down with
the Debenters of all Arrears due to the Officers and Soldiers of the said
several Regiments, and their two months pay is ready in the counties to be
paid unto them; so that it is no way doubted, but that they will be all of them
this week disbanded; together with the remainder of several Troops of Horse
which are yet not disbanded: but there has lately been disbanded thereabouts,
Col: Cooks Regiment of Horse, which were at first providing for Ireland, but
now submitted to the Ordinances of Parliament for disbanding, who will no doubt
be considered according to his merit by the Parliament, in some other honorable
employment or service for the Commonwealth.

All Letters out of the Northern parts do certify, The disbanding of all the
Horse and Foot Soldiers in Yorkshire, except the Foot in the town of Hull, and
four Troops of Horse which were also in disbanding the last week, and so before
this without question disbanded: By the happy dispatch of this business, the
county of York and other places are eased of Free quarter: And in effecting
this work of disbanding these Northern Forces, Major Genesis Lambert has given
sufficient testimony of his fidelity to the Parliament, and good affection to
the Country. And from Durham the Letters impart, The disbanding of Major
Sandersons Troop of Horse, and Captain Lilburns Troop of Horse, and Captain
Blaxtons Company of Foot, and Captain Grays Company of Foot: The disbanding
money of those two Troops of Horse, and two Companies of Foot which they
received, was about Eight hundred pounds. The other particular Forces of Horse
and Foot in the rest of the several Northern counties, are not come up this
week by the Post, but are expected by the next: But the Letters of this week
dated this instant February from Durham, impart, That diverse Papists are said,
by good hands, to go with some of the Scots that passed by into Scotland, and
some of them (seeing the Parliaments Soldiers) told them, They must now alter
their opinion, and be no longer for the Parliament, but for the King: Whereunto
some of the Soldiers replied, How could they be for the King, when they had
sold him away.

And as concerning the Supernumerary Forces in Northwales under the Command of
Major General Mitton, consisting for the most part of several Troops of Horse,
they all express their willingness to submit to the several Ordinances of
Parliament; and their disbanding money is sent down, with the several Warrants
for the disbanding of them: So that we doubt not but by the next, the same will
be actually performed. The Supernumerary forces in Cheshire, Lancaster, and the
rest of the counties in that part of the Kingdom; and of Staffordshire,
Notingham, Derby, Norfolk, Northampton, and Warwickshire, where many Companies
of Foot, and some Troops of Horse that were maintained by the several counties
are to be disbanded, of whom part is finished, and Warrants and money for the
rest is provided and dispatched unto the Commissioners in the several counties;
whereby in those and all other counties, the Supernumerary Forces are and will
be disbanded, and the whole Kingdom eased of all Free quarter, which was too
great a burden to be long endured; and therefore the Parliament took the same
into their serious thoughts, and has hitherto had a happy progress, and their
care will be to go on to do good unto the Kingdom, and to ease them in few
months much more then they have done, in case new designs and devilish plots
do not again break out to hinder their good intentions and resolutions.

I hear, that hitherto but little has been done for the disbanding of the
Supernumerary Forces in Southwales, under the Command of Major General
Laughorn, but the moneys are there provided, and the Warrants sent down, but
Commissioners were wanting to perform that service; which the Parliament has
now supplied, by authorizing Baronet Richard Phillips, Col: Horton, Col:
Edward; Prichard, Col: Tho: Carn, Col: Jones, Col: Lewis, and diverse other
Gentlemen of the several Counties, speedily to disband the said Forces, and to
take all their Accounts, and to pay them two months pay, according to former
Instructions and Ordinances of Parliament made in that behalf; whereby those
counties will find great ease and contentment. I remember nothing more at
present, but that the Forces in Plymouth remain undisbanded, although they were
first taken care for; which, as I am informed, has happened by reason the six
months Assessments of the county of Devonshire has been much retarded, both
in assessing, collecting and paying it into the Treasurer General of that
county; whether by the default of the Gentlemen of that county trusted therein,
or backwardness in the Inhabitants to pay the same, or what other obstruction
has happened, is unknown to me, but I hope all will end well, which God grant,
that this Kingdom may once again enjoy the blessed fruits of truth and peace.

25. Feb. 1647.
Imprimatur

Gilbert Mabbot.

FINIS.

