A late LETTER FROM Sir Thomas Fairfax's Army now in TRURO. Relating the
several Passages in the TREATY, And what is concluded. Communicated to both
Houses of Parliament upon Monday 16. March 1645.

Die Lunae 16 March 1645.
ORdered by the Lords assembled in Parliament, that this Letter be forthwith
printed and published.

Ioh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 17 March
1645.

For the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House
of Commons.
Being a Letter sent from Sir Thomas Fairfaxs Army now in Truro.
SIR,
I Wrote to you this day of the further progress of the Treaty held all this
day, and till twelve at night, and yet could not be finished, though all the
material parts were over; those which remain are only circumstantiall, yet
so necessary to be concluded in order to the perfecting of the Treaty, that
more time is granted for the finishing thereof, so the Treaty and Cessation is
to continue to morrow also; and the Rendezvous of this Army, that should have
been to morrow, is put off till the next day, at which time the Enemy is
likewise to draw out to a Rendezvouze, and there according to the Articles, or
as shall be further agreed on, dismount their common Troopers, and deliver up
their Horses and Arms: The Enemy is so impatient till the Treaty be done, that
this very day there has no less then between thirty and forty Lieutenant
Colonels, Majors and Captains, come away from the Enemy to us, besides others
that came to visit our Quarters, that did not return; This evening likewise
there came a Captain and forty Gentlemen of quality, with their Horses and
Arms, who likewise by the Articles are to have the benefit of their Horses: And
likewise there came from Penryn 96. Common Soldiers, with their Muskets and
Matches lighted, and twelve more since came, and forty more gone another way,
which so much disheartened Colonel Trevanian, the Governor of the Fort and
Harbor at Penryn near Pendennis, that he sent unto the General late this
evening, to desire that he might be included within the Treaty with the Lord
Hopton, and have the same Conditions that other Officers have, which are,
Passes to go home, and Protections to live quietly from the violence of the
Soldiers; we conceive there will be all Officers and others of quality, being
allowed their Horses according to the Articles, near two thousand Horse that
will come to be delivered up to the General for the use of the State; and
though they stand the State in two thousand pound Horses and Arms, yet they
will be worth to the State ten thousand pounds at the least, but that is the
least thing considerable in this great business. The dissolving of such a
strength, by which means the West of England is cleared of a Field Enemy, and
Foreign adversaries deprived of that assistance they did expect from this
force, whilst it was in so considerable a Body; We doubt not, but Pendennis
will upon the disbanding of these Forces, incline to moderate terms, the
Governor thereof is a Gentleman of good Fortune and Estate in the County, and
in all likelihood will not be so mad to see all the whole Gentry at liberty,
enjoying their own, and himself as it were in Prison, enjoying nothing that is
his own. I cannot express with what joy most of the Officers receive those
Conditions, and wish they had sooner known our intentions to wards them: those
which are most discontented at this business, are the Troopers that were to be
dismounted, but many of them do, during this Cessation, use ways in an handsome
manner, to recompense themselves and ours too, by exchanging good Horses for
bad Horses, gayning twenty shillings or thirty shillings in exchange from our
Troopers, they reserving the bad Horses, to receive twenty shillings upon the
delivering of them up unto us again; so we have many of the Horses already,
though not in manner according to the Treaty. I had directions to prepare a
Letter for the Committee of the Army, to make stop of the providing of Horses
for the Train, for that here will be six hundred to be spared for that
purpose, and the rest that are serviceable to be likewise disposed for Recruits
in the Army. I am Sir

Truro, March 11. 1645. Your most humble Servant J. R.
I Stayed the Messenger till this forenoon, but can add no more, but that the
Commissioners are at it, and as some of them tell me, almost finished the
Treaty; (I shall as soon as they are signed by both sides) send an Express
with the Contents. Though one Army visit another during the Cessation, yet we
are more circumspect in keeping strong Guards, then when the Enemy was most
active against us.

Truro March 12. 12 at noone.

This morning 100. Soldiers of Colonel Champernoons Regiment are come in,
with Muskets, Swords, and Bandeleers.



FINIS.

