In this BOOK is the FIGURE OF THE Dividing the Land of ISRAEL AMONG The Tribes
of ISRAEL, (That is, among those that have the Faith of Israel) when their
Captivity is returned; that is to say, after they are brought up out of their
Graves, and that employed Men have cleansed the Land aforesaid of all the dead
Bones of all the Warriors of the World: Wherein is the Figure of the bigness
of the Priest's Portion, and Temple therein; And of the Levite's Portion; And
of the City Jehovah Shammah, wherein Christ and his Saints shall reign 1000
years; And of the Ground for food for them that minister in the City, which
shall be chosen out of all the Tribes of Israel; measured out by the square
Root of 121; And of Prince Jesus his Portion, that shall be in the Land of
Israel; And of the bigness of the City New Jerusalem, which comes down from
God out of Heaven when the 1000 years aforesaid are ended; which is known by
the square Root of 120, as may be seen in the square Figure of 10000 Furlongs
also herein included. And all or most of the Signs of Christ's coming explained
in Verse; with other Mysteries, by the aforesaid Author.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1688.

map The figure of the dividing of the land of Israel according to Ezekiels
prophecy when the Captivity thereof shall be returned


(...),
I Present thee in the adjoining printed Paper the Figure of the dividing of
the Land of Israel among the Tribes of Israel, (that is to say, among the
Tribes that have the Faith of Israel: For though the Children of Israel be as
the Sand of the Sea, yet but a remnant shall return out of Captivity. Says
Esaias 10.22 be saved. Says Paul, according to the Septuagint. Rem. 9.27.) after
they come up out of their Graves, when the Prophecy of the 2d Psal^ is
fulfilled, after the battle in Armageddon is ended, and that they have cleansed
the Land of Israel of all the dead Bones, of all the Warriors of the World,
Ezekiel. 37. chap. 38. chap. 39. Rev. 16.13, 16. chap. 19.21. So that Nation shall
not lift up sword against Nation, for they shall beat their swords into
plow-shares, and their spears into pruning hooks, neither shall they learn war
any more, Mich. 4.3. And wherein Prince Jesus shall have his porttion, who is
called the beloved servant, born to be a King, but not then to be a King, as he
said, My kingdom is not now here. (I pray take notice, that if I vary from
Translations, I cleave to the Original Hebrew or Greek Copies) John 18.36, 37
who shall sit and rule upon his Throne, and be a Priest upon his Throne, Isai.
42.1. Ezekiel. 44.13. chap. 46.1, 2, 4. Zech. 6.12, 13. wherein is also described
the holy Oblation of 25000 Reeds square, Ezekiel. 48 8, 10, 20. which according to
the measuring Reed of six Cubits long by the Cubit and hand-breadth, wherewith
it was measured, amounts to 55 Roman Miles long, and so many broad, allowing
the Hebrew Cubit to be 1 Roman Foot, as Robert Morden in his Geography
rectified says it is. Which 55 Miles aforesaid is 50 English and better, it
being 1833/5180 of an English Mile: if 17 English Inches by Guild Hall Standard
be an Hebrew Cubit, exactly agreeing with the Roman Measure, as in his Book
aforesaid, he says it is and does agree. Wherein the Priests shall have a
portion of of the said Oblation, deducting a apiece place of 500 Reeds
long and 500 broad in the midst thereof for the Sanctuary, which is the 1 1/10
Roman measure, answerable to 1 Mile 36 Foot English measure. Besides the
Suburbs (or profane place, as it is called of the Sanctuary. Ezekiel. 45.2. chap.
48.8. chap. 42 16, 20. which shall be 50 Cubits in breadth round about the Wall
of the Sanctuary aforesaid. And the Levites also shall have a portion of of the
said Oblation, chap. 48.13. And the City and Suburbs with ground for food for
them that minister in the City, which shall be chosen out of all the Tribes of
Israel, is the other of the said Oblation, ver. 15.20. And for proof, that the
measuring Reed aforesaid was about 11 Roman Foot long, these arguments
following will demonstrate. First, A Cubit (i^ the Hebrew Tongue called Amah)
is so called, says Fuller in his Pi^gah Sight of Palestine, from Cubitus the
Elbow as that from Cubo to lean, or Cupto, according to the Greek, to bow,
because properly the space betwixt the elbow and tip of the middle fingers end,
and is of an ordinary Man's arm 18 Inches Roman measure, which is 17 English
measure. And forasmuch as the Cubit of the measuring Reed was a Cubit and hand
breadth, Ezekiel. 43.1^ and that the things herein spoken of were measured in the
Vision, chap: 40.1, 2. by the measuring Reed of 6 Cubit long by the Cubit and
hand-breadth, chap. 40.5. And that the measuring Reed was 6 great Cubits, chap.
41.8. ^ argues that the measuring Reed (as I shall make appear is about 11
Roman Foot long, every Cubit being 18 Inche according to the lesser Cubit, and
four Inches added to it for the hand breadth, to make it a great Cubit,
according to the Cubit of the Sanctuary. Now I reckon 4 Inches to the
hand-breadth, as they do which measure the heigh of a Horse by a staff, and
grasping the staff in their hands, one hand-breadth after another, which is
about 4 Inche of an ordinary hand: but how to order the hand in measuring, to
make it 3 Inches (as some account it) I know not, neither do I think that any
Man can tell me. Secondly, The breadth of the Land of Israel is commonly he to
be (says Purchase in his Pilgrimage) 60 Italian Miles broad, which is but 5
Italian Miles more than the length ^ breadth of the holy Oblation aforesaid;
and therefore cannot be much longer than I reckon it, because that the Prince,
who is more than a Man, Ezekiel. 44.1, 3. is to have his Portion on the East and
West side of the holy Oblation aforesaid; And the River Jordan and the East-sea
called also the Salt-sea, Jesh. 12.3. on the East Side thereof and the
Mediterranean or great Sea on the West Side thereof, they being the East and
West bounds of the Land ^^ Israel, and of the Prince's Portion, Ezekiel. 47.18,
20. chap. 48.21. will not suffer his Portion to be much more tha^ 2 Roman Miles
broad on the East Side, and the like breadth on the West side of the holy
Oblation aforesaid, which breadth and length aforesaid, little more or less,
being considered by Jesus of Nazareth, who is that Prince aforesaid, (
Greenvell in his Exposition of Ezekiel. says, that some Divines, both Ancient and
Modern, hold Christ to be that Prince) will give him cause to say, The lines
are fallen to me in pleasant places, I have a goodly heritage, Acts ^^ 22, 27.
Psalm. 16. Thirdly, Solomon made a Vessel called the Molten Sea, of 10 Cubits
from brim to brim, according to the first measure which was measured according
to the measure that Moses and Bezaleel were instructed in, for the work of the
Sanctuary or Tabernacle, as it is called. And God that commanded the
Israelites, Levit. 19.35, 3^ that they should do no unrighteousness in
Judgment, mete-yard, weight and measure, saying, that they should have just
balances, just weights, just ephah, and a just hin: says also Ezekiel. 45, 10,
12. Ye shall have just balances, just ephah, just weights, and a just bath:
the ephah and the bath shall be of one measure, that the bath may contain the
tenth part of an b^^mer, and the shekel twenty gerahs. Mark twenty Gerahs, as
the Lord commanded by Moses, Levit. 27.25. And ^ concerning the Cubit, Solomon
was instructed in it for building of the house of God thereby, the length
thereof b^ Cubits, after the first measure, was 60 Cubits, and the breadth 20
Cubits, 2 Chronicles. 3.3. This is the same length and breadth that the Temple is to
be of, that is spoken of in Ezekiel. 41.2, 4. For the dore-posts thereof are to be
six Cubit broad on the one side, and six Cubits broad on the other side, which
was the breadth of the Tabernacle, ver. 1. And seem they are expressed to be
alike by the Cubits, why not the Cubits alike? See Exodus 26.30 where 8 Boards
of the Tabernacle of 1 Cubit broad were set up at the West End of the
Tabernacle, which was the breadth of it. The Cubit therefore is a Cubit and
hand-breadth, Ezekiel. 44.13. So then, according to the great Cubit aforesaid,
Solmon's Molten Sea had in it (if it was of a round figure like a Bushel
4259200 Hebrew Inches, which agree w^^ 3847319 English Inches, for it was ten
Cubits from brim to brim, round in compass, and five Cubits high, and a line
thirty Cubits did compass it round about; That is to say, 10 Cubits in the
Diameter at the top, and 10 at the bottom and 5 and 5 at the sides, and it
received and held 3000 Baths. 2 Chronicles. 4.2, 5. I say there was in it 3847319
English Inches, or near that number, according to Morden's rule, That 29
English Inches in length, be the same w^^ 30 Roman or Hebrew Inches; And that
there was 4259200 Hebrew Inches in it, if made according to the Figure
aforesaid. Thus I demonstrate by Weights and Balance, and thus I found it out,
and thus you may doei^^ Take two pieces of Paper (or what you will, that will
demonstrate it better) of a like bigness and weight, a^ apiece, and let 1
of them be called 100 Cubits, that is, to suppose it, 10 Cubits long and 10
broad, and (...) this serve to make Weights for weighing the other piece, of
what figure soever it be. Then cut 1 of them into a rou^^ figure, but let the
Diameter thereof be of the same length and breadth with the 100 Cubit weight
aforesaid, a^ you will find it to weigh by Weights that you may make of a known
quantity, (suppose 1 of them be 9 long (...) 9 broad, that weights 81, agreeing
with Multiplication, that 9 times 9 is 81: and if that weight be too heavy for
your round figure, whose Diameter is 10, as aforesaid, you may counterpoise it
by a weight of 1 Cubit made out of the 100 Cubit weight of Paper aforesaid, as
the 81 weight was made,) and then it will be 80, as I found a round figure to
be to a square of 100 aforesaid. Vincent Wing, in a Book of his making, does
not make a round, to a square Figure, altogether so big as I make it; for he in
measuring a round Figure, (suppose it of Land) gives directions to multiply
half the Circumserence, by half the Diameter. Now suppose that half the
Circumserence be 11, and half the Diameter 3; then there is in it, according to
that rule, (wherein 22 is reckoned the Circumference of 7 the Diameter) but 38;
whereas by my way of measuring by Weights, I make it somewhat more, for I make
it as 40 to 50, whereas his is as 38, to 49, which is no great difference: And
if there was 3847319 English Inches in the Molten Sea, and they divided by
3000, because so many Baths were in the Molten Sea. It shows that 12824
1100/3000 Inches were in the Bath or Ephah, which Fuller in his Pisgah Sight
says is 4 Gallons 2 Quarts, which multiplied by 10, makes it out, that 12824
1100/3000 Inches were in the Homer, which divided by 360, because so many Pints
are in a Homer, holds forth that 35 2^^/360 Inches were in the Pint (if they
had 1) which is but 1 Inch, and 7/11 of an Inch in a Pint difference; And
indeed the Bushels in Essex, before they were cut, which was done about 10
years ago, where they call 5 Bushels a Horse or Ass-load, (for they usually lay
as much upon the one as the other) were much about that bigness; that 5 of them
were very nigh the bigness of an Homer, for in the Cambridge-shire Bushels of 8
Gallons to the Bushel and 272 Inches to the Gallon, according to Winchester
Measure, there are in 5 Bushels 40 times 272 Inches, which is 10880 Inches; we
were forced to put about 2 Gallons, which is 680 Inches into 5 Bushels to hold
measure in Essex, which is 680 joined to the 10880 aforesaid, make 11560
Inches, which is within 1264 Inches of the 12824 Inches in the Homer aforesaid,
which is but 4 Gallons 3 Quarts difference. But if the great Cubit was but
longer than I demonstrate it to be, then the Homer (which is an Hebrew word,
and signifies the Loading of an Ass) would be 8 Bushels, 3 Gallons, 1 Pint
Winchester Measure, which is too much to lay commonly upon an Ass in a
Hill-country, as the Land of Israel was, Ezekiel. 36.4, 6. chap. 38.20, 21. chap.
39.4. But if the Cubit aforesaid was but less than I hold it to be, then the
Homer aforesaid would be but 3 Bushels, 7 Gallons, 1 Pottle Winchester Measure,
which is too little for one Horse or Ass-load. And thus is the Cubit plainly
proved to be about 22 Hebrew Inches aforesaid, which is 21 8/30 English Inches.
I am willing to tell you, that according to 28 Inches in the Pint, this goodly
Vessel would hold and contain 68 Tun, 39 Gallons, 1 Pottle and 7/28 of a Pint
Wine-measure. I could say more to prove that the Cubit (by the Ephah that Ruth
gleaned and thrashed in one day, and by the Wall of the Terrple, Ezekiel. 40 5. to
be about that length that Robert Morden aforesaid says it is: but this I have
said I think is sufficient. I therefore proceed to speak of the City wherein
the Lord Jesus will dwell, Acts 15.16, 17. having its name Jehovah Shammah,
Ezekiel. 48.35. which signifies the Lord is there; for the Lord has said that he
will return the Captivity of Israel, and build again the House of David that is
fallen down, etc. that the residue of men might seek after the Lord. The Hebrew
Text reads it, that the remnant of Adam might possess it, even all the Gentiles
that call upon my Name, says the Lord, that does all these things. Acts 15.16,
17. Psalm. 15. Isa. 2.2, 3. Jer. 30.3 is, For the City shall be built for the
Lord, from the Tower of Hanancel to the Gate of the corner, and the
measuring-line shall yet go forth over against it upon the hill Gareb, and
compass about to Goath and the whole valley of the dead bodies, and of the
ashes, and all the fields to the brook of Kidron unto the corner of the
Horse-gate toward the East shall be separate unto the Lord; and when it is set
up of this fashion it shall not be plucked up, nor thrown down any more for
ever, Jer. 31.38, 40. by which it appears that it shall be a far more
glorious City than ever it was before or since that Prophecy, and God has
promised that he will make it the praise of the Earth, Isa. 62.7. Let any man
show me any other meaning of these Scriptures aforesaid than the literal
meaning aforesaid, and he shall be to me a great Apollo. Now this City
aforesaid, with the Suburbs, which shall be toward the North 250, toward the
East 250, toward the South 250, and toward the West 250 Measures broad, shall
be 5000 Measures long and 5000 broad, which is 11 Miles square Italian measure,
and to measure it round about from Gate to Gate by all the four sides, is 18000
Measures of the Reed aforesaid, Ezekiel. 48.35. chap. 40.5. which is 39 Miles 6
Primes Italian measure, or 26 Miles 2 Furlongs English, for it is 4500 Reeds
long on every side, which is 49000 Roman Foot, which is 47850 English, which is
9 Miles 9 Primes Italian measure, which are the length of 9 Miles 20 Poles or
Perches English measure, and there is in the whole square 98 Miles Italian
measure, which make 84 Miles, 61 Furlongs, 5 Acres English measure, having at
the Northside 3 Gates, at the South Side 3 Gates, at the East side 3 Gates, and
at the West Side 3 Gates, as I have described them, with the Names of the
Tribes of Israel thereon in the Wall of the City aforesaid, Ezekiel. 48.31, 35.
with greets from gate to gate, and other streets therein probably, according to
this Figure, not opposing them that think there may be more of them little
streets therein, than I have described. Now will I offer some Reasons why I
lined but the great Streets according to the Figure aforesaid. First, because
the Lord's dwelling will be in the midst of ^t, as in New Jerusalem; And seeing
every high Hill shall be thrown down, and every Valley exalted, the rough
places made smooth, and the crooked ways made strait, that all flesh may see
the salvation of God, which is Jesus Christ, Esaias 40.^, 5. chap. 12.6. Rev.
22.1, 2. Acts 15.16, 17. Luke 2.30. Rev. 2.7. chap. 21.22. Now the high Hill,
low Valley, ^ough, crooked ways that formerly were to Jerusalem, shall not be
used in the day that all the Land is turned into a Plain, from Geba to
South-Rimmon, and Jerusalem is listed up and abides in her place, from
Benjamin's Gate, to the place of the first Gate, unto the corner Gate, and from
the Tower of Hananiel unto the King's Wine-presses, Isai. ^5.7, 8, 9. chap.
40.3, 4. Zech. 13.10. but a smooth, safe, strait, easy, plain, highway (as I
have described in the figure to some of the Gates, which should have been made
to all the Gates, if it could have been done without interruption) shall be to
Salvation's house aforesaid. Secondly, by drawing the Streets after this
manner, I figure out very handsome Marketplace, or place to walk in: for both
these words the Original word signifies, of two Miles and almost two Furlong
long, and so much broad as may be known by the scale for Jehovah Shammah. And
to what purpose ^id God tell them Israelites (that would be ashamed of all
their evil ways, who should enjoy the Land of Israel, wherein Jacob their
Father did dwell, and be placed in the said Land as they are set down in the
Figure) Ye shall have just weights, just balance, just shekel, just ephah, and
a just bath, if there should not be buying and selling there? and what needs
that saying, that the Levites shall not sell, etc? Paul says, 2 Cor. 9 6. He
that sowes his Charity sparingly, shall reap sparingly; and that one Saint in
the resurrection shall differ from another, as one Star does differ from
another in glory: therefore he that reaps plentifully, ought to sell of his
reapings to make that difference. And although have drawn all the Tribes
Portions of an equal bigness, it is probable, they may exceed one another in
bigness and ^odness as they do in places: for this I observe, that the most
worthy Tribes are placed nearest to the City and ^emple, where the Houses and
Grounds (most likely) will be of most value, as about London and Westminster.
and they are so placed, according to Ezekiel. 47.48. chapters, that from the
North-border (which is the City Hamath, city plan A Ground Platt of two
Glorious-Cityes that shall be HEREAFTER
The one Jehovah Shammah according to Ezekiel. 48.35. and Revel. 20.9

The other New Jerusalem according to Revel. 21.v2.9.10 etc.

Note that the Great lines in the Figure do signify the Gate-streets; The
other lines which lead into the Gate-streets are Lesser streets: And all the
white places do signify buildings, Courts, etc.

and the Cities Beta, Berothai, Sibraim, Damascus, to the coast of Hauran,
Joshua 13.5. and 2 Samuel 8.5, 6, 8.) to the South-border, which is toward
Teman, whose bounds shall be from Tamar, to the Waters of Meribah in Kadesh,
and the River to the main Sea. Numb. 34.3, 4, 5. Ezekiel. 47.16, 19. that it
amounts to 1600 Furlongs. Which Fuller's Pisgah Sight says is the length of
the Land of Canaan. And so far the blood is to run out of the Winepress, (which
shall be trodden without the City Sion.) Rev 14.1, 20. Thirdly, by drawing the
Streets after this manner, I figure a City of strength, for the streets are
therein lined from every gate to the house of the Captain, Heb. 2.10. Mich.
5.2. in a strait line; so that he may see to every Gate, and send his Armies
thither as he pleases, Rev. 19.13, 14. And Tindal's Translation says thus, Isa.
26.1. Then shall this Song be sung in the Land of Judah, We have a strong City,
the Walls and the Ordinance shall keep us. And let no body think there is no
need of these things, for this City shall be besieged. Rev. 20.7, 9. Now will I
speak concerning the City New Jerusalem, which is a City that is above, Gal.
4.26. and comes down from God out of Heaven, when the first Heaven and the
first Earth are passed away, and there is no more Sea. Rev. 21.1, 2, 5. and
therefore is not the City Jehovah Shammah aforesaid. For on the East and
West Side of the holy Oblation aforesaid, wherein is the City Jehovah Shammah,
is the Prince his Portion which joyneth to the Great Sea, the West border of
the Land of Israel. Ezekiel. 47.20. chap 48.21. who is God's Son, Ezekiel. 44.2.
Psalm. 72.1. for the Son spoken of in the first verse, is meant God's Son. And
may be read thus, as I had it from a learned Person: Give the King thy
Judgments, O God, and thy Righteousness to the King thy Son, because of the
affixis. And in that day shall running-waters go out from Jerusalem, half of
them to the East-sea, and half of them to the West-sea, (and so it is described
in the Figure) in Summer and in Winter shall it be. Zech. 14.8. But it is not
so now, for the waters that go forth from Jerusalem in the Brook Cedron,
toward the East-sea, behave themselves like a Brook in Summertime: which
waters, when a man has most need of, are not to be found. Job 6.15. And if
waters did continually flow from Jerusalem, yet they cannot now go down to the
West-sea, for the Hill-country, spoken of Luke 1.39. lies between: but when
the day of the Lord is come, Zech. 14.1. All the Land shall be turned to a
Plain from Geba to South-Rimmon, as is described in the Figure, and Jerusalem
shall be lifted up, ver. 10 by the Hil^^ and Mountains that lie about it. Psalm.
125.2. that the Mountain of the house of the Lord may be established upon the
top of Mountains, Mich. 4.1, 2. the Mount Olivet being one of them Hills
(toward the East) that lie about Jerusalem, which shall cleave in the midst
thereof, toward the West, and cause a very great Valley, Zech. 14 4. and
consequently be the cause, with the Mountains aforesaid, by God's power, that
Jerusalem shall be lifted up, and abide in her place, from Benjamin's Gate unto
the place of the first Gate, and from the Tower of Hananiel, to the King's
Wine Press. ver. 10. Again, Jerusalem built again upon her own heap, cannot be
New Jerusalem, for New Jerusalem is a City apiece (whose breadth is as
much as the length) of 12000 Furlongs. Which is of a side 109 Furlongs and
better. Not 12000 Furlongs long, and 12000 Furlongs broad, for 3 Gates of a
side is too little for such a great City. It had need to have above 300 Gates
of a side. Much less is it to be believed that it is 12000 Furlong high: for 1
Gate of a side in the midst thereof, is enough for such a high City; for he
that is on the North-east corner, or North-west, South-east, or South-west of
the City, is but 6000 Furlongs from a Gate of either side; but he that will go
up to the top of the City, has at least 12000 Furlongs to ascend from thence.
Neither is it like, that a City of that height should have a Wall but of 144
Cubits high. Rev. 21.17. I understand it therefore after th^^ manner, that it
is a square City, (not Cubical, for the Wall of 144 Cubits aforesaid allows not
that meaning) of 12000 Furlongs according to the former part of the 16th verse
of Rev. 21. and that the height thereof is answerable to the length and breadth
thereof (agreeing with the Original) according to the latter end of the said
verse It is probable, that it is 2 or 300 Cubits high, at the out sides
thereof, and 3 or 400 Cubits high nigh to the street of Gold in the middle
thereof. Rev. 21.22. chap. 22.2. And so it is equal, answerable, semblable or
proportionable in the height thereof to the length and breadth. Now I am
confirmed, that such an equality of length, breadth and height is the meaning
thereof, by the Reed that the Angel had, to measure the City, and the Gates
thereof, and the Wall thereof, which is said to be a Golden Reed. Not that it
was made of Gold, for that is the worst matter that a measure can be made of,
because of its heaviness, and being apt to bend. But it was called a Golden
Reed, because it had Numbers upon it, to measure the City, which was 12000
Furlongs, and therefore a surd number which cannot be known but by the Roots of
Numbers. Secondly, it had Numbers upon it that would measure the Gates of the
City, which I do not think were Oblongs, as they commonly now make Doors; but
that they were rather of the old fashion, fit to hang 12 Pearls in the 12 Gates
thereof for Doors: and consequently had such Numbers upon it, as a common man
does not understand how to reckon by them. Thirdly, it had Numbers upon it to
measure the Wall of the City, which was 144 Cubits. So that if the Angel's Reed
was of the length that that Reed was of, which measured Jehovah Shammah, of 6
Cubits long by the Cubit and hand-breadth, Ezekiel. 40.5. of 11 Hebrew Feet long,
as I have demonstrated it was, there might be 6 Cubits length of a common
Italian man figured upon it, which is 9 Roman Feet long. And 24 of them
Measures was the height or thickness thereof. Rev. 21.12, 17. which is 216
Roman Feet. Which, according to English Feet, is 208 24/30. Now this Wall is
built with 12 Foundations. The first Foundation thereof is Jasper, (a precious
Stone, well known to Lapidaries, as all the rest are also known) of 144 Cubits
broad. The second Foundation Sapphire, which I understand to be 132 Cubits
broad, and upon this Foundation, which is a setting off of 12 Cubits, which is
18 Roman Foot, (as I shall make appear, when I speak of the bigness of the said
City,) 3 or 4 Men may walk a breast thereof, 9 Foot being set off on the
inside, and 9 Foot on the outside thereof, the length of 13 Miles and more. The
third Calcedony, with the like settings of as all the rest of the Foundations
are made. The fourth an Emrald. The fifth Sardonix. The sixth Sardius. The
seventh Chrysolite. The eighth Beril. The ninth a Topas. The tenth
Chrysoprasus. The eleventh a Jacynct. The twelfth an Amethist. All which said
precious Stones are set down to make us believe the Reality of the thing. And
upon the top of the said Wall, which is 12 Cubits, as I understand it, broad, 6
or 7 Men may walk a breast, as 3 (...) 4 may do upon any of the other
Foundations. Come I therefore now to treat of the exact bigness of the City is
the length and breadth thereof, for the 12000 Furlongs aforesaid must lie in a
apiece, the breadth thereof being as much as the length thereof. Rev.
21.16. And I do say that 6250 Measures, each measure being the Ro^^ of 120
Foot Roman measure, is the Breadth, or Root of New Jerusalem, as 625 Roman Feet
is the Breadth, or Ro^^ of a Roman Furlong. For as 625, multiplied by 625,
produces 390625, the number of Feet in a Roman Furlong so 6250, multiplied by
6250, produces 39062500, and that multiplied by 120, the square of the Reed or
Measure the measured the City, produces 4687500000, the true number of Feet of
12000 Furlongs aforesaid. And this Root 120 (...) Foot, the number of the Names
of the Disciples of the Lamb sent forth into all the World to make a Bride
(...) the Lamb; I conceive to be marked in the Golden Reed, so called for its
Excellency, as the Golden Rule is for (...) Excellency. Or if you will, Thus I
say, That 100 square Furlongs of a side, each Furlong being so much bigg^^ than
a Roman Furlong, as 120 is bigger than 100, is the side or root of 12000 square
Furlongs contained in New Jerusalem aforesaid. For 100 times 120 is 12000.
Which that I may the better demonstrate how long, and how broad it is, I have
drawn the Figure of 10000 Squares out of the Figure of New Jerusalem of 12000
Furlongs (annexed to this writing) for 10000 Furlongs. Which was done, by
dividing the Figure into 12 equal Oblongs, and then taking 10 of them for 1
Oblong, I put the breadth thereof 10 to the length thereof 12 into one line,
and erected a Perpendicular at the midst thereof 11, that thereby I might draw
the side of a four square of 120 answerable to the Oblong of 120 or 10000
Furlongs aforesaid. Which was done by extending my Compasses to half the length
of the line aforesaid, and setting 1 Foot of my Compasses at the place of
Conjunction where the length and breadth of the Oblong was joined, and touching
the Perpendicular aforesaid with the other Foot: From which place touched, to
the Base of the Perpendicular aforesaid, is a true length of a side of a four
square Figure made out of the Oblong of 120, or 10000 Furlongs Oblong
aforesaid. Which that you may know, That the way I took for turning the Oblong
into a apiece, is a good way; do thus: Let the line on the left hand,
from the bottom of the 10000 square to the place marked with 40, signify the
Root of 1600 Furlongs, because if you make a square of 40 Furlongs in a side
thereof, there will be 1600 Furlongs in the said square, agreeing with the Rule
for Multiplication, that 40 times 40 is 1600. Then let the line at the bottom,
from the corner at the left hand, to the place of 20 at the bottom, signify
the Root of 400, because 20 times 20 is 400. Then let the Ladder-line or
Hypothenuse from 40 to 20, as in the Figure, signify the Root of both those
numbers, that is, 2000 Furlongs; for a four square made with that line, by
adding 3 lines to it, of the same length, will contain in it as much as both
the other lines made into squares; to wit, the 1600 Furlong-root, and the 400
Furlong-root. Then suppose the length of the Root of the 2000 aforesaid,
reaches almost to the square of 45 in the left hand of the Figure, as it does.
And suppose the length of the Root 10000 be placed at the bottom of the Figure
where it is to be seen, and a Ladder-line reaches from the far end of that, to
the end of the line that reaches almost to the 45th. square; That Ladder-line
will be the Root of both those numbers; that is to say 12000 Furlongs. And is
of the same length, with a side of the 12000 Figure, with the 12 Gates; from
whence the 10000 Oblong figure aforesaid was taken. And so it will hold true in
any other proportion. As for Example; Let the side of 3 of those Squares at the
bottom stand for the Root of 9, and it agrees with the Multiplication-Table,
that says 3 times 3 is 9 And let the side of 4 of those Squares on the left
hand that join to it at the bottom, be accounted the Root of 16, agreeing with
the Table aforesaid, that 4 times 4 is 16. A Ladder-line from the far end of
the 3 Squares, to the far end of the 4 Squares, will be the length of 5 of the
Squares: as you may prove by the Figure, which is the Root of 25: agreeing with
the Table aforesaid, that 5 times 5 is 25. Again, as the length of a 100 square
Furlongs is the Root of 10000 square Furlongs, so the Diagonal-line, or line of
furthest distance from corner to corner, according to the Figure, is the Root
of 20000 Furlongs, for a apiece made equal to that line will contain as
much as the bottom line turned into a Square, which is 10000 Furlongs, and the
length of the line on either hand, turned into a Square, which is 10000
Furlongs. And half the length of that long line, from corner to corner, which
is in the Figure, is the Root of 5000 square Furlongs; for to make a Square of
half the length of 1, is but. And the Root of 250 is to be seen in the Square,
which is made of the Diagonal-line, which answers the Root of 5 Diagonal Units
for the Foot, which is 50; and 10 Diagonal Units for the Leg, which is 200. I
will only say thus much at this time, of this matter, That as 100 times 100
Squares, each Square being a Furlong, is the Root of 10000 square Furlongs. So
100 times 100 Squares, each Square being a Furlong, and the 5th. part of a
Furlong, is the Root of 12000 Furlongs. Which is to be done by the Rules and
Figure aforesaid. And Multitudes of Millions of Roots (I suppose) may be made
by this Square, or another like it better drawn, which may be made use of in
Arithmetic, to multitudes of purposes. Now I will offer some reasons why I
reckon the 12000 Furlongs of the City to be Roman measure. First, because it is
prophesied in Scripture, that blood shall run out of the Wine Press, trodden
without the City Sion, by the space of 1600 Furlongs. Rev. 4.1. chap. 14.1.20.
which space Fuller (in his Pisgah Sight of Palestine) says is the length of
the Land of Canaan. And I have read also that Benjamin Tudilensis, a Jew,
says, That 1600 Italian Furlongs is the length of the Land of Canaan. And
seeing that every high Hill shall be thrown down, and every Valley exalted, the
crooked paths made strait, and the rough ways plain and safe, that all flesh
may see the Salvation of God, which is Jesus Christ, dwelling in the Tabernacle
of David on Mount Sion, Esaias. 40.3. chap. 12.6. chap. 51.10. chap. 35.9. Luke
2.30. 2 Samuel 5.9. I am apt to think, that they are Italian Furlongs, because
the blood may run from the Wine press, trodden without the City Sion, to both
ends of the Land of Canaan without Hill to stop it. Secondly, I reckon them to
be Italian Furlongs, as best known to the World. And God that made the World,
would have all men saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth. 1 Timothy 2.4.
And the World then, when the Revelation of John was written, and long before,
and ever since has been, and as to continue under a Roman power till Christ's
coming. 1. Maccabees 8.1.10. Luke 2.1. Acts 22.26. Dan. 7.7, 8, 9, 11, 13, 19,
21, 22, 23. What Nation under Heaven (said Augustus Caesar to the Senate of
Rome in the time of the 4th Kingdom being in Iron. Dan. 2.33, 40. chap. 7.23.
as Heylin in his Geography recites it) has not sued at your doors for Peace,
but you have sent War into their gates. And since that Rome became Pontificial,
being in the Feet with the 10 Toes of Iron and Clay, riding upon a Beast with 7
Heads, which 7 Heads signify the 7 Hills whereon the City is built, namely
Palatinus, Capitolinus, Aventinus, Coelius, Esquilinus, Quirinalis, Viminalis,
all which Hills are now within the Wall of the City of Rome, as they were when
John wrote the Revelation. And the Heads also signify the 7 Governments
thereof, which have been in it since it was first built, 5 whereof were past,
says the Angel to John, which 5 were, First the Government by Kings,
afterward of Consuls, Dictators, Tribunes, Decemviri, one is, says he, which
was that of Emperors, when John was shown the Vision, which was the 6th, and
the other, faith he, is not yet come, which is that of Popes, which made the
7th Which Exposition I read in Heylin's Geography 40 years ago. Which
Government by Popes, has continued ever since Constantine the Emperor made the
Priest (...) Prince; And in that grace, the Empire's grace, disgraced ever
since. As Warner in his Albion's England rhimes it. And when Constantine the
Emperor aforesaid, gave Sylvester Bishop of Rome the Government of Italy (the
Beast) with ^he 10 Kingdoms, namely, France, Spain, Portugal, Ireland, England,
Scotland, Denmark, Swethland, Poland and Germany, (which 10 Kingdoms, are
signified by the 10 Horns of the Beast, and 10 Toes of the Image of the Man's
^eet, that were of Iron and Clay. Which Iron and Clay (as a Doctor of Divinity,
so called, told me) signify the Magisterial and Ministerial Power of them.)
There was a voice heard in the Air, auricularly to say over Constantinople, ^he
Metropolis of the Emperor, (as Fox in his Acts and Monuments has it.) Now is
the poison poured forth into ^he Church. And a learned King says thus in his
Book, To all Christian Kings, etc. The 10 Horns in Rev. 17.12. ^^gnifie us
Christian Kings, etc. And by the power of Italy (the seat of the Beast, upon
which Mystery Babylon ^^e great City, Rev. 17.1.5.18. rides with the 10
Kingdoms aforesaid, is Rome's power in Europe, Asia, Africa, and America,
achieved. So that there is scarce any Kingdom under Heaven, that there are not
some drunk with the Wine of her Fornication, in her belief of the Trinity,
Transubstantiation, Pardons, Purgatory before the Resurrection, Worshipping of
Images, and Pope's Supremacy, etc. forbidding to Marry, keeping of Lents,
forcing of Tithes, and many other departings from the Faith, besides her
Whore-houses she allows for them that dwell in her own City, and others. Now
will I speak of the Happiness which the Saints shall enjoy in these two Cities,
and upon the Earths where they shall be placed. One of the Earths being the
Earth that is now. 2 Pet 3.7. which was made to be inhabited, and where Israel
shall be saved: for thus says the Lord that created the Heavens; God himself
that formed the Earth, and made it, he has established it, he created it not
in vain, he formed it to be inhabited: And commands all the ends of the Earth
to look unto him and be saved thereon, Esaias. 44 17, 22. And this agrees with
Dan. 7.27. where it is written, that the kingdom and dominion, and the
greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven shall be given to the people of
the Saints of the most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, (when the
time comes) and all dominions shall serve and obey him, or rather it, the
Original signifying it or him, Dan. 7.23, 24, 26, 27. For thus Daniel was
informed, ver. the 7th of the fourth Beast, being made to know the
Interpretation thereof, which I have proved to be the Roman Monarchy: out of
which Monarchy, namely, out of one of them Kingdoms (signified by the 10 Horns,
of which I have given an account, shall proceed a little Horn, That is to say,
an underling King which shall wax exceeding great toward the South, and
toward the East, and toward the pleasant Land, whereby we may conclude, that
he goes from a Country that is North-west, to the pleasant Land wherein
Jerusalem is placed. For upon that Land is the little Horn called Gog-Magog, to
have his overthrow, and there to be broken without hand, that is, by the 6
Plagues that God will plead with him. For God will call for a sword against him
through all his Mountains, which are the Mountains of Israel, Ezekiel 38.8. Every
man's sword shall be against his Brother in his hand, and will plead with him
with Pestilence, and with Blood, and overflowing Rain, great Hailstones, Fire
and Brimstone, without a Comma at the word Fire, as I have written it, are the
words translated by Tindall, so that I conceive it shall be Fire made of
Brimstone. This is the overthrow of Gog-Magog, who shall be seduced ( S ducam
te Jerome's Bible reads it) led about from the North parts, to the Mountains of
Israel, there to take a prey and spoil, and turn his hand upon the desolate
places that have a long time lain wast, but are then inhabited by the people of
Israel, ver. 12.14, 22. chap. 39.1, 4. Rev. 19.17, 18. Dan. 8.9. chap. 11.40,
41, 44 For tidings out of the East, into the North, shall trouble him, who is
also called King of the North, Chetham, Lucifer, The Lion out of his
entanglements, The proud man of the Caldeans, ( Spoilers it should have been
translated) who come all for violence; their Horses are swifter than Leopards;
they come from far; they sup up the East Wind, (in the Margent) their saces
shall look toward the East, (and therefore come not from Caldea) to fell the
trees of Lebanon. Hab. 2.17. Esaias. 7.14, 8. He is also called the little Horn
with courtecus eyes: oculis humanis, Junius and Tremelius read it, in the 7th
of Daniel. The little Hori with a fierce countenance and wise, in the 8th of
Daniel. Both the Horns signify but one person, who springs from Javan, who was
Father of Chetham, out of whose Country Alexander the Great went, 1 Maccabees
1.1. Rome also bears that name, Dan. 11.30. Chetham also was the Father of
Brute, who brought the Britains into Great Britain; for Chetham begat Saturn;
Saturn, Jupiter; Jupiter, Dardanus; Dardanus, Tros; Tros is he who built Troy,
in remembrance of whom London was formerly called Troynobant, which is all one
with Troynovant; Tros begat Assarracus; Assarracus, Capys; Capys, Erychteus;
Erychteus, Anchyses; Anchyses, Eneas; Eneas, Pesthumus; Pesthumus, Brule, who
built Troynobant, and probably brought Troy Weights hither, as William the
Conqueror coming from Haver ^grace hither, brought Avoir du Poi^ Weights from
that Town with him. Thus Brute, who brought the Britain^ Worshippers of the
Goddess Britona (as Sheringham tells us) into this Country, called Albion from
Albion the Son of Neptune, (as Warner tells us, from whom I learnt Brute's
Generation) Neptune was the Son of Saturn, as the Dictionaries tell us, and so
we are descended from Chetham and Javan as aforesaid. This Brute is said to
suppress the State of the Albinists, huge Giants fierce and strong, the chief
of which stands pictured in Guild hall in London, whose Title was Gog-Magog,
which is as much as to say, the Protector of Magog. And I suppose upon this
occasion: Brute having conquered this Island, with the assistance of his Cousin
Corenius, and his Allies, descended of the Trijans which were fled into Italy
after the destruction of Troy about the Coasts of Venice, as I have read it,
and so mingled their Language with that People, which makes it differ a little
from the Welsh Language, brought in with Brute. This Brute or Brutus (of which
Name there was a Noble Family in Rome, and so the likelier to be true) at his
Death left the South part of this Island to his Son Locrin, called of him
Loegria; The North part thereof beyond Humber, to his Son Albinact, called
Albania; The West part thereof beyond Severn, to his Son Camber, called of him
Cambria; And Cornwall to his Daughter whom Corineus had married, called of him
Cornwall. And in their days a King called Humber came with a Fleet of Ships
into the River, now called Humber, and landed on the Northside thereof: King
Albanact gave him battle, and was worsted; whereupon King Locrine went down and
fought him nigh to the River aforesaid, and overthrew him there, and in that
River was Humber the King drowned, and therefore called Humber. This King
Locrine aforesaid married the Daughter, some say the Niece of Humber, I suppose
his Heir, and begat a Daughter on her called Sabrine; But the Daughter of
Corineus, King Locrine's Wife, with an Army of Cornish Men, gave him battle
near the River Severn, and overthrew him there, and drowned Sabrina in Sabrina
fluvius, called Severn to this day. And the better to bring and keep the
Kingdom in subjection to her Son Madan the lawful Heir of Locrine, and her
Father Corineus, who threw down Gog-Magog at the Clift of Dover (called
therefore the Downfall of Gog-Magog) erected two Statues, the one of Gog-Magog,
who is pictured with his Bow and long Staff; the other of Corineus, with his
Halberd in his hand, in the chief Hall of the Kingdom, th^^ now is called Guild
hall, (agreeing with the Records of the City of London, as I have been told,)
as Oliver the Protector so called, after his overthrowing the Scots, hung up
the Scots Ensigns that he had taken from them, (th ^^ he might thereby the
better get up and ride in the Saddle of the Kingdom) in Westminster Hall, the
chief Hall (...) the Kingdom. We read of a Gog who is said to be the chief
Prince of Meshech and Tuball, Ezekiel. 38.2, 3, 14, 18, (...) chap. 39.1, 11. A.
Mondy in his Book presented to the Lord Mayor and his Brethren, in the year
1611. says, the Samothes the sixth Son of Japhet, called by Moses, Meshech,
according to our Translation, but by Jerome's, Mos^^ pronounced by the Jews,
Sheth, in the last syllable thereof, as a Scholar told me. It appears to me
that Samet^^ and Moshech is all one person, for the Jews use to shorten Names,
as Aram turned into Ram, Matthew 1.3, 4. Ruth 19. and Sheth, the last syllable of
Mesheth, by inversion of letters, turned into These, the last syllable of
Samothes aforesaid, which Samothes, he says, had all the Country between the
River of Rhine and the Pyrenean Mountains for (...) portion. And Tubal
(according to T^rapha) had Spain. So that this Land wherein we dwell, according
to Ho^^ Scriptures and Chronicles, appears to me to be the Land of Magog, and
the Language we now speak is the Langua^^ (...) Magog. Magog had a Language,
Genesis 10 5. and no likelihood of its being lost. And France and Spain are the
(...) Kingdoms (as I suppose) that Ezekiel. 38.2, 3 speaks of. And I no more think
that the Language we speak is the Saxon Language, as some account it, or the
Gallick as others, than that Gog-Magog Hills in Cambridge shire (whereon
Higmon-Gog's Yard, as the Countryman told me is, that was at Plow by them,
which Yard is environed with a great double Wall, wherein Gog-Magog lies
pictured, and to great admiration that it keeps its figure, and is not marred,
and within two or three Furlongs of that place, as I guess it, I have not
lately seen it, there is a round Hill thrown up wherein Hogmon Gog is said to
bury his Wife with a shovel,) came from those places with the Saxons Conquers,
which are descended, as Warner in his Albions England tells us, from Jupiter
after this manner. The Saxons which in these descents derive from Gods and Men,
Jove, Minos, Geta, Flockwild, Flyn, Freodwolph, Freoloph, Woden, each as I name
them other's Son. This Jove or Jupiter aforesaid, was the Son of Saturn; who
was the Son of Chetbam; who was the Son of Javan aforesaid. The Normans also
came of Javan aforesaid. For thus William the Conqueror told his Soldiers here
at his Landing in England:

You come, said he, among the English Pikes to hew you Honors out, Howbeit of
more hardy Foes no passed Fight has sped you, Since Rollo to your now abode,
with Bands victorious led you, Or Turchus, Son to Troilus, in Scithia zato bred
you; As Warner in his Albions England rhimes it. This Troilus aforesaid was the
Son of Priamus that lost Troy to the Grecians. Priamus was the Son of Laomedon;
who was the Son of Ilus; who was the Son of Tros; who was the Son of
Erichtonius; who was the Son of Dardanus, says Swan's measuring Reed; who was
the Son of Jupiter; who was the Son of Saturn; who was the Son of Chetham; who
was the Son of Javan, as aforesaid. Thus being descended from Chetham by Albion
the Son of Neptune, that conquered this Island, from whom it was called Albion.
And from Brute that brought the Britains hither. And from the Romans that
Julius Caesar and other Roman Captains and Popes sent and brought hither. And
from the Saxons that Hengist brought hither. And from the Normans that William
the Conqueror brought hither. I see no reason but that Balaam in his Prophecy
of the Ships that come from the Coasts of Chetham, Numb. 24.24. did point out
this Country where we dwell. I shall therefore speak no more at this time of
the little Horn or Gog-Magog that God will overthrow by assisting his Army of
Saints, who shall have a resurrection, To come with God and Christ upon the
Mount of Olives, 1 Cor. 15.22, 23. Zech. 9.13, 15. Ezekiel. 39 4. Rev. 19 14, 19,
21. That so the kingdom, and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under
the whole heaven may be given to the Saints, and they possess the kingdom for
ever; but will speak what they shall enjoy in the first and better
resurrection. Rev. 20.6. Heb 11.35. First, their natural bodies shall be made
spiritual bodies, 1 Cor. 15 44. without corruption, ver. 42. being born of the
Pedigree of Christ, ver. 49. Children of Christ, Heb. 2.13. Isai. 8.18. Members
of his body, and of his flesh, and of his bones, as the Wife of Adam was made
of her Husband, Ephesians. 5.25, 28, 30, 32. Genesis 2.21, 22, 23, 24. And Sons of
Abraham, being blessed, as being descended of him, Genesis 12.3. because we shall
be the Children of Christ. For if we be Christ's seed, then are we Abraham's
seed, and heirs of the blessing promised to us by God in him, being heirs of
Abraham, Romans 4.12, 13, 14 Gal. 3.29. For after this manner the Saints shall
derive their Pedigree from him: Abraham begat Isaac, he Jacob, he Judas, he
Phares, he Efrom, he Aram, he Aminadab, he Naashon, he Salmon, he Boos, he
Obed, he Jesse, he David, (there is 14 Generations, as Matthew counts them) he
Solomon, he Rehoboam, he Abia, he Asia, he Jehosaphat, he Joram, he Hosias, he
Joatham, ^e Achaz, he Ezekias, he Manasses, he Amon, he Josias, he Jeconias,
(there is 14 Generations, as Matthew counts ^tem) he Salathiel, he Zorcbabel, he
Abiud, he Eliachim, he Azor, he Sadoch, he Achim, he Eliud, he Eleazar, he
Matthan, he Jacob, he Joseph, he was the begetter of Mary, by whom was begotten
Christ, (there is the other 14 Generations that Matthew speaks of) Matthew. 1.17.
Luke 2.17. And he is to be the begetter of the Saints from the lead, who by
that doing to them, making them thereby partakers of his divine and humane
Nature, will be his Children; for he is to be Pater futuri seculi, as Jerome's
Bible reads it, that is, Father of the future kind, Isa. 9 6. 2 Pet. ^.4. In
all from Abraham 43 Generations; for by Christ's being begotten from the dead
by God, according as it is written in Acts 13.33. Thou art my Son, that day
have I begotten thee. His Father Adam's Nature was not done away, for he was
flesh and bones, as he said himself after he was so begotten, Luke 24.39. And
yet he was a spiri^ual Body, or quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. 15.44, 45. And so are
we to be partakers of his flesh and bones, as aforesaid. Now that he was made
of the seed of David, as Paul bids Timothy remember, and also was the branch of
Jehovah, ^s Isai. 4.2. chap 53.1. having a Father and Mother that begat him,
who was also the chief born of every creature. Remember the word Creature, Col.
1.15. No other having his begetting from God but himself, John 1.14, 18. Hear I
^ray what Luke says, chap. 1.31, 35. as Castalian Translates it, Ac scito, te
utero concepturam, parituramque filium quem ^esum nomine vocabis. Is erit
magnus, and supremi filius vocabitur: eique dabit Dominus Deus solium Davidis,
ejus Parentis, ^que in Jacobeorum domum regnabit in perpetuum, nec ullus ejus
regni finis erit. At Maria quo pacto fiet istud, inquit An^elo cum ego virum
nesciam? Et ille respondens: Te Spiritus Sanctus, inquit, invadet, and supremi
vis inumbrabit: itaque ^anctus iste partus dicetur Dei filius. In English thus:
And know, said he to Mary, thou art about to conceive, and a^^ut to beget a
Son, whom thou shall call by name Jesus: he shall be great, and shall be called
the Son of the Highest; and ^e Lord God will give him the Throne of his Father
David, and he shall reign over the House of Jacob for ever: neither shall ^ere
be any end of his kingdom. But Mary said to the Angel, How can that thing be
done, seeing I will not know a man as ^et. And be answering, said, The holy
Spirit shall enter the house, ( Beza reads it, Super veniet in te; That is,
Come upon, ^^to thee. It also signifies to leap upon, as the male does the
female) and the working ( thrusting back the Scholar's Com^^^ion Englisheth the
Greek word, that is translated Power) of the most High shall shadow (our
English Church reads (...) overshadow) thee. And so that reverend thing
begotten by God, shall be called the Son of God. Now seeing ^^od was his
Father, and Mary his Mother, he must needs be God-man, (one person in one skin,
not two persons (...) one skin, by birth,) and so continues, having no
corruption in him, he being made perfect through sufferings, of ^^at
imperfection that came to him from Adam by his Mother Mary. Heb. 2.10, 11.
chap. 5.2, 3, 5, 9. chap. 7.27. (...) she had brought forth a Woman-child, she
must have laien in the blood of her purefying 60 days. (The Woman ^as first in
the Transgression) but seeing she brought forth a Man-child, she lay in the
blood of her purefying but ^^o days, Lev. 12 2, 5. No longer than from
Christmas to Candlemas. Therefore a Man child is not conceived so much sin, as
the Woman child is. The next thing I shall observe to you is, That whosoever
shall forsake Father or Mo^^er, Wife or Children, Houses or Lands, through
persecution, for Christ's name's sake, and the Gospel, now in this World; (...)
shall therefore receive an hundred sold of Brethren, Sisters, Mothers, ( Beza,
in his Annotations upon the Greek Testa^ent, says thus: In tribus vetustis
scriptum legimus, and Patrem, and Matrem; That is, in three old Copies we read,
^^d Father, and Mother) and Children, and Lands, and Eternal life. But many
that are first, (in the parting with those ^^ings) shall be last rewarded, said
Christ: and many that are last, shall be first rewarded, as he explains it by a
Para^^e, Mark 10.29, 30, 31. Matthew. 10.27, 30. chap 20.1.16. Our Savior
Christ, to comfort the twelve Apostles, ^^hich had forsaken all those things,
and followed him; said thus unto them, That in the Resurrection, ( Regeneration
A SQUARE OF 10000 FURLONGS
it is translated) when the Son of Man shall sit on the Throne of his Glory,
they also should sit upon twelve Thrones, judg^^ the twelve Tribes of Israel.
And the rest of the Saints are also to reign with Christ after that manner,
though not (...) judge the twelve Tribes aforesaid, yet to judge the rest of
the World, and have a share in judging the Angels, 1 Con^ 6.2, 3. Rev. 20.4.
Psalm. 149.6, 9. And Paul said, Acts 17. 30, 31. That the times of Men's
rebellion, God now despise^ because he has appointed a day, in which he will
judge the World in righteousness, by that man whom he raised from the dea^ And
if the World shall be judged by him, then the Saints shall likewise have a
share therein. For Christ says, Th^^ he that over-commeth, he will grant to
sit with him upon his Throne, even as he also had overcome, and was sat down
with his Father upon his Throne. For the Saints are not to sit with Christ upon
his Throne for nothing. The Justices (...) not upon the Throne with the Judge,
for nothing, They have a power, and the Mother of James and John, the Sons of
Zebede, desired that her two Sons might sit with Christ, the one at his right
hand, and the other at his le^^ hand, in his Kingdom. Matthew. 4.21. chap. 20.20,
21. Believe it, courteous Reader, that Saviors shall come u^ upon the Mount of
Sion to judge the Mount of Esau, when the Kingdom shall be the Lords. Obadiah
21. And believe also the Son of God's words, That the Saints shall have an
hundred sold for their forsaking Father, Mother, Wife Children, Houses, Lands
in the world to come, as he promised. What though a Saint has but one Wife in
the wor^ to come, yet if she be an hundred fold better in respect of time and
goodness, than her that he parted with: Christ is as good as his word. But
those Translations which read they shall have them now in this time, do
contradict experience. For many forsake Father, Mother, etc. for Christ's sake,
that cannot have them here. Therefore those Translation that say that they
shall have them now in this life or time are to be corrected. Again, That
saying of Christ which he explained, by a Parable, That many that are last in
forsaking, shall be first rewarded; and many that are first i^ forsaking, shall
be last rewarded, Matthew. 19.27, 30. chap. 20.1, 8. quite overthrows such a
meaning, as if they should have them before the resurrection, and before the
time comes that Peter and the rest of the forsakers, an^ such as shall be
beheaded for the witness of Jesus receive their rewards, and sit upon Thrones,
and judgment is give^ unto them to act and do as it is written for all his
Saints, Rev. 20.1, 4, 6. Psalm. 149. Dan. 7.9, 26. Neither do^^ that saying of
Christ in Mark 12.25. That when they shall rise from the dead, they neither
marry, nor are given in ma^riage, but are as the Angels of God: contradict that
saying of his spoken before in Mark 10.29, 30, 31. That they should have an
hundred fold of Wives and Children in the resurrection, as aforesaid; for the
Sadduces that believe no resurrection, Mark 12.18. supposed that they had
gotten Christ upon the hip for his asserting, that in the World to c^^^ his
Followers should have an hundred fold of Wives and Children, when as they could
tell him of a Woman that had ^^ven Husbands, which they believed by the law of
Moses were all to be married to her that had buried them; if the^ be a
resurrection, which they believed not, as aforesaid, not understanding the
Scriptures, how that Death (as P^^ tells us) loses a woman from the law of
her Husband; so that if her Husband be dead, she is at liberty to be marrie^ to
another man, and so shall she not be bound to marry any of them which she had
outlived. Romans 7.2. He said therefore unto them that brought this tale unto
him, That there was a woman that was married to a man that di^^ and left no
issue behind him, and he had six brethren that married her to fulfill the law
of Moses, who also died a^^ left no issue behind them, and afterward the woman
died, and they asking him whose wife of them she should Fo^^ be. As may be
understood by their answer which they received from him. For Christ told them,
that in the Re^^rection they cannot die any more, for they are like the Angels
which die not, Heb. 2.9. And therefore they marry n^^ nor are given in marriage
to raise up seed unto their Brother. The word First also should have been in
Romans 13. (...) and in 1 Timothy 2. I know it is commonly understood, as if the
Angels married not; but that is their mistake: (...) to what end then should
they have seed? Heb. 2.16. And they that think that the Angels do not Marry,
h^^ not, I suppose, consulted that place of Scripture in the 4th. and 5th. of
Revelations, where it is said, that the (...) Beasts ( living Creatures it
might better have been translated) with six wings apiece, and the twenty-four
Elders wh^^ Kings among them Angels, known to be so by their Crowns, (for David
was none of them, he being not ascended into (...) Heavens, Acts 2.34. He and
the rest of the Saints must first enjoy a Resurrection, which is the first
Resurrection or else they are miserable, and their Faith was vain, 1 Cor.
15.12, 16, 18, 20, 23, 24. Rev. 20.4, 5, 6.) said to (...) Lamb, which is the
root of David, (Mark that, the root of David) thou wast slain, and have
redeemed us to God by (...) blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and nation,
and people: which words they could not say, unless there was ^^ting among them.
And for proof that there are Princes, and Kings, and Languages in Heaven, see
these pla^^ of Scripture, Col. 1.16. Dan. 8.16. chap. 10.5, 6, 13.1 Cor. 13.1.
Now that the Saints shall have Fathers a^^ Mothers, Wives and Children, read
Ps. 128. 2 Cor. 6.18. 2 Pet. 1.4. For God in that day will be their Father, and
they shall his Sons and Daughters. Christ will be their Father, he shall be
called Pater futuri seculi, The Father of the ^u^^ generations, Isa 9.6. For
those that are for signs, and for wonders, like Christ, God will appoint him to
be the^^ Father, for they are to be his Children, chap. 8.18. For as we have
born the kind of the earthly Adam, so we must (...) bear the kind of the
heavenly Adam; for flesh and blood only cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven,
1 Cor. 15.49, (...) being made members of his body, of his flesh, and of his
bones, Ephesians. 5.30. and by that means we shall be the seed Abraham and Sarah,
Isaac and Rebecca; for in Isaac shall thy seed be called, Gen 21.12. They were
the Fathers and Mothers of Christ, and consequently will be our Fathers and
Mothers, for Christ their Son, bone of their bone, (...) flesh of their flesh,
will beget us from the dead, and make us thereby bone of his bones, and flesh
of his flesh, as aforesaid according to the working whereby he is able to
subdue all things unto himself, Ephesians. 3.21. For as the Father has life in
^^^self (without a Wife) to beget from the dead, so has the Son likewise, John
5.18, 29. I proceed now to give surd^^ proof that the Saints shall have
Children, Houses, and Lands, and Eternal life, as Christ has said. But before
I (...) that, I think it convenient to tell you, That the ^45 Psalm does prove
that Christ shall have a Wife, and Daugh^^^^ and Sons. And concerning the
Queen, the 10th. verse says thus:

O Daughter, take good heed, incline and give good ear, Thou must forget thy
kindred all, and fathers house most den^^ And in the 16th. verse of the
Singing-Psalms it also says thus:

Instead of Parents left, (O Queen thy chance so stands) Thou shall have Sons
whom thou may set, as Princes in all I (...) And they that think this Psalm
to be meant of Christ, and his Church, because New Jerusalem is called the
Bride, Lamb's wife, Rev. 21.9, 10. I think, have but little discerning in this
matter. For if Prince Jesus give a gift of inheritance, Ezekiel. 45.7, 8. Ps.
16.10. to any of his sons, the inheritance thereof shall be his sons, it shall
be their posse^ by inheritance: But if he give a gift of his inheritance to one
of his servants, then it shall be his to the year of libe^^ after, it shall
return to the Prince, but his inheritance shall be his sons for them. Now this
Prince, Expositors, (...) modern and ancient, says Greenhill in his Exposition
of Ezekiel, is Prince Jesus, who is called King, and Prince, (...) 27.24, 25.
one shepherd, verse. 24. John 10.16. And the servants of this Prince, are
members of the Bride, the (...) wife aforesaid, for they are faithful, Psalm.
101.6, 7. but not sons, as aforesaid. For these sons which are to receive the
Inheritance, prophesied by Ezekiel, chap. 46.16, 17, as aforesaid; He was not
to see, till he had made his Soul an offering for sin. But the promise is, that
when he had made his Soul an offering, etc. then he should see his seed, Isai.
53.10 Seeing therefore that Christ, the Head of the Body, the Church, Col.
1.18. shall have a wife and children, it cannot be denied, but that the Body,
his Members, shall have wives and children; and to this agree the words of the
Prophets. Psalm. 128. Psalm. 1.3. Ezekiel. 27.25, 26. And that they shall have
houses, and lands, see Ezekiel. 45.1, 4, 5. chap. 48. Isai. 54.1, 3. chap. 45.18.
Jer. 31.38, 40. And then will be fulfilled Christ's promises which he made in
his Sermon in the Mount, and no good thing wanting to those that lead a godly
life, Matthew. 5.3, 8, 12. Psalm. 34.10. And the Jews shall have a Temple to
worship God in; Into which, no stranger uncircumcised in heart, nor
uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter, of any stranger that is among the children
of Israel, says the Lord God. And the Levites that are gone away far from him,
when Israel went astray after their Idols, they shall also bear their iniquity:
yet they shall be Ministers in the Temple, having charge at the gates of the
house: They shall slay the burnt-offering, and the sacrifice for the people.
But the Priests the Levites, the Sons of Zadock, that kept the charge in God's
sanctuary, when the children of Israel went astray from him. They shall enter
therein to offer unto God, the fat and the blood, says the Lord God. Ezekiel.
44.9, 15. Now this that is written by Ezekiel, is not contradicted by Paul, 2
Cor. 3. For Paul does not speak there of the Law being done away, but of Moses
glory in the shining of his face being done away. And he there prefers the
Gospel ministered by him and Timothy to the Saints of Corinth, which was made
known by them, (not with Ink in Tables of Stone, as the Ten Commandments were
written, which Moses was the Ministrator of) above the law, for that their
Gospel was written in the fleshie tables of their hearts with the Spirit of the
living God, they being enriched by him in all wisdom, utterance and knowledge;
even as the testimony of Christ was confirmed in them, Mark 16.15, 17, 18. So
that they came behind other Churches in no gift, Acts 1.3. 1 Cor. 1.1, 2, 5, 7.
Of the like import also is the 7th. Chapter of the Hebrews, which prefers the
Priesthood of Christ, before the Priesthood of Aaron. Because Christ was made a
Priest with an Oath, but Aaron without an Oath. Christ, by reason of Eternal
life, has an unchangeable Priesthood; but Aaron, by reason of death, had not.
Therefore (as in the 12th. verse) the Priesthood of Christ being put above (the
Greek word is Metathesis) the Priesthood of Aaron. There is made of necessity a
preferrence of the Law belonging to Christ's Priesthood, the new Covenant
spoken of, chap. 8.18. which is above the Law belonging to Aaron's Priesthood?
ver. 11. What shall I say more in confirmation of this Doctrine, Christ
preached it up in his first Sermon in the Mount; Think not, said he, I am come
to destroy the Law, or the Prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill
it by my doing and teaching. For I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass,
one jot, or one tittle, shall in no-wise pass from the law to be observed, for
(the Greek word is an) all the Law shall be fulfilled. Whosoever therefore
shall break one of these least Commandments, which the Law commands to be
done, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of
heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach them least Commandments, the same
shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven. For I say unto you, said he,
That except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees in teaching the Law, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom
of heaven. Ye have heard, said he, that it was said by them Scribes and
Pharisees of old time, Thou shall not kill: and whosoever shall kill, shall be
in danger of the judgment. There was all that they taught about killing. But I
say unto you, said Christ, That whosoever is angry with his brother without a
cause, shall be in danger of the judgment. Which is as much punishment as they
taught for killing their brother without a cause. And whosoever shall say unto
his brother without a cause, Racha shall be in danger of the counsel: but
whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of Hellfire. Therefore,
said he, if thou bring thy gift to the Altar, to be offered by the Priests, and
there remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee: Leave there thy gift
before the Altar, and go thy way: first be reconciled to thy brother, and then
come and offer thy gift, Matthew. 5.1.17.24 And in his Sermon in the Temple,
probably his last Sermon that he preached there, He said unto the multitude and
his disciples, The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat: All therefore
whatsoever they bid you observe of Moses's law, that observe and do, Matthew.
23.1, 2, 3. I think I have spoken enough of this matter at this time, I
therefore will give an answer to them that would know the Signs when the times
of the restitution of all things shall begin.

IF you would know of me some Signs, when Jesus Christ will come
To the valley of Josaphat, and give to Men their doom.
When Sion's City's built so large, as by me is set down;
And that the Lord therein does dwell, which is her chief renown.
And that the Saints are divine born, do eat and drink the best:
Adorned like Kings, do judge the World: with Seed by wives are blessed.
Then I Will you tell what I have read shall happen before then,
War, Plague, Famine, Fear, Pit, and Snare, shall thin the World of Men.
Heaven powers do shake, the Sun turns black, the Moon blood, and I find,
Heaven Stars do fall like Figs from trees, shak'd with a mighty Wind.
The Mountains melt, Mount Ol'vet cleaves to East, West, North, and South,
Such as fight Christ are killed by the two-edged sword of his Mouth.
Before those glorious times begin, wherein the Saints always
In holiness without fear serve, their God both night and day.
The Mountains of Israel yield fruit, and food does grow upon
The hills, and dales, and valleys, and upon the Mount Sion.
The Son of Strengths, with twelve times twelve thousand chaste ones appears,
Whose presence in that Holy place, is gained by the tears
Of those that weeping to Sion that Mount do ask the way,
And there a Covenant with the Lord do make to last for ay.
These hundred forty four thousand are men bought from the Earth,
In whose mouths there was found no guile, and therefore they go forth.
With the Lamb wheresoe'er he goes, and they have also right,
To be before God's Throne, and there to serve him day and night.
And many such are then in Heaven, when Rome shall be no more,
And Hallelujahs sing to God for judging that great Whore.
These first-fruit men are clothed with Robes long, pure, trim, white, and
fine,
Procured by the blood of God, and they as Stars do shine.
But lo, a Dragon great and red does wait, Christ to devour;
But then the Son unto God's Throne is caught up that same hour.
And then in Heaven a fight is fought by Mich'el and his Men,
Who throw the Dragon down from thence, not to come there again.
For neither Satan nor his Spirits are able to prevail,
Against Mich'el and his Angels bold, which make them for to quail.
The field they win by the Lambs blood, and by his Test'ment-word:
Which makes them careless of their lives, not fearing Satan's sword.
When as that Satan sees himself cast down upon the Earth,
Then he against the Isr'elites in malice marches forth.
But they from him do flee as fast, as Eagles with great wings;
Then he on the Sea-sand does stand, and thence a Sea-flood flings,
After them in their flight, that so he may cause them be drowned,
But his intent prevented is by a gulf in the ground.
Before Jehovah Shammah's built, where Christ and Christians dwell,
A thousand years before New Salem comes down from Heaven I tell.
A Nor-west King of Japhet's line, does march and conquer Babel,
Roma, Palestine, Egypt, and rules Phut, and Cush the Sable.
Paras, Gomer, Mesheth, Tubal, the Togarmites, and Gaul,
With all the Nations under Heaven upon this mighty Ball.
The Princes of Europe burn Rome, the last Pope he is slain,
Whose wondered at by the whole World, because he lives again.
And open his mouth in blasphemies, and proves an angry rod,
To those that will not worship him in that same house of God,
That placed at Jerusalem is, the Holy City called,
For in a part of that same house, as God he is installed.
Where he does sit and vaunt himself, above all Gods to be:
And the false Prophet, fire and stars, makes to come down from the Sky.
And other Miracles he does, the Nations to deceive,
For he an Image makes to speak, that they a mark receive,
In their right hand or else forehead, for therein does he fix,
To be seen the print of his name, Six hundred sixty six,
To honor him as God it is, that killed was with sword,
And so fall from the God of Gods, and Christ his Son and Word;
If not, they killed must be with Sword, this is it that he says,
And then it will be manifest, who patience has and faith.
But whosoever takes the mark of him, that killed was with sword,
Shall drink the wine of God's fierce wrath, this is God's Angel's word.
And from Gog's mouth goes like a Frog, does Wonders not the least,
For he over dried Euphrates brings, the Kingdoms of the East,
Unto Jerus lem, not Rome, where Gog Magog will dwell,
For to the first, not to the last, that Flood's an obstacle.
And there, in Mauzim he adores a strange God, which his Sire,
Never knew with gold and precious stones, provoking God to ire,
Whom he regards not, but Women he lusts after much,
And to ascend above the Stars, in heart his thoughts are such.
And to change Times and Laws, his thoughts are fixed much upon,
And he has power to do so till three years and half be gone.
In all which time he makes to cease the daily sacrifice,
And heads an Host against Jesus Christ, when he comes from the Skies.
O Lion raised from thy dark house, which have the snorting horse,
To stand against the chiefest Prince, this is not thy best course;
For he with six Plagues will the strike, Blood, Pestilence, and Fire,
Brimstone, Hailstones, and great Flood-rain, as tokens of his ire.
Then dead Kings from the Earth shall speak this Speech to thee in scorn,
How art thou fallen, O Lucifer, from Heaven, thou Son of Morn?
Lo thus the fierce-look'd Man that was so prudent, mighty, and,
Would fight against the King of Kings, is broken without hand.
After that he was grown great, in twenty three hundred days,
Was beaten by the Cedar-branch, and so has lost the Bays.
For he an Army has that throw stones with a Sling full well,
The Sword cannot hurt them, and they are called, chosen, faithful.
And then the Lord an Egypt-flood does make there with broad streams,
Wherein no Galley goes with Oars, nor Ship sails in those Leams.
And then a whirlwind, with great rain, and hailstones fly so fa^^
The tacklings are loosed, that they cannot strengthen the Mast.
There Is an end of the Ships of Chetham, that afflict Ashur and that afflict
Eber, etc.
Two Prophets two and forty months oppose the Man of sin,
Who is the eighth, and of the seventh sort, chiefest ruler in
The City Rome, before it is burnt, and wept over by Kings,
Saying alas, when Heaven is glad, and Hallelujah sings.
In Cuds they preach, where Christ our Lord Jesus was crucified;
And their words true believed by few, by signs are justified:
For if that any man will hurt them in their Prophecy,
By fire that comes out of their mouth, thereof they are sure to dye
And they have power to hinder rain twelve hundred sixty days
And to turn waters into blood if the World will not God praise
And they also the Earth can smite with Plagues both great an^ small,
Whilst that Euphrate's Angels fight with head and tail and all.
By their Horses, whose heads are like the heads of Lions fierce,
Out of whose mouths go fire and smoke, and brimstone that (...) pierce
Those men that have not God's seal in their foreheads, (...) that will
Persist in thefts and sorceries, and the Saints seek to kill.
An hour, a day, a month, a year, these Angels power does last,
And they the third part of bad men into death's lap do cast.
And five months power before this is given to Locusts for to sting
Such wicked men with grievous pains, but not to death th^^ bring,
After the third part of the Sun is smit, and eke the Moon,
And eke the Stars, that one third part of all their light is g^^.
Which Plague succeeds the Wormwood-drink, that kills many men,
And the burnt Mountain cast in the Sea, precedeth that Pl^^^^ then
The third part of the Sea proves blood, that one in three do dy^
As well in Ships, as those that in the bottom thereof lie.
And before this fire Hail and Blood are cast upon the Earth,
Which burn the third of trees and grass, and so begins a dunk
Which does increase to such a price, I think I reckon well;
Barley is for a Noble sold, Wheat one pound a Bushel;
And Oil proves scarce, and Wine proves scant, God's (...) none can control;
Because the Drunkard cannot get Wine, he then begins to b^^^.
When these Prophets have said and done what they ought s^^ and do:
Then he that was 'live, dead, and lives, does kill them like foe.
And they dead are not put in Graves, that all men may th^^ see;
Who'f late were sad, but then are glad, 'cause from them th^^ are free.
John then and there does prophecy before Nations, Kings, (...) People,
In the Quire which his Reed laid out, and Pope-Gods 's in (...) Steeple.
For he that said what if I will, he tarry till I come,
Will make it known he still does live, and it is believed by s^^^
For Heylin his Geography does to this purpose say,
John went alive into his Grave, and there himself did lay.
As Page five hundred thirty sev'nth does witness, where (...) sed
Some learned Men do think he sleeps, and that he is not d^^^
Now of the sev'n last Plagues I tell, that are to Angels g^^^
By one of the four Seraphims, chief Ministers in heaven;
Whose office it is night and day the service to begin,
In the Temple of that fashion Moses Temple was in.
With a great Vessel made of Glass, and other things I count,
Which Moses saw when he with God was on the bur^^ Mount.
But whilst the Angels take the Plagues, the strength of them is so,
In the Temple where they are given, no Man can therein go.
Then Moses, and Christ Jesus sing, and many more accord,
Thou only art holy, O God, who fears not thee, O Lord.
For then God with a great voice bids the sev'n Angels go forth,
And pour the Vials of the wrath of God upon the Earth.
The first comes then, and a noisome and grievous Sore does fall
Upon the Men that on the Man of Sin, as God do call.
The second Vial makes the Sea as dead Man's blood to be,
Then every living Soul does dye that is in the great Sea.
The third Angel's Vial does make waters to drink not good,
For in the Fountains and Rivers, they are turned into Blood.
The fourth Angel's Vial does make the Sun scorch Men with fire,
Yet they blaspheme the Name of God, and from Sin don't retire.
The fifth Angel's Vial does make the Pope-God's Kingdom dark;
And pain does make them gnaw their tongues, yet they goodwill not work.
The sixth Angel's Vial does make Euphrate's River dry,
That the East Kings in Mageddon may be there instantly.
The seventh Angel's Vial does make a great Earthquake and Hail,
That Cities fall, and Talent stones hit men, yet they do rail.
But before this, The Isr'elites and Jews shall ask the way
To Palestine and Sion Hill, and be found there that day.
When Magog's force, more swift than horse, shall make that Land to tremble,
And some to run, for fear o'Gun, and in the desert assemble.
For Magog grows exceeding great, as I do understand,
Toward the South, and to the East, and to the pleasant Land.
And when six thousand years are come since God the World did build;
That the great Sabbath is begun, my Signs are all fulfilled.
Which Verses I mean in the plain literal sense. And although Astronomers
declare in their Books that one Star is bigger than all the Globe of Earth and
Water, yet I believe them not. For, that John in his Revelation speaking of
things that must be hereafter, Rev. 4.1. which he saw in a Vision in Heaven,
when he was called up thither to that purpose, says thus, That lo there was a
great Earthquake, and the Sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the Moon
became as blood, and the Stars of heaven fell unto the Earth, even as a
Fig Tree casts her green Figs, when she is shaken of a mighty wind. And the
heaven departed as a scroll when it is rolled together, and every Mountain and
Island were moved out of their places. And the Kings of the earth, and the
great Men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty Men, and every bondsman, and
every freeman hid themselves in the dens and rocks of the mountains; And said
to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that
sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: For the great day of his
wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? Rev. 4.1, 2, 3. chap. 5.1, 6, 8.
chap. 6.12, 17. which Scriptures in the plain literal sense plainly confute
that opinion. And here I challenge any Astronomer whatsoever to render any
other meaning hereof (if he can) than the plain literal meaning. But if he be
not able, then let him believe what is therein written in the book that God
gave to the Lamb, chap. 5.1, 7. chap. 6.12, 17. which agrees with Christ's
words, Matthew. 24.29, 30. Luke 21.25, 27. and with Isai. 13.10, 11. and Joel
2.31. And if so many Stars fall to the earth, as there fall green figs to the
earth from a fig tree when she is shaken with a mighty wind, then multitudes of
Stars will fall to the earth; and probably some of them which are of the first
magnitude. For according to Bagwell, in his Mystery of Astronomy, which is
highly praised by John Booker and five others, he tells us that a Star of the
first or greatest magnitude, of which there are 15, that every one of them is
107 times bigger than all the Earth. Of the next degree 46, each of them 87
times bigger than all the Earth. Of the third sort 208, every one of them 22
times bigger, etc. Of the fourth sort 280, 54 times bigger, etc. Of the next
degree 221, 36 times bigger, etc. And of the least sort 55, which are set down
to be every one of them 88 (I suppose he meant 8) times bigger than all the
Earth. John Seller in his Atlas Coelestis, of the 6 degrees aforesaid says
thus of them, According to Ptolomy's computation, they amount to 1022. Pliny he
says, reckons them 1600, and the absolute number of all the Stars to be
innumerable, at least by humane calculation. And according to Tycho, and Boyer,
a Star of the first magnitude is (compared to the Earth) as 68 to 1. That is,
68 times bigger than the Earth. A Star of the second magnitude, is as 28 to 1.
The third sort for greatness, as 11 to 1. The fourth as 41 to 1. I suppose he
meant as 4 to 1. The fifth as 1/18 to 1. And the sixth as to 1. That is, three
times bigger than the Earth. See I pray how they differ. Bagwell aforesaid
says thus also, that some other of the ordinary Stars are much bigger than the
whole compass of the Earth, and that the least of all the Stars in that heaven,
are bigger than the Moon. Believe him who will, but I will not. For I read in
the Scripture of Truth, that God said let there be Lights in the firmament of
heaven to give light upon the earth: and it was so. God then made two great
Lights, the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the
night: he made also the stars, and set them in the firmament of heaven, Genesis
1.14, 15, 16, 17. Which foresaid Scripture enlightneth my understanding to
believe that the Sun or Moon are bigger than any of the Stars. And if there be
such a number of Stars, and that they be so many Worlds as Cardinal Cusanus,
and Jornandus Brunus affirm (This is set down in the Book (said to be made by
Bishop Wilkins, to prove that it is probable, there may be another habitable
World in the Moon) they will so cover the Earth, that the Kings of the Earth,
etc. sha'l not need to say to the Rocks and Mountains, Fall on us, and hide us
from the face of him that sits upon the Throne. When they are then hidden
with so many Worlds, probably some of them 107 times bigger than all the Earth.
And if their sayings be true, it will be impossible for the Kings of the Earth
and their Armies to make war against Christ and his Armies, which they will
do; as God's word declares. Rev. 19.9, 11, 19. And concerning the Sun's
bigness, it is so great, as a great Astronomer told me at Greenwich, that it is
impossible, if his words be true, that the Moon should shadow all the Sun from
all the Earth at one time, as Tycho affirms it cannot do; but he is therein
contradicted by the supposed Bishop aforesaid, who says, That the Diameter of
the Moon, for the most part, appears to be bigger than the Sun's; and also
says, That Tycho is therein singular, being opposed by Keplar, and all other
Astronomers; I say it is impossible that she should totally eclipse the Sun, if
she be less than the Earth 45 times, as Atlas Coelestis says she is, and that
the Sun is many Millions bigger than the Earth, as the Astronomer aforesaid
says he is.

And now Countryman, what do thou think of this bigness? The Astronomers
laugh at thee for thinking that the Sun is no bigger about than thy Cart-wheel:
I will tell thee what I think; and that is, That it is not so much about as the
Nave of the Wheel. But they tell us, that his distance proves him to be vastly
bigger than the Earth: Why so, Countreyman? there is no reason for them to say
so; for Lights appear biggest when they are farthest off. I remember that the
Fields men in Dullingham Field thought that they had seen a Scare-fire, that
is, an House in flames of fire, when it was nothing else but a Candle shone
through the glass upon the top of the Lord Gor^e's Chamber in Stechworth, a
mile or two off. And thou may take notice, that the Sun shows bigger when he
rises and sets, than at noon time of the day, when he is at the highest and
nighest to us. And thou may take (...) Hat, and prove this plainly. Suppose
the hole of thy Hat wherein thou put thy head, does signify the round
Earth. If thou measurest from the place right against the knot of thy Hatband,
to that part of the verge of the Hat that is nighest the knot, that part of
verge is nearer the knot than the other part of the verge is that is farthest
of from the knot: As for example; Suppose the hole in thy Hat be 8 Inches over,
and the verge of thy Hat be 4. If thou measurest from the knot aforesaid, to
that part of the brim that is nighest to it, it is but 4 Inches: but if thou
measurest to the farthest part of the brim, it is 12. Now suppose the Earth to
be round like a ball, as it is, if the Waters be measured with it, and that it
is about 8 thousand English miles thick, as I shall afterward demonstrate it
is, if I have occasion to write again of this subject. The Sun must needs be 8
thousand miles farther off from thee when he is right under thy feet, than when
he is right over thy head, as he does so move in 12 hours time to those that
live under the equinoctial line, and the Sun must needs be 4000 miles nearer at
high noonday when he is right over thy head, if he be but 10 miles off then,
than when he is at rising or setting; And although there is not 4000 miles
difference to us that live in 52 latitude, yet there is about 2000 miles
difference. Now I speak of the Sun's being about 10 miles distant from the
nearest place of the Earth to those; because I read in the Scriptures of Truth,
That the whole Earth was of one language, even of one speech. And it came to
pass, as they journied in the East Country, that they found a Plain in the
land of Shinar (I remember that I have read of a Caliph of Babylon that drew a
mighty great circle upon the Plain of Shinar, I cannot now spare time to look
in my books to find it, that I may tell you the bigness thereof, because the
Printer must have that I now write to day, and I must make all the have I can
to go into the Country a while to mind my husbandry there. Therefore bear with
me a little, if the things I write now be not well digested) and they dwelt
there. And they said one to another, Go too, let us make brick, and burn the^
thoroughly. And they had brick for stone, and slime had they for mortar. And they
said, Go too, let us build us a City and (...) Tower, whose top may reach unto
heaven, and let us solemnize us a name before we be divided abroad upon the
face of the whole earth. And the Lord came down to see the City and the Tower,
which the children of men builded. And the Lord said Behold, the people is one,
and they have all one language, and have begun to do this that they intended,
neither will they desist from their advice, for they will complete those things
they spoke of in the work. Genesis 11.1, 3, 7. if I hinder them not. Therefore the
Lord did there confound their Language, and the name of the City therefore was
called Babel, that is, i^ words at length, Babylon, i. e. confusion. ver. 9.
And now Astronomer, or whosoever thou be, that think Heaven o^^^ their
heads is above 10 miles from the Plain of Shinar, show me any other meaning of
this Scripture, if thou can? (...) not, I pray thee, the word of God be to
thee (as it was to them whose wisdom God threatened to destroy) like a book that
is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this I pray
thee: And he says, I cannot, for it is sealed. Isai. 29.11. Take pains I pray,
and open the seal, and mind more what it says, than what the Coperni^^^ say:
For they would make thee believe that the World that thou live upon, turns
round 21600 miles in 24 hours and though thou shootest an Arrow upright, that
will not leave thee, for that the Air that is about the Earth is a^tracted to
thee, (I wonder how we come to have the Winds blow this way and that way then,
seeing they allow^^ no Coops (for Orbs they will not allow the Ptolomeans) to
coop the Air to the Earth;) yea, they will make th^^ believe, if thou will part
with thy wits, that though thou be 47 degrees from a Star that is in the
North or So^^^ part of the Heavens, which are round, farther off at one time
than they are at another; yet that Star is not elev^^^ to the sight by thy
approach toward it, because of the vast distance, as they tell thee, that is
between thee and th^^ Star. For that though thou be whirled upon the poles
of the ecliptic from North to South, and so from So^^ to North 31560207 miles
round about the Sun, as Atlas Coelestis says that the circuit of her Sphere
is; yet that^ not considerable, by reason of the vast distance of them Stars
from the Earth, which as Atlas Coelestis aforesaid (...) thee is 142746428
Semidiameters of the Earth, and therefore the circumference of that Sphere is
3589053046^^ miles. And so will they set thy wits at a distance from thee. But
that they may not be believed, I will speak the distance that is betwixt them.
Bagwell aforesaid says, that the distance of the Sun from us is 4169955 (...)
and. Thou see he lays it down to of a mile, as if he had measured it with a
mete pole. And he says (...) that it is 166 times bigger than the Earth. The
Astronomer aforesaid said many millions, that is (at least) thirty hundred
thousand times bigger than all the Earth; and the other said 133 times. I Will
tell you of a bigger wonder (...) this, if their words be true; I have it in
Atlas Coelestis, in the 5th. Table, showing the true magnitude of the (...)
Stars, that is, of one of the greatest, and one of the least, viz. Sirius, and
Alcor, supposing the apparent Dia^^ of Sirius to be 18 of Alcor 4, according to
the distance in the Copernican Hypothesis, maintaing the Parallax (...) by the
Earth's motion not to exceed 10, and imagining the Diameter of the Annual Orb
to be such as upon (...) Principles it is stated to be, according to Keplar.
The Diameter of Sirius contains Diameters of the Earth 12^^ Lo! has he not out
done the Astronomer of Greenwich? For Keplar, whom Bishop Wilkins admired for
his Sk^^ Astronomy, tells us, that Sirius his Diameter contains the Earth 12550
times; That is, the breadth of that round ^^ is one hundred millions and four
hundred thousands of miles. For 12550, multiplied by 8000, the Diameter of
(...) Earth produces 100400000 aforesaid, and the circumference thereof is
315542857 miles. So that to go round a^^ it at 20 miles the day, 'twill take
43225 years. And the distance of Sirius aforesaid is 142 millions 746 thousand
(...) Semidiameters of Earth, which is 570985712000 miles. What reason is there
to believe any of them, by r^^^ of the distance between them? It is, says
Bagwell, from the Earth to the Sun 4169955 miles, as aforesaid. ^^las Coelestis
says 5021896 miles; but Atlas Coelestis nor Bagwell do prove that the Sun is
4169955 miles from Earth that I can find in their books, Bagwell tells us
therein, that the Diameter of the Earth is 6872 miles, (...) that I allow; and
he says, she casts a shadow 74602 miles: That I allow not; and he tells us
moreover, (...) above or beyond that shadow, there can be no darkness, but a
continual light round about the World: If it be^^ then the Earth cannot cause
darkness to the Moon, as he says it does, because the Moon is distant from the
E^^^ as he says in his book 160426 miles, and so out of the power of her
shadow. I do not speak this as if I tho^^ that the Earth being between the
Moon and the Sun, is not the cause of her eclipse or darkness, but to show th^^
that the Astronomers say is not Gospel. But how does he prove that the Earth
does cast a shadow 74 02 (...) These Rules following, says he, will give
satisfaction. 1. Note, says he, that the distance of the Sun from Earth is
4169955 miles. 2. The Diameter of the Earth is 6872 miles 3. The Sun's distance
I divide by Earth's Diameter, and find the Quotient to be 614: and so many
times the Diameter of the Earth reaches up (...) Sun. 4. I proportion by the
compass the Diameter of the Earth, in a figure the length of a Barley corn (or
(...) part of an Inch:) which being divided by 3, makes 204 Inches; and that
being divided by 12, comes to 17^^ 5. I choose a plain level just of that
length, namely 17 Foot; upon which, at one end, I place the figure (...) Earth;
and at the other end thereof, I set a light in proportion to the Sun. 6. The
same light being at the (...) from the figure of the Earth, makes the shadow
thereof to be 11 times the length of the said Diameter. 7. I multiply the said
Diameter, which is (as abovesaid) 6782 miles, by 11, and that produces 74602
miles; which is the length of the said shadow, and may well cause so great a
darkness as night it self to our sight, notwithstanding the greatness and
glorious light of the Sun, as he says. To this I reply, That if a plain level
be chosen of 17 Foot, upon which, at one end, be placed the figure of the Earth
inflamed almost round about, as the Moon is, (as a round ball will be that is
hung over a brisk fire) as we may perceive it is at all times, especially when
she is in the full. I say then, That that round figure casts not a shadow 11
times the length of the Diameter of the figure, but only according to the
Diameter of the figure not inflamed. And from hence I argue, that if the Moon
were as far from the Earth as the Stars are, suppose 10, 20, 50, or 100 miles,
she would not be darkened or eclipsed by the Earth at all; but it may be that
her distance is but, or from the Earth, of their distance. If I be asked why I
reckon it, or rather guess it to be but 10, 20, 50, or 100 miles from the Earth
to the Stars, which Bagwell aforesaid says is so far distant, that it is
116000000 of miles. And, if it were possible, he says, that a Stone should be
let fall from thence, of that bigness and weight, as it should be continually a
falling 150 miles an hour, until it should fall to the Earth, it would be 88
years, 3 months, 2 weeks, 4 days, 5 hours, and 20 minutes, falling down from
thence to the Earth. Tycho Brahe says, that to the starry Firmament is 14000
Semidiameters of the Earth, which is 56000000 miles, or thereabout, which is
but half the distance. Albategnius says 19000 Semidiameters; Keplar a
Copernican 142746428 Semidiameters of the Earth, which is about 570985712000
miles, which is no less than 10196 times bigger than Tycho Brahe reckons it to
be: There Is a swinging Sum, Ten thousand one hundred ninety six times bigger
than Tycho Brahe declares! Thomas Hill in his book of the Sphere, says, That
the Earth compared unto Heaven, is as a point: yea, so little in comparison, he
says, as a Pepper-corn unto a Circle of a thousand paces compass. For if the
Earth, says he, were of any sensible greatness, a man should not see the half
of Heaven. And how greater the Earth should be, by so much the lesser should a
man see the half of Heaven. I allow of what he says, if the sight of our eye
did not fly, as it does, in a bowed line; but it does, for that some years ago
the Moon did rise totally eclipsed, when the Sun and Moon were both above the
Horizon, and that the Moon began to recover her light at the lower part of her,
being next our Horizon, and therefore under the Earth: And this was seen by my
self, William Gorham of Cambridge, and J. Hands, (that made the book called
Astronomia Christallina, who supposed the Earth to be the Center of the World,
and that it turned round about upon its own Axis every 24 hours, and by that
means he supposed the starry Sky to be immovable, and that the Planets did
move from West to East upon the Poles of the Ecliptic; an opinion to me more
probable than that of Copernicus, for by this opinion every 69 miles nearer the
Pole raises a degree) which could not have been seen by us, if our sight had
run to them in a strait line. And that which is to be seen at Greenwich Stairs
puts the matter quite out of dispute concerning the sight of the eye: For if
you stand upon the Garden-stairs, when the Tide is down, at a low water, and
look over the River, you cannot see the Cattle feeding in the Marsh, by reason
that the bank of the River intercepts your sight; neither can you see the house
wherein the Ferryman lives, nor the top of the Chimney when the Tide is down,
as aforesaid: But when the Tide is up, then you may see the chimney, and the
house, and the door of the house, which commonly stands open, and the ground
upon which men walk when they go into the house, and the cattle feeding, yea a
Dog may be seen then in the Marsh (if there be one) by them that stand upon the
Stairs aforesaid, as I was told in the Boat by one of them that brought me from
thence, when I had been there to make an observation concerning what was told
me of this matter. Neither could Satan have shown Jesus upon an exceeding high
Mountain, (he was too subtle to undertake to show the sight of them in a
valley) all the Kingdoms of the World, and the glory of them, which he did do,
Matthew. 4.8. if Christ's sight did not then fly to those places in a bowed line.
For probably the Mountain whereon he was set, was Mount Nebo, not far from the
place where he was baptized, as others think. See for this Fuller's Pisgah
Sight of Palestine, and that is not (nor any Mountain in Palestine) one mile
high; and if he was shown all the Kingdoms aforesaid there in a strait line
from his eye, it requires a higher Mountain to stand upon, than is needful to
do it upon a Mountain that is midway of the Kingdoms aforesaid. Now the length
of the Kingdoms aforesaid in that day, was from the East-Indian Ocean to the
West of Spain. 1 Maccabees 1.3. chap. 8.1, 3, 4. Dan. 2.39, 40. chap. 7.23.
which is 103 degrees at 69 miles to a degree, according to the part of the
circle that is made upon the 10000 square Furlongs. And to see from thence to
them two places aforesaid, the Mountain must be 2153 miles high, as may be seen
in that Figure, or else he must look 430 miles under the Earth, according to
that Figure. And thus is Hills's Argument aforesaid answered, or any Argument
against my drawing the Circle of the Earth so big, and the Moon, Sun, and Stars
so near it. I therefore conceive it is better to heed holy Scriptures, than to
hearken to what they say: Now the Scriptures of Truth tell us, That God made
all the Stars, Sun, and Moon, in one day. Genesis 1.14, 19. Whereas in making the
Earth and Waters, with their appurtenances, he wrought part of the first day,
all the third day, all the fifth day, and all the sixth day; as may be seen in
that chapter. I conclude therefore, that they are not so many Worlds as
Cardinal Cusanus and Jornandus did hold. And concerning them Lights aforesaid,
Judge. 5.20. says, That the Stars in their runnings fought against Sisera. And
if they did run, they did not stand still, as the Copernicans affirm. Joshua
knew that the Sun was in his race, and the Moon in her walkings, or else he
would never have commanded them to stand still. Josh. 10.12. So that that day
was as long as two, Eccles. 46.4. Hezekiah did believe that the Sun did move
forward, and that he could go backward, according to the word of the Lord, Isa.
38.8 I therefore conclude that they do move the fixed Stars in Heaven, (which
probably is one of the three Heavens, 2 Cor. 12.2.) run round about the Earth
366 times in one year, the Sun 365 (little more or less) either of them.
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, according to the law that God has
given them, Psalm. 148.6. Luna half so many times as there be Tides in a year;
All of them, except the fixed Stars, move one while toward the North, and
another while toward the South, sometimes nearer, and sometimes farther from
us, as it were in a screw line, not compelled with Strings, as the Ancients did
think, or with Wheels, or some such device to make Epicycles and Eccentricks,
nor turned about by Angels, as others immagine, but as Fishes move in the
waters, as I have read some suppose. The Jews did probably think that they were
living creatures, because they burnt incense to them. And Rev. 9.1, 2. tells us
of a Star's sliding down to the Earth with the key of the bottomless pit, which
he opened; and that does strengthen my judgment that they are so. I did intend
to have made Observations concerning the Figures of Copernicus, Tycho, and
Ptolomy, showing the difference of these Astronomers positions of the Planets,
and how that RANNEW's Figure is to be preferred before them: but I have not now
time and Paper. But I will say thus much, That I bear no ill will to any man's
person, but I am troubled to see men's Writings make the Word of God of none
effect in these matters, and so hinder men's believing the Scriptures in other
things. Farewell courteous Reader.

Thy friend to serve thee,


