REASONS Humbly Offered to the Consideration of Both Houses of Parliament,
AGAINST THE Exportation of Wool OUT OF ENGLAND and IRELAND.
WHEN a Nation has some Rich and Necessary Materials for Manufacture within it
self, exclusive, of other Countries, it has the Monopoly of that Manufacture to
the rest of the World; and therefore can never be under-sold, but may vend it
so as to pay all Extraordinary Charges, with sufficient Gain to the
Manufacturer and Merchant.

As Manufacture seems a kind of Debt to the Laborious Part of the People, who
by Nature are entitled to Live; so it is the Highest of all Charities, and the
most Substantial and Universal: For, What signifies the Distribution of a
little Broken Meat amongst a few Wretches, in comparison of this Noble Way of
supporting many thousands of Families, which at the same time preserves them
from Starving, keeps them from Idleness, and makes them Useful to the Public?

The Labors of People bestowed this way, especially when the very Women and
Children may get good Livelihoods by it, must necessarily make a Nation a
Prodigy of Wealth: For whilst every ones Hand and Head is employed, and
continually improving one Commodity or other, they work for the Nation wherein
they live, as well as for themselves. For if 100000 Manufacturers get 6 l.
apiece per Annum, the Nation must gain or save yearly 600000 l. by their
Labors, though the Materials be bettered only the Value of their Wages. And if
the Number be greater, or Gain more apiece, then the National Gain still
increases more and more in proportion. All which is too evident in the present
State of France, and the contrary in that of Spain, which, notwithstanding the
Wealth of the Indies, is yet, for want of Home-Manufactures, the poorest and
Weakest of all Europe, and the most dispeopled.

Wool was ever held, and still is, the Principal Commodity of this Island;
and, if duly looked after, might be made the Greatest in the World: First,
Because our Neighbour-Nations, whose Wool is too Course or too Fine to be
wrought alone, can make but little Cloth of any considerable Price, without a
Mixture of our English or Irish Wool: Secondly, Because the Materials of the
Woollen Manufacture are of small Value whilst Raw and Unwrought, at least in
comparison of the Manufacture when fully Improved; which may be made Ten or
Twelve times the Value, according to the Workmanship; and consequently, will
make a Return of so much more Treasure to the Nation, than the Raw Materials.

It Is therefore very imprudent, and of most dangerous consequence, to suffer
our English or Irish Wool, unwrought, to be Exported into Foreign Countries;
since this may in time transfer the Manufacture it self to Foreigners, and
with it the incident Riches and Populacy, because our Manufacturers must follow
the Wool, to our unspeakable prejudice: And by this means, besides our present
Loss of Men and Money, these innocent Materials may at length return in the
shape of Armed Men and Ships, to the Terror and Confusion of an Unthinking
Lazy People.

These Considerations made our Ancestors very severe against the Exportation of
Wool, as appears by the many Laws they Enacted, and the several Methods they
used for preventing this National Mischief; and His late Majesty of Blessed
Memory was no less zealous, who first by His Proclamation, dated 15 Sept. 1660.
the better to hinder the Exportation of Wool, granted half His own Moiety of
the Forfeitures to all such Persons as would seize any Wool, or Prosecute the
Exporters; and when neither this would do, nor yet the great Penalties the same
Year imposed, in the Fourteenth Year of His Reign He made it Felony to Export
any Wool whatsoever. Yet notwithstanding, for want of due Care for putting the
said Laws in Execution, the Mischief still continues, to the great decay of
that Noble Manufacture.

For now our Wool being stolen out of England, and therefore sent away
Custom-free; and our Clothes and Stuffs being carried away undyed and
undressed, and great Customs being laid on English Cloth by our Neighbors,
because they get great store of our Wool, very cheap, to make Cloth enough of
their own, the Dutch and French are now our Competitors in this Manufacture,
and will in a short time beat us out of it, if speedy Care be not had to
prevent the Exportation of Wool: For they have actually beaten us out in the
Northern, East-land, and German Trades, and share with us in that of Turkey;
for having found means to get our Midling Wool from Ireland, cheaper than the
English Clothier, and mixing it with their Foreign Woolls, which are Two
thirds cheaper than ours, they make thereof vast quantities of Course Clothes,
Druggets, and Stuffs, which are acceptable Merchandise not only to Spain,
Portugal, Germany, and other Countries, but even to England and Ireland.

This, if not timely prevented, will quickly destroy our Foreign Market and
Vent of Cloth; it has already sunk the Value of our Raw Wool, which was
formerly valued at 30 or 40 s. but is now in most Parts of England sold at 12
or 13 s. the Todd; and when Exported, because so common abroad, it yields not
above a Third of its late Price, and must yet sink lower, while the French and
Dutch Manufactures increase, and ours decay; for if the English Clothier pays
more for his Materials, than they do, he must quit his Trade, because he cannot
live by it; and then our Neighbors must have our Wool, and we their Cloth, at
what Rate they please.

Our Woollens formerly Exported, were reckoned at near Two millions of Pounds
Sterling. per Ann. and particularly what went to France at 600000 l. But the
French King having set a Tax of 50 per Cent. upon our Cloth, has rendered this
Trade impracticable there.

The Dutch have so prevailed upon us, that the Clothes we now export to
Hamburgh are but of low Price, from 3 to 7 s. a Yard, and most of them undyed
and undressed.

Our East-land Trade is sunk more; for heretofore this Company alone usually
exported above 20000 Broad Clothes, 60000 Kersies, and 40000 Doubles Yearly;
but of late not above 4000 Broad Clothes, 5000 Kersies, and 2000 Doubles. And
now at Dantzick, our late great Staple, we sell so little, that it is not worth
the naming. We trade to those Places with Treasure, whence we use to import
much.

In Swedland the Natives have set up a Manufacture of their own Course Woolls;
but are still, as well as Denmark, Liefland, and Norway, very much supplied by
the Dutch, and impose greater Customs upon us for what we vend, and insist to
have ready Money for what we have to buy; whereas formerly they bartered for
Commodity.

Our former Great Trade to Muscovy is in a manner lost: The Dutch now send 1500
Ships into the Soundt, and 40 to Muscovy yearly; and we send not above seven
into the Soundt in a Year, and of those, but two laden with Woollen
Manufacture; the other five with Ballast, and therefore are to buy their
Foreign Lading with ready Money: And to Muscovy we hardly send two in three
Years.

But what is still worse, we Import yearly much Fine Cloth from the Dutch, and
Stuffs and Druggets, and Hats also, from the French; our own Trade in English
Hats and Stockings much decaying, through the Exportation of Wool: So that our
late Monopoly of Woollens is quite vanished, and our People starving at Home,
or running into Foreign Countries after the Wool, leave their Wives and
Children a Parish-Charge: whereof we may take one obvious Instance in the Town
of Reading, where the late Number of Clothiers being about 160, are now reduced
to 12 or 13; and the Poor so increased, that they cost the Town near 1000 l. a
Year. Perhaps in some Towns, where Provisions are cheaper, the Clothiers may
bear up somewhat better; but he that will examine into our Clothing Towns, will
find the Trade decaying every where more or less, and hear the grievous
Complaints of the Clothiers that continue in the Manufacture.

Thus the French and Dutch having long envied this great Manufacture of
England, have of late made a mighty Progress toward its Extirpation, and
thereby of the great Support of the English Nation; (Doubtless the Wool-sacks
were placed in the Upper House of Parliament, to give us a Precaution of it.)
Yet I question not, but if we did Manufacture all our Wool, we might again
monopolize the Trade of Woollen Clothing; And it is plain, that if we did
Manufacture all our English and Irish Wool, it would find vent in the World;
since it is now all Manufactur'd in England, France, Flanders, and Holland, and
finds vent in the aforesaid Mixtures of Course Woolls, whereby the Bulk of the
Manufacture must be much increased.

Sir Walter Rawleigh, above sixty years since, proves, That England in fifty
five years time lost fifty five Millions of Pounds Sterling, by the Dutch Dying
and Dressing our White Clothes: What then may we imagine they get, and we lose,
now, that they have our Wool also?

Upon the whole Matter, as it is undeniable, that while our Cloth yields no
rate abroad, our Wool can bear no price at home, and therefore Lands must
decrease in their Rents; so it is plain, the only way to make both valuable, and
consequently to raise the Rents of Lands, is to hinder the Exportation of
Wool, without which our Neighbors can make very few pieces of Cloth of any
considerable value; And it is demonstrable, it is the Interest of this Nation
rather to burn yearly all the Wool not Manufactur'd in England and Ireland, and
pay the Proprietors out of a Public Fond, than to suffer it to be Exported
into Foreign Countries.

It Is therefore humbly offered as the most effectual expedient for preventing
so great, and so general a Mischief for the future, that because it is found by
experience, that what is every ones business is no bodies business, and
therefore, the Exporters of Wool are seldom taken notice of; a certain number
of Commissioners be appointed by His Majesty to put the said Laws in due
Execution: And that the Clothiers, whose immediate concern it is, be obliged by
Act of Parliament to contribute, as most of them have already subscribed,
toward the charge of such Officers as shall be employed to that purpose; which
in a short time will certainly raise the price of their Cloth abroad, a
Shilling for every Penny they lay out that way; and then, the value of our
Wool, and consequently of Lands, must naturally rise in proportion.

Much more might be added to this purpose, too long to be crowded into a single
Sheet; which is ready with all Humility to be offered to a Committee of either
House, when the Bill for the more effectual preventing the Exportation of
Wool, etc. shall be taken into Consideration.


