REASONS Why the MINISTERS, ELDERS, AND PROFESSORS, Who Protested against the
pretended ASSEMBLIES at St. Andrews, Dundee and Edinburgh, cannot agree to the
Overtures made unto them at the Conference upon the 28. and 29. of July, 1652.

Together with the INSTRUCTIONS, given by them to such of th^^ number as were
sent to the said Conference.

And the Letter directed to Mr. David Dickson, for communicating their PAPERS.

Printed at Leith by Evan Tyler, 1652.

Right Reverend,
WE have now for these fourteen days past, been employed in using our best
endeavors, and waited for Overtures from you, for healing the breach, and
removing the differences that are amongst us; And now there being no ground of
hope given us, nor any desire made unto us for continuing the Conference,
whereby a better understanding might be attained, We have thought good before
our parting from this place, to send unto you this enclosed Paper, together
with the Instructions given in writing to these who were sent from us to the
Conference, the Copy whereof was offered by them to these who were sent from
your number, and left with them; Both which Papers we desire you to communicate
to those of your meeting. (...)st

^ry loving Brethren in the Lord.
Edinburgh 29. July 1652. Subscribed in the name of many Ministers, Elders, and
Professors throughout the Land, who desire Truth and Peace.
Directed For the Reverend Brother Mr. David Dickson, Professor of Divinity in
the College of Edinburgh.

REASONS Why the Ministers, Elders and Professors, who Protested against the
Pretended Assemblies at St. Andrews, Dundee and Edinburgh, cannot agree to the
Overtures made unto them at the conference upon the 28. and 29 of July 1652.
Together with the Instructions given by them to such of their number as were
sent to the said Conference, And the Letter directed to Mr. David Dickson for
communicating the Papers.
ALbeit the Essays and Endeavors which were used by us, before our coming
hither, for removing of differences and attaining of Union and Peace, upon such
grounds as might (indeed) bring forth a discovery of our and the Lands Sin, and
contribute for removing the guilt thereof, and for securing and promoving the
Work of Reformation amongst us, might in a great part have acquitted our
consciences, and cleared us before the world; yet the deep sense that we had of
the many and great prejudices which do ensue to the Work and people of GOD, by
our continued Divisions and our ardent desire of Peace and Union, upon the
grounds foresaid, constrained us to lay hold upon the opportunity of your
meeting together at this time, and to re-present unto you some necessary and
just Propositions, as fit subject of our conference; and that we were willing
to hear what should be offered by you to us, in order to these ends; and, that
therefore ye would forbear to assume unto your selves the power of, or
constitute your selves into a General Assembly. And when we found this
in-effectuall, and our Union rendered more hopeless by your denying a desire so
just and reasonable, and so agreeable to the practice of former Assemblies, as
was instanced before you by these who knew the Records: Nevertheless upon a
surmise of a purpose in you to confer with us, we did for diverse days wait
upon you, being desirous to have seen upon your part some serious applying of
your selves to the real means of healing, and to have found solid satisfaction
unto the things contained in the Propositions offered to you by us: But in
place of this, the Brethren who were appointed by you to confer with some of
our number, did intimate unto us, that all which they had in Commission to make
offer of, was, that ye were willing to take off the Censures infl^cted by the
former Assembly at St. Andrews and Dunder, and the Censurableness that persons,
who have transgressed against the Acts thereof might be liable unto, Providing
that these Brethren Censured and deserving Censure, should pass from their
Protestation against the former and present Assemblies and Judicially before
their Presbyteries and Synods, engage themselves under their hands, not
hereafter to deliver their judgments in Preaching or writing, or any way else
to hold up the late differences: Which Overture when it was earnestly desired
by these of our number to be given to them in writing according to their
Instructions, not only because it was diverse ways represented by such of your
number as did confer with them, but also that they might the more perfectly and
better understand the same, and be able to make an exact report thereof to
these who sent them, and mistakes thereupon might be prevented: It was most
peremptorily refused, albeit most earnestly urged and desired during the whole
time of the Conference: Therefore having set down the same als truly and
impartially as our judgments and memories could attain; We do for our own
vindication, and satisfaction of others give these Reasons following, why we
cannot accept thereof.

I. Because there is hereby no remedy at all offered for the course of
defection involved in the public resolutions, nor for preventing the like for
times to come, which is the main ground of difference; but upon the contrary we
are required upon the matter to retract our Testimonies thereanent, and
judicially to give Bonds and Engagements hereafter to be silent concerning the
sin and guilt thereof.

II. Because our passing from our Protestation does import a real
acknowledgment of the lawfulness and freedom of the Assemblies in regard of
their constitution, and of power in them to inflict and take off censures, and
so by our own con^ent, does not only retract and condemn the testimony which
we formerly gave against the same; But also obstructeth the remeading of what
is past, and the attaining a lawful, free General Assembly for the time to
come, and so wreathes about our own neck, and the necks of the Lords people,
the yoke of unfree, corrupt and unlawful Assemblies.

III. Because the offer which is made, though it contains Immunity in regard of
these who have not acquiesced unto, or opposed these Acts for the time past,
yet the Acts of themselves do notwithstanding thereof, still stand in force, as
a ground of persecution against all these Ministers and Professors, who shall
not accept of the conditions contained in this offer, or thereafter fail in
performance of the same.

IV. Because this offer is so far from reaching satisfaction to all or most
part of the Propositions offered by us, that it does not give satisfaction to
any one of them, but pitcheth upon a particular, which ought to be of least
consequence with us, (as importing but our personal suffering) without taking
notice of the Lands defection, and of those things which do concern the Kingdom
and Interest of JESUS CHRIST and the purging of his House; and what a sin and
provocation should it be against the Lord, and what a stumbling and grief of
heart unto the godly who have concurred in these Propositions, and after such a
defection, do expect repentance and reformation, and the purging of his House
of corrupt Officers and Members, if we should make such a transaction, as seems
to promise present security to our selves, but does not contribute for
preserving of the truth, and attaining a solid peace and union in the Lord.

V. We cannot see how the passing from these Propositions, and the taking upon
us such engagements for the time to come as are desired, should not involve us
in the condemning of our own judgments, and in the acknowledgment of a sin and
offense in making these Protestations, and bearing testimony against the
Public, Resolutions, and import that what is done by you in taking off of
consures and censurableness (as you term it) is an Act of mere favor and grace
upon your part, unto Deliquents, upon their repentance. And though we hope that
we shall never be ashamed, but esteem it our mercy and glory to acknowledge any
thing whereby we have provoked the Lord, or offended others, yet being more and
more convinced in our consciences, that what we did in these things was a
necessary duty, we dare not purchase immunity and exemption from Censures at so
dear a rate, as to deny the same, we shall rather choose still to be sufferers,
and to wait upon the issue that the Lord shall give, then to provock the eyes of
his glory, grieve the spirits of his People, and wound our own Consciences by
so unsatisfying and so sinful a transaction.

And conceiving that, we shall not have the opportunity to speak unto you
hereafter, as being now about to dissolve our Meeting; We do from the zeal that
we owe to the honor of God, and from the tender respect that we owe unto you
as Brethren, and for exonering our own Consciences, most earnestly beseech and
obtest you, by your appearing before the Lord Jesus Christ, to give your selves
unto Prayer, and searching of your own hearts and way, in Order to Public
Resolutions and Actings, until each of you find out wherein ye have turned
aside from the straight way of the Lord, and employed your gifts and power not
for Edification, but for grieving the spirits of many of the Godly, and
strengthening of the hands of the wicked, and to Repent thereof, and to do no
more so, least wrath be increased from the Lord, the godly of the Land more
offended, and our breach made wider, and our wound more incurable. If both you
and we might obtain mercy of the Lord to know our trespass, and why he
contends, and to accept the punishment of our iniquity, and humble our selves
before him, who knows but that he might yet have compassion upon us, and
pardon our sins, and heal our Land.

July the 28. Antemerid. 1652.
Mr. Andrew Cant, Mr. Samuel Rutherford, Mr. James Guthry, My Lord Waristoun,
Mr. Robert Trail, Mr. John Nevay, Mr. James Nasmith, being nominated to meet
and confer with some Brethren, Members of the present pretended Assembly, the
Instructions following were given them, and the Meeting does require and expect
that they will walk according thereto.

I. That they shall Declare to the Brethren with whom they are to meet, That as
they do adhere to the Protestations formerly and lately given in; so they do
protest that they do not meet nor confer with them, nor receive any Papers from
them as being in the capacity of Commissioners of a General Assembly, but
only as sent from a meeting of Ministers and Elders, wanting any such
Authority.

II. That whatever be offered by the Brethren with whom they do confer, they
desire to get it in writing from them as the mind of the Meeting whereof they
are Members; That it being communicated to us, Answer may be given thereunto by
our whole Meeting.

III. That they do not engage in Conference with them at first about the matter
of Censures; It being neither the chief nor only ground of our grievance; and
because with us things of that nature, and any thing of personal concernment
ought to be of the smallest value, while there are many things in question
betwixt them and us of far higher Consequence to the Kingdom of Christ and his
Interest; as anent the causes of Gods controversy with the Land, and the way of
Remedy and cure of the former and late defection, and the way of preventing the
like in time coming; The est ablishing and promoving the Work of Reformation,
and the purging of the Kirk, and the like, as are said before them in our
Propositions given in to their Meeting; And that they do int^mate to the
Brethren foresaid, that we cannot look upon an offer relating only to the
Censures upon some of our number as satisfaction to them or us, and that
(besides what we have said, for other Reasons to be communicated in due time to
their Meeting. And that therefore they shall offer to these Brethren, and desire
of them that if there be any Conference at all, the subject matter of it may be
upon the whole Propositions in the order as they stand.

IV. That in case of their refusing the latter part of the former Article, they
shall require and demand from the Brethren of the other Meeting, That they
would Declare whether we may expect that th^se from whom they were sent will
either by the said rethren, or any other way give Answer and Satisfaction to us
anent the Propositions, and what is their sense and meaning of the Public
Resolutions, and anent the Constitution, Acts and Proceedings of the Meeting at
Dundee, and of this at Edinburgh, and what they minds to do in reference to the
same.

V. That in case there be not satisfaction on obtained in these so just and
necessary things, They do pro^esse their own and our dis-satisfaction with any
thing that has been offered by them to us, or answered to our desires first or
last. And that they protest for themselves and us, That as we have sought Peace
and pursued it by all lawful and possible means, though much in vain on their
part So we are henceforth free from the guilt and blame of the sad prejudices
and evi^l consequences whatsomever, which may follow upon their present way,
and their former and future Actings of that nature so contrary and destructive
to Edification and Peace.

FINIS.

