Reasons humbly Exhibited, why Ministers Tithes and Profits should not be taxed
as a Real Estate of yearly Rent, or yearly value of Land, as hitherto they
have been, but as a Personal Estate of Goods and Chattels only.
1. FOr that their Tithes do arise from, and by the yearly improving of the
Stock of the Farmer, or Ocupier of Land, and if the Farmer suffer loss
therein, the Minister suffers in his proportion with him; neither has the
Minister a right in Law to any thing Tithable which is fixed to the Freehold
until it be severed therefrom, and then if the Farmers nine parts thereof be
justly deemed Goods and Chattels, and in justice and equity is assessed but as
a personal Estate, then surely the Ministers tenth part of the same cannot
justly be deemed other then Goods and Chattels, and in like justice and equity
ought to be assessed but as a personal Estate of Goods and Chattels only, and
not as a real Estate of yearly Rent, or yearly value of Land.

2. For that the Act compriseth all Estates under Real and Personal, and (as
is humbly conceived) holds forth yearly Rent or yearly value of Land to be
only Real Estate, and all other Profits, Money, Goods, Chattels, Stock,
Merchandises, etc. to be Personal Estate, as in fol. 308. Now Tithes being but
the tenth of Goods and Chattels Tithable as aforesaid, and of no other or more
value, then so much Goods and Chattels: How in justice and equity can they
according to the Rule of the said Act be assessed for more then a Personal
Estate of so much Goods and Chattels?

3. For that the late Committee of Parliament for the Army by their Order of
the 3. of February, 1652. Resolved that all Profits and Salaries arising or
allowed to any person, by, or in respect of any Office belonging to the
Commonwealth, ought to be assessed as personal Estate, and that the
Commissioners for the Assessments for the Army in the City of London, do take
care that the respective Assessors and Collectors for the said City do proceed
in the assessing collecting of the said Assessments and Arrears accordingly,
and is there not the same reason, the like Rule should be observed in the
Country? Now how far the Office of a Minister will be deemed belonging to the
Commonwealth, is humbly submitted, yet sure as the Ministers Tithes and
Profits are allowed as a Sallary or Reward, or hire for his labor and pains in
the discharge of his said Office (which will clearly appear to be so in the
next reason) so there is an adequate suitableness to receive a like benefit by
the said Order, viz. of being assessed, but as a Personal Estate.

4. For that the whole yearly Incumbe of the Ministers Living, is but the
Sallary, Reward, or ^ire for their constant labors, viz. they by their
constant labors in their Ministerial Office do produce so much yearly toward
the maintenance of themselves and Families: and that it is the Sallary, Reward,
or Hire for their labor appears, first, because the Scripture so terms it,
saying, the Labourer is worthy of his hire, referring to the Office of the
Ministry. 2. Because they have no other Salary, Reward, or Hire for their
labor and service allowed them by or from men. 3. Because if they cease to
perform the constant service and labor of the said Office, they are liable to
be ejected by Law and Equity, which of late years, to the great comfort of
many fearing God in several places, has often been done and practiced; unto
which servitude and encumbrances a Real Estate of yearly Rent, or yearly value
of Land is no way liable: Therefore how in justice and equity can the yearly
profits of a Ministers labors be assessed equal with yearly Rent, or yearly
value of Land, or for more then a Personal Estate as aforesaid?

5. For that no Lawyer or Physician, etc. although he get 500 l. a year by his
Science and Practice is assessed for the same as so much Real Estate of yearly
Rent or yearly value of Land, but as a Personal Estate of so much money:
Therefore in justice and equity, how can the product of the poor Ministers
labors (which to many is not sufficient maintenance for themselves and
Families) be assessed at more then so much Personal Estate of money or Goods?
etc.

6. For that the said Act, to the end that there may be an equal and right
proportioning of the Tax, does enact that a pound rate be made of all Real and
Personal Estates, according to the value thereof, and gives by way of rule an
instance how they shall be valued; that is to say, every 20 l. money, Stock, or
other Personal Estate shall bear the like charge, as shall be laid upon every
twenty shillings yearly Rent, or yearly value of Land; so that 100 l. yearly
Rent or yearly value of Land, according to that computation, is always worth
2000 l. money, and so of a greater and less proportion, which said Rent, as it
arises certain without labor or service, so is it descendable or alienable to
Heirs or Assigns, when as the Minister must first perform the service of the
place, if he look to receive the Profits thereof, which if they amount at the
years end to 100 l. are never more worth to him, then so much money, Goods, or
Chattels, if he happen to live to the end of Harvest, and can get it in; nor
is it descendable to wife and children, nor can be by him put to sale, as in
the case of Lands aforesaid, although the Minister bestow his whole time from
his childhood, till the age of 23 or 24 years at the soonest, sometimes much
longer at the great Charge of Friends to fit and prepare himself for the work
before he is capable in Law to take upon him the Office of a Minister and take
the profits of a Benefice: Therefore how in justice and equity can their Tithes
and Profits be assessed equal which the yearly Rent or yearly value of Land,
or for more then a personal Estate of money, or Goods and Chattels as
aforesaid?

The aforesaid Reasons considered and humbly conceived to be valid, the
Minister has hitherto been assessed at nineteen times in twenty, more than his
due proportion.


