REASONS FOR THE Passing of the BILL FOR THE More Effectual Suppressing Vice
and Immorality, Humbly Offered to Both Houses of Parliament.

The Second Edition, with Additions.

LONDON, Printed by W. Downing, for William Hawes, at the Rose in
Ludgate Street, 1699.

REASONS FOR THE Passing of the BILL FOR THE More Effectual Suppressing Vice
and Immorality, etc.
ONE would think it should be a needless Undertaking in a Christian State, to
give Reasons for the Passing of a Bill which it is scarcely possible for any
Man that would be accounted a Christian to offer the least Reason against. But
the common Degeneracy in this Age and Nation being such as is hardly to be
paralleled in any History, whatever some may think, makes it too necessary.
Therefore I humbly crave leave to lay before the Members of both Houses such
Considerations as, with Submission, I conceive, will incline them to believe it
not a thing indifferent, whether this Bill shall pass, or no.

And first, if we consider the Character which the Sins of Uncleanness do bear
in Holy Writ, it is plain that those who will own this to be a Revelation from
God, must think them to be of the most criminal Nature, and such as will
subject those, who live in the Practice of such Sins, to eternal Damnation;
from which nothing can save them but Repentance and Amendment of Life. I will
select but one or two of those Texts out of the many that might be produced to
this purpose. The Apostle tells us, Heb. 13.4. That Whoremongers and Adulterers
God will judge. And lest any should be deluded into false Hopes or slight
Thoughts of this Matter, by the Sophistry of profane Wits, he warns us all,
Ephesians. 5.6. 1 Cor. 6.9. Let no Man deceive you with vain Words; assuring it for a
certain Truth, that neither Fornicators, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate
Persons, nor Abusers of themselves with Mankind, shall Inherit the Kingdom of
God. And therefore does seriously exhort those he writes to, to Mortify their
Members which are upon the Earth; Fornication, Uncleanness, evil Concupiscence;
for which Sins, he tells us, Col. 3.5. the Wrath of God comes upon the
Children of Disobedience.

And indeed one may easily conclude there is a greater Contrariety to the Will
of God in those Sins, than most others, from this, that the very Approaches to
Uncleanness are more nicely guarded than to any other kind of Vices. It is only
by the Eye, the Hand, or the Ear, that this Devil can enter into the Soul; and
if either of these Sentinels, the very Right-Eye, or Right Hand, should offer
to betray us, our great Lawgiver strictly commands the one to be plucked out,
and the other to be cut off; and backs it with this Reason, that it is a piece
of Violence most highly profitable that these Members should rather perish,
than that the whole Body should be cast into Hell, Matt. 5.29, 30. And then as
for the Evil Communication from the Tongue, which above all, does corrupt good
Manners, the Apostle strictly commands; That Fornication, and all Uncleanness
should not be so much as once Named amongst us as becomes Saints, Ephesians. 5.3.
And adds, verse. 4. Neither Filthiness, nor foolish Talking, nor Jesting, which
are not convenient: An Admonition which I cannot but wish all Christians would
seriously consider, and then Obscenity would not pass, as it does with too
many, for a Jest, and filthy Talk would be Banished out of all Conversation.

And why a heavier Damnation, and a stricter Caution should be given against
these Sins than any other, will not seem strange to any one that reflects upon
the fatal Consequences of these Crimes, as well with respect to our condition
in this World, as in the World which is to come.

As to the World to come, the Texts already cited do sufficiently show that
Exclusion from the Presence of God, and the Kingdom of Heaven, together with a
fearful Doom to the dreadful Miseries of another Place, will be the certain
Sentence of such Sinners; and the Reason is plain to any one that has right
apprehensions of the Holiness of God, and of the Purity of Heaven.

A Soul debased with inordinate Lust, is thereby so unqualified for Communion
with God, that the Heathens could not but see it; who therefore required, that
all who would be admitted to their Mysteries should first be Purged with such
Rites as they Instituted for that purpose. They were sensible it was not for
the Honor of their Gods, that Men who were not thoroughly distinguished from
Beasts, should come to keep them company. How much more strictly then will it
be required by the Author of our Salvation, who has designed us for the Blessed
Estate in which we are to be like him, and with him, that whosoever has any
hope of this should purify himself as he is pure?

And indeed, as there is an utter Antipathy between a Sensual and a Divine
Mind, and therefore, as Blessed are the pure in Heart, for they shall see God;
so, on the contrary, consider Heaven, and you will find from the Nature of the
thing, as well as from the Testimony of Scripture, that into that place no
Unclean thing can enter. Light and Darkness, Heaven and Hell, are not at a
wider distance than Purity and Uncleanness; so that there is a natural
Impossibility that a Soul should be Saved so utterly indisposed and unqualified
for it.

Nor are the Consequences of the Sins of Uncleanness less fatal to Mankind,
with respect to this Life; and this under what Capacity soever we consider
them, whether in their private Capacity, or with respect to their Families, or
to the Public Society.

And 1st, as to their private Concerns. Let the Experience of all Men in all
Ages speak out, and they would see, not only in Seripture, how the wisest and
strongest of Men have been overcome, and ruined with extravagant Lust; but they
would find much of the same in other Books. Or if they are not given to
reading, if they would but look about them in the World, especially in such an
Age as this is, they cannot but see a multitude of sad Examples of those that
have been ruined in like manner. Alas! how often do we our selves see that
Observation of the Wiseman verified to a tittle, Prove. 6.26. that by means of
a whorish Woman a Man is brought to a piece of Bread; And that the Adulteress
hunts for the precious Life. The whole seventh Chapter also contains most
admirable Observations to this purpose; amongst which the 22, 23, 26, and 27.
Verses, are exceeding emphatical: There it is said of a strange Woman (so the
Scripture calls the Woman that is not a Man's own Wife; but there it is
especially spoken of a Street-walker) such a one meeting with a Young Man void
of Understanding, he goes after her straitway, as an Ox goes to the
Slaughter, or as a Fool to the Correction of the Stocks, till a Dart strike
through his Liver, as a Bird hastes to the Snare, and knows not that it is
for its Life. She has cast down many wounded, yea, many strong Men have been
slain by her. Her House is the way to Hell, going down to the Chambers of Death.

2. Next, consider how Families are affected with the ill Consequents of this
Vice, and we shall find that nothing does so fatally destroy the Peace, the
Interest, and the Succession thereof, as the Sins of Uncleanness. And as to the
Peace and Comfort of Families, I dare appeal to the very Whoremongers and
Adulterers, whether they themselves would resent any thing as a higher Injury,
and be more disturbed upon any account, than to have their own Wives or
Daughters debauched. And indeed, it is observable, That those very Persons who
are most Infamous Outrageous, whenever those Misfortunes happen themselves for
Corrupting of other Men's Wives and Daughters, are always the most Impatient and
Outrageous, whenever those Misfortunes happen to the Dishonor of them, and
their own Families.

The Interest also of the same is most highly concerned both in the Chastity of
the Wife, and of the Husband: Of the Wife, especially in great Families, since
if her Chastity be not preserved, the Husband's Estate is in danger to be swept
away from his own natural Offspring. And then, as to the Husband, I believe it
will be as soon granted as proposed, that a Gentleman can with the third part
of that Charge maintain a Virtuous Wife, and her Family, as a Whore, and her
spurious Issue. The reason is, the Desires of the one are reasonable and
regular, and consequently satisfied with moderate Expenses; the Appetites of
the other are Loose, Extravagant, and Boundless, and never to be sufficiently
Gratified. Besides, the Wife reckons she spends of her own, and if she exceeds,
her own Children are like to suffer for it. But for the strange Woman, she is
usually like a Soldier that lives at discretion in the Enemies Country, She
Hates, and believes she is hated, for she knows there is reason for it.
Besides, she cannot forget she has a separate Interest from the Family of her
Paramour, and therefore her business is to sell her self as dear as she can;
and if he gives her all that he has, it is less valuable than what she has
given him. Moreover, possibly she has Children by him; if not, yet at least she
must provide for Old Age. All this while I am speaking but of one single
Concubine, which no Lawless Man can content himself with, no more than he can
with one Wife. And if he has many drawing upon him together, they will have
sooner done their Work, which is to Beggar him and his Family. Such infinite
reason, with respect to the Interest of Families, had the Wife-Man for that
Caution of his, Prove. 5.10. Remove thy way far from the strange Woman, and come
not nigh the Door of her House, least Strangers be filled with thy Wealth, and
thy Labors be in the House of a Stranger.

But then if we consider, how the Successions of Families are often
extinguished by means of a Whorish Woman; and in what a terrible manner also
this commonly happens, the last and only Hopes of many Families being cut off
in a senseless impious Duel, fought upon the account of some Lewd Strumpet (the
most usual Occasion thereof) this indeed is a Consideration that does not only
bring down the Gray Hairs of the unhappy Parents with Sorrow to the Grave, but
does also strike all that hear it with Horror; as well upon that score, as with
respect to the fearful Sentence at God's Tribunal, which the miserable
Debauchee is gone to receive.

Nor is it to be passed by as unworthy a serious Reflection, that though the
utter Extinction of Noble Families does not every day happen on this occasion;
yet every day we may see what Crasie and Sickly Constitutions are to many
Successions derived down from the envenomed Seed of one or other of the vicious
Parents to their Innocent Children; so that it were happy for them, if the
Succession had sooner failed, and they had never seen the Sun. Oh therefore
that Men would weigh this, that though the Lips of a strange Woman drop as the
Honeycomb, and her Mouth is smoother than Oil; yet her End is bitter as
Wormwood, sharp as a two-edged Sword. Her Feet go down to Death, her Steps take
hold on Hell, Prove. 5.3, 4, 5.

And now lastly, as to those Mischiefs to the Public, occasioned frequently by
the Sins of Uncleanness, without recurring to History, either Sacred or
Profane, (both which give us the Accounts of most bloody Wars, and utter
Desolation brought upon whole Countries on the score of a Strumpet, or an
Adulteress, and of the Divine Vengeance upon whole Nations for Crimes of this
Nature, when become universally prevalent,) I shall content my self with laying
before You those sad and fearful Effects of Lewdness, which may fall under our
own Observation at this Day, to the very Country we now live in.

And it is not an inconsiderable Evil to the Public, that so many Hundred
Persons are Yearly Executed, some for Murders, others for Robberies, others
for Theft and Burglary; the greatest part of whom, upon Enquiry, will be found
to have been entangled in the Snares of Lewd Women, or they had never brought
their Heads into an Haltar. And it was but the last Sessions that I was my self
amazed to see so many Young Men, in the very Bloom of their Years, receive the
Sentence of Death for the Crimes now mentioned. And speaking of it, with
Concern, to one of the Judges, he told me it has been his Observation, since he
came upon the Bench, That Whoredom has generally been the first Occasion of
that which brought them to their unhappy End. For these Persons being strongly
addicted to their Lusts, and yet of none, or of broken Fortunes, those lewd
Women whom they Associate themselves withal, force them upon those violent
means to feed their Lusts, which terminate thus in their utter Ruin.

But the grand Mischief and Bane of all to the Public, as well as the high
Dishonor to God, which arises from an Addictedness to the Sins of Uncleanness,
is Atheism and Infidelity.

Now the Atheist is that Leviathan that takes his Pastime upon the Earth. He
knows no Law but his own Will, and therefore indulgeth himself in any
Wickedness that he can safely commit; Adulteries, Murder, Oppression, and
whatever else can be thought of that is monstrously flagitious, and highly
mischievous, he perpetrates to choose. He devises Mischief upon his Bed, he
sets himself in no good way, neither does he abhor any thing that is Evil.
He slays the Widow, and the Stranger, and murders the Fatherless; yet he
says, the Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it, Psalm.
94.6, 7.

Thus is the Atheist like some wild and savage Beast, which ravages and
despoils the whole Voisenage round about him. But after he has perpetrated some
horrible Villainy, if you will take the pains to trace the mighty and
mischievous Monster back to his Kennel, you will always lodge him in the Bed of
Lust. It is there he first sucked in, and was nourished up in savage Principles:
It is thence he issues out, the Mischief and Terror of all within his Compass.

And if you desire to know why a strong and habitual Addictedness to unlawful
Pleasures should so fatally, and almost inevitably fix Men in Atheistical
Principles; the Reason is, 1st, that Sensuality and Filthiness do, of all other
Sins, send up such gross and foul Exhalations as must necessarily intercept our
View of Heaven: And indeed these do so flag the Wings of a thinking, soaring
Mind, that the Powers and Faculties of the Soul can never rise higher than
Sense and Matter. They do also so defile and muddy the Mind, that it can take
in no Spiritual and Divine Idea's, which can be thoroughly impressed only upon
pure and unsullied Intellect. 2dly, And Sensual Pleasure being of all other
sinful Courses the least patient of any Check or Control, no sooner are
Persons given up to the Gratification of their Lusts, but you shall find they
immediately cast about for the best Arguments they can devise against those
great and mighty Restraints to the same, which, even in their fullest Draughts
of Pleasure, so often pall their Appetites, and chill their Blood; namely, the
Being and Providence of God, the Immortality of the Soul, and a future
Judgment, and indeed against the whole Christian Doctrine: And as they are
resolved to Live, so they would fain persuade themselves they shall Die, life
the Beasts that perish. And how apt Men are to believe, even against the
clearest Evidence, what is strongly their Desire, and what they think is highly
their Interest and Concern, should be true, we daily see; and those Persons
especially we are speaking of, do fatally find, till a lingering Disease,
Afflictions or Calamities recall them back, and fix them down to serious
Thoughts; and then, alas! most of them open their Eyes, and see their Errors
when it is too late. Thus does Atheism and Irreligion, that Bane of Humane
Societies, owe its Birth and its Growth to Sensual Pleasures.

And if so, if an Evil so highly mischievous to Public Societies, as well as
the Souls of Men, does derive its Being, and all its Force, from the Sins of
Uncleanness; it ought then to be the especial Care of all Civil Societies to
destroy the Dam that nourishes and breeds up so foul a Monster. Principiis
obsta will be a ruling Maxim to all well-governed States; and therefore to
strangle so fruitful a Parent of Mischief, as Sensual Lusts appear to be, does
infinitely become the WISDOM OF OUR NATION.

In short, we are, or at leastwise profess our selves to be Christians; and as
the very original Design and Tendency of Christianity was toward nothing more
than to extinguish the Lusts of Concupiscence which did reign in the Gentiles,
who knew not God, 1 Thessalonians. 4.5. So we may as well renounce our Christianity it
self, as give a National Favor, and public Allowance to these Enormities; as
the not passing of this Bill will, I fear, by many, both at Home and Abroad, be
interpreted no less.

One thing is most certain, That no Man can be against it upon the Account of
Religion; for the Suppression of the Vices of Uncleanness is a part of
Christianity, which Christians of all Denominations, if true to their
Principles, can freely come up to. It is not here as in disputed Matters of
Religion, with respect to which all are not agreed how far it may be fit for
the secular Powers to interpose. But as all Parties of Christians will consent
to have Immorality restrained; So the Immorality that is to be restrained by
this Bill, by the Verdict of express Scripture, comes under the Cognizance of
the Civil Magistrate; It is an heinous Crime, yea, it is an Iniquity to be
punished by the Judges, Job. 31.11. And that the Judges may have Law to Punish
it by, is the Thing we Humbly desire of our Legislators.

FINIS.

