REASONS Humbly offered to the Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS, By the Free Traders
of ENGLAND, Against the IMPOSITION desired by the Creditors of the
Hamborough-Company, to be laid on all Goods coming from any Part between the
Schau and Callice, for the Discharging of the said Companys Debts.
1, THAT we are informed, that the said Debt was Contracted by reason of great
sums of Moneys lent and given to our former Kings, or their Ministers, and to
those in Authority in the Times of the late Troubles, for the Maintaining of
their Patent, which was then called into question, as prejudicial to the Trade,
but especially to the Manufactury of the Nation.

2. Wherefore we judge it unreasonable, that all German, Flemish, and Holland
Goods, brought in by others his Majesty's Subjects, that are not of the said
Company, should be charged toward the payment of those Debts which were
Contracted by the said Company, for their particular advantage only.

3. By this Artifice, the said Company do tacitly insinuate themselves into a
kind of owning or approving of their Patent by Parliament; which we humbly
conceive, not to be the intention of this Honorab^e House: but on the contrary,
we hope the Parliament will look upon it as a Monopoly, and judge it
prejudicial to the Nation, to have their Patent owned by which they pretend a
Right to be the Sole Exporters of our Woollen Manufacture, to the places within
their Patent; which doubtless they will put in Execution, with the utmost
Rigor, if o^ce their Patent comes to be owned by Parliament.

4 But, if besides this, they could so settle their Patent, as to have the Sole
Importation of all manner of Goods, out of the Countries mentioned in their
Patent, which hitherto has been Free for all men, we humbly desire the
Honorable House of Commons, to consider the prejudice the Nation would receive
thereb^: for, if one Company, how great or numerous soever, have the sole
Exportation of our Manufacture ^o so considerable a part of the World; and the
sole Importation of all Commodities from so considerable a part of the World,
they may by their BYLAWS so Combine together, as to buy our Manufacture at as
low a Rate, and to sell the Commodities they port, at as high a Rate as they
please, and so Enrich themselves, to the Impoverishing of the Nation.

5. But, to show that the Imposition it self is of prejudice to the Nation, in
regard it wo^ld be too tedious to instance in all Commodities, we will only
instance in that one Commodity of Linen: All ^innen from Germany, Holland, and
Flanders* have already very high Customs and Duties laid upon them, amounti^g
in some sorts to 20. in some to 15. in some to 12. per Cent. and those that pay
least pay above 10. per Cent. of ^he vallue which is much higher than the
Duties on any other sort of Linen, and in particular the French Linen;
Whereas most of the Linnens from Germany, Flanders and Holland are bought with
the product of our Manufacture, and ought therefore to be the more encouraged;
whereas, on the contrary, most (if not all the F^ench Linnens are bought with
ready Money, and are not the Returns of the product of our Manufactury, in
regard the French King has laid so great an Imposition on our Manu facture,
that hardly any of it is transported into France.

6 But, if yet more Impositions be laid on those Linnens, it will more increase
the Impor^ation of French Linnens, and consequently more enrich France, and
more obstruct the bringing in of Linnens from G^rmany, Holland and Flanders,
and consequently the Consumption of our Manufacture: For if they cannot vend
their Linen, they cannot buy our Manufacture: but on the contrary, as they
find the Linen Manufactures to decay, they will be necessitated to fall upon
making Woollen Manufactures, and will in time need none of ours.

7. This new Imposition would diminish his Majesty's Customs, for about of the
Linen that come from Germany, Flanders, and Holland, are again Exported, to
Ireland, to the Canaries, and to other Western Islan^s, and to our Colonies and
Plantations in the West Indies, upon which, when so Exported, his Majesty does
Retain declaro ha^f the Customs: now if this new Imposition be laid upon them,
the Duties will be so high, that there can be none Export^d, but the above
mentioned places will be furnished at cheaper Rates from Holland, Hamburg and
Flanders, and cons^quently his Majesty will lose all that part of the Customs,
which he now keeps of the said Linnens, which after Importation are again
Exported. Now in regard there will be scarce any Exportation, because the
Duties will be so exceeding high, it will be worth the while to run them on
Shore, and so defraud his Majesty of the whole Custom, to the great diminution
of his Majestys Revenue; whereas at present, because half the Custom and the
whole Additional Duty is returned at the Exportation, no man endeavors to save
Custom, because he then loses that benefit at the Exportation.

8. We humbly desire the Honorable House of Commons to consider whether if they
make a Presid^nt of paying this Companies Debts, it may not become the Case of
the Companies of London, who have borrowed Mone^s upon their Common Seal, and
of all Corporations, and the Chamber of London it self, and whether the Bankers
and others that have lent, and may hereafter lend vast Sums of Money, may not
hope for the like Favor? the conseque^ces of which the Honorable House of
Commons will be best able to judge.

9. To lay a Tax upon Goods, would make all men leave of their Trades in the
Company, and drive th^^r Trade in Dutch Bottoms, or in some Marts or Towns as
are out of the Companys Privileges.

10. This very Debt, was, by a Committee of the House of Commons, 21. Jac.
Voted to be fully sa^^sfied, and a Sum over and above, and the Charter of the
Hambrough Company a Grievance, both in the Creation and E^ecution of it; and
will the Parliament in their Legislative own to make that good by an Act.


