REASONS Humbly Offered To the Honorable the Commons of England Assembled in
Parliament, showing the great Loss that Accrues to their Majesty's in their
Revenue, and their Subjects both at Home and in their Plantations Abroad, by
the African Company's Engrossing the Sole Trade of Africa, confining it to the
Narrow Joint Stock of little more than One Hundred Thousand Pounds, excluding
all other their Majesty's Subjects both at Home and Abroad, to their Great
Detriment and Threatened Ruin.
I. FIrst, their Majesty's Island of Jamaica being very large, and not a
Twentieth Part Planted, requires a greater Supply of Negroes, than the African
Company have furnished them with, and for those they bring they exact
exorbitant and intolerable Rates, which tends to the Ruin of the Inhabitants
and Planters of the said Island.

II. It was once agreed before the King and Council, toward the latter end of
King Charles the Second, That the Company should furnish the Island of Jamaica
with Three Thousand Negroes per Annum at 17 l. 2 s. 6 d. per Head; which, as we
are informed, was in pursuance to what they were obliged upon obtaining their
Charter, though particular Merchants offered at the same time to do it for 14
l.; but the King being desirous to please the Company, obliged the People to
agree with the said Company at 17 l. 2 s. 6 d; though presently after, and ever
since they were abused in Both; for they had not from the Company the
Quantities promised, and the Company exacted what Rates they pleased, even to
22 l; and since to greater Prices; and they have 10 per Cent per Annum Interest
after six Months, for all that do not pay in their time.

III. Hereby the Increase of Their Majesty's Revenue is extraordinarily
obstructed, since if the Planters were supplied with Negroes suitable to their
occasions, whereas they now produce one Tun of Sugar, they would make four
Tuns; and Indigo, Cotton Wool, Ginger, etc. in proportion, and each Tunn or
four Hogsheads of Sugar, pays Their Majesty's for Duty 6 l.

IV. Sugar, Indigo, Cotton-Wool, etc. being produced by the strength of
Negroes, if the Island be slenderly supplied, or at dear Rates (which must be
expected when none sells but the Company) then will the said Commodities cost so
dear that England cannot hold the Market with the French, Dutch, and Portuguese.

V. Other Foreign Nations may Trade freely on the Coast of Africa, At times the
Company have had fourteen of the King's Men of War cruising on the Coast of
Africa, and off the Islands, to take all English Merchantmen who had not their
Permission.
as Brandenburghers, Danes, French, Portuguese, etc. but if Englishmen (not of
the Company) be there getting Negroes or Gold in Exchange for our Woollen
Manufactures, the Company have heretofore procured Men of War, and have given
Commissions to their own Ships to Seize upon, bring into Port, Condemn and Sell
their Ships and Goods to the Company's Use.

VI. Since the Trade of Africa has been managed by this Company, NB. Eeach 4th
Rate costs little less than a 1000 l. a Month.
and confined to the narrow Joint Stock of 100000 l. there is but one Buyer of
such of our Woollen Manufactures of Says, Perpetuanoes, Cloth, etc. as are
exported to those vast Countries, to the great damage of the Makers thereof in
particular, and of the Nation in general. They buying such Goods as are proper
for that part of the World, almost at their own Prices, and no greater
Quantities than they can vend at excessive Rates; whereas, were the Trade Free,
their would be a great number of Buyers, the Goods would sell dearer at home,
and greater Quantities exported and vended abroad: So that by the limiting that
Trade Their Majesty's Customs are diminished, our Woollen Manufactures
discouraged, the Exportation thereof much lessened, and many Families who
subsist thereby, reduced to Extremity and Want.

VII. It may be considered, whereas the Planters of Jamaica have laid out
Twenty times more than the said Company's Stock in Settling the said Island, and
that it is by their Industry, Labor, and Pains brought to what it now is, and
that it has been and will be Kept, Maintained, and Defended against all their
Majesty's Enemies by their Majesty's Subjects there, and not by the Assistance
of the African Company. It may be also considered, That the said Company
neither by their Valor, Council, nor Estates, have added any thing to the
Increase, Support, and Maintenance of any of their Majesty's Dominions. How
Grievous then it must be, that this Company would force their Fellow Subjects
to give them 30, 35, and 40 per Cent upon their whole Cargo, only for their
Permission to Buy Negroes in Africa, for their own Use, though their Ships so
Trading perhaps do not come within several Hundred Leagues of any of the
Company's Factories; which Dear-Bought-Permissions have been but lately
obtained, and that with Difficulty; and yet this Company must have so much, or
else it has hitherto been the Custom of the said Company to Seize the said
Ships as aforesaid, to the Ruin of abundance of Families.

VIII. And the more effectually to Oppress their MAJESTY's Subjects here, who
do Make and Sell the Woollen Manufactures proper for that Trade, as
Perpetuanoes, Says, etc. this Company does oblige those who do give them 30
and 40 per Cent for their Liberty of Trade, to take their Cargoes from the said
Company, so that still there is but One Buyer, by which means the Woollen
Manufactures are lessened in their Value.

IX. The Abuse put upon Masters, Owners of Ships, and Seamen, are innumerable,
for they having so great a Part of the World shared out to themselves by their
Patent, a great many Ships, though never so unwillingly, must enter their
Service, or Rot in the Harbors; and if they or their Seamen do carry any small
Adventure, at their Return they are certainly Ruined; first tying them up to
intolerable Conditions by their Charter-Party, and then stop all their
Freight; and have always a standing Committee to manage their Lawsuits, and
their whole Stock to Wage War against the Poor Master, who if he will not be
kept out of his Freight four, five, or six Years, must come in an Humble Manner
to Submit to the Mercy of their Court, for such a Mulct as they shall be
pleased to set upon him; which is generally to lose the Value of his Goods, and
over and above, to pay 100 l. or more, according to their own Will and
Pleasure; or if he will come to a Reference, he must choose for his Arbitrators
two of their own Committee, whereby they make themselves Judges in their own
Case.

X. Lastly, If their Majesty's Subjects in the Sugar-Plantations, if those here
in England that do make and are concerned in the Woollen Manufacture, if the
Merchants, Owners of Ships, Masters, and Seamen are so Used by this Company
when only Supported by a Patent, what Oppressions may they not expect when they
are Supported by a Law?

For Redress of the aforegoing Mischiefs, and Prevention thereof for the
future, We Humbly Propose as an Expedient to this Honorable House, That the
Trade of Africa may be left Open and Free, or under such a Regulation that any
of their Majesty's Subjects may at any time be admitted to Trade in some sort
like the Turkey Company, with their Stocks apart; so will the Woollen
Manufactures be advanced in their Price, and their Vent increased, Merchants,
Planters, and Owners of Ships encouraged, and their Majesty's Customs much
Augmented.


