Reasons most Humbly Offered to the Consideration of Parliament, Why a Bill now
depending before them, against Richard Thompson and Partners should not be
passed.
THE Bill suggests, First, That the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom made for
prevention of fraudulent and wicked practices of Bankrupts in deceiving their
Creditors, do not sufficiently reach the evil contrivances of Richard Thompson
and Partners, in regard the Penalties of the Laws are not severe enough to meet
with them.

The Honorable Houses of Parliament can best judge whether in general the said
Laws and Statutes be not sufficient? and, Whether it be the defect England,
than in any other part of Christendom. And if the former Laws have been thus
long sufficient for others, It is humbly hoped there will appear no occasion
for making a more rigorous Law against Thompson and his Partners, than against
any other, since they lie under the same circumstances with all other trading
Merchants.

Second SUGGESTION: Secondly, That Richard Thompson and Partners having been
Merchants and Traders in or near the City of London, and acquired great
Estates, the better to gain them Credits, became joint Partners in taking up
and giving Security for great sums of Moneys, by which means they became
possessed upon Security to the value of about 200 Thousand pounds, with intent
to defraud all their Creditors.

The Sums though great were not above 136 Thousand Pound in all, as appeared
to their Creditors, upon view of the Books, and is said to be l. merely to
increase clamor against them; the greater their Estates were at first, the
better was their Security, and the less probability is there of having any
fraudulent design. Their Security was made good by them for above five years,
no man all that time was refused either Principal or Interest when demanded.
But afterward their Creditors running upon them all at once, destroyed that
Security; but they deny that ever they had any intent at any time to defraud
any one of their Creditors of a penny.

Third SUGGESTION: Thirdly, That in Order to accomplish this fraud they
disposed their Stocks into several Factories beyond the Seas, and put the same
out of the reach and power of any Commission of Bankrupt; which practice of the
said Richard Thompson and Partners are to the utter ruin and undoing of many
Families.

They did as all other Merchants employ their Moneys in Foreign parts in the
most probable Trades, the better to enable them to pay Interest, but March
1675, till near Midsummer 1677, by agreement with their Creditors, lay
constantly open for their daily inspection, which clearly shows that there was
nothing of secret contrivance on their parts, but always in a fair open method
of Negotiation.

Fourth SUGGESTION: That Richard Thompson and Partners, the better to color
their wicked designs after they had made over their own private Estates, and
secured the Moneys of their Creditors, did refuse to pay any of them. And the
said Richard Thompson and Partners did appoint a meeting with all their
Creditors, to acquaint them that in regard their Moneys was beyond the Seas
(though they could not pretend any loss) they did only desire time to pay them
without abatement; to which they consented: Which design of the said Richard
Thompson and Partners was to get what Moneys they could into their hands, and
to secure their Books and Accounts, and leave all their Creditors unpaid.

The fact indeed is thus, When the Creditors first grew jealous (without any
just cause given on their parts) they did not for six Months after refuse l.
This being so suddenly torn out of their several Trades (well) but newly laid,
was of so great prejudice to the growing Estate, that they were enforced to
desire a meeting of all the Creditors, which being accomplished, they there
proposed to surrender Books and Estates into their own management, desiring
them either to accept thereof, or to allow time. The far greater part of the
Creditors upon their own reasons, and the inspections made into their Books,
refused the first, but complied with the second, that so that Estate (what
remained) abroad might be drawn back with better convenience, and subscribed
their agreement to that purpose. Whereupon Thompson and his Partners proceeded
with all diligence to get in what they could, lest all should be lost, well
hoping to have paid every man, but were disabled by one third of their
Creditors, who standing out by daily Actions, Arrests, Attachments, and by
threatening with Statutes of Bankrupt; extorted from them some double, some
treble, their Proportions payable to them by agreement aforesaid; and many were
paid their whole Debts, by which means there was Issued out to them and others
in Principal and Interest at least 50000 l. being above one third of the whole
remaining Debt, which necessarily after their first streights put them upon
further Extremities. So that it is evident hitherto there could be no fraud
intended.

And as to what is said, That they could not then pretend any loss, so far they
allow it to be true, that having at that time subjected their Books to their
Creditors, they discoursed but sparingly of their Losses, (although then very
considerable:) Because the complying Creditors had many of them promised to
give new Credits, nor were the wounds ^^ the Estate then so wide but the
performance of such promise would have closed and cured them, and would not
only have re-established Thompson and his Partners, but secured their Creditors
debts, which was the only Cause that they did not openly publish their Losses
at that time, but that such there were, has since been and will at any time be
made out by clear and full proof if desired.

Fifth SUGGESTION. That a Commission of Bankrupt is lately Issued out of His
Majesty's High Court of Chancery against the said Richard Thompson, and
Partners; but they to prevent the due execution thereof, have absconded
themselves, and conveyed away their Books and Estates on purpose to defraud
their Creditors, and the Execution of the said Commission, and are declared
Bankrupts by the said Commissioners in pursuance of the several Statutes
against Bankrupts, etc.

About Midsummer 1677, (till which time their Books and Estates lay open to the
Creditors view and disposal), they taking a Survey of their Richard Thompson
and Partners abscond themselves, or convey away their Books or Estates, with
design to defraud their Creditors; but being in a most deplorable Condition
under daily Arrests from those Creditors, that had not complied before, their
Estates and Credits was thereby ruined and destroyed. Whereupon one of their
company was forced into the King's Bench Prison, where he has remained ever
since, and long before the sitting of the Parliament made frequent offers to
deliver up the residue of their mangled Estate into the hands of their
Creditors, which by as near a calculation as they could make, amounted to Six
Shillings eight pence per pound, which with the 50000 l. paid before, makes
above thirteen Shillings per pound of the whole debt (if it had been equally
divided), being a much greater Composition than most men have lately paid under
the like Circumstances. With this Proposition most of their Creditors (seeming
satisfied concerning the great losses come upon the Estate, which are ready to
be made out upon Oath by good and creditable Witnesses), were as before, and so
still are willing to accept the remaining Estate according to the aforesaid
Calculation and Proposal of 6 s. 8 d. per pound, the which they publicly
declared in print before the meeting of Parliament; but are hindered by those
few, who not only do violently prosecute the Statute of Bankrupt against them,
but also have preferred this Bill, which tends only to the further wast and
imbezlement of the remaining Estate, and ruin of many poor Families. And this
they violently prosecute, (it is to be feared) only for their own private
advantage, and to prevent so good an agreement as aforesaid, from coming to a
conclusion. In order whereunto they waylaid another of the Partners, when he
adventured to have met the Creditors upon their own desires, published rewards
in print, to any that should discover him or any other of them, search houses
for them, and procured them to be publicly proclaimed Bankrupts, for which
extraordinary eagerness they cannot imagine any cause, unless it be, because
they have lately before the bringing in this Bill, offered to the Major part of
their Creditors, the whole Estate in kind, so as all their Obligations may be
delivered up, and they be allowed a reasonable maintenance for their numerous
Family.

This being the true Narrative of their present State and Condition, they most
humbly offer to the serious Consideration of Parliament.

First, Whether they will think it fit or reasonable to pass this Bill (and
that with a retrospection) purposely to punish them in a way more severe than
ever by Law has hitherto been provided, and that for a fact committed before
the Law made; an accident under which many other eminent Citizens have
unhappily fallen of late years; and some of them since this misfortune happened
to these, and yet none but themselves made liable to the penalties intended to
be inflicted by this Act.

Secondly, Whether it stands with the Honor of Parliament to make a Law to
invite any person whatsoever to a breach of Faith, by discovering a secret
trust reposed in them, and to confer Rewards upon them for the same, or to
impose a penalty upon such, who notwithstanding such Law shall be just in
keeping the secrets of those who have entrusted them.

Thirdly, Whether if a Bill for such a pupose shall be thought reasonable to
pass the same, ought not to be General against all men in Thompson's and his
Partners Condition, and not against them and their Trustees or Creditors only:
and whether convenient to be made with retrospection, or only to punish such
who shall fall under the like Circumstances with them for the future.

Whereas to prevent all agreements between the said Thompson, and Partners, and
their Creditors, and the more easily to effect the passing of this Bill; some
of the Prosecutors thereof, have, and do frequently declare abroad, that they
have been offered their whole debts with a good surplusage, (...)te.
so as they would agree to proceed no further upon this Bill. Now the said
Thompson and Partners do solemnly declare to all the world, That neither they,
nor any of them, nor any others for, or on their behalf, by their direction, or
with their privity, knowledge, or consent, has or did at any time directly or
indirectly ever make any such offer to any of them. But on the contrary do
aver, that such Propositions have been made to them, to which they could never
give their consents, least they should justly lay themselves open thereby to
the Censures of the rest of their Creditors, who in such case would have had
good grounds to have affirmed they were guilty of designing to defraud them of
their just Debts.


