REASONS Humbly offered for Preventing The Exportation of Wool, And for
Encouraging A FREE TRADE IN English Woollen Manufacture TO landers, Brabant,
Zealand, Holland, West and East Friezland, Germany, Switzerland, and Hungary.
EVery Nation beyond the Seas encourage the Exportation of their own
Commodities, and their Markets are open and free for all Buyers, because they
enrich themselves thereby. And certainly it is the Interest of this Nation to
prohibit the Exportation of Wool, and to invite all Persons to Buy and Export
the Woollen Manufacture of England; for that a Pound of Wool, when wrought,
yields ten times the value of the Wool, and many Thousand Families are
maintained thereby, there being many several Trades whose (...)ivelyhood depend
upon the Woollen Manufacture (viz.) The Washer, Shearer, Picker, Comber,
Spinner, Knitter, Wea(...)er, Cloth-worker, Tucker or Dresser, Fuller, Drawer,
Napper, Kalenderer, Dyer, Setter, Presser, and Packer.

Several Statutes have prohibited the Exportation of Wool unmanufactured for
the better setting on work the poor People* this Kingdom, and to the intent the
benefit of working the same into Cloth, Searges, Stuffs, Bays, Kersies,
Blankets, Hats, and (...)ockings, may come to the Subjects of this Kingdom, and
not to Foreigners. For the same Reason the obstructing (...)he Exportation of
those Commodities, when wrought, is injurious to the Crown, and destructive to
the Subject; for (...)t is plain and obvious, that the hindrance of the
Exportation of the woollen Manufacture prevents the consumption of Wool in
this Kingdom, and brings down the price thereof, and empoverishes the Subject,
so that he is not able to pay his Rent; and consequently the mischief falls on
the Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom; and the more woollen Ma(...)ufacture
is Exported, the greater will be the King's Revenue, and the more Ships
employed. Therefore, and for the (...)easons following, the Hamborough Company,
who pretend to have the sole Trade in Cloth, and all other woollen Manufactures
to the places abovementioned, are destructive to the Trade of this Kingdom.

The Hamborough Company in a few years last past have been the occasion of the
loss of vast Sums of Money to (...)his Kingdom, for they have arrested the
Ships and Goods of all Persons not Free of their Company, by Process out of
(...)he Admiralty Court, for endeavoring to send Cloth, Searges, and Stockings
to Germany.

They have also Summoned others before the Privy Council, and caused them to be
imprisoned, and others they (...)ave sued at Law, and in the High-Court of
Chancery, for Trading in the woollen Manufacture of this Kingdom, and (...)ave
by such means put so great a stop to the Trade here, that in Silesia, and other
parts beyond the Seas, they have (...)earnt to make Cloth themselves, and do
make several Thousand Cloths in a Year; and they many times attempt (...)o
Import Cloth into England. And this has been occasioned by the Hamborough
Company's putting a stop to the Trade here.

The Germans, and others, are now, very curious, and will have Cloth, Stuffs,
and Stockings, sent them according to their Patterns, and will not go to
Hamborough to buy, but send their Patterns into England, where they can be
supplied with all varieties much sooner, and at less charge.

Those of the Hamborough Company send all their Cloth to Hamborough and Dort,
where all Persons must come to (...)uy, which they will not do, by reason those
places are far distant from the habitations of the buyers; and when they
(...)ome there perhaps cannot be supplied according to their Patterns; so that
if they cannot have Cloth, Stuffs, and Stockings immediately from England
according to their Patterns, they will and do buy Cloth made in parts beyond
(...)he Seas, which has already much impoverisht the Clothiers of this Kingdom.

The Hamborough Company do not Trade in a joint Stock, as other Companies do,
but every Man Trades for himself with his own Stock; and all persons free of
that Company must take an Oath not to send their Cloth to any Towns (...)eyond
the Seas, but Hamborough and Dort; and to observe all Orders by them made, and
to be made, so that they (...)o as much as in them lies, obstruct a Free Trade,
and, if not prevented, will in all probability ruin most of the Clo(...)hiers
and Dealers in Cloth of this Kingdom.


