REASONS Humbly Offered for Continuing the Right of Foreign-Built Ships, now
belonging to English Owners, to Load at and from any of the Plantations for
England directly.
THE Intent of the Bill for Preventing Abuses Committed to the prejudice of the
Plantation-Trade, particularly by the Scotch, and to hinder the Trading in
Foreign-Built Ships from Port to Port, and from one Colony to another in the
Plantations, being now before your Lordships,

It is Humbly proposed to your Lordship's Consideration.

I. That the present War has very much decreased the Shipping of England,
especially those Employed in the Plantation-Trade, so many having been Taken,
and Lost. The Consequences of the War have made all Materials for Building
Ships very dear, and the Great Occasion the King has for Shipwrights, makes
Building not only very Chargeable, but also Dilatory, for want of
Ship-Carpenters, and altogether a great discouragement to Build many Ships
during the War.

II. That Foreign-Built Ships, Called English Shipping, as belonging Bona Fide
wholly to English Owners, and Bought for Valuable Considerations, and Navigated
with the Master and three fourths English Seamen, are not even in Times of
Peace Excluded by the Act of Navigation, nor by the Act of Frauds, from going
to the Plantations to load there for England directly, Paying Aliens Customs if
not made Free.

III. That during this War, there has been a want of Shipping to bring off the
Yearly Product of the Plantations, the Natural Consequences whereof are High
Freights, and few Goods, and those Sold Dear here, and but little left to be
Exported to Foreign Markets, for the want whereof we suffer so much in the
Exchange, and are forced to send out the more Money.

IV. That the English Merchants and Traders in this Kingdom being no^ debarred
by the said Acts of Navigation and Frauds to Trade with Foreign-Built Ships,
under the Conditions therein mentioned, have always been possessed of such
Ships, whereby the Customs as well as the Trade have been Increased.

It Is therefore Humbly Hoped that such Provision may be made in the said Bill,
as may Preserve the Right and Property of the Subjects to continue such
Foreign-Built Ships in the Plantation-Trade as before this time they are
Possessed and Owners of. Provided they do not Trade from Port to Port in the
Plantations, nor from one Colony to another.


