AN EXACT ACCOUNT OF THE RECEIPTS, AND DISBURSMENTS Expended by the Committee
of Safety, Upon the Emergent Occasions of the NATION.

Delivered in by M. R. Secretary to the said Committee, to prevent false
Reports, and prejudicate Censures.

LONDON, Printed for Jer. Hanzen. 1669.

AN EXACT ACCOUNT OF THE RECEIPTS, etc.
May it please your Honors,
I Am come here according to Order, to present unto ye, an exact Account of
what Money was disburs'd by the Committee of Safety in the short time of their
sitting. Truly I would fain justify my self and them who were my Masters, for
I desire to appear an honest man outwardly what ere I am inwardly. I know and
am not ignorant what a good thing it is to be a good Steward, for I know you
love good Stewards, and have thrown out the Family of the Stewards, because you
thought them not to be good Stewards; I make no question but your Honors will
find this to be a just and true Account; for I learnt Substraction,
Multiplication, and Addition while I was at Drury House, and I thank God I
attained also to some small knowledge of the Golden Rule; I could have wished
with all my heart it had bin more, yet I intended to have perfected my
knowledge in the Committee of Safety, had my time not bin so short; However I
entreat your Honors to consider, that the Committee of Safety could be at no
small charges, in regard of the Expenses that waits upon Authority. We had many
Mouths to feed, many wanting Brethren that were in charity to be relieved; and
Charity, your Honors know, how laudable a thing it is. All men love Money, all
men seek for it, and are never well till they have it; And would ye have the
Committee of Safety more then men? Truly I can assure your Honors they were but
men at their highest, and now they are God knows what; it is thought some of
them now wish they were women: It Is true, Changes have been very advantageous
to a great many men in these times, but there are no changes now can do them
good, but such Metamorphoses as the Poets speak of. I my self wish I had been
changed into an Elder tree, to have been cut out into Pot-guns, when I first
fingered a penny of their Money. Truly I think the curse of Simon Magus fell upon
them, for no sooner was their Money spent, but they were forced to run away; so
that I may say of them, that They and their Money perished together. How it
perished, I hope your Honors will hereby receive full satisfaction; I would
have your Honors contented with this Account which I have here brought, but I
assure your Honors if you will not, I can bring you no other. I have one word
more by way of Petition, That your Honors would be pleased to consider my
condition, and if I have laid out any money out of my purse (as you may hereby
perceive that I have) that you will be pleased to restore it me again, and give
me ten times as much more. It Is a sad thing to be poor and needy. O Hunger,
hunger, said the famous Champion of England, more sharp then the stroke of
Death, thou art the extremest punishment that ever man endured, if I were now
king of Armenia, and chief Potentate of Asia, yet would I give my Diadem, my
Scepter, with all my Provinces for one sliver of brown Bread. I speak this to
show you how much it concerns every man, and as well my self as any body else,
to prevent poverty, which makes me urge my petition to ye once again, That you
would not only not take away what I have got, but rather, as I said but just
now, give me ten times more. May it please your Honors, I have done, the Lord
bless you, and incline your hearts to pity and compassion.

Received out of the Treasuries of the Excize, Customs, and the Exchequer --
430000 l.

Disbursed as follows.

The ACCOUNT.
l. s. d. IMprimis, For three and twenty long Cloaks, at seven pound ten
shillings per Cloak, to cover the Committee of Safety's Knavery, 243 00 00 Item
for six dozen of large fine Holland Handkerchiefs, with great French Buttons,
for the Lord Fleetwood, to wipe away the Tears from his Excellencies Cheeks,
at twenty shillings per Handkerchief, 72 00 00 Item for four New Perriwigs for
his Lordship, at six pound a Perriwig, together with a dozen pound of Amber
Powder, with four wodden Blocks, and half a dozen of Tortois shell Combs, 41 10
00 Item for a Silver Inkhorn, and ten gilt Paper-books covered with green Plush
and Turkey leather, for his Lady to write in at Church, 07 03 03 Item paid his
young Daughters Musick-Master, and Dancing Master, for fifteen Months Arrears,
due at the Interruption of the Parliament, 59 05 00 Item for twelve new Brass
Nails that were wanting in his Coach, and removing all his Excellencies horses
shoes, and blooding his Pad Nag, 160 01 02 Item for four rich Mantles for his
Lady, two laced, and two embroidered, and a brave New Gown, made to
congratulate her Husbands new Honor, 270 00 00 Item bestowed by her Order, upon
the Journey-men Tailors, and given to him that brought home and tried on her
said Gown, seven Pieces in gold, 07 14 0^ Item for changing an old fashion
Caudle-cup, and three silver Skillets that were melted, 10 00 00 Item for the
Use of his Excellencies Rooms, his Chairs and Cushions; as also for Candles
and Scotch-Coales, while the Committee of Officers sat in his House, 500 00 00
Item for an innumerable company of Pectoral Rolls, and Lozenges, to dry up his
Excellencies Rheum, at two pence a piece, 30 02 02 Item paid the Apothecary's
Bill, for Pills and Glisters for the last Autumn, 31 12 00 Item for two Rolls
of Spanish Tobacco for Colonel Sydenham, at twenty shillings per pound,
according to the Protectors rate, and five black Pots to warm Ale in, at twelve
pence a piece, together with ten groce of glazed Pipes, at nine shillings the
groce, 45 13 04 Item for two gilt Horn-bookes for his great son, at two
shillings six pence a piece, 00 05 00 Item bestowed upon the Lord Lambert five
thousand pounds, to buy him the several Pictures of Moses, Mahomet, Romulus and
Rhemus, Caesar, and all those that were the first Founders of large Empires and
Kingdoms, 5000 00 00 Item presented to the Lord Lambert the Root of a Tulip,
and a certain East-Indian Flower with a hard Name, which for their rarity, cost
two hundred and fifty pound, 250 00 00 Item paid the said Lord, who is now no
Lord, six thousand pound, to be spent the Lord knows how, in a certain
Northern Expedition, which came to nothing, 6000 00 00 Item laid out for seven
rich New Gowns, bespoke at Paris for the Lady Lambert, to be worn seven several
days one after another, at her Husbands coming to the Crowns, every Gown
valued at sixty pound, one with another, 480 00 00 Item for Pins and Gloves for
the said Lady, 83 09 00 Item for seven New Whisks, laced with Flanders Lace of
the last Edition, each Whisk valued at fifty pound, 350 00 00 Item for four
hundred Packs of French Cards with Pictures, to play at Best and Picquet
withal, 200 00 00 Item for a new pair of Spurs for Colonel Clark, and a new
Whip with a silver Handle, and a Coral Whistle at the end of it, to call the
Ostler, 003 06 00 Item for Vamping the said Colonels Riding-boots, and for new
Spur-leathers, 10 00 00 Item laid out for Wedding Clothes for the Lord
Lambert's Daughter, 1150 00 00 Item given to the Lord Wareston one thousand
pounds to buy him a House and Land here, because his Lordship had expressed a
very great dislike of his own Country, and was then resolved never to have
gone thither any more, 1000 00 00 Item given to the Lord Strickland for his
very ordinary Service, a dozen of gilt Nutmegs, at six pence three farthings a
piece, 00 06 04 Item given to Colonel Berry five hundred pound, to buy him a
three-handed sword, 500 00 00 Item given to Lord Mayor Tichborn three thousand
pounds, to buy him a Hobbyhorse and a clear Conscience, 3000 00 00 Item paid
to a Spectacle-maker, for a Spectacle with one glass for Col: Hewson, four
hundred pound, 400 00 00 Item paid for three great Saddles for the Lord
Lawrence's son, and for Provender for his lofty Steeds, ever since the
Protectors Political death, 500 00 00 Item reimbursed to the said Lord
Lawrence, several Sums of Money which his eldest Son had squandered away upon
Poets and Dedications to his Ingenuity, to the value of five hundred pound
more, 500 00 00 Item paid Sir Harry Vane to defray the extraordinary charges of
his fruitless Voyage into the Hope, 800 00 00 Item given the Gunner for four
Salutes as he went off the Admiral, ten pieces in gold, 12 00 00 Item paid the
Scrivener for writing out the League made betwixt him and the Lord Lambert,
when they joined their Forces together, 15 00 00 Item for a great sharp Knife
to cut his Meat, according to his stomach, with an Agate handle, 02 04 01 Item
for Caudles devoured by his Lady every morning, for these last three months,
60 07 02 Item allowed Sir Harry Vane five hundred pound, to pay for the
Exchange of Money which he transferred into Holland, 500 00 00 Item allowed him
him five hundred pound more, to buy him Fortunatus's Cap, 500 00 00 Item given
to Colonel Cobbet three hundred pound, to buy him Mambrine's Helmet, and the
Sword which St. George pulled out of the Rock, 400 00 00 Item disbursed to the
Lady Thomas, at the request of her Father in law, four hundred and seventy
pounds, to make her husband a new pair of Horns, his old ones being now worn
our, 470 00 00 Item for new Chairs for the Council Chamber, and for brushing
the Hangings, and Airing the Room, for fear of any Infection that the Lord
Lamberts enemies might leave behind them, 201 03 06 Item for Switches which
the Lord Lambert wore out when he interrupted the Parliament, and for making
clean his Boots the next day, 43 00 00 Item bestowed upon Mr. Holland nine
hundred pound to buy him six New Iron chests, to lock up his Money in, 900 00
00 Item paid the Herald for a New Coat of Arms for Major General Disborough,
with this Motto, God speed the Plough, fifty eight pound, 58 00 00 Item paid
for new Matting one of his Bed-chambers, sixteen pound, two shillings, two
pence, 16 02 02 Item paid the Lord Whitlock one hundred pound for his great
Swedish Cat, that it might be kept in the Tower as one of the Lord Lamberts
Chattels, for the public benefit and satisfaction of the Nation, 100 00 00
Item paid the fellow that cut the Lord Lamberts corns, the day before he went
out of Town, five pound in gold, 05 10 00 Item for a Tinder box for the Lord
Lambert, with a thousand Card-matches to light his Candles with, when he waked
in the night, 16 15 10 Item for half a score New Lasts for the Committee, to
set their consciences upon when they began to pinch 'em, 30 07 00 Item taken by
Mr. Cor. Holland five thousand pound, to satisfy himself for an old Debt owing
him by King James, paid no less then twice before, 5000 00 00 Item taken by the
Lord Whitlock, to satisfy himself for his Embassy into Swedeland, 20000 0 0
Item given to Mr. Thankful Owen, a small Collop to etch out his fortunes, 400
00 00 Item given to Mr. Brandrith a thousand pound, because he had never any
thing given him before, 1000 00 00 Item presented by the whole Committee to the
Lady Lambert, a Tooth-pick Case of Gold, beset all over with Diamonds, Rubies,
and Emeraulds, cost fifteen hundred pound, 1500 00 00 Item for a bundle of
Rods, and Utine to soak them in, which Rods were prepared for those that voted
the Lord Lambert out of Commission, 75 10 05 Item given to Cardinal Mazarine
fifty thousand pounds, to show him there was Money stirring then in England, as
well as in the Protectors time, 50000 0 0 Item bestowed upon Colonel Salmon
five hundred pound, to buy him Borage-water, and Syrrop of Gillyflowers, to
keep up his heart, by reason of his continual sighing, 500 00 00 Item laid out
of my own purse two hundred and fifty pound, for several Colations and Dinners
both in Fishstreet, and elsewhere, 250 00 00 Item for Bottles of Wine spent in
my own house, one hundred pound, 100 00 00 Item for Banquetting-stuff, and
Sweetmeats of all sorts, for my Wife to entertain Visitants; and for six new
Flander-lac'd Smocks, 300 00 00 Item for a Neck-lace of Oriental Pearl, and
three Diamond-rings, and a silver Warming-pan, 400 10 06 Item for a New great
Powdering-tub, and a Suit of Tapestry hangings, 61 05 00 Item laid out one
hundred thousand pound, which was carried down to the banks of the River Tweed
by way of Temptation, which being utterly refused, was afterward distributed
into private Quarters, which is all the account I am able to give of it, 100000
Item paid the Under-clerks of the Committee, several sums of Money spent in
Alehouses and Bawdyhouses, according to their several accounts, amounting in
all to one hundred eighty three pound, 183 00 00 Item paid Politicus five
hundred and five pound, to make good several sums of Money by him lost in
Bowling Greens, and at the Comb-makers Ordinary, 505 00 00 Item for Capers,
Sampire, and Olives, and ten Bushels of Kentish Pippins for Lambs-wooll, being
all very scarce commodities in the North, to furnish the Lord Lamberts Table,
700 06 02 Item for a hundred bottoms of Packthred, but for what use I know not,
103 00 00 Item for Ink, Paper, Pens, Wax, and blew Dust, 1000 00 00 Item for a
hundred thousand pound of great Candles, and given as a Gratuity to the
Chandlers boy for bringing them in, 2500 00 00 Item paid to Linck-boyes for
lighting the Commissioners and Council of Officers home to their Lodgings, 94
00 00 Item paid unto the Sentinels, for pissing near the Guard, 057 03 06 Item
for East India Night-Gowns for the Commissioners, and the rest of the Officers,
and for Night-caps for them, 233 00 00 Item paid the Chaplains for three
Fast-days, and for Pomecitron to keep the Commissioners empty stomachs from
wambling, 789 00 00 Item for twelve pair of cut-finger'd Gloves for my self to
write in, 10 00 00 Item for Coffee which the Commissioners drank every morning,
especially when they had got a Dose over night, 340 10 00 Item toward the
repairing the Ruins of Trey, 20000 Item for Whips, Tops, and Joynted-babies,
for the Commissioners younger children, 89 07 00 Item for writing out the
Instrument of Government seven times over, 050 00 00 Item allowed Colonel
Hewson, for his charges at the Sessions House, 495 00 00 Item for three blew
Beans in a blew Bladder, 93 00 00 Item paid to Lilly for casting the Nativities
of the Commissioners children, 500 00 00 Item given to Sir Harry Vane three
thousand pound, to raise a Regiment of Anabaptists, 3000 00 0 Item bestowed by
his appointment upon Inciters, Promoters, and Instigators, 1000 00 00 Item
given as a present to the Pope twenty thousand pound by the said Sir Harry, for
several and sundry courtesies done him by his Holiness, 20000 0 0 Item for a
hundred new cords, which were to be used when the Lord Lambert came to Town;
and also for new setting the Axe in the Tower, 204 05 10 Item for a very strong
Padlock to be hung upon the Parliament House door, and a silver Key, which was
to be delivered to St. Peter, to be by him kept till the Lord Lambert should
call to him for it, 110 12 08 Item given the Porter of Wallingford-House, for
letting the Officers in and out, and sitting up all hours of the night, 100 00
00 Item for drawing the Mortgage of my Lord Lamberts House and Lands, and for
Fees to the Council, 200 00 00 Item for a New Riding-hat for his Lordship,
because he was told that that which he wore in the day of his wrath, made him
look like a Finsbury Archer, 10 00 00 Item bestowed in New years gifts one upon
another, every one giving out of the public stock, 7000 00 00 Item for a
Paddle staff and a brown Bill for Major General Disborough, when his Worship
pleases to walk his grounds, 07 10 00 Item paid to M. Saloway for Raisons,
Corrans, and Pruens, at excessive rates, for the keeping of Christmas, 2000 00
00 Item laid out for Turbants, Shashes, and Scimitars for the Lord Lambert, and
the rest of his Adherents, nine thousand five hundred fifty six pound, which
made men think they would have turned Turks, had they come into power, 9556
00 00 Item to the three great Officers in the Commonwealth of Oceana, the
Polemarch, the Strategus, and my Lord Epimonus, ten thousand pound, to buy 'um
Figs, Melons, and yellow hats, 10000 00 0 Item given in charity to the State of
Venice, who are the Bulwark of Christendom, 12000 00 0 Item laid out upon a
great Hog-trough to be set up in Rumford, as a Trophy of their public
Magnificence, 3000 00 0 Item sent into Lapland for the retaining of a certain
Necromancer, who was to assist them in the carrying on their great Work, 5000
00 00 Item for black Wool and Civet, to stop the ears of the Committee and
Council of Officers from hearing any thing that might tend to their own, or the
good of the Nation, 50 00 00 Item laid out for a New Scepter for his intended
Highness the Lord Lambert, 500 00 00 Item for Granado's to fire the City, 100
00 00 Item paid for a pound of May butter, made of a Cows Milk that fed upon
Hermon Hill, given to the Lady Lawrence for pious uses, 87 10 00 Item given to
a Projector, toward a certain Design which he had to bring over an enchanted
Castle, to secure the Lord Lambert's foes in, 5000 00 00 Item paid to another
Projector, toward a Design which he had to look in the middle of the Western
Ocean, for a great Spanish Gallioon that was sunk with the weight of the Gold
that she carried, some thirty years ago, 2500 00 00 Item for a fair pair of
Tables, with several bales of Dice, that those Commissioners who cared not to
trouble themselves with the Affairs of the Nation, might not want something to
pass the time away withal, 57 50 00 Item for nine Mil-stones for the Lord
Lambert's nine Worthies to wear about their necks in stead of Georges, and for
blew Ribbans to hang them in, 500 00 00 Item for one of the Emperor of Russia's
cast Furre-Gowns, for the Lord Wareston to wear while he was President of the
Committee, 754 00 00 Item for a Shooe-makers Measure to be provided by Colond
Hewson, for the Commissioners to take the length of the peoples feet, 023 00 00
Item for a Tun of Sallet-oyl, to make their Tongues glib, when they were to
talk with the Aldermen and Common council, 233 12 06 Item paid the Lord
Fleetwood for Scraps given to the Beggars at his door, 300 00 00 Item for
twenty pair of Castanets for the Ladies to dance Serraba^ds at Sir Harry Vanes
sons wedding, 050 00 00 Item paid to the Army, Never a farthing. 000 00 00 Item
paid to the Navy, as much. 000 00 00 Summa totalis, 430000 l.

Thus your Honors may see how vainly and profusely we have squandered away a
very considerable Sum, which your Honors had carefully laid up for better and
more important uses. I shall only say this in the behalf of my Masters, that
if you please not to be rigorous with them, and to call them to any further
Account, they will take it not a little courteously, and be bound to pray for
your Honors, though if your Honors think ^t to do otherwise, I do believe the
whole Nation in general will be more indebted to your Justice.

FINIS.

