The Reasons Humbly offered for continuing the Stage-Coaches upon the grand
Roads of this Kingdom ANSWERED.
First and Second Reason,

THe keepers of the said Coaches apprehending the usefulness of them to the
public, and being by Counsel advised it was lawful to set them up, did about
30. years sithence set them up, have ever sithence continued them, at their
very great charge and hazard for the convenience of the subject and to the
general satisfaction of those that have used them; laid out all their stocks
upon, and spent all their time in management of them, by means whereof they
have rendered themselves unfit for any other course of lively hood for support
of themselves and familes.

Answer By the Stage-Coaches on the Grand Roads of England, is meant Exeter,
Salsbury, Bristol, Southampton, Dover, Norwich, Lincoln, Northampton, York
Westchester, and Shrewsbury, the owners of which Coaches, join in opposing the
suppressing.

Norwich was set up about 30 years, sithence York about 18. Chester about 20,
Exeter between 20 and 30. the others very lately.

The first stage-Coaches were long Coaches in the middle of the Wagons, that
traveled with their horses one before another, about 20 or 25 miles a day,
were a week or eight days going to York, Exeter, and Chester, and so
proportionably to the other stages.

These traveled easy, carried sick and Ancient people, journeys suitable to
their strength, and went not above one to a place, in one week, so did no great
hurt.

And as it was a great convenyency to the Subject, that could not travel any
other way, so it was lawful to set them up.

But the persons who now keep Stage Coaches, are not the men that first set
them up, nor have they continued them 30 years, or been since they undertook
them a conveniance to the Subjects that have used them, any way answerable to
the grandeur of the mischiefs they have been, and are, to Trade in general,
especially to the Manufacturers of Wool, Leather, ^ron, the staple commodites
of the Kingdom, who ought to be encouraged; nor have they given that general
satisfaction to those that have used them, as will appear in the answer to
their Arguments.

But these Gentlemen finding the Coaches aforesaid set up, took the advantage
of the late troubles, and when men's horses were taken from them, so that they
had not to carry them their journeys, set up these Coaches that go with horses
two a breast, and for many years traveled with four horses in a Coach, and
went to York, Exeter, and Chester, in a week, and but once a week; all this
time there were so few, that they did little or no hurt, but now of late, have
set up running Stage-Coaches, change horses twice a day, run these long
journyes in four days, to the great prejudice of the Country, and they have
three Coaches a week at least, sometimes, 4, 5, 6, Coaches go to every of these
towns, which is a great destruction to the Country as will hereafter appear.

From these Gentlemen, example it is, that now all great towns in England have
set up Stage-Coaches and every little town within twenty miles of London sworms
with them, to the almost utter destruction of the Country.

These Stage Coachemen that have been the principal occasions of this
incomparable advantage to the Kingdom, having laid out their stock their time,
and their wit, to contrive this Ruin, and who have no way to live but upon the
further destruction of the people, hope therefore that they shall be continued,
and allowed. For York and Lincoln Stage is kept by Mr. Doin a Scrivener by
trade, Mr. Gardne^ an Innholder in York, and a Coach and Harnes-maker, follows
the trade, The Widow Hayhunt who is Licensed to keep a Coach in London and
keeps an Inn, Exeter Coach is kept by Mr. Fleming a Licensed Coach in London,
Mr. Biscopy and Mr. Baker both rich men and of other employ. Shrewsbury and
Chester Coach kept by Mr. Halloway Mr. Fowler and Mr. Earl, all rich men, and
Licensed to keep Coaches in London, and the last of them, follows the trade of
Coach and Harness making. Dover Stage kept by Mr. Jones Licensed in London,
Nothampton, by Mr. King Licensed in London. Winchester and Henly, by Mr.
Hathoway and Mr, Robinson, both Licensed, Windsor, by Mr. Sadler a Licensed
man, and Mr. Lee a Rich Barber Chyrurgeon. Gloucester, Bedford, Huntington, by
Mr. Comwell, Mr. Rash, Mr. York, All three of them great Carryers and keep
Wagons. Bristol, Bath, Newberry, by Widow Tooby, who is Licensed. Mr. Baldwin
that has an Inn at Twiford, Mr. Wells Innkeeper at Bath, Mr. Shute a Baker,
and Mr. Drew Innkeeper at Newberry. Redding Coaches, the owners Inholders in
Redding, Tunbridge, Mr. Forster, and others, all Licensed in London. Gilford,
Mr. Kemp Licensed in London. Mr. Smart Innholder in Gilford. Oxford. Mr. Moore,
and Mr. Bartlet both Waggoners and Carryers. Salisbury, Mr. Minchin a Carryer,
the others great Inholders in Salisbury, and so in most towns of England, (
except here about London, which are all set up within few years) The owners of
Stage-Coaches are Inholders, first, one in a town set up a Coach, brought all
Guests to his house, Then a second, third and fourth in a town set them up to
bring guests to their houses, and run one against the other, killed multitudes
of Horses and almost ruined one another, insomuch that excepting these Long
Stage-Coaches, (who you see know not how to live, though qualified as
aforesaid) they would be glad all over England to have them put down, if that
all might go down, for then trade would be defused, and each expect a Trade
according to the reception they had for their Guests.

3. Reason. They aleadge they employ great numbers of people of other Trades,
set poor boys at work, that would live idly, breed many fit to make Coachmen
and Postilions for the Nobility and Gentry.

To this it is humbly answered, where they employ one man in their service,
they destroy a hundred men that (if they were put down) would live handsomely,
they have a man to drive a Coach, and a boy at an Inn to rub their Horses, and
an Hostler to help grease or make clean their Coach; this is the most they use:
but they take away the trade of the Shoemaker, Spurrier, Cutler, Girdler,
Lorrainer, Gunsmith, Glover, Hosier, Clothier, and all that depends upon
clothing. The Smith, the Braysier, the Founder, the Tailor,, Cloth-worker,
Cloth-drawer, and a hundred Trades more, to which men were bound, served seven
years Apprentiship, and are of the greatest advantage to the Kingdom,, ought
to be encouraged, being the Manufacturors of the Staple commodities of the
Kingdom; these with their Families will be proved above two hundred thousand
of them are undone, shall these be ruined by about two thousand men that drive
Stage-Coaches and rubb horses heels, on pretense they shall be fit to serve the
Nobility and Gentry; when as whilst they are breeding, they so lower the Rents
of Lands, by hindering the Consumption of the Manufacturies and Provisions of
the Kingdom; that few Gentlemen will be in a capacity (if continued) to keep
either Coach or Horses for them to drive.

4. Reason they offer is, That multitudes of Men and women, ancient or sickly,
and so of children that are not able otherwise to travel, or not without great
danger will be prejudicial.

It is humbly offered, such people when they had occasion to come to London
(before these Coaches were set up) did come up on horseback, but if they be
ancient and sickly, or young children, then is the long Coaches much fitter to
carry them, then the running Coaches, for they travel easier, go out later,
come in earlier, bate longer by the way; and therefore as anciently would be
made use of, if running Coaches were down and these if not too numerous, would
do no great hurt to the Country.

5. Reason, It would be great trouble to the Subjects, disapoint their
business, and be an imposing upon them in the manner of their travel and
expenses, which is unusual, grievous and without President.

For Answer, It need be no disappointment, for if they be minded to Coach it,
they may set out a day or too sooner, and come in the Wagon Coaches; if their
business be speed, they may ride Post, and as cheap as in these Coaches; for a
man may have a Post horse at 3 d. a mile, which to York will come but to one
pound sixteen shillings, and you must pay forty shillings for the Coach, and
then you may come in half the time that the Coach comes, and there is no
imposing upon any man, he may hire a Coach, travel in his own Coach, or go in
long Coach, or hire Horses, go Post, or use his own horses.

6. Reason, Persons that come from Ireland, France, Flanders, Isle of Wight,
Garnsy, Jersey, from Scotland or Wales, what shall they do, they have found by
experience how exacting men are that keep Horses to Let, and found the
inconveniency of tired Iades.

Here you may see the design is only to keep up the six or seven Stages
aforenamed. Dover to bring Passengers that come from France and Flanders,
Bristol, Exeter and Chester to bring Passengers from Ireland, or Wales, and
York to bring people from Scotland, Southampton to bring from Isle of VVight,
Guernsey and Iersey, of which there will be no need at all to have any Coaches
but the Wagon Coaches; and whereas they talk of tired Jades, were these
Coaches down, that men might have hopes of hire for their horses, they would
keep very good ones, and let them cheaper then ten shillings a day, which
Gentlemen are forced to pay for riding in these Coaches. And I should be glad
if they would be so ingenious as to confess how often Gentlemen are hindered by
the breaking of their rotten Harness, or Wheels, Axeltrees, or Pearches; or by
their Tyring of their Horses, or overthrowing their Coaches, and so brought at
midnight into their Inns by Torch lights.

7. Reason Putting down Stage-Coaches would be greater prejudice to the
Subjects in general then the keeping them up, can be to any person; yet if all
the Petitioners were all damnified, their interests all conjoined together, are
not to be respected in comparison of the public; and that keeping these
Coaches is of such public concernment, they offer,

1. That way of Traveling by which the people receive most benefit, can Travel
with the least expense of money and time, and most advantageous to their health
and business, ought to be countenanced.

2. That way of Traveling which is absolutely necessary to many, useful to
others, and imposed upon by none, ought to be countenanced, but such is that of
Stage-Coaches, therefore

For Answer, It is great presumption in these Coachmen to bring or set up their
Interests, in the balance or in competition with the interest of the public,
and to say (as in effect they do) that if all the Petitioners were damnified
their interests (howbeit they know the interest of all the Gentry, the Farmers,
the Country Tradesmen, and all the Manufacturors of our Staple Commodites, is
concerned in their being supressed, insomuch that they are cursed where ever
they come, by the people, nay, though they know the safety of the King and
Kingdom is endangered by them, the Kings Revenue as well as Gentlemen's Estates
are lessened, breeding of Watermen and Horses hindered) are nothing nor to be
respected in comparison of the public, which they would make their own
particular interest to be.

For the Arguments they give, we will admit them good and right, and offer
that, which it is hoped will convince all the Readers, that they are rather
against them than for them.

First, Stage-Coaches is a way of Traveling by which men receive most benefit.

Second, Can Travel with least expense of Money and Time.

Third, With most advantage to their healths and business.

Fourth, They are absolutely necessary to some, useful to others, imposed upon
by none, Ergo, to be countenanced.

For the first, can that way of traveling be of the greatest benefit to
travelers that is to the destruction of Trade, prevents the consumption of
Provisions and Manufacturies and brings down the rents of all men's Estates.

They that travel, are either the Gentlemen, the Tradseman, the Husbandman, or
the Poor.

If Gentlemen, what advantage is it to him, suppose he could save money by a
Journey to hinder the consumption of Provisions, and the Manufacturies of the
Kingdom, by which he brings down his own Rents ten times as much in a year, as
he saves in his Journey.

If Tradseman, he cannot be said to have advantage by that way of traveling
that destroys all Trade, his Interest is to promote consumption of all
Commodities.

The Husbandman or Farmer, cry out all over England, they are ruined and have
no vent for their Corn, and Hay, and Straw?

The Grasier, he complains for want of a market for his Cattle; And for the
Poor, Wagon, or long Coaches, would best suite with their Purses.

Secondly, It is a mistake to say men may travel with less expense of money or
time by Coach, then they can do otherwise, for men may travel faster if they
ride Post or on their own Horses (then in most Stage-Coaches,) and as cheap or
cheaper all things considered.

Note, from London to Exeter, York, Chester, each Passenger pays 40 s. and as
much from those places to London, in all 4 l. is four days going, four days
coming in the Journey they change Coaches and Coachmen four times, and each
person that travels usually gives the Coachman 1 s. at the end of his Stage;
that comes to 8 s. and pays at least 3 s. more for the Drink the Coachmen have
upon the Road, this comes in all, to 4 l. 11 s.

This traveller when he comes to London on Horseback, lies at one Inn, pays
nothing for his Lodging, but coming in Coach, pays 5 or 6 s. a week for his
Lodging, so that if he stay fourteen days in London, it costs him 10 s. this
makes 5 l. 1 s. besides the inconveniency of having meat from Cooks at twice
the rate he might have it in Inns, now if these Coaches were down, excellent
Horses would be bred and kept by Gentlemen for their own use, and for men that
cannot keep Horses good, would be kept by others to set out to hyer, these a
man would let for 10 s. or 12 s. a Week. So that if a man were to come from
York or any other long Stage to London, say he were five days coming, five
days going, and stay twelve days in London to dispatch his business in all
three Weeks, Horse hyer will come to 36 s. Horse meat at 14 d. a day one day
with anot her comes to 1 l. 5 s. 8 d. in all 3 l. 1 s. 8 d. so that there is
forty shillings perfectly saved, toward paying for Boots, Spurrs, Saddles,
Rideing-Clothes that are necessary for travelers on Horseback, and would
certainly be better spent on these things, by making whereof the Poor are kept
and relieved, then to be given to a Stage-Coachman for indulging a man in his
lazy and idle habit of body, and thus in proportion a man may save from all
shorter Stages. From Northampton you must pay 16 s. to London, and so much back
from Bristoll, 25 s. from Bath. 20 s. from Redding 7 s. from Salsbury 20, or 25
s. and so in proportion for shorter or longer Stages. If a man come on his own
Horses, the very money paid for Coach hyer would defray the charges upon the
Road; but for them that keep no Horses, if these Coaches were down, you would
have in all great Towns of England, many good Horses kept to be let to
travelers, and there would be a Correspondency between those that keep Horses
in one Town, and those that keep them in another; so that a man might come to
Northampton or to any other place, and have Horses for half the price they now
pay for Coach hyer, and leave the Horse at London, and when his business is
done in London, might hyer Horses back for half what is paid for Coach hyer,
thus it would be over England; by which encouragement would be given to breed
vast numbers of Horses, and Gentlemen would be necessitated to keep Horses for
their own use, and those would be kept in the Kingdom which are now (almost all
that are good for any thing) sent out, and great numbers would be kept in all
Cities and great Towns to be hired out, which would occasion the consumption of
vast quantities of Horse-meat, and raise the price of them, and consequently
rents of Lands.

Thirdly, These Coaches are neither advantageous to men's healths or business.

Pray what advantage to a man's health is it, to be called into the Coach an
hour before day in a morning, and to be kept in the Coach an hour or two within
night to sit in Winter time shaking with Cold, choked with Foggs, freezing for
want of stirring, brought into the Inn so late at night, he cannot stay up to
get a Supper because he must be gone early, called up so early that he cannot
eat, hurryed along all day that he can get nothing to Eat.

What convenience is it for a man when his business is done at London or else
where, for want of a Horse to stay a Week or fourteen days for a passage in
one of these Coaches at great charge that he might save?

What convenience is it for a man that day he is to go out of Town, to be
forced to an hour, or else left behind, so that often he is compelled to leave
business undone and come again about it, which might have been done in an hour
or two, and all this to comply with a surly cursing Coachman?

What convenience is it that a man can never go out of the Road upon any
occasion whatsoever, nor stay at any town to see a friend, or dispatch any
business, but where these Coachmen please, and as little time as they please?

What convenience is it to be stuffed up in a Coach with Strangers, old Sickley
diseased people crying Children, to whose humors men must be subject, and
forced to bear withal and be crowded with their bundles and boxes, and almost
poisoned sometimes with there nasty sents.

But to have these Coaches suppressed, men's lazye humors discountenanced, and
for men to travel on Horseback, this would be a great inconveniency.

For then Gentlemen might so soon as their business is done, having Horses
ready, return home, and not be compelled to stay for a passage in these Coaches.

They may go out in the morning at what time they please, come in at night as
early as they please, choose their company on the Road, and avoid those that
suited not with their quallities and tempers, they might stay as often and as
long in the day time at any place, to bate as they pleased, go out of the Road
when they please, travel as short or long Journies as they please, keep out of
the Foggs, Cold, or Wet, as much as they please; and thereby preserve their
health by taking into a House when the weather is unfit for traveling. And by
this means would many poor Families in the Country be maintained, the Tailors
would get money by mending Clothes, the Sadlers by stuffing or mending Saddles,
Smiths by shoing Horses, mending Bits, Snaffles, etc. Shomakers by liquoring
and mending old Boots, or selling new ones, the Hatter by dressing or putting
Hats on the Block when spoiled with dirt and the weather, and many other
Tradsemen be maintained, besides this way of Traveling. Travelers would come
into their Inns before Shops shut up, stay till Shops open in the morning,
understand the trade of the Town, and if they find any thing useful for them,
lay out Money, buy of the Manufacturies off the place, as Silk or Woosted
Stockings in some places, Laces in other places, Gloves at other places, Boots
or Shoes at other places, Linnen-Cloath at other places; this would be a great
relief and encouragement to the poor People that make these things, and bring
money to the several Towns where they live, and an advantage to those that buy
them.

And if these Coaches were put down, persons would not so often travel from
home, but keep in the Country, and live upon their Estates, by means whereof,
they would buy what they had occasion of in the Country of the Mercers, or
other Tradesmen there, who are now most of them ruined by their neighbors
buying all at London; and by this means money would be kept circulating in the
Country, the ancient Trade of London with Country Chapmen kept up, which
would be of advantage to London, for then they know who they trust, and where
to have money certainly when due; advantage to Country Chapmen, by reviving
Trade amongst them again, and advantage to the Gentlemen who will save the
charges of journeys to London to provide what he may have in the Country, and
thus Gentlemen being in the Country and keeping Horses, and good houses will
take off their Tenants provision, cause such a consumption of them that the
price of them and of his Lands thereby will quickly be raised. But these things
and a hundred more that might be named, (only it is feared they would be too
long,) these are neither conducing to Travellors healths, or business, but
Stage-Coaches are, Ergo to be encouraged.

4. These Coaches are not absolutely necessary to any person, for sick and aged
persons may travel in the Long Coaches aforementioned, with more ease and
better convenience to them, then the hurrying Coaches that travel so early and
late, and run so far of a day, and stop so little by the way, and they are much
better for children.

They are not useful to others, for any man may hier a Coach if his condition
or business requires it, or travel in his own Coach.

But these Coaches are imposed upon many, for since they have been set up in
such multitudes, men careless of keeping good horses sold them, and they are
now forced to come by Coach or no way; Keepers of Horses to Let to hyer, being
so discouraged by them, that they keep none; upon all these accounts it is
hoped the Arguments used for continuing the Stage-Coaches, makes clear for the
suppressing them, since men without Coaches may travel more to the advantage
and benefit of the public, with as little or less expense of money and time,
and yet do infinitely more good with it than by traveling in Coaches, and may
Travel with most advantage to their healths and business.

And since Running Stage-Coaches are neither absolutely necessary to any, or
useful to others, more then other Coaches would be, and yet are imposed upon
many of the Subjects, Ergo they should be discountenanced.

For the Answer they have given to the Reason^ (...) not think them worthy a
Reply, but leave all men that read the Reasons, and their Answe^ judge how
little they have to say against the truth of what is offered against them; but
shall discovery of one or two falacies, by which they endeavor to deceive the
people.
THE long Stage-men tell all people they hinder not the consumption of
Horse-meat; for they (...) but 36 Passengers in a Week, and do keep 40 Horses,
each of which does eat double what a S^ horse eats.

For answer; It is true they keep 40 Horses, and carry but 36 men in a Week;
but they carry 3^ ^ral Passengers every Week, and keep the same 40 Horses all
the year; so that in one year with 40 (...) they carry 1872. Passengers, which
must go and come those Journeys. Let all the world judge w^ if there were not
these Coaches, would not at least 1000 of these Travelers keep Horses for
themselv^ Horses for their Men some of them; so that there would be 1800. at
least used to do the work that n^ do, the like disproportions there is in all
the long Stages

Come to your short Stages 20 or 30 Miles a day, each 4 Horses in a Coach,
carries 6 Passengers that is, 36 in a Week, which makes 1872. in a Year;
Consider then how many Coaches there a^ Windsor, who with 16 Horses carry 7442.
Passengers yearly, 4 at Redding, who with 32 Horses c^ many; 10 at St. Albons:
and so there are to all Towns within 20 or 30 Miles of London. Conside^ one of
these Coaches carrying 1872. Passengers a Year with 4 Horses, how many of these
1872. mu^ Horses of their own, or hire Horses that would be kept to be let, you
would find there would (...) Horses at least kept for one that is now kept,
which will occasion the consumption of Horse-meat.

It is observable, Before these Coaches set up, London spent all the Hay, Oats,
Beans, Pease wit^ or 30 Miles off London that could be spared out of the
Country, and had vast quantities from He^ Water, and from below Graves-end,
many Ships Lading of Beans from Hull, a world of Lincoln-shi^ from Boston and
Lynn, and then Corn and Hay for Horses bore a good Price at London; which
Standard for all Countrey-markets, and then great store of Cattle came from
Yorkshire Lancashire ^coln-shire, and bore greater Price then now, and that it
is not so at this time, is the great prejudice^ Country, and why it is not so
now, is plain.

It is in great measure occasioned by these Stage-Coaches, that are so
numerous, and common, and g^ Towns, so that no man now will keep a Horse; Why?
because his Rents are fallen he cannot; Why i^ fallen? because there is no
consumption, why no consumption of Horse-meat? because now 40 H^ the longest
Stages, 32 Horses in middle Stages, and 4 Horses in twenty Miles Stages, do the
work of (...) 1500. Horses that would otherwise be kept.

In London and Middlesex, before these Coaches set up, abundance of Merchants
and oth^ Tradesmen, as well as all Gentlemen, considering their occasions some
to ride to Fai^ Markets, others to take their pleasure, or go to their
Countrey-Houses, keep Horses for themselv^ for their men; but when the Act for
restraining the Hackney-Coaches in London to 400. came out were above 1200. in
London, who finding they could not work, then removed and placed themsel^ 3 in
a Town, in almost every little Town or Village within 10 or 12 Miles, and all
along the River of 7 and at each Town near the said River; so that now Citizens
and Gentlemen in Middlesex. t^ Horses, and men to look to those Horses, and
Horses for them to ride with them, having a Passag^ Shilling or two from or
into any Town or place about London keep no Horses, nor the men they us^ and
Gentlemen that come to Town in Coaches, coming without Men or Horses; hinder
the great ^tion of provision for Man and Beast, that used to be in London,
London not being now able to spend wh^^ within twenty Miles of it; nor the
Beasts that come from the Countries aforesaid, which is to the great p^ of the
Gentlemen and the Grasiers, and by this means Pasture-lands about London are
fallen a third^

These Coaches ruin the Watermen, carry all Passengers that used to be
Skuller or Oar-fares, an^ the breeding Seamen for the use of the Kingdom.

They hinder the breed of Horses, of which there will be a necessity for all
Gentlemen to apply the unto when Stage-Coaches are put down, otherwise the
Kingdom cannot be served.

They ruin the 400. Hackney-Coaches in London that are Licensed, pay 5 l a
Year, are bound to k^ Horses and Coaches; for these short Stage-men bring and
carry all Passengers to all Towns within (...) of London, and come into London,
break and annoy the Streets, yet pay nothing toward repairi^ if they were
down, at least 100. or 150. of the 400. would be hired out of London, by which
t^ would be less broken or annoyed.

They not only hinder the consumption of Leather, by making Boots, Saddles,
Portmantues, (...) Holsters, Belts, Girts, useless, but hinder making many
Coaches; for if they were down, there (...) made two for every one that is now
made.

They prejudice the Post Office certainly, when Coachmen within 20 Miles of
London offer to g^ Masters 15 or 20 l. per annum a piece for the benefit of
their Letters,.

They must hinder the excise, when it is plain, not one moiety of the Beer and
Ale is consumed on t^ or in the Inns in London, that there was when Gentlemen
did travel with Servants, the Innkeeper (...) two thirds so much for the
Excise as they used to do.

In short, Stage-Coaches are become by their numerousness a common Nuisance, and
tend to the (...) on of the whole Kingdom, so that from all Parts and great
Cities and Towns in England complai^ against them, and most of them petition
for suppressing them. And in as much it is as true, the Pl^ the War destroyed
many people, which hinder a great consumption of what was formerly, the (...)
now there is to use all mean^ to suppress those projects that tend to the
hindering of the consumptio^ may, and certainly will be consumed when they are
destroyed. And such sort he Reasons aforesaid (...) Coaches* Ergo. not to be
countenanced.


