REASONS HUMBLY OFFERED To the Consideration of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, On Behalf of the BILL to Restrain the VVearing of East India and
Persia Wrought Silks, etc.
THAT the Advocates for the East India Company rather blind and amuse the
Matter controverted, than explain it; for the Dispute is not with or against
the Trade in general, but that Branch only which is certainly destructive to
England in the Value of its Land, Productions, Manufactories, Navigations,
Land-carriages, and to the extreme Dispeopling thereof. All which we have and
can make good.

England's own Productions, is the Foundation of all its Wealth, Navigation and
Merchandise; and the due Improvement thereof, especially in the Wool, is what
ought to be principally regarded and promoted; and the Packs in the Honorable
House of Lords bespeak no less.

That England had never recovered the Mischiefs former great Importations of
India wrought Silks brought upon us, had we not been beholden to the Invention
of Worsted Crapes, which for several Years was a universal Fashion, and cut out
the East India Goods and recovered the Trade for Wool, when many Growers
thereof at that first Invention, having Six, Eight, some Ten Years Wool before
hand; and it did likewise greatly increase the Trade in Number, that now want
Employment both at London and other Parts.

That English Wool being first Improved by Manufactory in several Counties and
Towns, and afterward by Navigation and Merchandise to Spain and Italy, brings
home unwrought Silks and Spanish Wool, for the Employment both of Silk Weavers
and Clothiers; which Spanish Wool is again, with our own, Manufactured and
Exported to Turkey and other Parts, and the principal ^s thereof are raw Silk,
and Grograin and Cotton Yarn, Unmanufactured; which again Employes Multitudes
of People, that, as well as the former, live and consume the Productions of our
own Lands.

That the passing this Bill into a Law, will in a few Years greatly increase
our numbers of People in this Kingdom, and will so invigorate the Minds of all
Fabricators both in Silk, Wool, and Grograin Yarn, that have any thing of
Stock or Credit by Faith and Hope, to contend with all other Disadvantages,
though Money should be as scarce as at present; whereas the contrary will
discourage (those of great Ability) to that degree, that the Out-Parishes of
London, Tower-Hamblets, and all the Wool Manufacturing Towns in England, will
not be able to support their Poor.

That East India wrought Silks, etc. is Destructive to all the before mentioned
Advantages, to the Dispeopling of the Kingdom.

That nothing is so great and unnatural a force upon Trade, as sending our
Woollen Manufactures to East India, in regard they are not worn there, but sent
to Persia; to the extreme prejudice of our Turkey Merchants and that Trade. So
that the Consumption of Woollen Manufactories is not increased thereby.

That the more wrought Silks comes from East India, the less raw Silk does come
both from India and Turkey; and nothing is so valuable an Exchange for our Gold
and Silver as raw Silk.

That the passing this Bill will give the East India Trade either to the Scotch
or Dutch, is so Frivolous as deserves no Answer, for it must produce the quite
contrary Effect.

That our Entertainment of so many thousand Strangers argues a necessity for
passing the Bill, unless we intend to maintain them without Working, or Starve
them.

That whatever Reasons induced the French King to part with his Weaving
Subjects, it is plain, that whilst he had them, he took great Care for their
Preservation; for by his Edict 26th of October 1686. He not only Prohibited the
Wearing all sorts of East India Silks and Callicoes; but likewise under a
severe Mulct, forbid the Imitation of figured and flowered Silks, by Printing
or Staining any thing in likeness thereof, and under the same Penalty commanded
all them Prints and Tools for so doing, to be utterly demollished, and never to
be made again. By which it is plain that King had another Opinion of this Trade
and People, then the East India Doctor, that in his Superfine Spun
Linse-woollse Discourse would render it otherwise to us.

That part of the Act for Navigation looks strangely Unreasonable if this Bill
deserves not to Pass, when for the sake and profit only of Throwing and Dying
of Silk, it is prohibited so to be brought both from East India and several
other Parts, for the Weaving part thereof is at least four times the Value to
England than both Dying and Throwing is.

That Manufacturing of Silk is as Reasonable and as Natural, and no more
Foreign to England than to France, Holland or Flanders, though of later
attainment; and it being so greatly beneficial (as it certainly is) deserves
and requires to be the more tenderly Cherisht and Supported.

That at the price Provisions sell in England, it is impossible for English
Manufacturers, either Clothiers, Silk Weavers or Silk Throwsters, to work
Cheaper then they do.

That it is the Interest of all Fabricators, to Work and Sell as Cheap as they
can Afford, and Trade will in that Case certainly adjust it self, and they that
do not will Suffer for it: But we believe not, that our Noble Ancestors placed
the Wooll-packs just under the Throne, to make Wool as little worth as it
possibly could.

That neither Italian, French, or Dutch Silks can prejudice us in our Trades,
so much as India Silks will and does, we Working upon more equal Terms with
them.

That Passing this Bill may occasion the East India Company to Import the more
China and Bengal raw Silks and Cotton Yarn, to the greater Employment of
Shipping and our Manufacturers, which the other will destroy.

That the Great Mogul will be no more displeased at this, than the Great Turk
was, when those Merchants left bringing over Turkey Manufactured Silk, Hair
Grograins and Tammies (which in our Memory were the general Wear of our
Grandmothers and Mothers) and now instead thereof import us only raw Silk
Grograin and Cotton Yarn to Englands great Advantage.

That what is commonly called East India Silk, the principal Substance with
which it is made, is their fine Cotton-Yarn, of which sort of Yarn the Company
never brought much, if any unwrought; and it being softer in feeling than our
English Worsted, better gratifies the Fancies of our nice Females. And except
in that respect, our Grazetts and Autherines are as good a wear as they, if
made to the Value. And these India Silks, are by the Draper or Mercer, sold as
dear, or dearer than English Silks or Stuffs.

That skilful Seamen are made by our Newcastle and Coasting Trade, in such
small Vessels as are continually plying, to serve our numerous Manufacturers
with Coals, Corn, Butter and Cheese and other Necessaries, whilst Trading to
India, consumes them more than in an ordinary manner; and if it be for the sake
of their bringing wrought Silks, they will dye in a bad Cause; for in respect to
Navigation, raw Silk from Turkey, is five times more bulky than wrought from
India.

That if for the gain of the East India Company, our Manufactures must be
destroyed, or work at their Prices, that have all the Necessaries for Life, six
times as cheap as England can afford, and want neither Clothes nor Fuel; the
value of Land, and all its Productions and Rents, must sink answerably thereto.

That we cannot believe, that good Policy for England which is for Holland,
they living in a small spot of Ground, are obliged in reason to leave Trade
more free, and lay their Taxes on the Consumers only: But we that are blessed
with a large Tract of fruitful Land, rich Mines, productive and laborious
Cattle, convenient Ports and Navigable Rivers, must with the Manufacturing our
own Productions improve our Land, by feeding our People, support our Trade,
Traffic, Navigation and Land-Carriage, and by all Lawful ways increase our
People; and if for the sake of any one of these, the others are prejudiced, the
Public must suffer Diminution thereby; but if in Conjunction all are Advanced,
this, and this only, will procure a healthful Constitution in the Body
Politic; and when the other parts of the World can agree on a free Trade, it
will be time for us to consider; and till then, make the best Improvement of
the Blessings of Almighty God.

That the Sentiments of that great Member of the East India Company, Sir Josiah
Child, may judge betwixt us in the 43d Page of his Discourse concerning Trade,
says, That whatsoever advances the value of Land in purchase, That improves the
Rent of Farms, That increases the bulk of Foreign Trade, That multiplies
Domestic Artificers, That inclines the Nation to Thriftiness, That employs the
Poor, That increases the stock of the People, must be procuring Causes of
Riches.


We shall conclude with the undeniable Maxim, of the said Sir Josiah, which he
lays down in his Preface to the said Book.

That a Foreign Expense, especially of Foreign Manufactures, is the worst
Expense a Nation can be inclinable too, and ought to be prevented as much as
possibly.


