THREE Great Questions Concerning the SUCCESSION AND THE Dangers of Popery,
FULLY EXAMIND, IN A LETTER TO A MEMBER of this Present PARLIAMENT.

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted in the Year, 1681.

Three great QVESTIONS, etc.
THere never did, nor perhaps ever will come, a matter of greater importance,
taking in all circumstances, before a Parliament, than the of late much
agitated business of Succession; upon the right stating whereof, the present
and future quiet and prosperity of this poor distracted Nation, does inevitably
depend. I cannot therefore, Sir, but extremely commend your resolution, and
wish the same to all your Fellow Members, of considering fully so momentous an
Affair; wherein, that I may give you all possible satisfaction, I will in their
order lay before you my naked sense upon every of your questions, viz. 1.
Whether the Parliament have power to alter the Succession? 2. Allowing that
they have, whether the reasons on which the late House of Commons proceeded
against the D. to wit, his departure from the Church of England to that of
Rome, and thereby giving Birth and Life to the late damnable and Hellish Plot,
be sufficient? 3. What dangers the Nation will be under, in case the Crown
descends upon a Popish Successor, or more particularly upon his R. H. These
Questions are great and Weighty, and their solution requires not only greater
prudence and judgment, but great courage and honesty; I wish I could be
equally confident, I should not be found wanting in the former, as I am certain
I shall not in the latter. But that I may no longer keep you from passing your
own censure in both instances, I desire, you will consider seriously, not only
the frame and constitution of the English Laws, but likewise those of Nature;
for on the due consideration of both, the true Answers to your Questions must
be founded.

Man was no sooner brought into the World, than he found he could not preserve
his being, nor attain the end ont's happiness, without entering into society;
nor yet, having entered into society, without a strict observance of compacts
and agreements; that all men, having a natural equal right to all things, there
could be no Society without Government and order: That to secure this State, it
was necessary, Men should not only keep their Promises, and speak truth with
their Neighbors, but submit themselves to a Governor, sufficiently empowered
in all disputes, to force their compliance to his final sentence and
determination; it was requisite to put into his hand, an unlimited absolute
Power, because otherwise it could not be supreme, nor he their Governor: For
the exercise of this they chose the most wise, honest, and courageous Person,
binding him to no other Law, than what in reason and conscience he should find
most conducing to the good of the Community, founded upon that Golden and
Eternal Law of Reason, of Nature, of doing to all Men as you would be done
unto. For passion and self-interest disabling Men from judging aright in their
own cases, they wisely made a man without private interest, themselves agreeing
to support his expenses, and thereby placing him above controversies of his
own, he became an impartial common Father, not possible to be more kind or
indulgent to one than to another, while they continued equally obedient. Now,
because their attendance upon labor would incapacitate themselves, and that
one could not have a better pretense than another, they also agreed, that the
Empire should be hereditary; considering that not only instruction which none
else could give, but likewise the virtues of the Father might with the blood be
transmitted to the Children; -- Sed diu
Lateque victrices catervae
Consiliis juvenis revictae,
Sensere quid men's rite, q^d indoles
Nutrit afaustis sub penetralibus
Posset, quid Augusti paternus
In pueros animus Nerones.
Fortes creantur sortibus, and bonis
Est in juvencis, est in equis patrum
Virtus: nec imbellem feroces
Progenerant aquilae columbam.
Doctrina sed vim promovet insitam
Rectique cultus pector aroborant.
Hor. l. 4. Car. Ode. 4. But even they, who spread their Arms so far,
Arms used as much to Victory as war,
By the brave Youth overcome, were taught to know,
What a great mind, as greatly bred could do,
What mighty things by him must needs be wrought,
Whom Nero got, and whom Augustus taught.
Courage and virtue in the blood are sown,
Nature in this her self has equal shown:
The brave are Sparks but of their Fathers Fire.
In Beasts wesee the virtue of the Sire;
Nor does the Kingly Bird, beloved of Jove,
Stain his great Race and hatch a feeble Dove.
Education urges on to deeds,
The inbred virtue sleeping in it is seeds,
With nobler thoughts inspires Heroic minds,
And strengthens all the greatness that it finds.
a Rule that can no more fail in Men, than in Beasts, but when interrupted by
some very accountable accidents.

Wisdom having thus brought men from the state of War and Poverty, into a
condition, of peace and plenty, it is plain nothing but folly and madness can
disturb or destroy that happiness. It Is then very evident, that whether you
consider Mankind, like mushrooms, sprung up in the night, as the Poets Fable of
the Dragons Teeth slain by Cadmus and sown in the ground, the Foundation of
Hobs's fancy, as before him of Aristotle's; or deduce as more consonant to
reason, and Scripture, his origin from one Man; the grounds of Government and
Obedience must still have been the same, and founded upon the foregoing
considerations; whence it will evidently appear, that in all parts of the
World, Empire must have been Monarchical at the beginning. To this truth not
only profane, but sacred story bears Testimony. Principio rerum, says an
Author of great credit, gentium nationumque imperium penes Reges erat: And
wherever in the old Testament Government is spoken of, whether of the Jews from
Adam downwards, or of the Neighbor Nations, even of such little ones, as were
confined within Walls, as of Jericho, Tire, and Sidon, there is no mention but
of Kings, and single Rulers, till after the death of Moses and Joshua; when the
Tribes dividing from their common bond, began to set up Chiefs and Heads of
their own degenerating by degrees from Monarchys, their primitive institution;
but meeting with ill success in all their changes, they begged at last to have,
like other Nations a King to go in and out before them. This having been, and
still being the most general, we may safely conclude it, the best of all
constitutions; But as there is nothing certain, not fixed in the Universe, but
al things in perpetual fluctuation, so the manner of Dominion has met with many
changes and revolutions in the several Ages and parts of the World, according
to the prudence or imprudence of Governors, and other concurring accidents.
From one where the power was first vested, it fell into the Hands of a few, and
from the few into the hands of many, where finding no resting place, but soon
falling into Anarchy and confusion, it wheeled about again to it is first form;
and yet even there, the unsteady course of humane affairs permits it no longer
to continue, then till the unequal courage and virtues of the Successors, make
way for the encroachments of the Ambitious, or the folly and madness of the
giddy multitude, to give it fresh rounds and turns: So that if a man would
examine things strictly, he would find more reason to give to every of the
Governments of the World, rather the name of a fluctuating Oligarchy, than that
by which they are commonly called; for upon exact scrutiny it would perhaps be
found, that even the most absolute Monarchs admit some He or She Privadoes, or
Copartners into the managment of their Scepters. In the beginning the burden of
a Crown was not so heavy, nor the cares so many, as to need Advisers, or
Supporters; then Integrity was so great in Prince and People, that his will,
was their undisputed law, the emergent Dictates of his pleasure, no written
constitutions, silenced all their controversies: Populus nullis legibus
tenebatur arbitria Principum pro legibus erant. But after upon great increase,
and spreading of mankind, the Princes found it necessary (as Jethro, Moses
Father in law, had done in the case of the Jews) to distribute some part of
their power, but with dependence upon themselves, among the Elders, chief and
wisest of their people, and to consult with them, at their pleasure, in all the
weighty Affairs of state. Hence came the Egyptians Magi, not Conjurers as is
commonly received, but Astronomers and Counselors of State, the best Judges of
meum and tuum, in a Country, where those boundaries were often interrupted, by
the overflowings of Nilus; to this likewise are owing the Eastern Monarchs,
Sophies, Colleges of wise and disinteressed Philosophers, and studying and
employed in the good of their Countries, as well those of China. Indostan, or
the great Mogul; the Tartars, and the Persi^ns, as of others; After whose
Exam^s the Turks instituted their Divans, practiced by the Emperors of Fez and
Morocco, and by all the rest of Africa. The same reasons gave the Ethiopian
Priests, and the Druids (of the Gauls and Brittians, originally the same
people) their power, and to the Jews their Sanhedrim; to the Germans their
Dyets, and to the Romans their Senate, to the Pope as a temporal Prince, his
College of Cardinals; to the Saxons, our immediate Ancestors, not to instance
in more, their Wittena Gemot, or great Council, since the Norman conquest
altered in Name and other circumstances; though not in the foundation, to that
of our present Parliaments. In all which it is very observable, that the Priests
the Flamens, and Archflamens, (for such there were among the most barbarous,
who had their glimmerings of a future life) always held the first form, and
were in the management even of State Affairs, of greatest credit. But to pass
by the rest, and come to our own, in which we are most immediately concerned, we
shall find, that upon the Roman Empires going to wrack, and their Colonies with
many of the Natives being hence drained, to support it is tottering State; there
arose a contention between the B^tiains and the Picts, for the dominion of this
Island; they were both originally the same people, but the Picts contemning the
vassalage and the Customs of the Romans, to which the other had submitted, fled
into the extremest parts called Scotland, from the Irish Inhabitants, who were
anciently known by no other Name, and now returning with assistance, were too
hard for the Britains. Hereupon they were forced to entreat the help of the
Saxons, a Warlike people of Germany. The motion being communicated by Hengist,
to whom it was first made, they embraced it, conditionally they might have the
continuance of their own Laws and Custom and the conquered Country equal
ydivided, among the Adventurers; for they undertook not the voyage, so much
with design of assistance to others, as of advantage to themselves. Hengist
surmising this to the Leaders, they soon assembled and drew together 9000 men,
besides Wowen and Children. On the confines of the River Elbe, as their
Neighbors the Franks had done before, on the Banks of Sala; and as these did
here so did they three enact by mutual agreement, the performance of those
Artcles, appointing that Hengist and his line should be their Leaders, and
their Kings; reserving to themselves, the power of choosing a new Monarch, only
upon the failure of his issue. Accordingly they set sail, and soon arriving in
England, had first the Isle of Thanet, and after Kent ^signed for their
Province; after many bickerings, fresh supplies, and inundations of their own
People, they at last not only drive out the Picts and Scots, but even the
Britains; forcing them into the remote part of Wales and Cornwall; the certain
consequence of unnatural civil Wars, and dissentions; where the contending
Parties ever become loosers, making way for some stranger, or third Person to
snatch a way the prize. Policy would have taught the Britains, that Leagues
with an overpowerful State always prove destructive to the weaker; and that
they could not reasonably have expected, from foreign assistance, any other
fate than that of the Lamb in the fable, who calling for the Lions aid against
the Wo^, had only the pleasure of seeing him first chased away, and himself
immediately after devoured; or then that of the Mouse and the Frog, who while
striving with each other for the mastery, gave the Kite an opportunity of
sweeping away both. Not to instance more remotely, it was this that soon after
upon the Saxon divisions, encouraged the invasion of the Danes, and gave
England to the Normans, and Ireland to the English. And not long since while
King and Parliament were disputing for the Supremacy, Liberty and Prerogative,
made the way for others to destroy both, and instead of an excellent well
tempered Government, to set up an intolerable, and most arbitary Tyranny. I
hope the sense of the unexpressible calamities, under which the Nation then
groaned, will teach us to avoid such miseries for the future; another civil
War, being like without a miracle, to enslave us to a Tyrant of another Nation,
which like the Devils entering in a second time, would make our latter
condition, seven fold worse than the former; from which in all appearance,
nothing but Providence, and a Spirit of moderation, and concord, can defend our
Country.

The Saxons having at length gained the Victory, pursued their resolutions,
even during the Heptarchy, as far as the frequent and almost continued Wars
would permit: after the stronger had swallowed up the rest, they centured into
a single Monarchy; and in the person of Alfred, Collected into one body the
substance of their Laws, attempted before in part by K. Ina: and yet to be met
with in Lambert. The execution of these by the after incursions of the Danes,
being interrupted, they were at last methodiz'd by the Confessor; by whose
death, the Normans possessed the Crown, they were rejected, and the usages of
their own Country, and the effects of their Princes will, in their stead,
imposed upon the people; who Stomaching their being thus enslaved, after long
grumblings, and often calling to be ruled by the Laws of holy Edward, they had
by firs the restoration of them in great measure, especially in the first
Harry's days, the better to secure his Usurpation. But that not continuing, at
length a Rebellion broke forth, and produced the confirmation of them, in the
great Charter, or Magna Charta; which in the main, as the best Lawyers will tell
you, is nothing else but the repetition, or examplification of their old
Ordinances, and ever since have been the foundation of all our Statutes.
According to these the people were to be Governed, Liberty and Property secured
against the encroachments of invaders, and Justice to be distributed in the
several Shares, or Shires of England, as in Germany, where Tacitus tells us,
Jura per pagos reddebant; For to make their conditions most easy, the
controversies were to be determined in their own Voisinage, by the Hundreder,
or Lord of the Manor, from whom they might appeal to the Comes, or Lord of the
County, who, with the assistance of several Aldermanni, or Hundreders,
pronounced sentence. Upon this Custom is founded our Judges of Assizes, and the
several Justices of the Peace their Assessors. From this County Court, the
last final Appeal was to the Great Council, after the Conquest called by the
name of Parliament, and composed of the great Lords, Spiritual, and Temporal,
assembled in the presence of the King, when, and where he was pleased to summon
them. To this general meeting, came from all the parts of the Kingdom, as many
as were aggrieved, either by themselves, or their Attorneys, or Lawyers: And
hence it is, that we so often find it mentioned, not only in Spelman, but in
Hoveden, Malmsbury, Marthew Paris, and the rest of the Monkish Writers, that to
this Curia Magna did resort the Princes, Lords, and Chief men, and Causidici ab
omni part Regni: From whence arose the mistake in after Ages, as if those
Lawyers, who were only the Attournies, and Pleaders of their Clients Causes,
made any part of the great Council, unto which the Commons, (whatsoever Mr.
Bacon, Petit, or any former Writers can say of their Jurisdiction) were not
admitted till the latter end of Henry 3. reign, when he observing the
difficulties under which his Father had long struggled, wisely allowed them
such a constitution, and particular Privileges of their own, as might serve to
Counterballance the Power of the Lords, grown so exorbitant that without due
poising and equal Liberation, no otherwise to be done, It must of necessity
endanger the overthrow of the Monarchy, and the disturbance of the whole
Nation. He is therefore to be accounted the first Author of our present
Parliamentary usages, and after his prescript they to this day receive their
Summons, and their being; and yet if we narrowly look into the matter, we
shall find they are more altered in Fashion than in substance, notwithstanding
their often gaining both upon the Crown and the Lords, by the Kings first
allowance of their management of the purse-string of the Kingdom; for the Lords
House alone was made, and still continues the Court of Judicature, and the
ultimate decider of Appeals, where according to their first institution, no
original Cause was to take place; to the house of Commons he has left the first
motions of Grants, and Aids or Subsidies, who represent the People now, as the
Lawyers did before, and cannot in Propriety of speech as well as of Justice be
called by other name, nor allowed greater Power, than of Attorneys. The write
says plainly, The Lords are to advise and deliberate with the King, upon
certain weighty affairs of state, the Commons to consent, and do what, in such
cases, the King shall thereupon enact; whence it clearly follows, that their
Power depends wholly upon the Princes pleasure, and reaches ex instituto, no
further than to the matters by him propounded, and therefore could not
intermeddle with any thing else without his Permission; The Commons then were
called together to represent the peoples grievances, to pray, and receive
redress, as the King, with the advice of the Lords should ordain, and to
signify so much to the several places, for which they serve; Printing not
being then found out, and promulgation being of absolute necessity to the
obligation of all positive constitution. To this Council the people flocked, as
their business, or their humor led them, in confused multitudes representing
by petition their grievances; the Lords appointing a Select number of their
own, first to consider whither they were fit to be propounded to the rest; the
ground of our present Committees. The Commons attending bare-headed for the
Resolutions, consented to them as do Plaintiffs, and Defendants to the Judges
decisions in the Courts of Westminster Hall. Hen. 3. as was said before, to
lessen the power of the Lords, and bring a confused Assembly to a Regular
meeting, ordained every Shire, City, and Borough to send two Knights, and two
Burgesses, as Attorneys for the others: yet till sometime after, they had no
constant Speaker, nor those privileges, of which length of time, and
concessions of Kings have given them possession.

But as neither, nor both Houses, have any original Right or Power, but, as all
Creatures do upon the Almighty, so their Lives depend upon the Breath of the
Princes Nostrils, and with his Call or Command, come into, or go out of the
World: so has the King, on the other side, condescended and promised, That he
will not without their Consents and Approbations repeal old, nor make any new
Statutes; but more particularly, in thirty three Parliaments he has confirmed
the Foundation of all, Magna Charta, the boundaries of their Liberty, and his
Prerogative; and in three declared it so much unalterable, that any Act of
Parliament or Judgment, made or given contrary to it, shall be, and is hereby
made ipso facto null and void. And that with good reason; for this being the
Summary of all ancient Laws and Customs, and the exact Rule and Measure of
Right and Wrong, as well between the King and his Subjects, as between one
another, made or confirmed anew by the unanimous consent of every individual
Person of full years, at the first coming into the Kingdom, and submitting to
the Government of Hengist and his Successors, and conformable to the Laws of
Nature, of Nations; Quod tibi non vis fieri alteri non feceris, ought without
dispute to remain sacred and inviolable, and to be imprinted in the minds of
all freeborn Subjects, and carried about with them in their understandings, as
the Phylacteries of old in the Garments of the Jews. By all which it is plain,
that as the Kings Image and Inscription makes the Coin, so his Approbation or
Fiat makes the Laws current; and consequently, the supreme Legislative Power is
solely vested in him, who may therefore allow or reject at pleasure whatever
Ordinances his Houses judge advisable: The contrary would be a Solecism in
Government, giving to the King the Title only, and leaving to his Subjects the
Power of Kingship; This making the Governed the Governors, and therefore
implying in it self a manifest Contradiction, needs I hope no further
Confutation.

Now in order to answer your first Question, you must remember, that Magna
Charta provides, That no Freeman shall be disseized of his Freehold, put out
of his Inheritance, or forejudged of Life or Limb, but by Legal Process, the
Laws of the Land, and Judgment of his Peers; and by another Branch, That the
Kings Rights and Privileges shall be preserved untouched. One of the chiefest,
and upon which all the rest depend, as on a Cornerstone, is, the
Hereditarinesse of the Monarchy, so that no attainder by Parliament, or
otherwise, should hinder the Descent of the Crown upon the next of Blood; the
Laws supposing the King never dies, which he must do, if the Empire were
Elective: and to the observation of these Laws, on pain of Damnation, the
present and former Kings have all been sworn: So that the King having no power
to act contrary to his Oath at Coronation, and the Laws in being, and the two
Houses having none at all but what is derived from him, it is plain the next
Heir cannot be put by the Succession, without great impiety and violation of
Justice. And this has been declared so in all preceding Parliaments not awed
by Usurpers, as well as by the practice of our Ancestors. And that which most
confirms it, is, That never any yet claimed the Crown in Parliament, but under
the pretense of Lineal Descent, which was never allowed when false, but when
there was not a power in the true Owner equal to the Invader's. Nor does the
King alone in this particular lie under the obligation of Oaths; The Lords and
Commons have not only bound themselves by act of Parliament, 1 Jac. cap. 1. to
defend the true and lawful Heirs of the King, acknowledged the undoubted
Successors, with their Lives and Fortunes to the Worlds end; but do also swear
as often as they meet, or take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, to defend
all the Privileges, Rights, and Preheminences of the Crown, (under which none
can doubt, but Descent in the Right Line is included) against all Pretenders
whatsoever, whether Foreign or Domestic.

But because there are a sort of Men, who, from the foregoing Considerations,
being conscious they cannot maintain the Power of Parliament in this
particular, have recourse to the Law of Nature, I will give you a Scheme of
that, even in their own Sense and Theorems. The Law of Nature is co extended
with the Power of Nature; there is therefore nothing naturally unlawful, and
every man, whether he be wise, or whether he be a fool, is sui juris. Every
thing endeavors to conserve it self within the State of Nature, and to be sui
juris, i. e. to do what he will, to repel all Force, to live ex ingenio suo, i.
e. to be an enemy to every man but himself, if he contradicts his Will. Men
are liable to several Passions, i. e. have several Appetites, by which
naturally they are engaged against one another; and by the Law of Nature they
enforce, i. e. they contend equally jure naturae, which I English, by the Law
of Power. One man is stronger than another by force, and so compels him, who
before was sui juris, to be alterius juri, when he has him bound, disarmed, or
takes away all his Power of offending, or holds him in fear or obliges him by
benefit, or expectation of benefit, by which last means he subjects both his
Body and his Mind, as long as his Fear or Hope lasts, but no longer: By the
former he subjects his Body only, which is the safer way. Again, One man may be
stronger than another by Wit, and so are men subjected to be alterius juris, by
Opinion, Religion, or Superstition, Error and Deceit. Two then are stronger
than one, and therefore the more consenting have the greater right of Nature
against the fewer dissenting, may urge, and compel, and deprive them of their
Natural Right, and, in brief, treat them as enemies. And because no man can
secure himself against a whole World of single men, who have every one the same
Right against me, that I alone have against every one, and much less against a
number joined together; it is therefore necessary for me, who else can have no
security to enjoy what I have, nor probability to acquire many of the
Desirables of Life, to associate my self, and depart from so much of my natural
Right, as prudence and reason oblige me to do, which is pacto vivere, i. e. jus
civitatis, the Law, Right, or Power of the Commonwealth: So that I have
henceforth no more Right to the Law of Nature, than is allowed me, or not
forbidden. I say, not forbidden, because, what is not forbidden, I retain. And
this is the Foundation of Laws; and though a Law be Positive, yet the Virtue of
it is Negative, and as much as to say, You shall not use your Liberty of Nature
in this particular. By which it is very evident, that after men have entered into
Society, those things that before were lawful, cease to be so any longer;
Right, and Wrong, Just and Unjust, depending on the Concessions, Covenants, and
Agreements of the Persons thus combining into one Body. And therefore nothing
is more unreasonable and fallacious than to assert, That the Power and original
Right of Nature for the forming, or altering any Government, still continues,
and may at pleasure be resumed by the major part, or their Representatives;
whereas that Power is restrained, and can never more be made use of, without
every single Persons consent in the whole Community, or ^osning the Bonds of
Society, and re-instating them in the condition of War and Misery, Madness and
Folly. The ground of the mistake must be Inadvertencie, or Inconsideration, in
not regarding, That promises once made can never be broken, no not by the
greatest number, without the free consent of every individual party concerned.
This Power of restraining the Right of Nature, is Empire: If in one it is
Monarchy, if in some it is Aristocracie, if in the common Counsels of the
People it is Democracie; all these Governments are lawful, where they are
Governments. Now to disturb or ruin any of them, is Rebellion, and returning
to the state of Nature, and utterly unlawful; which yet any man, or company of
men, may do by the original Law of Nature, i. e. by might and Power; but at his
or their peril under the impeachment of Folly, of not obtaining his or their
End, of losing the benefit of Society, and of being ^ated as Enemies. Now,
because men are not guided, or governed by Reason always, no man, or company
of men are to be trusted to their own discretion, and the conduct of their own
Reason; for every man's Reason, is Reason to himself, but the Reason of the
Community is the Reason of State, not the Reason of the man. And therefore,
the Supreme is always entrusted with this Reason, and in the Exercise of it
ought to be secured by a transcendent Power, to give Check to the pretentions
of the Enemies of Society. This must be done two ways: I. By assuring a
strength competent against any Attempts of retrieving their original Right of
Nature: 2. By an equal Administration of Justice, and good Government; for, Res
nolunt male administrari. The end of Government is, That men may live together
unanimously in the equal use of Civil Laws. The end of Religion is, to be happy
in the next World; and therefore ought not to interfere with Civil Laws, or
those by which the good this Life is regulated. But because the Motives to
Obedience to those Laws do very much depend upon the Rewards and Expectations
of a Future State, they are therefore necessarily conjoined; so that whatever
Religion is established by Law, becomes Law, and ought not in prudence to be
changed and disturbed. Whoever has a private Religion or Opinion, seeing it is
not more in our power to have mentem sanam than corpus sanum, yet if the man be
not mad, or injurious, he may and ought to enjoy it freely without punishment,
provided he do not violate the peace of the City: If he do, it is nor Sincerity,
but Hypocrisy; and seeing there may be bona men's in malo articulo, all liberty
ought to be afforded, that can reasonably and modestly be claimed by any of
those who pretend a tender Conscience. Now if you consider throwly these
Positions, you will find not only the Reasons of entering into Society, but the
Causes of its Continuance, and Decay fully asserted. The Rules of Government
are as demonstrable, as any Mathematical Problems; and where the Supreme is
wise, there can be no Rebellion, or not dangerous; and wherever there is, the
Government is infirm and foolish. In order then to your Question, you must
observe, That Power is an equivocal Word, and is sometime taken for the Right
and Force of Nature, sometimes for the Right and Force of Laws. In the first
sense it is called vis, or potestas; in the latter, jus, or dominium. The first
sort of Power men in society have renounced, and cannot use without returning
to the State of War, where every man has as equal Right or Power over another,
as another has over him. The second sort of Power is that which the Laws of the
Society warrant, and by which it is said, Illud tantum possumus, quod de jure
possumus. Now if we consider the Power of Parliaments bounded by Laws, in the
letter sense, it is plain they can have none to bar the Duke from Succession,
because the Laws Common and Statute leave them no such Power, and in Nature and
Reason, after entering into Society, they can exercise no more than is left them
by the Agreements of the Society. In the first sense, it is true, they have
power to do what they please, as two is stronger then one: But then it must be
remembered, that the using that Power loosens the bond of the Commonwealth, the
whole having no more Right over Peter and Paul, while they break not the Laws
of the Country, than Peter and Paul had over all the rest. If it were not so,
there would be no Right nor Wrong in the World, neither subsequent nor
antecedent to Humane Constitutions; Virtue and Viec would be but empty Names,
Scar-crows for the Fools and the Weak: For every thing would be lawful, that a
man had force or strength enough to justify. A Principle destructive of
Government and Society, of Peace and Happiness. Everle Thief and Murderer,
Robber and Traitor, if successful, being honest persons, guilty of no
Mischiefs. Thus indeed Vice becomes Virtue, Prosperum scelus virtus vocatur.
This therefore not being to be allowed among men, much less Christians, the
Parliament cannot justify a Power of putting by the next Heir, by the
Constitutions of the Kingdom, nor by those of nature; which allows not the
major part to have recourse to natural Force or Liberty, without leaving all
the rest of the Members to their choice of entering either into none, or a new
Form, or continuing under the old. And those that assert the Parliament may do
what they please, know not what they say, if they deny others the same freedom;
and if they do, it is bidding all men Draw, and try who has the strongest Arm,
and the longest Sword, making Might or Power the only Rule of Justice, and
Measure of Humane Actions. But this so dangerous mistake is grounded upon not
considering, that what was lawful before I became a Member of the Society,
ceases to be so after. When a Bargain is once concluded between one man and a
thousand, the thousand cannot without injustice break the Agreement, nor
without folly expect the single man will not take the first opportunity to be
revenged, and obliege them to their first Contract. And whether he prove
successful or no, it will occasion such Mischiefs and Calamities, that they
will too late repent their Follies, and find no other comfort, than the sad one
which this scrap of Latin affords, Supplicium stultorum stultitia. But further,
if you rightly examine things, you will find, that the Lords only act for
themselves, and that the Commons of England do no otherwise represent the
People than as Attorneys, who, therefore are presumed limited to the first
Constitutions, and Fundamentals, that is, the Common Law, or Magna Charta,
whose Bounds if they exceed, they forfeit the Patent or Commission by which
they act. This is agreeable to Reason, and the practice of Former Ages, when
the Commons being asked their Consents to new Matters, went home and consulted
their Principles, and according to their directions gave in their Answers, as
you may find at large in the Rerum Anglicarum Scriptores, and as in the present
as well as ancient usage in the Dyets of Germany, and States of Holland. And
thus it was in the Senate of Rome, who, though they had the Supreme power as a
Parliament in England, yet in the making of any new Law, there was a Rogatio
Legis, an exposing of it in Tables to the view of all for a certain limited
time, wherein if the meanest showed Arguments why it should, it was wholly laid
aside. And so dangerous a thing have Innovations in this sort been accounted by
the Ancients, that among the Locrenses, and other Commonwealths of Greece, new
Laws were propounded with Ropes about the proposers Necks, submitting
themselves to the loss of their Lives, if the proposition were not approved by
every single person. And in Poland, no King can be elected without the consent
of every individual Elector. And indeed in so material an Instance, as the
designation of a Supreme Governor, upon whom depends the Fates of Thousands,
no majority, Parties, or Factions, ought to prevail. The same care have our
Ancestors taken in the case of Jurors; concluding it necessary, for despoiling
a man of his Life or Fortune, to have the matter of Fact so plain and
conspicuous, that it should not be possible for any to doubt or long dispute
it: And upon this reasonable Supposition it is, that they are not allowed
either meat or drink, or that eleven agreeing, while One dissents, should make
a Verdict. And can the public Concern of the Nation, of putting by the next of
Blood from his Right to the Crown, be of less moment? Consider this in time,
lest hereafter by a dear bought repentance, you confess your fatal Error.
Besides, the Commons do not represent one sixth of the Nation, their Electors
being only such freeholders, as are worth 40 s. a year, or upwards, together
with the Freemen of Incorporated places; these are far short of the Body of the
people; and for them to fetter the rest, who have none or less Estates, is to
make themselves Lords and Tyrants, and to the others not Servants, but Slaves
and Villains; a power unreasonable, and therefore not to be allowed by the
Clergy, who, as such, have no hand in the Election, and are a considerable part
of the People; nor by the Husband men and Laborers, and many others, who,
without Freedom inhabit Corporations, who bearing their proportion of the
public charge, are equally entitled to the protection of the Laws,
Free-born-Subjects, and therefore unasked cannot be presumed to consent to any
alteration of Government either in the Form or Person, by making an Hereditary
Monarchy, Elective. Such a Power once acknowledged, may after at pleasure
change it into Aristocracy, or Democracy. Nor, in my opinion, is it a mean
Argument against the Commons, being the Representation of the whole People,
That of 512. Forty should be enough to oblige the Consent of all the others;
That London should send but four, when an old Borough with a Shepherd and a
Dog does half as many; and, That Cornwall, which in the Number of Shires is but
the two and fiftieth part, makes above an eleventh; and yet London, the sixth
part of the Kingdom, but the 128. part of the whole Representative. Whoever
weighs this Inequality, must find out a new signification of Words, if he calls
the Parliament the Representative of all the Commons of England. Let it be
remembered, how easy it is to make a second Rump, by Cunning, and Address,
Threats and Tumults, to make the House so thin, that forty agreeing shall be
still the major Party; and then see how far the Nation must conclude themselves
bound by their Actings. One may well conclude, all that Voted against the Act,
and all, or most that were absent, will fight for his Title against whom it was
made, as well as all, or most of those that: hold not themselves represented;
and what can be the issue of this, but a renewal of the Yorkist and Lancastrian
Quarrel, in which was spilt the blood of 20000, besides that of several Kings
and Princes, and Nobles without number? And yet it appears in Story, That the
Right Heir was never kept out beyond the second Descent, nor that ever any
Usurper, Though Armed with Power, claimed the Crown, but by pretending to be of
the Right Line; nor did the Parliament ever consent, out when awed by Fear, and
a vast Army. As for the Act 13. Eliz. the best Lawyers will tell you, it is now
out of doors, made in defense of a possessor without Title, against the
rightful Heir, at that time excluded for Reasons as obvious as tedious here to
be mentioned, but after joyfully received and solemnized in Parliament, 1 Jac.
and Obedience promised to him and his Heirs for ever; so that now, in the
opinions of many, that Statute ought no more to be urged, than that which made
Oliver Protector, and excluded his present Majesty and his Line.

To allow the Parliament so Despotick a Power, is to submit at present, and
make our selves obnoxious to unaccountable miseries hereafter. What shall
hinder a Parliament, who at pleasure makes every thing lawful or unlawful, as
they are awed by a strong hand, or left at liberty by a weak, to do any thing,
though never so extravagant; to sell the Kingdom to the French, or any rich
enough to make the purchase? I confess, I think it a hard proposition (and
that which makes the Government of a single man, though Tyrannical, more
tolerable than this of so many) That the major part of 700. as they may be
ordered of less than 100. who as Commons have no inderivative Power, and are
only called to advise and deliberate with the Prince, as Counselors, should
make that lawful that could not be done so without their Consents, and me a
Rebel for resisting, though I have the greatest part of the Nation on my side,
and my Actions warranted by all those that are called Fundamental, and held
sacred, and inviolable by Englishmen, as our Bibles are by all Protestants. He
that remembers England has been given by a King to the Pope, and offered to the
Turk, and that a bold and resolute Prince has humbled Parliaments, as much as
ever a weak and gentle has exalted them, ought not to think it impossible, but
that the Parliament may one time or other be wrought to sell, or inslave the
Peoples Liberty: For, a worthy Author has it, Nothing but a Parliament can
destroy a Parliament; and we know there have been that deserved no other
Titles, than of Indoctum and Insanum Parliamentum. I should not wonder, that
men resolved rather to quit their Country, than yield it to an Arbitrary power,
or any pretense whatsoever, with the bold Romans Farewell applied to this
Kingdom, Vale venalis civitas mox peritura, si emptorem inveneris. I need not
put you in mind of Pensioners, or tell you a mercenary parliament is an acry
Notion: What has been, may be again. I reverence a well-constituted Parliament
as much as any man: and look upon it as an excellent preservative of Justice
and Liberty; yet I am not so fond of the Name, as to make it an Idol: it is not
at all improbable, but that it may be so managed, as to become the Instrument
of the peoples Slavery, and the Princes Tyranny; and therefore, I hold it no
more lawful to ascribe Omnipotency, or Infallibility in all Determinations to
a Parliament, than to a Pope or Council; the one is not more circumscribed and
bound up by Scripture and Apostolic Traditions, than is the other by the
Fundamental Laws of the Land, (such there are in every Country, as Magna Charta
is in this) by Nature, and by Reason: All which tell us, That no single man in
Community is to be put by his Right or Property by any subsequent Law against
his own Consent: and that if he be, he is at liberty to regain it any how, by
force, or by violence, without the least imputation of Wrong, or Injustice.

As for your second Question, you will find its Answer easily deducible from
what has been said already; For, allowing that the Parliament have power (which
yet without every individual persons Consent they cannot have, either by
Nature, or their own Constitutions) to alter the Succession; yet no motives can
be sufficient to induce men in their senses to such an Act, but plain
transgressions and violations of the Laws in being; nothing else being a Crime,
or penal. The Apostle tells us, If there had been no Law, there would have been
no sin; and that though sin was in the world before, yet till after the Law, it
neither was nor could be imputed: i. e. Yesterday I killed my neighbor, but
that was not unlawful, consequently not punishable, because the Act against it
was but this day enjoined, and every man is left to the use of his natural
power, in such instances as the Laws do not restrain. This is so plain a truth
in all Countries, where Men are not governed like Beasts, that it is not only
folly but madness to assert the contrary: The Abettors are not to be convinced
by Arguments and Reasons, but by Hellebore and Bedlam. Now, there being no Laws
in being, that enjoin the Heir of the Crown of England to believe as the Church
of England, his departure from that to any other Church can be no Argument for
his Disinherison. But the other part, his giving life, and birth to the plot,
is of another consideration, and, if true, deserved not only his being put by
the Crown, but his Life: And therefore, I conceive, if that had been evident, he
had not escaped so easily, nor indeed could he, without the imputation of great
partiality and injustice upon the House of Commons: No mean Argument of the
Duk's Innocence to any considering person. For, if they proceeded so far upon
an Illogical Consequence, or unreasonable Proposition, to wit, That his going
over to the Church of Rome must have given birth and life to the Hellish Plot,
what would they not have done farther, if they could have proved, that he was
indeed the Author? which he must have been of necessity, if he gave birth and
life to it. Now lest the World should take every thing done by any Factious
number to be the Act of all the Commons, much less of the Parliament, and so
defame the Justice and Integrity of the English Nation, and lest the people
should believe whatever they assert, as Oraculous, as the Vulgar do of things
in Print; it is necessary to examine this matter very narrowly, and enquire how
they came by this Discovery, or why, if it were real, they inflicted no severer
a punishment than an Act, that the best Lawyers tell us would have been of no
force, had it passed even the Royal Assent; which I cannot think it ever would,
because contrary to the King's Oath at Coronation, and his Promise and
Resolution declared even in that very Parliament, where many doubt its passing
the third time among the Commons, and none dispute but that the Lords would
have rejected it upon the first reading. The grand Discoverer, Dr. Oats, has
not accused his R. H. but, one the contrary, in public and private, acquitted
him from any guilt, or knowledge; as, beside his printed Narrative and
Depositions in Parliament, may be made out by Persons of unquestionable Honor.
Could then a Vote make matters of Fact, Truth or Fals-hood? That depends upon
natural and eternal Causes, and Connexions of unalterable Principles. Surely
no, nor would any man in his Sense have given the more credit, though it had
passed 500000 Votes instead of 500. If twenty Colleges of Virtuoso's, or
Greshamites, should conspire to vote the old Philosopher in the right, who
every where asserted Snow was black, yet could they not persuade one Plowman to
disbelieve his Senses, and subscribe to so ridiculous an Opinion. And as to
Capt. Bedlow, (and upon these two the whole Hinge of the Plot does turn, for
the rest came in but in subsidiam probationis) he pretended at first to know no
more than the inhumane Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godsrey; and yet however he
became more knowing after, he never accused his R. H. which he would certainly
have done, had he found one probable Circumstance; even upon his Death he
acquitted him. Yet, to say Truth, his accusation would have been of less credit,
for his having been so mistaken in his main Discovery, as to be contradicted by
Prance; the reason, I suppose, why no Narrative in Capt. Bedlow's Name, was
ever published. Read Mr. Oats his Depositions, and you will find the D. was to
run the same fate of his Brother, (whose sacred Life God long preserve) if he
would not approve of all their Villainies, and after his Majesty's Murder accept
the Crown as Feudatory from the Pope: And, without dispute the villainous
Contrivers of the Plot would have spared neither: which is plain by Mr. Oats
his asserting upon Oath in the Name of the Jesuits, that no good was ever to be
expected from the Race of the Stewarts, with other Reflections on the R.
Family, with submission not fit to have been published: And further, that they
had resolved, notwithstanding his Love to their Religion, not to trust him with
a Secret, his great affection for his Brother would persuade him to reveal. It
is then impossible, he could give Birth and Life to a Plot, to which he never
was privy? as for Colman's Letters, in my Lord Danby's Words, the best evidence
we yet have of the Plot, they were not writ by the D's allowance or consent,
nor do they speak of introducing Popery otherwise than by gaining an
Indulgence, and that by a Parliament. Besides, it is notoriously known he was
offered his Pardon and large Rewards, if he would confess the Plot. And it is
senseless to imagine, (none can, but an unthinking Crowd) that he would not
speak a Truth to save his Life, at least not damn his Soul by dying with (...)
in his Mouth (after which nor previous to it, there could be no Absolution) but
to the last notwithstanding the repeated offers of Pardon and Reward, he
protested his Ignorance and Innocence.

Oh, but, say some, how then could the Commons proceed as they did? Why,
perhaps the publisher of that designed Bill abuses them; but if he did not,
they do, who conclude the Major part consented to it. Those that did, may be
supposed hurryed on by misguided Zeal; passion, or prejudice, imposed upon by
Suggestions, as agreeable to the King's pleasure to banish him for ever by Law,
who in Obedience went into a voluntary exile for a season; If this be not, I
confess I am at a loss for the Reason: But of this they were soon convinced
by his Majesty's Speech to the contrary. Besides, it had been but equal to have
given his R. H. liberty to make his Defense; to condemn a Man unheard is no
where practiced, where there is the least shadow of Government. The Laws of
God, and of Nations forbid, nay, make it inconsistent with Society, to hang a
Man first, and convict him after, or, to punish any one (...) post facto. My
Lord Strafford's Case was never to be brought into president, and if that were
not sufficient, the whole proceedings by Act of Parliament since his Majesty's
Restoration were condemned, as illegal and contrary to all Morality. And would
not the D's Case have been just the same? Do you but make it your own, and you
will be of that Opinion.

Whence I conclude, that the Reasons on which the late House of Commons
proceeded against the D. were insufficient, because not only not warranted, but
contrary to the Laws in being, as well as to those of Nature, and all Societies
under Heaven. And now I come to your third Question, what dangers the Nation
may be under in case the Crown descends upon a Popish Successor, or more
particularly upon his R. H?

For answer to which we must consider, that dangers to any Country are Foreign
or Domestic, Invasions from abroad, or Encroachments a home. Against the
former, every Kingdom is in danger, be the Prince of any or no Religion, and
therefore the People are obliged to be always on their Guard. Against the
latter the hazard lies in the Princes neglect, or breaking of the bounds of his
Subjects Liberty, Property, and Religion: and since the safety of all Princes
depends upon the contrary, why a Popish one should offer it more then another,
I cannot comprehend; and more particularly why his R. H. should design it, is
not at all likely, if we examine either the influence Popery can have over the
Government, or consider impartially the D's Character.

Government was first framed for the good of Mankind in this Life, without any
regard to another, and depended upon a due and equal administration of justice
in the Governor, and Obedience in the governed. This was long observed in the
World before Religion entered, especially Christianity, which all allow,
neither did, nor could alter the Laws of the City, or Commonwealth. Evangelium
non abolet politias is every where an allowed Maxim, drawn from our Savior's
own Words; Friend, who made me a Ruler or judge among you? The Law is open, and
by that the controversies between you and your Brother are to be decided. He
came not to disturb, but to enlarge, and confirm the peace of the City, and his
Laws considered apart are as consistent with those of a Kingdom, as the
Bylaws of any Corporation within a greater State. He declared his Kingdom was
not of this World, and therefore could not design to alter the grounds of
Government and Obedience, which are one and the same in all Countries whether
Christian or Pagan, founded upon self-interest and preservation, and continued
by mutual Relation of Love and Duty, Protection and Obedience; things, that
truly considered, can never be altered by the super-induction, or change of any
new or old Religion. If then Christianity make no alteration, it is impossible
the sub-divisions, or particular Sects should. So that whatever Opinion, either
King or Subject be, in point of Religion, Popish or Protestant; Lutheran or
Calvinist, Presbyterian or Episcopal, the ends of Government peace and quiet,
Liberty and Property may be secured and enjoyed, and the end of Religion too,
eternal Salvation; this depending on moral Duties, and Conformity to the Laws
of the Land; our Savior having threatened Damnation to those who resist the
higher Powers; the greatest of punishments being appointed both by the Jewish
and Christian Law to Rebellion, called by the first, the Sin of Witchraft, and
in the last, a fighting against God himself.

Now all Laws that concern our temporal estate being made in the times of
Popery, I cannot find why they should be changed by a Popish Monarch; nor how,
without a change or violation the Subjects can suffer. As for the Laws that
established the Protestant, and abolished the Popish Religion, they cannot be
otherwise altered but by an equal power, with that from whence they had their
Being, King and Parliament, who agreeing can by a change no more prejudice the
public in order to Heaven, than they did before; that being only accidental
and extrinsecal to the Substance of Religion, by which alone, and not by Forms
or Ceremonies Men are to be saved; every Country making differences in such
things according to the several interest of States, or humors of the people;
as in England the Commonwealth is tempered by the King's holding the Balance,
between the power of Lords and Commons, and that upon the taking away of
either, the Government must be destroyed: so the Religion of England, or indeed
of any Kingdom, where there are several Sects, seem only to be preserved by
fixing a Balance, which taken away, must be the ruin of the whole; and
therefore undeniable policy will tell us, that the Episcopal legal Government
is no otherwise to be preserved, but by equally indulging the Non-Conformists
and the Papists, for to suppress both is now impracticable, and to suppress
one alone will be found impolitick. A Truth grounded upon the present State of
Europe, where, while England kept the Balance between France and Spain, the
universal Monarchy was a Dream, or groundless Fancy: but that being removed,
it is impossible, if two or three Martial and prudent Princes happen
successively to govern France, but that before imaginary Empire will really
fall to the Lot of that Nation, unless all the other States join against it,
and give our Country the power it enjoyed, when Spain was an equal Match in the
Contention. For my own part, I see nothing to be dreaded in case of a Popish
Successor, because he alone cannot alter the Laws, nor the Religion; nor can he
the execution, since that is out of his, and in the hands of such as are not
only sworn to it, but upon failure liable to great Penalties and Forfeiture,
not only to the Prince, who possibly might, but to the Informer, who cannot be
supposed to remit his proportion. And considering that the Laws in being have
entrusted the executive power of the Militia by Sea and Land, and of
distributive Justice in Courts, and all Offices of Trust, as well in the
Country, as about the Princes Person, and the power of making, and altering
Laws in the Hands of Men of Anti-popish Principles, I cannot apprehend, why we
should conceive any danger from a Princes enjoying to himself any Heterodox
Opinion whatever. For to think he would impose them upon his Subjects; is to
conclude him not only imprudent, but distracted; since it would be to create
himself disturbance, without the least prospect of advantage: for what does he
get or loose by their being of this, or that Persuasion? His Good, his Wealth,
his Glory, his Honor, and Security, consists in their conformity to the
established Government, and for their future Happiness he cannot as a Prince
be solitcious; it is out of his Province, and now out of Fashion for Kings to be
Priests and Prophets. This then would be folly, and to pursue it would be
madness, because it would be to oppose his single strength, (for in this case
he would stand alone) to the united force of Lords and Commons, and the whole
Body of the People. And who knows not, that in this Sense Dominium fundatur in
voluntatibus hominum. For without an Army, and a very great one, he could not
compass his impertinent project, this Army he could not raise without a vast
Treasure; this Treasure he cannot have but from his own people in Parliament,
who will not give it to their prejudice. For out of Parliament he cannot have
enough, even for his ordinary Expense, much less for the defense of the
Kingdom against foreign Attempts; because upon the death of the present, the
following Successor will find so much fallen off, that there will not be left
one third of the present insufficient Revenue for all necessary Uses of the
Crown: An Argument that alone may convince the sober and unbiased, that be he
of what persuasion soever, he must of necessity comply with his Parliament who
cannot be supposed neglectful of the great Concern of Religion. And to think
that the Papists at home, or abroad will give it, is Folly, or Inconsideration.
Those at home could not by the sale of all their Fortunes make the Fond; that
can never be supposed by men in their wits: nor indeed can I see, why they
should contribute at all, since their gain by offices, of which they are now
incapable, would be but advantageous to some; and why shall the whole be at a
loss for the profit of a few, and that uncertain? Besides, that party is now
more a Gainer, by freedom from offices of Charge and Trouble, than they could
then be by the partial Advantage of Employments. The Papists abroad will less
find their Account; for Princes of all Religions, and the only present rich and
powerful one of That, expends his Money for Earthly Glory, leaving, as he
ought, the Heavenly to the Spiritual Princes. These all are, ever were, and
will be, such Lovers of Wealth, Pomp, and Grandour, as not to bestow it in the
purchase of Heaven, which they know is not to be bought for Silver or for Gold.
The Pope regaining Peter Pence could not invite him, if he had the Sum, for if
you compute that, you will find it a Trifle, 6666, reckoning it after the way
of the present Chimney-money, set for 160 odd thousand pounds, at two shillings
a Chimney; whereas that was only a penny a House, not a penny a Chimney, as in
this Caluclation is allowed, when Houses are much more than in those days. And
for the First Fruits and Tenths, they are no less inconsiderable. For
Indulgences, Appeals, and the consequent Charges, they are trivial and
accidental, and go not into the Pop's, but into particular Officers pockets.
Besides, no one Pope can hope to see such a Design effected; and the Nephews
and Nieces will prevent their converting their Riches to the advantage of the
Successors. And as for the Church or Abby-Lands, they could not on this account
be of any moment, since if restored to the Church which would be uncertain, as
the effect of War, they would fall into the hands of Clergymen, who have
nothing before hand to contribute.

Now considering that the late raised Army, under 30000 men, put the King to
the charge of more than a Million; how many Millions, think you, must be
requisite for a much greater Army, necessary for so great a Design; when the
Opposition will be strong and lasting, the very Lifted Millitia being above
160000? And supposing that all the Papists in the three Kingdoms would become
Volunteers in this extravagant Expedition, the whole would be still as
disproportionat, and as unliklely to prevail, as an Army of Pigmies, with
Spears of Bulrushes, mounted on Crans, against an Army of Giants, riding on
Elephants, and every way well appointed for War.

In the year 1672. (and they cannot since be much increased) the Papists, upon
a Survey of them, Conformists and Nonconformists severally, were found
throughout England to be under 27000. Men, Women, and Children: In Scotland the
disproportion is greater on the protestant side; in Ireland, on the Papists:
Yet by a Medium of all three, there would be 203. Protestants to one Papist.
What then can be dreaded from them, though assisted with an Army of profligat
Hirelings, (for none else would fight to destroy Religion, and enslave their
Country) and a Prince of their own Persuasion, whose Example could win but on
the mean and base, the flattering and mercenary Courtiers, to hold with him, as
with other Kings, their Necks awry? So inconsiderable a Number could not shock
the main Body of the People, sighting not as the others, for Opinion, or for
Pay, but further, for Liberty, Property, Religion, and Estate; of which being
possessed, though the others were equal in Numbers, theirs would be the
advantage, according to that Rule, Milior est conditio possidentis. And indeed,
considering the Athelstical bent and humor of the Nation, whose Religion is
generally in their Mouths only, and not in their Hearts, I am apt to conclude,
the great Heat and Contention is founded upon the apprehension of the loss of
Church and Abby-Lands, not of protestantism; and the rather, because it is
urged, Nullum tempus occurrit Ecolesiae: The Maxim is and Regi; and yet we
find, though most of the Lordships of England belonged formerly to the King,
they are now possessed by others without danger of reassumption, and yet even
that has been practiced in former Kings Reigns, and advised by parliaments who
al ways reputed them unalienable. And yet why we should now be more sollicitous
for fear of the Church, than of the King, I cannot understand; since either
prescription, or their own Consent, lies against both, and that even in the
infancy of the protestant Religion, upon the return of Popery by parliament,
the Pope did in Q. Mary's Reign, by his Legate Cardinal Poole, confirm to the
Laity the Temporal possessions of the Clergy. And can any one imagine that how,
when a contrary Religion is of so long standing, and the professors as far
exceeding the Papists in number, as they did then the Protestants, a parliament
would be kinder? Earthly Interest will ever weigh more than Heavenly; the World
being now so much enlightened with Knowledge and Letters, beyond its former
Experience, when not only Salvation, but Wisdom, hung upon the Lips of the
priests, it be will be impossible for men to be persuaded, even upon their
Deathbeds, to bestow all for the gaining of Heaven. The Statute of Mortmain
was made in the height of Popery, and none but Fools can suffer themselves to
be imposed upon, that a Statute of Restitution could be possible in the
Meridian of a contrary Religion. This is well known to the leading and
considering men; who having Designs upon great Offices and preferments in the
State, make the Care of the Church a pretense only to their Ambition. It Is
notoriously evident, That no men were more violent for the general Indulgence,
nay for Popery, in 167^. (not to mention their before breaking the Triple
League, and entering into an Alliance with France) than those who now are
accounted the only Lovers of an English Interest, and the Protestant Religion.
A Restitution of the Great Seal, or a Treasurers White Staff; a Diamond-hilted
Sword, or being a Public Minister, might persuade the same Persons to act
again as arbitrariously as before, set up France and run down Holland, with a
delenda est Carthago. Good God! how strange it is, that men who changed with
every Wind as that of their own Private, not their Countries Interest, blew; or
some younger Spirits influenced by their Precepts and Examples, in hopes to
make new, or retrive cracked Fortunes, should ride and hurry the Nation to so
much Heat and Passion, as endangers our utter ruin and destruction, either
from Intestine Divisions, or Foreign Invasions! Consider this in time, before
you are bemir'd and bewitched by any Will of the Wisp, who now leads you astray,
and will certainly leave you in the lurch, when he has gained the Point he
drives at. Judge of future by former Actions, and remember, if we must have
any, That the old is better than any new Master.

Oh, but (say some) If we have a Popish Successor, he will be the worst of
Tyrants, being obliged (says the Author of the Few Words among many) to
extirpate his Protestant Subjects, under the pain of Excommunication and
Damnation, and that by virtue of the Council of Lateran. An Assertion very
groundless, whether you consider at large the Princes Interest, with which such
a Practice is incompatible, his being a King, depending upon his Subjects; and
a powerful one upon their Multitude, Strength, and Riches: or if you consider
the Influence Christianity it self has upon the Civil Magistrate, or the
particular Obligations of this pretended Decree; Concerning which, you are to
know, that this Council is not esteemed General, nor the Decrees of this
(wholly rejected by Canus and Bellarmine) nor of any Council, esteemed
infallible, or obligatory in point of Discipline, where they are not received
and corroborated by the Temporal Prince, who has the power of rejecting all or
what part he thinks fit of such Decrees; as appears not only in this, but in
that of Trent, which is not universally received either in France or Germany.
Besides, these few that own this Council, say it was never designed against
Sovereign Independent Princes, nor was it ever practiced out of Italy: So that
why it should be dreaded in England cannot be found reasonable, since at this
day in France, Germany, and other Countries, where the main Body of the People
is Popish, Protestants are permitted their Freedoms, and their Fortunes. A
sufficient Argument, that Popish Princes fear no such Sentence from Pope or
Council. In some places of Germany, the people are governed successively by
Popish and Protestant Princes, Lutherans by Calvinists, further asunder than
Church of England and Papist, without inconvenience or disturbance, taking
their turns morning and afternoon in the public Churches; and notwithstanding
the differences in Speculative matters, nor possible to be avoided, live
together as they ought in the Union of Charity, the only bond of perfection,
and Badge of true Christianity. So that Papists may be good Kings, and good
Subjects, as they are de facto, and have been, and therefore may be again. And
to show how little particular Opinions can alter the Duties of Allegiance and
Subjection, let it be remembered; That in the King of France his Descent upon
Holland, and in the time of his whole War with that State, he could never get a
Popish Spy.

But here I am not ignorant the Persecutions of Queen Mary will be urged,
though impertinently; for besides that the odds was then on the Papists side,
yet in her Six years Reign as Speed and Baker tell us, there were but 277 put
to death, and of these above 200 profligate Persons, all dying by the Law,
then, and several Ages before in being, De Haretico comburendo, by which
several suffered in Queen Elizabeth's and King James' days for Arianism since
abrogated. So that, as the case now stands in England, none can suffer as
Heretics, till some new Law be first made, and that, you know, must be by
Force, or Parliament. The first is shown impossible, and the latter improbable:
Yet if such an Act passd, it must be esteemed consonant to the desires of the
whole Nation. So that the Martyrs of Queen Mary's days can no more be accounted
such, than those who have suffered since the Popish Plot, both being punished
justly, according to the Laws in being. These last are reckoned 170 in the
space of eighteen Mouths; of which, 147 starved and died in Prison, and 23.
executed, to every of whom Pardon and Reward was offered, would they but
confess themselves guilty, and make a Discovery; besides five since condemned,
and many more fled, starving and begging in other Countries. And here I confess
my amazement and wonder, that so many Laymen and Clergymen, Learned and
Illiterate, should all continue obstinate in the denial of this damnable and
hellish Popish Plot, when the Conspirators owned that cruel one of the
Gunpowder Treason.

Nor can the Objection be less trivial of the hazard to the Kings Sacred Life,
while a Papist is to succeed; since a Clement or a Raviliac is not more easily
found among them, than a Poltrot or an Andelot among the Hugonots or
Presbyterians. But it is no greater disparagement to have single Instances of
Wickedness in a Soceity, than to the Apostles, that there was a Judas in the
number. It Is much more easy for Papists to give, than to receive upon this
account a Rowland for an Oliver. They can not only return the number of
Assassins, but in stead of a few private ones; show them many public
Executioners of Kings and Princes, and in stead of particular Asserters of the
King-killing and Deposing Doctrines, as Mariana and La Forest, (who yet do it
but Problematically, and are with their Books censured and condemned by the
Eight Universities of France, and the General of the Jesuits Order, and the
whole Body of the Catholics, and expressly forbidden by the universally
received Council of Constance, Sess. 5.) I wish there could not be found whole
Shoals of the Reformed that avow those Antichristian Principles, not only
abroad, but in England and Scotland. Baxter, yet alive, has never recanted the
Tenets of his Commonwealth; not his owning, in his Saints Rest, his not
finding upon the strictest examination, to have done amiss, in fomenting the
late Rebellion. I need not menti Outlandish Names of Calvin, Beza, Paraeus,
etc. nor those of Scotland, Knox, Bu chann etc. a Page would not contain all
Miltons Englist Tutors and Scolars in this particular, whose Religion is
Treason and Rebellion, and whose Devotion is all Cheat and Hypocrisy, and who
are ineed so much the worse and more dangerous Jesuits, as their Doctrines are
in English, and openly maintained, whilst the other publicly disavow what they
are accused of. Those all with one voice say, Dominion is jure divino; the
others say, it is founded in Grace, and derived from the People in trust, who
upon male administration may resume their first Grant, dethrone and murder
their Sovereign, in spite of all the obligations of Oaths and Promises of Faith
and Allegiance. Now though it is possible both Parties may be mistaken, yet I am
sure the Papists Error is on the safest side for Princes. Consider, Sir,
seriously, and tell me, if you find not of the two, the Jesuits of Glascow and
Geneva more pernicious to Peace and Government, than those of Rome or St.
Omers: Compare their Pract^es and their Principles, and try whether the Paris
Massacre of 40000, by D'avila, and as is plain in Story, a politic Stratagem,
be not seventy times exceeded by the War of that Country and Germany, to name
no more, upon the score of Reformation: Whether the much-nois'd Numbers slain
in Ireland, computed by the Ingenious and Learned Sir William Petry, on both
sides, during the whole Rebellion, not above 36000, in a conquered Country, set
on foot for their Liberty and Estates, not for Religion, be not far outdone by
the late Rebellion of England, contrived and carried on by the Godly party.
This was not Christ's Method of planting the Gospel; it is the Sword of the
Spirit, and not that of the flesh, that must propagate Religion; yet excepting
our own Country, where it came not in dry-shod, have not the Reformers every
where waded deep in Blood in opposition to popery? I need not instance, the
Countries are obvious, and it is an undeniable Truth, that there has been ten
times more War and Blood shed, on the score of Religion since Luther and
Calvin's time, then was in all the parts of Europ before, while popery was at
the highest. But besides all this, the Vote of the late House of Commons, has
most certainly secured on that side all danger to the King's Sacred Person,
Whom God long preserve; for if now any should be so mad, as to be Authors of so
great an Impiety, considering the vast inequalities of their Numbers, they
could not expect less then the loss of their own Lives, and of the whole party,
and therefore by that Vote they are not only charmed into Loyalty, if otherwise
disposed, but qualified to guard the King's Person, if admitted, from the
attempts of any other Conspirators; so that their mutual safeties depend upon
each other. And therefore it were advisable, since other acts forbid their
access to Court, for all the Papists to quit their Country or their Religion,
lest they might hereafter smart for the Act of Nature, or the wickedness of any
other Faction, if not likely, at least not impossible. Sacred and profane story
furnishes us with many instances of plots made by one, and fathered on another
party. And the beast in the Apologue with a Lump of Flesh on his Forehead, was
not imprudent in quitting the Forest upon the Lions proclamation. That all
horned Beasts should at their peril depart; for when he was asked, why he ran
away, he answered, If the Lion said, the Lump was a Horn, it would be in vain
for him to contend, or after hope an escape. And really, I see no security in
the change of Religon, since people are so imposed upon, to swallow Gudgeons in
believing, if that indeed they do what they so loudly speak, that after all
Oaths, Tests, and Sacraments, they are still Papists in Masquerade, and have
Bulls and Dispensations for dissembling and perjury; a Supposition not only
idiculous, but reflective upon the Wisdom of the Parliament: for if no mark of
discrimination, nor scent can be found to discover the blown Deer, and separate
them from the rest of the Herd, it is in vain to hunt, and the Parliament have
taken great pains to find out papists, but to no purpose, a censure no less
severe upon them, than 'twould be folly in the Pope to expect Obedience from
those he absolved from all Obligations: For the Oaths do not only allow them to
swear Fealty and Homage to one Prince, but bind them to renounce all others,
and being so taken in the plain literal Sense and Acceptance of the Words,
there can be no reserve. For however the Jesuits are accused to allow
Equivocation and mental Reservation, they are not yet arrived to that impudence
of owning to the World so monstrous an Impiety. And therefore I hope the new
Sheriffs of London re abused by their Friend who publishes their having taken
the Oaths and Abjurations in their own meanings, and tell us, that how
contrary soever, that may be to the plain Words, yet it is conformable to the
Sense and Intention of the Imposers, the Parliament. A new Doctrine I confess,
and very expressive of a tender Conscience. For if you examine it aright, you
will find it turns the design of Oaths, into Folly, leaving them no force, nor
Men under any Obligation. For it is all one to swear, and not to swear at all,
if the taker of the Oath may do it in his own, and not in the Imposers Sense;
it reconciles extremes, makes a narrow half-pynt City Conscience, and one as
large and wide as the great Tun of Heidelberg, the same. Here will be no longer
stumbling at straws, nor leaping over Blocks: straining at a Gnat, and
swallowing a Camel will be a Jest; all will go down with equal ease, and all
ties between King and Subjects will cease; the Oaths of Coronation and
Allegiance are Fopperies, Chaff to cath the credulous; neither will be
perjured, if the one prove a Tyrant, or the other a Rebel. So monstrous a Tenet
ought not to escape public Animadversion. And I do as verily believe, a Jesuit
shamed that Pamphlet upon the Sheriffs, as that the Papists made Venner's plot,
and the two following of 1662, and 1666. although in their stead the poor innocent
Fifth Monarchy men and Phanaticks paid the reckoning at Tyburn. But if indeed
there were Dispensations to he had, is it supposable by Men ( Fools may take a
Windmill for an enchanted Castle, and Don Quixor- like, fight against the
wind) that any would forfet Liberty, Fortune or Country, much more Life it
self, as is notorious many have done, rather than take these Oaths.

There is then no cause to fear the Papists will be undiscoverable, or that
they can be terrible, considering the smallness of their Number, tho the D. of
Y. should come to govern. For besides that it would not be in his Power, nor
for his Interest, as is already shown, to innovate the Constitutions of Church
and State, nothing like it can be dreaded from his Character, which all
knowing, and disinterested Persons will thus give you; That he is a Prince of
so many admirable Endowments and excellent Qualifications both by Nature and by
Art, as make it a question to which of the two he is most indebted, and render
him matchless in the present, and rarely exceeded by any in former Ages. He is
not only of innate Courage, fearless and intrepid as a Lion, but a Commander of
great Experience, both at Land and Sea; preferring the last more for his
Countries safety and honor, than his own ease or pleasure; In all things
temperate and sober, in his Actions between Man and Man nicely just, in his
Word and Promises strictly faithful, and religiously punctual, sincere in his
Friendships and Professions, a kind Brother, and a dutiful Subject, an obliging
Husband, and an excellent Master, a great lover of Business, sedulous and
diligent, and indefatigable in Labors; affable and easy of access, patient in
hearing and dispatching the meanest, of quick Apprehension, and sound
Judgment; and tho in this traduced by Envy, Malice, and Design; yet I defy the
worst of his Enemies, to instance wherein he ever spoke impertinently on any
Subject. He is what the French call un bonest homme, too comprehensive to be
Englished by one Word, signifying, A Person composed of all the good Qualities
that make Men truly valuable; He was born to retrieve the sinking Glory of the
English Nation, a Truth once readily acknowledged by all, and would be so at
this day, if the contrary were not imposed by the cunning of the Ambitious,
under the disguise and pretense of Zeal for Religion; in which, whatever his
private Opinions are, he desires not a liberty he would not grant. He is not of
a narrow persecuting Spirit, so much in love with his own, as to despise the
Opinions of all others. He would have every Man enjoy the right of Nature,
Liberty of Conscience, without disturbance of the public peace. In a Word, he
is brave and generous, liberal but not profuse, resolute but not stubborn,
great but not proud, humble but not abject; in all his Actions he shows himself
a Gentleman, but in none forgets that he is a Prince. He is not an Angel, but a
Man, and therefore not free from some Passions and human Fraitlties; but in the
World there cannot be found a Prince with fewer. He needs not boast the Statues
of his Ancestors, he has a stock of fame and virtue of his own, large enough to
make him great. He is doubly related to the Title of his Grand Father Henry the
4th, by Birth, and by his Sufferings. Without flattery he may be accounted the
most illustrious of modern Hero's, and very little, if at all outdone by
Caesar or by Alexander, by Hannibal or by Scipio. The English, Scots, and
Irish, have been Witnesses of this Truth to their Honor and Renown. The
French, the Spaniards, and Flemmings and the Dutch, the German, Sweed and Dane,
have seen and felt his Actions to their cost and to their Envy. And what has
this great Min done, to have felt his Virtues and his Laurels withered and
forgot? Is it for exposing his person, like a common Sea man for the Glory of
the English Nation? or is the change of the peoples Affections owing to the
alteration of his Opinions about the Modes and Circumstances of Religion, for,
in reality it is no more? Oh! no, it proceeds from the subtilty of some
Fellow Subjects, who under pretense of Love for the public, and Zeal for
Religion, design for themselves a Tyranny, and therefore endeavor by all the
arts of Malice to remove out of the way of their Ambition this great Person,
the only Obstacle; imposing upon the World; that all themselves aim at, are
intended by the D. when nothing is further from his thoughts, than a purpose of
governing England otherwise than by the established Laws. A Lie may for a while
sully and eclipse the brightest Innocence, but at length it must break through
those Clouds with a greater increase of Luster and of Glory. It Is good
Machiavilian policy, calumniare fortiter, aliquid adherebit; Throw Dirt enough,
some of it will stick. There was a time, when only Vice was safe, and
honorable, and nothing fatal but to be brave and virtuous; and the best
Citizens were therefore proscribed; and why should it be wondered that in
England, as well as in Rome, or Athens, no Aristides should be banished for
being too good?

Now considering that Laws may bind a King (which to deny is folly and madness)
and that there are already enough and more may be added, to prevent a Popish
Successors mischieving Protestant Subjects, if there were no Laws to this
purpose, yet prudence and right reason would continue to us the enjoyment of
Liberty, Property and Religion, let never so bigoted a Papist ascend the
Throne: much less is any alteration to be apprehended from the Duke, who
besides all those Obligations, does further secure us by his innate Goodness
and temper: it is no wonder his Majesty should so often forbid the intermedling
with Succession; since he could not but conclude from so unreasonable a
procedure, something else might be designed, besides the security of the
protestant Religion; under the sairest Tufts of Grass, we know Snakes are
likeliest to be hid. For first, there was no cause to conclude the D. should
certainly outlive his Royal Brother; or if he did, that he would or could
alter the Government; nor secondly, that he should always continue of his
present Opinion in Religion, since he that once changed might do so again, upon
the alteration of his temper, never at a stand, or the same in any person, or
upon his fuller consideration of the Controversy. But if in this he should
remain unalterable, and chance to outlive him, his consenting to such an Act
would never prevent great Effusion of Blood, civil War, and unaccountable
Miseries and Calamities; for let Men Fancy what they please, the D. would
still have no small party in England, all or most of Scotland and Ireland would
be entirely for him; he is accounted by both a Prince of their Blood, and by
their Laws, who no more than those of England allow their Kings mortal, to be
their Sovereign upon the Death of his predecessor, without the Formalities of
Proclamation or Coronation; and who knows not that the united force of these
two Kingdoms with the power within the third, would counter balance all the
rest of the Might of England. Besides, Scotland and Ireland being distinct
Kingdoms, and governed by Laws of their own Parliaments, no Act made by that of
England can be binding in any instance, much less in excluding their Sovereign.
Now over and above those advantages, all the popish Princes of Europe (and
they, if united, are too strong for the Protestant) would be on his side, if
Religion have that power some Men apprehend. But if it have not, yet France
would account it their interest to reinstate the D. in his possessions, for
then they two joining (to which nothing else could invite the King of England)
all rubs in the way of the Universal Monarchy would be certainly removed. And
what would the Consequence of this be, but a running into the inconveniency we
would now avoid, Popery and Arbitrary Government, otherwise not only an
uncertain, but an imaginary Fear. Though this should not happen in the person
of the D. yet his exclusion may otherwise occasion it. For let it be
considered, that to keep him out, an Army must be maintained, which will
increase our Charge, another great evil; and that Army must have a General, and
who can be assured that either the then King or the General, or both shall not
hereafter turn Papists, and changing with their Religion their Tempers, by the
assistance of that Army settle an absolute and Despotick power, enslave us, and
exercise an uncontrollable Tyranny over our Minds, our Bodies and Estates
Remember what our late revolution did produce, and forget not the Rump no^
Oliver, whose public Taxes were Mountains compared with those Mole-Hills under
which we now seem so much to suffer and be buried. If the Rider gives his Horse
the Reins, he knows not whither an unbridled Fury may at last carry him.

It Is not impossible, but the putting by the D. may end in a deposing the
present possessor: For if the late King was not only reputed a papist, but
executed for designing the Introduction of popery, though all the World knows
he was a stiff asserter of, and a Martyr for the protestant Religion; and if
now a presumed papist be declared unfit to succeed; how much more unfit must a
papist be declared to Govern? And how can we be assured, that Caracter shall
not hereafter be fixed upon our King, when we know one of the Brethren was not
long since Indicted for saying, The D. was a Papist, and the K. little better?
and that already every Member of the Church of England, the very Bishops, all
but Two not excepted, are called papists in Masquerade? Success makes men bold
against God and Man; and we arrive not at the height of Insolence but by
degrees, nemo repent fit turpissimus. Read the Pamphlets, and observe not the
Whispers, but the loud Discourses, and then tell me whether you can call this a
groundless Surmise. If the King cannot pardon the Earl of Danby, or any
Criminal, (which that Nobleman no more is, upon the account of his pardon,
than all his predecessors who have shown him the way) then indeed he is no
longer the Supreme, and may well enough be concluded already deposed more than
in Effigy. And yet this Doctrine is maintained by the Loyal Considerer of the
great and wighty Considerations touching the Succession, and publicly sold in
the Court of Requests; and another position no less pernicious, held by him and
many of the same principles, That there can be Treason against the State,
against the people, against the Government, excluding the Kings person, for
whose security alone the Satutes have provided against Treasons, not finding it
agreeable to Reason, or our own Positive Laws, to exalt above the King's, the
Majesty of the People. If such Doctrines be openly avowed, witness that
Pamphlet, and the Modest Answerer of the King's Declaration about his Marriage,
it is no wonder the King should depend upon other Guards for his Safety, than
the Affections of, at least, such loyal Subjects.

King Charles the First had many Promises of being made great and glorious,
provided he would part with his most faithful Friends and Counselors, then
styled disaffected and evil Ministers; and by granting some such small
Requests, he gave encouragement for asking, and left himself no room for
denying greater. And indeed he was made great, and extraordinarily exalted from
an Earthly to a Heavenly Throne, from a King to be a Martyr. Who can be
ignorant, that however to demolish a strong Fort, or a Tower well built, it be
necessary to labor long about the Outworks and the Walls with Cannon and with
Pick-ax, yet one only puff, though but weak, of a Princes Folly, or a Private
man's Ambition, who has good store of Followers, Money, and Wit, is able to make
the strongest Empire totter and fall, before the Ruin be expected. Athelstan
the great Saxon King, out of jealousy of State, was persuaded to expose to the
mercy of the Seas his Brother Elwyn, and thereby endangered the loss of his
Dominion; of which when he was put in mind, by his Cup-bearer's saying, upon
recovering with one Foot the slip of the other, See how one Brother helps
another, he cried out, Ah Traitor, live thou to upbraid me of that Folly, of
which your self was the Author? and thereupon caused him to be immediately
executed. Henry the Sixth had escaped Deposition and Murder, had he not
consented to his Uncle the Good Duke of Glocester's destruction, who living
kept him safe, and dying threw him down. After the same method did the Earl of
Northumberland bring about the Ruin of the Protector in Edward the Sixth's
time; persuading him to remove his Brother the Admiral, his only Bulwark and
Support; of which Contrivance, though too late, be died not insensible, leaving
to Posterity a Caution to avoid the Rock on which he split. The extraordinary
Caresses of a reconciled Enemy are ever to be distrusted, and always to be
accounted dangerous; and he may well apprehend a Design, that finds such, or
any man, more than himself, sollicitous for his Safety. The Wolves pretending
kindness to the Sheep, offered to make a League with them, but not till they
first had banished away their Dogs; this they no sooner did, than they paid
with the forseiture of their Necks, the price of their credulity, and their
folly. Nor is the Fathers Legacy to his Sons, of a Bundle of Twigs, less
instructive, these which single may with ease, cannot with difficulty, whilst
united he bent or broken. Divide and Impera, is more useful for the Aspirers
to, than the Possessors of a Crown; and he that suffers himself to be imposed
upon in one, lays himself open to all Instances; and will quickly perceive, the
more he grants, the less he is able to refuse When a Prince finds his Subjects
insist upon things unreasonable or unnecessary* much more proceed contrary to
his positive Commands, as in the Case of Succession, it is time to look about
him, and suspect they intend somewhat more than yet they discover.

The surest way to compass ones purpose, is to pretend the contrary; and if
you will be with success a Sinner, and exquisitly wicked, you must pretend to
be a Saint, and extraordinarily devout. You may with more safety eat your
Chestnuts, if, Monkey-like, you make use of the Cats Claws to pull them out of
the Fire. You cannot hope to enslave your Country, but under the specious Names
of Reformation and Liberty. The people may be gulled, and drawn to bite, if the
Hook be baited with a fitting Fly. If you will set up Presbytery, you must
pretend at first only to run down Popery: when the Popish Lords are outed, it
will be easy after to exclude the Bishops.

That here has been a long time, and still is a carrying on, a design to
subvert the Government and the Religion of the Nation, I perfectly agree with
the Writer of The growth of Popery and Arbitrary Government: But I wish the
Gentleman had named, as he easily might, the Conspirators. If you will believe,
against all Truth and Reason, the before mentioned Answerer to the Declaration,
they are centered in his R. H. and He alone has been the Author of the
Ministers miscarriages, or the Chances of ill Fortune, that have happened since
the Kings Restoration. One might have though Popery alone had been Crime
enough to render him odious, without loading him with the Burden of others.
Must they make him not only presumptive Heir, but presumptive Criminal? But I
confess, he that so much defames, and so irreverently treats the King, may
with less hazard belie his Brother. The end is visible, That what Justice
cannot, popular Fury and the Rabble should, take away the Being of that much
injured Prince. Hence it is, he is said to have been the Author of the Fire of
London: His never to be forgotten pains and Diligence to suppress those Flames,
are ill requited. He was then known to be a zealous Protestant, and could he
join with the Papists, who are now called the Authors, in a mean so destructive
of Religion? And if that were the Design, what hinders its being effected? If
the Papists must be acquitted, surely the Duke ought, in that the Phanatick
Plotters executed in April before, confessed at Tyburn they had so contrived
that fatal Scene, that it could not miscarry: And indeed the Event verified
their Prediction to aday, as to the Fire, though not to the rest of their
intended Tragedy. When Nero set Rome on fire, he commanded Christianos ad
Leones; an ill President for Christian Commonwealths: No man can make himself
innocent by throwing his Crimes upon others. But thus it fares with his R. H.
as well in this as in many more Instances. He is said to be the Author of the
Popish Plots, though not only Oats and Bedloe (the last confirming it at his
Death) have acquitted him, but likewise my Lord Danby tells you, in his Printed
Case, The King was so far from believing it, that it had never been brought
upon the Stage, but for the D's Importunity. This alone, if there were not many
more, is a sufficient Argument of his Innocence, and abhorrence of the Fact;
and yet now (forsooth) he must have revealed it after the King had given him
the intimation, that the Conspirators might convey away their Papers. If so, I
pray, why were Colman's, or any others found? But it will appear on
examination, that Beddingfield no sooner received the Packet, (of which how
Doctor Tongue could inform the Earl of Danby, then in Oxfordshire, 27 mils
beyond Windsor, so as to be with the King on that account within few hours
after, is a Riddle) than he brought it to the Duke, telling him, there was
mischief designed to his R. H. in particular, or to himself, or the Papists in
general, for that the enclosed Letters were forged, and one of them from Dr.
Fogorthy, to whose Person as well as Name he was, till then a perfect Stranger.
This Packet the D. gave to the R. that very day, about the last of August; who
looking on one of the Letters, said, he had ^en the hand before. Some eight
days after, Sir Edmundbury Godfrey sent by Coleman the whole Discovery, with
which the second time the D. acquainted his Majesty, who yet spoke not to the
D. of the matter. The rest of that Libel is as false as these two Particulars,
which therefore for brevity I pass over, no man in his Wits being able to
think it needs any other Confutation than the Fire. But before I conclude, give
me leave to tell you, That the D. has not exposed his Person on all occasions
for the honor of the English Nation, but wherever he appeared carried Victory
along with him, which in his absence was not found. In the first war he beat
the Dutch, in the second he got the better; but in both, the change of Admirals
altered our Success: And whatever false steps our Ministers have made, whose
Bastards are not to be laid at his doors, he is no otherwise accountable for
them, then you or I, who had no power to resist. Every one knows who have been
the public and lose Managers of Affairs; and these can witness, the D. could
never be reckoned in their number. He had no hand in dividing the Fleet in the
first War, nor in halling it up at Chatham before a Peace concluded. He was not
privy to the Advice of breaking the Triple League, nor making an Alliance with
France, which he no sooner heard, than he opposed, foretelling, with
Cassandra's Fate, the Issue. He influenced not a War with Holland, nor setting
upon their Smyrna-Fleet before a Breach declared. Delenda est Carthago was not
his Sentence, nor his Act the Shutting up the Exchequer? nor was he the Author
of Injunctions against the Bankers, nor of usurping the Commons Right of
filling their own Vacancies, nor consequently, of the other Part or Link of
this Chain and Contrivance, the Project of Indulgence; though, to give him his
due, he was for pursuing steddily Resolutions, when once taken; the contrary
would be a lessning our power, and a making us ridiculous at home and abroad.
Afterward, when these Measures were broken, and new ones embraced, he was for
pursuing the Interest of England in defense of the Spanish Netherlands, and did
as verily believe, and was as much imposed upon, as the most credulous in
England, that a War against France was then really purposed, when desired by
both Houses, in 1678/7. His preparations to hazard his Person in that
Expedition, are notorious Evidences of this Truth. Yet such is his misfortune,
that after all his Endeavors for the good of his Country, he is reputed a
Lover of the French Interest, though none be more hated by that Crown, (an
undenied proof of the mali^ of the Imputation) whose unwearied diligence has
been formerly employed, and may now be well suspected to foment and keep up
divisions between the King and his Subjects, the only way to prevent our
opposing his long designed Dominion. An Observation, that alone ought to invite
us to an Union, and a mutual Confidence, and to study in the Spirit of
Moderation, the healing of our Breaches; remembering, That no Reason of State
can be useful to the Public, or justify any Actions contrary to the Laws both
of God and Nations; That it is a shame and a reproach upon us abroad, and an
Inconvenience at home, to have a Plot kept so long on foot, wherein all who
should be found guilty upon unquestionable Evidence, might have been made long
since Exemplary. A speedy and impartial proceeding in this Case, without heat
or passion, or consideration of Parties, or of Interest, will remove all our
Jealousies and Fears, settle us upon the immovable Rocks of Truth and Honor,
and acquit and vindicate to the World, That an English Parliament is not
influenced by men, whose Ambition leads them to study their own private, more
than the Public Good; That they serve their King and Country for Glory, and
for Conscience, not for Gain or Preferment; That they design nothing but the
preservation of their Rights, Libertis, and Religion, by the Methods of peace
and prudence; which without doubt may be for ever secured by the Laws already
in force, or other new Additions, notwithstanding a Popish Sovereign. The Kings
of England have bound, and may again limite their Power with their own Consent
in Parliament: But if this Truth be denied, because of that Maxim in our Laws,
The King can do no wrong; it cannot, That their Ministers and Officers, who
must be, and are accountable for all, and punishable for Illegal Actions, may
be so confined, as may make our Fears unreasonable of any Encroachments or
Innovations, let never so many Popish Princes much less any one, succeed.
Whoever suggests the contrary, is imposed upon by Ignorance, Interest, or the
Malice of crafty and designing Achithophels, who prefer their particular
Advantage to Religion and Liberty, no other way really to be endangered, but by
debarring the D. his Right of Succession; which once past into an Act, will, in
case he survive, most certainly-bring upon the Three Kingdoms Horror and
Confusion, Desolation and Misery, and all the sad Effects of a Civil War. Evils
so far from your Temper and Inclination, that I need not caution you against so
much madness and Folly, as inevitably attends the not regarding the Wisemans
Advice, My son, f^ar God, and Honor the King; and meddle not with those that
are given to change.

What I have written, I have written in obedience to your Commands, the love of
Truth, and zeal for the Public, being (as you know) neither Courtier nor
Pensioner, never was, or like to be, addicted to Popery, not obliged by King
nor Duke in any particular Grace or Favor, but being wholly Independent, and
having something to lose, and sensible no others can suffer by War and
Rebellion, I have used the same freedom without, as I hope you will within
doors, for preventing those Calamities which seem to do more than threaten the
Nation; from which, nothing but Gods Providence, in the Wisdom and Moderation,
Courage and Prudence of our King and Parliament, can defend this unhappie and
distracted Kingdom.

FINIS.

