Reasons humbly proposed for Asserting and Securing the Right of the Subjects
to the Freedom of Trade, until they are Excluded from it by Act of Parliament.
THE Consideration of the Settlement of the East India Trade having taken up so
great a part of the Two last Sessions of Parliament, without bringing it to
Perfection, by reason of the intervening of other Public Affairs, as well as
by the great Opposition and Delays used by the East India Company; and each
Sessions having ended in an Address to His Majesty; The First, to Dissolve
their Charters, and to Establish a New Company to preserve the Trade; the Last,
only to Dissolve their Charters: which being since become Void by Act of
Parliament, by their making Default in Payment of the first Quarterly Payment
of the Tax charged on their Joint Stock, at the Time limited by the Act, the
said Company is since Confirmed by New Charters, Dated the 7th October, and
11th November last.

It Is Humbly Conceived, That the Asserting the Right of the Subjects to the
Freedom of Trade, until they are Excluded from it by Act of Parliament, is a
Matter highly Necessary at this Time.

I. Because the Omission of it may be construed, An admitting that the Crown
can Exclude some Subjects from Trade, and Grant it to others, without an Act of
Parliament.

II. Because the Consequences of Allowing and Admitting such a Power, may be
Dangerous and Fatal to this Kingdom.

III. Because the Company have Seized the Ships and Goods of some of their
Fellow Subjects for Trading into the East Indies, and have Prosecuted others
with Malicious and Vexatious Suits, in Actions of 100000 l. and 20000 l. though
by Law they might Trade thither.

IV. Because they have so lately Asserted in their Petition of the 21th of
October last, That the Sole Trade to the East Indies is Granted to them by
Charter; and that the Trading of others thither, is contrary to the known Laws
of this Kingdom. Whereupon an Order of Council passed, to Stop the Ship
Redbridge, on the bare Allegation in that Petition, That they had notice She
was Bound to the East Indies.

V. Because they did procure the Stop of the Ship Edward, alias Seymour, and
the Henry, in March last; which Ships were both Cleared at the Custom-House and
Gravesend, and had an Order of Council, and Protection for their Seamen; as is
now constantly practiced by reason of the War: the Edward, alias Seymour, being
fully dispatched with all her Cargo on board, Sailing to the Buoy in the Nore,
was Stopped in an unheard of manner, by Powder and Ball, several of the Men of
War firing at Her 6 or 7 times with Shot; which had like to have brought her
Mast by the Board: And though sight and Copy of the Order by which She was thus
stopped was demanded of the Commanders of the Men of War, yet neither could be
obtained. And both Ships were stopped without any Order of Council, although
there was an Order of Council for their Proceeding; and they were continued
under Restraint about Three Weeks time; which at that Season of the Year might
prove the Loss of their Voyages.

VI. Because their former Grants which are Restored and Confirmed by their two
last Charters, contain the Grant of several Powers, which, it is humbly
conceived, are dangerous and destructive to the Rights, Liberties, Lives, and
Estates of their Fellow Subjects; and which they have formerly put in
Execution, and are likely to do again: being no ways discouraged, by any
Punishment inflicted on them for their former Unjustifiable Actions.

Some of which Powers granted in their former Charters, are as follow.

Power to Seize Ships and Goods for Trading thither, the Ships and Goods to be
Forfeited; and besides the Transgressors to incurr the King's Indignation, and
Imprisonment during the King's pleasure, and such other Punishments as the King
should think fit; and not to be released, 'till they had given Bond to the
Company, never more to Trade to the East Indies. -- Power to enter into the
Ship or House of any one, Trading within the limits of their Charters, and to
Seize his Goods without Account. -- Power to Seize the Persons of any
Englishmen found in the East Indies, and to send them home for England. --
Power to Judge the King's Subjects in India, by their Governor and Council, in
all Causes, Civil and Criminal, and to execute Judgment upon them. -- Power to
Execute Martial Law. -- Power to Muster Soldiers, to make Peace or War, to
recover Satisfaction for Injuries by Force of Arms. -- Power to License any
Persons, even Aliens and Infidels, to Trade; though the King's Subjects are
restrained from it.

Whether such Powers can be granted by Charter; or whether it be fit to trust
those with but a color to Execute such Powers, who have already so much
Oppressed their Fellow Subjects by pretense of the same Powers, is well worthy
Consideration. For thereby the Lives, Liberties, and Estates of their
Fellow Subjects who may frequent the East Indies in their Lawful Trading, may
again be Exposed to the same unjust Violence and Oppression which they have
formerly susfered from them.

VII. Because these two last Charters contain such Mysterious Grants, as are
without Precedent or Example; granting them that in Fact, which could not be
justifiably granted in Words. For though they only grant them all such and the
like Lawful Powers, etc. -- which they had or might lawfully hold, use, or
enjoy, etc. by virtue of their former Charters, as fully to all intents and
purposes, as if those Powers and Charters were at large recited: yet those
Powers not being any ways distinguished, which of them are Lawful, and whicch
Unlawful, it is left to the Company, their Factors, Servants, and Mariners, to
judge, which are, and which are not Lawful: And by what they have already done,
it is easy to guess how ready they will be to Execute any other Powers
contained in their former Charters, which they themselves think to be for their
Advantage: And if hereafter in any other Reign, there should be such Judges as
there have been in some former Reigns, who would call any thing Lawful, which
the Crown would have to be so, then the Powers in their former Charters may all
be lawfully used.

VIII. Because they will be encouraged by color of their former Grants being
so mysteriously restored, to oppress and ruin their Fellow Subjects: For they
having a Common Purse, to justify and defend their Actions, the endeavoring
to obtain relief against them by Law, will be rather an Increase of the Injury,
than a Remedy thereof; so that they are in effect left without any Redress.

The undoubted Right which all the Subjects of England have freely to Trade to
all Parts not Prohibited by Act of Parliament, may plainly appear by the
following Particulars. 1st, By the several Statutes which have been made to
declare and assert that Right to the Freedom of Trade, which the Subjects had
before those Laws were made.

2dly, By the Opinion of the Judges, and the several Judgments which have been
given in Westminster Hall, notwithstanding the Exclusive Charters of the
East India and African Company have been pleaded.

3dly, By His Majesty's Message sent the House of Commons the last Sessions, in
Answer to their Address in Relation to the East India Company; wherein His
Majesty recommended to them the preparing a Bill in Order to pass into an Act
of Parliament to Settle that Trade; expressly declaring, that the Concurrence of
the Parliament was necessary to make a complete and useful Settlement thereof.

4ly, By the declining to have this Matter brought to a legal Determination, as
was proposed before the Privy Council, by those who opposed the Passing the new
Charter.

5ly, By the several Petitions delivered the Honorable House of Commons by the
Company themselves, and others by their Procurement, praying to have this
Company Established by Act of Parliament; which plainly shows, that they
themselves acknowledge the Subjects have a Right to that Trade, till they are
excluded from it by Act of Parliament.

And it seems a great Hardship, and an Addition to the Misfortunes which have
already and daily do attend Traders in this War, by the Losses and
Disappointments which they have and do sustain in their Trade, to have the War
made a Pretense to deprive them of the Right which they have to Trade to the
East Indies, from which they could not be hindered, if it were now a time of
Peace; and to have that great and profitable Trade given only to some of Their
Majesty's Subjects, to which all the Subjects of England have an equal Right by
Law, and from which they cannot legally be Excluded by any Charter whatever.

It might rather have been supposed, that the Losses and Disappointments which
have attended all Traders in this War, should have been an occasion of
Indulging them in their lawful Trades, rather than be made use of, as now it
is, to hinder them of their Right to this profitable Trade, and of the most
probable means of retrieving the Losses they have and do daily sustain by the
War: And it might well have been concluded, that the want of Money which the
Public Revenue has felt by the Interruption of Trade, and the Difficulties
which appear to find out Ways and Means to raise Money to carry on the War,
would have been Reasons sufficient to encourage all Merchants to Trade, rather
than to hinder them from their lawful Trading. For if those Merchants who
Petitioned in August last for Protection for Four Hundred Seamen, to go to the
East Indies in five Ships this Season, could have obtained the same, they would
have paid Sixty thousand Pounds for Customs at the return of those Ships, in
less than Two Years time, and have furnished Their Majesty's with Five Hundred
Tuns of Saltpeter, at 60 l. per Tun; which by the Company's hindering others
from trading, and not trading themselves, is now sold at 160 l. per Tun; and
they would also have furnished the Nation with Callicoes and other East India
Goods much Cheaper than they are now from Holland, or than they will be by the
Company, if they have the Monopoly of that Trade; who though they had no
Charter, had Protection granted them for Twelve Hundred Seamen, at the same
time when others were refused: and Yet in the last two Years time, they have
not paid above Twenty or Twenty one thousand Pounds for Customs, and of that
great part for Aliens, and other Men's Goods brought home in their Ships.

These Merchants who Petitioned for Protection for Four Hundred Seamen to go to
the East Indies, were so well assured of their Right to the Trade, that they
not only offered to bring it to a Trial at Law last Term, but publicly
declared to all the World, that if it had been time of Peace, and that they
could have been secure of their Seamens not being pressed from them, they would
have sitted out Ships for the East Indies barefaced, and stood upon the Law of
the Land for their Justification.

All which is humbly submitted to Consideration; and it is humbly hoped the
continuance of these Mischiefs will be prevented, by asserting the Right of all
the Subjects of England to the Freedom of Trade, until they are excluded from
it by Act of Parliament; and that some effectual Provision may be made to
secure the Freedom of Trade in time of War to all Their Majesty's Subjects
indifferently, that so some may not be interrupted and stopped in the Exercise of
it, whilst others are permitted freely to enjoy it.
