REASONS Humbly Offered to the Most Honorable House of LORDS, Against
Repealing the Act for Relief of Creditors, by Making Compositions with their
Debtors, in Case Two Thirds in Number and Value do Agree.
MAny of the most Eminent Merchants and Traders of London, Petitioned this most
Honorable House several Sessions successively for the said Act, (which is now
Endeavored to be Repealed) and others Certified under their Hands as follows,
the Original of which Certificates was about April, 1694. delivered to the
Right Reverend the present Bishop of Salisbury.

I William Popple do Certify, upon many Years Knowledge and Experience, that
in France the Majority of Creditors obliges the Minority to submit to the same
Terms that they have accepted of. I William Cranmer do Certify, that I have
resided at Antwerp, and that if any Person fail there, two Thirds of the
Creditors in Value agreeing with the said Person, does Oblige the other Third
to accept of the same Agreement, and that at Amsterdam it is much after the
same rate, I having dwelt in Holland many Years. I Charles Peers do Certify,
that when I lived in Spain, have Experienced the Major Commands the Minor in
the above Cases. I Thomas Morice do Certify the same as Mr. Peers. I Obadiah
Sedgwick have been Concluded by the Majority of Creditors in Agreements made at
Amsterdam with my Debtor there, which I submitted unto in Conformity to the
Custom of that Country. I Ralph Lee do Certify, that when I lived in Italy,
have Experienced the Major Commands the Minor in the above Cases. I Samuel
Watts do Certify, that when I lived in Spain, the Majority of Creditors
obliges the others to Comply with what Compositions are made by the former. I
underwritten do declare, that in Holland is a Custom, when two Third parts of
the Creditors do agree, the others are Obliged to follow the same, John
Liestinck, J. V. D. I P. Raoul do Certify, that I have lived in France and
Holland, and that the Custom of both those Countries do Oblige all the
Creditors of Persons failing, to abide by the Agreement of the Majority in
Value of the Creditors.
It may reasonably be be believed, did not England more unmeasurably abound
than Foreign Trading Nations, with Gentlemen of the Robe and Quill,
Commissioners of Bankrupts, Clerks, and Solicitors, whose Fees and Perquisites
increase as Suits and Proceedings multiply, Endeavors had not been used for
having the said Act repealed, which is found by the Experience of many to be
good and beneficial, as appears by the Petition of several of the aforesaid
Merchants, upon which a Hearing was Ordered to be at the Bar of this most
Honorable House against the said Act of Repealing, by which said* Petition is
plainly showed,

That by Virtue of Agreements and Compositions, already made and perfected
pursuant to the aforesaid Act, many have received considerable Sums of Money,
which, without the said Act, they were never like to receive, by reason of the
Refusal of some few dissenting Creditors, and the Incapacity of Executors,
Administrators, Guardians and Trustees to Compound.

That much more Money may be received by Agreements and Compositions now on
foot, which are already subscribed and sealed by several Creditors, their
Executors, Administrators, Guardians, and Trustees by Virtue of the said Act,
and might be perfected in some reasonable time.

That the best of Laws have been, and may be abused, and if this Act for that
reason should be repealed, all the good Laws in the Statute-Book may for the
same reason be repealed; and by repealing this Act, not only the Power given to
Executors, Administrators, Guardians and Trustees to compound, but many
Agreements and Compositions now on foot will be made void, and much Composition
Money utterly lost.

It Is believed, that not any Composition or Agreement is made, but what some
Lawyer, Attorney, Clerk or Solicitor, had a hand in the making thereof for his
Client, and if any Fraud be committed, it may be attributed rather to the
Knavery of the Person employed than the Client, or that the Persons offending
are not Exemplarily punished to deter others from committing the like Offense,
and if the Law be deficient in any point, it may be, in that there is not some
severe penalty to be inflicted on such as give their Clients Evil Council or
Advice. For although the Penalties and Punishments are very severe against all
Compounding Greditors, as well as their Debtors guilty of any Fraud; yet there
is not any has been Convicted, and until they be upon a fair Trial, it is more
charitable to believe, rather the Prosecutor than the Prosecuted to be in the
wrong, and if after the Conviction of Criminals, there is an Equity lodged in
the Breast of his Majesty and his Judges with Mercy, to moderate the Summum Jus
which is Summa Injuria, why should an Act be repealed before any Persons
criminated be duly convicted of the Crimes imputed to them or the Innocent
suffer for the Nocent.

The Act only directs the Party or Parties to be Summoned, at whose Suit or
Suits, the Debtor is detained in Custody or Prison, which might be done with
little Trouble or Charge, but the Judges obliging the Debtor to summons all the
dissenting Creditors, though at great distance from one another, which is a thing
the Prisoner not being able to do himself, being under stra^t* Confinement, was
therefore put to a great deal of Trouble and Charges, and forced to employ whom
he could get cheapest to serve the Summonses, and if such Messengers to save
themselves the Trouble of serving many, or upon any other Account were Tardy or
Negligent, which way could the poor Man confined in a Prison help it.

There is little Doubt to be made, but that the Number of Persons which
absconded, and such as lifted themselves for Soldiers, to avoid Arrests, were
far greater than the Number of Persons arrested or in Prison, and few or no
Compositions or Agreements with any Debtors, other than such as were Arrested
or in Prison came before the Judges, so that several thousand Agreements or
Compositions may be made, and Complied with, of which the Judges can give no
account: And if an Exact Account were required, of what Prisoners they have
Discharged, it is believed not Five in a Hundred will be made appear to be
fraudulent; and shall Ninety five fair and honest Compositions or Agreements
suffer for Five, seeing the Persons discharged upon Fraudulent Compositions or
Agreements, are subject and liable to be Arrested again for the same Debts,
besides other Penalties they are to suffer for the same Offense.

Some Judges now refuse to grant Summonses, and others have granted some, which
have been duly served, at the Excessive Costs and Trouble of the Prisoners, yet
refuse to do any thing for the Prisoners Discharge, without showing any other
Cause than that the Act will be repealed, although all Agreements and
Compositions made before the Time limited for it is Repealing are to stand good,
and if they will not discharge Prisoners upon such Agreements or Compositions
before the Act is repealed, what may honest Debtors expect in case any should
be arrested hereafter upon Agreements or Compositions fairly made, according to
the true Intent and Meaning of the Act, and which none of their Creditors have
yet questioned.

The Losses many have sustained by the late War, and Casualties of Fire, etc.
which could not be avoided, and the poor Soldiers and Seamen disbanded are
real Objects of Charity, to plead for the continuance of the said Acts, and
none bur Goalers, Attorneys, Solicitors and their Litigious Clients, would keep
poor insolvent Debtors starving in Prison, who being at Liberty may get
Business or Employment, to maintain themselves, and keep their Wives and
Numerous Children from being burdensome to the Parishes, and to pay and
satisfy their Creditors, all or some considerable part of their Debts, but
this Act has lopt off many Suits, and therefore the Gentlemen of the Robe and
Quil make it their Business to have it damm'd and stigmatized, least another
more Beneficial to the Public should be grafted thereon.

It is therefore to be Hoped, the Premises Considered, this most Honorable
House may think fit to Continue the said Act, and make the Execution thereof
more Easy and Beneficial to both Creditors and Debtors, no Agreement or
Composition being binding by Virtue of the said Act, but such as are made, and
subscribed, and sealed without Fraud.

REASONS Against Repealing the Act for the Relief of Creditors, etc.


