Reasons humbly propounded against dissolving the Ancient Revenue arising by
Wine-Licences, and imposing thirty shillings, or any other sum, upon a Tun of
Wine, in lieu thereof to be paid by the Merchant.
1. THe Wine-Merchants Trade up to the height of their (greatly impaired)
Stocks and Credit, and although the addition of 30 s. upon a Tun of Wine may
seem small, yet it will substract no less then 27000 l. per annum out of the
Merchants Stocks, which they must pay in lieu of about 12 or 13000 l. per
annum, which the Retailers paid for their Wine Licenses for that Revenue, as we
are credibly informed never in the highest year yielded more; the payment of
which 27000 l. will enforce them for want thereof to trade for about 100000 l.
per annum less then now they do, which will not only be their loss, and a
further step to their ruin, but the King also will suffer in his Customs.

2. The Customs upon Wines are already so exceeding high (even above the first
cost of their Wine) that Foreign Princes have taken notice and complained
thereof; and we doubt not, but verily believe and expect, that an additional
payment upon the Importer of Wine, will occasion and induce those Princes to
increase their Customs upon our Commodities and Manufactures imported into
their Kingdoms, and so the Merchant will not only suffer a double mischief and
ruin, and Trade thereby lessened, but also the whole Kingdom will sustain
great damage in vending their Commodities and Manufactures.

3. The Customs upon Wines are already so high, that the Merchants after all
their great courage, hazards, perils and losses in foreign parts by Sea; and
after arrival, are forced to sell their choicest Wines at the Retailers Prizes
for money to pay the Customs, which Wine they compound and mix with mean
decaying Wines, and other Ingredients, to their great advantage: the addition
of 27000 l. per annum will prove an exceeding pressure upon the Merchants, and
no less difficult for them to raise and multiply their necessities, and farther
enable Retailers of Wine to prey upon them, and to increase their said evil
compositions.

4. That a Grant of Tonnage upon Merchants Importation of Wine, or any other
Commodities, was never given to any in England but to the King, as Sovereign
Lord, for protecting them in their Traffic at Sea and Land; nor is it granted
to any other person in any part or place in the World where we have been or
traded, but to the Sovereign, upon this general equity of protecting them in
their Commerce: And we humbly hope this Honorable House will not be prevailed
with to make a President herein.

5. If the Revenue of Wine-Licenses be dissolved, the number of Vintners will
be excessive. -- In Anno 1636. when England abounded most in wealth, there were
not above 2500 Taverns, and Wines were bought cheap beyond Sea, and not for
ready money, but in Barter for other Commodities. During the Disorders, all who
would sold Wine without License; and though the wars had exhausted the Kingdom,
yet about Anno 1660. the number of Vintners was increased unto about 4200.
(besides many untold, which were less observable) which produced greater
importations of Wine bought at enhaunced prizes, and not in Barter, but mostly
for ready money, to the Merchants damage, which Wines were bought up and
vended, through the multitude of Vintners, at excessive prizes, which we must
say is one of the great Leaks through which much of our wealth for this last 25
years has issued.

6. The Revenue of Wine-Licenses proceeds not out of the sober use of Wine in
the houses of the Nobility and Gentry, who usually have their Wines at the
first hand, but upon the more extravagant expense thereof in Taverns; and there
also nothing is imposed, but every man does limit his own expense and payments;
but if this Revenue be dissolved, and double the value thereof be charged upon
the Merchant, it will reach all persons and uses without distinction.

7. The Retailers of Wine were become so numerous and skilful in that hurtful
Art of vitiating Wine, that the Act of 12 Caroli 2. investing the Crown with
this Revenue of Wine-Licenses, does not only restrain the number, by appointing
them to pay for Licenses, but also does somewhat chastise them for their said
unlawful practices: but if this Revenue of Wine-Licenses be dissolved, then the
number will increase, to the debauching and consuming of the Subject, and the
said Castigation will be removed.

8. The psofits arising by VVine-Licenses is an ancient Revenue belonging to
the Crown, and though (till of late) imposed only by Prerogative; yet it
appeared so manifestly equal and necessary, that it was admitted without the
least opposition in the most stormy and adverse times, therefore it is hoped
the Retailers of Wine shall not be discharged from paying this their ancient
duty, which has endured all weathers, and an imposition laid upon the
depressed Merchants.

9. The Revenue of Wine-Licenses arises out of the vast gains of Retailers of
Wine, whose beginnings, though very mean, yet in short time they arrive to
great Estates, and are observed within these last 25 years (wherein all other
Traders have decayed) to have made more purchases then any other Traders in
England, yet by their earnest applications have brought an additional duty upon
the Merchant, and now design to increase the same, to free themselves from
paying for Licenses.

10. The Merchants Estates are usually either in foreign parts, or in
Retailers hands, or else floating on the Seas, and exposed unto amazing
hazards, and themselves possessed of little else then empty Warehouses, and
cannot procure money as Retailers of Wine may, who not only take much ready
money, but also having their Cellars full of Wine, can value themselves thereon
at pleasure: If the Merchant (though under this disadvantage) must find money
to pay vast Customs, yet it is hoped the same shall not be increased to free
Retailers of Wine from paying their ancient duty.

11. The Revenue of Wine-Licenses, as now placed, is to be paid by about 3000
persons, who are Retailers of Wine, which can hardly be felt amongst so many;
but if in lieu thereof an Imposition be upon the Merchant, the same will be
paid out of the Purses of a very few, who are already very much burdened, and
will be unto them an exceeding addition to their present payments and
sufferings, and but small for the Retailers to pay, and no more then what they
paid anciently.

12. If the Revenue arising by Wine-Licenses be dissolved, it will infringe the
ancient Liberties and Privileges of all the Corporations in England, who have
power by the Act 7 Edwardi 6. to grant Licenses unto Retailers to sell Wine to
be drank and spent out of their houses: As also deprive very many Pattentees
(who have paid great sums for their Patents, and (as we are informed) have now
some good allowance in the Rent of their Licenses, in consideration thereof)
for they who have Patents, and they who have none, will be equally free to
retail Wine, to the prejudice of the wealth and welfare of the Kingdom.

Object, We know it will be objected, That when Trade is free and open it comes
most profitable both to King and Subject.

Answ. This holds true in Merchandise, generally use full and necessary; but
where the Merchandise is a costly and luxurious superfluity, the more free the
trade is, the more it consumes and destroys the Subject, who had better give
the King treble the value of what he may have by opening such a trade, then to
have so much Wealth consumed in so great a superfluity; and if it be necessary
by Licenses to restrain the number of Traders in Ale and Beer, a Native
necessary and cheap Commodity, and less apt to produce excess, then sure it is
much more necessary by Licenses to restrain the number of Vintners, who deal in
a costly luxurious foreign Commodity, which tends much more to excess.

2. It may be objected, that it will be a great burden for Retaylers of Wine
at the same time to pay the new Imposition, and also for Wine-Lycences. To
which we answer.

That the payment for Wine Licenses is out of their great gain arising upon the
Sale of Wine, at the present Prizes, so it is no burden upon them and the
Honorable House of Commons have allowed them 4 d. upon the quart of French
Wine, and 6 d. upon the quart of Spanish-wine to defray the new imposition,
which will fully do the same, and time being given for payment thereof, wherein
then are they burdened? and how can they then be loosers? If necessary we
could present a Clue which would lead unto and discover their gains, the
^^^ughts whereof, and that hereby, shall farther increase the Merchants
necessity that they may prey upon them is not a little pleasing, which w^ ^^bly
trust and hope the Honorable House will not consent unto.


