Reasons humbly propounded against Dissolving the Ancient Revenue arising by
Wine-Licences, and Imposing Twenty Shillings, or any other Sum, upon a Tun of
Wine, in lieu thereof, to be paid by the Merchant.
1. THE Wine-Merchants trade up to the height of their (greatly) impaired Stock
and Credit; and though the addition of 20 s. upon a Tun of Wine may seem small,
yet it will substract no less than 26000 l. per annum out of the Merchants
Stock, which they must pay in lieu of about 12 or 13000 l. per annum, which the
Vintners now pay for their Wine-Licences: for that Revenue (as we are credibly
informed) yields no more. The Merchants Payment of the said 26000 l. will
enforce them for want thereof, to trade for 100000 l. per annum less than now
they do; which will not only be their loss, but the King also will suffer in
the Customs.

2. The Customs upon Wines are already so high, that the Merchants after all
their great Charge, Hazards, Losses in Foreign Parts, by Sea, and after
Arrival, are forced to sell their choicest Wines at the Retailers Prizes, for
Money to pay the Customs; which Wine they Compound and Mix with mean decaying
Wines and other Ingredients, to their great advantage. The addition of 26000 l.
per annum, will prove an exceeding Pressure upon the Merchants, and no less
difficult for them to raise, and multiply their Necessities, and further enable
Retailers of Wine to prey upon them, and to increase the said evil Compositions.

3. That a Grant of Tunnage upon Merchants Importation of Wine or any other
Commodities, was never granted to any in England, but to the King as Sovereign
Lord, for protecting them in their Traffic at Sea and Land; nor is it granted
to any other Person in any Part or Place in the World, where we have been or
traded, but to the Sovereign, upon this general equity of Protecting them in
their Commerce. And we humbly hope this Honorable House will not be prevailed
with to make a President herein to free the Vintners from paying their Ancient
Duty for Wine-Licences.

4. The Customs upon Wines are already so exceeding high (even above the first
Cost thereof) that Foreign Princes have taken notice, and complained thereof;
and we doubt not but that a constant additional payment upon the Importers of
Wine will occasion and induce those Princes to increase their Customs upon our
Commodities and Manufactures imported into their Kingdoms; and so the Merchant
will not only suffer a double Mischief and Ruin, and Trade thereby be
impaired, but also the whole Kingdom will sustain great Loss and Damage in
Vending their Commodities and Manufactures.

5. If the Revenue of Wine-Licences be Dissolved, the Number of Vintners will
be excessive. In Anno 1636, when England abounded most in Wealth, there were
not above 2500 Taverns; and Wines were Bought Cheap beyond Sea, and not for
Ready Money, but in Barter for other Commodities. During the Disorders, all who
would Sold Wine without License; and though the Wars had exhausted the
Kingdom, yet about Anno 1660, the Number of Vintners were increased unto above
4800, which occasioned Wine to be Bought at Enhansed Prizes, and not in Barter,
but mostly for Ready Money, which is one of the Leaks through which much of our
Wealth for these last 25 Years has issued.

6. The Revenue of Wine-Licences proceeds not out of the Sober use of Wine in
the Houses of the Nobility and Gentry, who usually have their Wines at the
First hand, but upon the more Extravagant expense thereof in Taverns, and there
also nothing is Imposed, but every man does Limit his own Expense and Payments;
But if this Revenue be Dissolved, and 20 s. per Tun, which is double the Value
thereof, be Imposed upon the Merchant, it will reach all Persons and Uses
without distinction.

7. The Retailers of Wine were become so Numerous and Skilful in that hurtful
Art of Vitiating Wine, that the Act of Duodecimo Caroli Secundi, Investing the
Crown with this Revenue of Wine-Licences, does not only Restrain the Number, by
appointing them to Pay for Licenses, but also does somewhat Chastise them for
their said unlawful Practices: But if this Revenue of Wine-Licences be
Dissolved, then the Number of Vintners will increase, to the Debauching and
Consuming of the Subject, and the said Castigation will be Removed.

8. The Profits arising by Wine-Licences, is an Ancient Revenue belonging to
the Crown, and though (till of Late) Imposed only by Prerogative, yet it
appeared so manifestly Equal and Necessary, that it was admitted without the
least Opposition in the most Stormy and Adverse Times; Therefore it is hoped
the Retailers of Wine shall not be discharged from paying this their Ancient
Duty, which has endured all Weathers, and an Imposition of double the Value
laid upon the Depressed Merchants.

9. The Revenue of Wine-Licences arises out of the Vast Gains of Re^ail^^s of
Wine, whose beginnings though very Mean, yet in short time they arrive to great
Estates, and are observed within these last 25 Years (wherein all other Traders
have decayed) to have made more Purchases than any other Traders in England;
yet by their earnest Applications, we have cause to fear they will bring upon
us a heavy Additional Duty, and also design to increase the same to free
themselves from paying for Licenses.

10. The Merchants Estates are usually either in Foreign Parts, or in
Retailers hands, or else Floating on the Seas, and exposed to amazing Hazzards,
and themselves possessed of little else than empty Warehouses, and cannot
procure Money as Retailers of Wine may, who not only take much Ready Money, but
also having their Cellars full of Wine, can value themselves thereon at
pleasure: If the Merchant, though under this disadvantage, must find Money to
pay high Customs, and also this vast Additional Duty; Yet it is hoped the same
shall not be increased, to free Retailers of Wine from paying their Ancient
Duty of Wine-Licences.

11. The Revenue of Wine-Licences, as now placed, is to be paid by about 3000
Persons who are Retailers of Wine, which can hardly be felt amongst so many
whose Stock is at least ten times greater, than the Wine Merchants: but if in
lieu of the Revenue of Wine-Licences, an Imposition be upon the Merchant, the
same will be paid out of the Purses of a very few whose Stock is small, and
already very much burdened, and will be to them an exceeding Addition to their
present Payments and Sufferings, and but little for the Retailers to pay, and
no more than what they paid Anciently.

12. That now the Merchants, when their Market for Wine is at the Worst, have
yet two sorts of Customers to take them off, viz. Free-Vintners, and those who
are not free; between whom there is some Emulation, which is often useful to
the Merchants, saving them from a Necessity of Selling their Wines upon the
Free-Vintners Terms: but if the Revenue of Wine-Licences be dissolved, all
those that are not Free-Vintners (who are more than those that are
Free-Vintners) will be utterly suppressed, and themselves and Families dispoiled
of their Trade and Livelihood, and the Merchants exposed to be preyed upon by
the Free-Vintners, who then will have too great opportunity to raise themselves
unto an exceeding Oppulency.

13. If the Revenue arising by Wine-Licences be Dissolved, it will Infringe the
Ancient Liberties and Privileges of all the Corporations in England, who have
Power by the Act of 7. Edw. 6. to grant Licenses unto Retailers to Sell Wine,
and the Benefit thereof enures unto the Poor of the said Corporations, who will
not only be thereby deprived, but also very many Pattentees (who have paid
great Sums for their Patents; and (as we are informed) have now, in
consideration thereof, some good Allowance in the Rent of their Wine-Licences)
for they who have Patents; and they who have None, will be equally Free to
Retail Wine, to the Prejudice of the Wealth and Welfare of the Kingdom.

Objection. We know it will be Objected, That when Trade is Free and Open, it
becomes most Profitable both to King and Subject.

Answer.This holds true in Merchandise, generally useful and necessary; but
where the Merchandiz^ is a Costly and Luxurious Superfluity, the more free the
Trade is, the more it Consumes and Destroys the Subject, who had better give
the King treble the value of what he may have by opening such a Trade, than to
have so much Wealth consumed in so great a Superfluity. And if it be necessary
by Licenses to Restrain the Number of Traders in Ale and Beer, a native,
necessary and cheap Commodity, and less apt to produce Excess; then surely it
is much more necessary by Licenses to Restrain the Number of Vintners, who deal
in a Costly, Luxurious, Foreign Commodity, which tends much more to Excess.


