REFLECTIONS UPON Monsieur Des Cartes's DISCOURSE OF A METHOD for the
well-guiding of Reason, and Discovery of Truth in the Sciences.

Written by a private Pen in French, and translated out of the original
Manuscript, By J. D.

LONDON* Printed by Tho. Newcomb. 16^4

TO THE Right Honorable, BULSTRODE WHITLOCK, One of the Lords Commissioners for
the Great Seal of England, etc.
MY LORD,
HAd I been so fortunate as to have brought your Lordship somewhat equal unto
you, that is to say, great, excellent, and worthy the eyes of all Europe, I
should not have need to begin this address with a prayer for pardon; which now
I must needs do, since, my Lord, I only beseech you to be a tutelar Angel to a
poor Orphan, whose Parents are unknown, and which is like to perish, if not
sheltered by your Lordships shadow.

Those who have had the honor to converse with your Lordship, very well know
how much, among your other virtues, your Candor and humanity are conspicuous,
and what Goodness and Tenderness resides in that high and noble Soul of yours,
which makes you so universal a Patron to all liberal Studies, and a Fosterer of
every thing virtuous, animating and quickening the inferior Bodies with that
great Light which continually dwells in your own Sun.

And, my Lord, more particularly, since I fear you have that admirable defect
of forgetting the favors you confer, give me leave to put your Lordship in mind
of what you have done to me, both in doing me the honor to think I might be
somewhat serviceable to you, as also in encouraging my poor studies; which
having received warmth and life from your protection, bring this poor offering
as the first fruits, which I beseech your Lordship to accept with the same
easiness as that great Prince did the hand-full of water, since it is the heart
that proportions and estimates every gift. In the mean while, my Lord, I shall
not cease, by my prayers and actions, to make appear that high reverence that
I carry toward you; and though I be the meanest among your innumerable
Adorers, yet is there none more cordial, more fervent, more sincere, then

My Lord, Your most humble, most devoted, and most obedient Servant, JO. DAVIES.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE Impartial READER.
IF a man should look on all Books, since there were any, he shall find that
few Authors have been so fortunate in their Writings, but they have left
somewhat for those that should come after them to except against; and so
consequently few have been transmitted to Posterity, without the castigations
and censorious remarks of other men; and these not proceeding from envious
emulation, but from sober and serious enquiry after Truth. But if any have been
thought so transcendent, as to have been able to escape these, yet whether
Posterity have not been abused by a servility of imitation of them, or
precipitate superstruction on them, is much to be questioned. However it be,
all these kind of Labors have ever been encouraged and rewarded as such, as
have both as to Religion and Policy not meanly obliged Mankind: Nor indeed can
we look on those that decry such endeavors, but as such as seek Fig Leaves to
cover some secret Errors, or are too fondly enamored of their own opinions.
Truth, as it is a Metal that cannot be counterfeited, so does it not decline,
but endure the severest test, and reckons its triumphs by its trials, which do
not consume, but refine it. Nature certainly is not grown old to feebleness and
sterility; or if it produce now as great ingenuities as it has formerly, can
it possibly be, that she will not find employment for them? otherwise a
Traditional acquiescence were as commendable as all the Disquisitional
recherches after Truth.

What excellent discoveries are there daily found out, even in things wherein
our ordinary subsistence is concerned, which yet we are not content only to
embrace, but endeavor to improve and advance? And why may not the same thing
happen also in Philosophy, which is of that extent, that she is not limited but
by the universe? It is indeed our weakness and our unhappiness together, to
attribute to some men that Authority over our Reason, which our Passions are
not able to recall; nor are we easily reduced to hearken to others, who shall
tell us truer things, though different from what we knew before.

But how little do we herein consider how often Error and Humanity may lodge in
the same Inn; whereas Infallibility is a thing, that, in this World, has not
what the Foxes, nor the Fowls of the Air have, neither hole nor nest. It is a
Negative Attribute of the Divine Majesty, one of the Regalia of Omnipotency,
which it is Treason in any thing that is Humane to assume. Religion it self,
which of all things has the greatest participation of, and correspondence with
the Divine Being, is hardly allowed infallible, when we look on it with
relation to the Humane dispensation thereof. Heresies, Schisms, Errors, etc.
are not certainly the Motes that render that great Beauty the fairer; but the
Black Patches, the Imperfections, and the acknowledgment of our Humanity, and
the then consequent presumption of our Error. Now if this happen in that
affair, wherein our precious and immortal Souls are embarked; what may we
expect in things which have only an alliance and conjunction with our external
happiness?

But as it happens in Religion, that the most eminent Heretics have been men
of excellent Learning and Endowments; so it must be supposed, that those only
can be Heretics in Philosophy, who are indeed great Philosophers, and such as
imagined in themselves, that they had something to acquaint the World that
should astonish it more then any thing it knew before. But he that undertakes
such a thing, ought to conclude with himself, that he intends to quarrel with
the common opinion, and therefore ought to presuppose whatsoever may make good
the ground of the received Tenets, which must be taken away to facilitate the
charge of a new, and, before, unheard of Assertion. It is no easy matter for
one man to foresee what a many may be able to object; and yet this was the case
of the great Author of the DISCOURSE concerning the conduct of our Reason, etc.
the truly great DES CARTS, the prodigy of his Age, and whose departure hence
so soon is yet the regret of the Philosophical World. But being withal but a
Man, it were an injury to the Divinity to think him inerrable; we may well
place him among the Heroes, but not among the Gods. Nor ought any man to think
it a thing any ways injurious to him, to reflect on what he has done, since it
is a thing he is so far from declining, that it is his invitation, as who
thought that Learning gained no small advantages by communication and
correspondence, and has obliged the world with his Labors, with this Caution,
that others by their experiments might advance his discoveries. Some there have
been, who have wrestled the World out of some tenet of Public Faith, who yet
in some other things, have that weakness which is the most adequate attribute
of mankind; and that it has fared thus with our great Author, may partly
appear by these REFLECTIONS on his DISCOURSE. I am in some doubt, whether he
might have seen them before he died, much more, before the publishing of his
Discourse, (it being his custom to communicate all things to be strictly
examined by his Friends and Correspondents, before he committed them to the
Press) for however he might happily think them slight, yet certainly we should
somewhere have met with his resentment. As for the Author of these Reflections,
I cannot do him so much honor as tell the World his name, for I never knew it,
having met with them accidentally in a Manuscript. If I have done him right (as
I believe) in the Translation I have performed what I undertook. If any man
will reflect upon these Reflections, he is at liberty, and will show himself a
Philosopher, by engaging Ingenuities into those Olympic exercises, where the
prize is TRUTH.

J. D.

ERRATA.
Page 19. l. 3. r. Ancients, p. 28. l. 2. r. of those, p. 38. l. 19. r. (...),
p. 45. l. 1. r. which it, p. 46. l. 23. r. internal, p. 53. l. 15. r. depend,
p. 59. l. ult. r. conceive, p. 74. l. 20. r. t.

REFLECTIONS UPON Monsieur DES CARTES'S Discourse of a Method for the
well-guiding of Reason, and the Discovery of Truth in the Sciences, etc.
WHenever I have to deal with any work of Monsieur Des Carts, I rowse my self
up to all the attention and vigilance possible: And this I do, not only out of
the justice which obliges a man to use the nicest scrutiny and ponderation of
Reason, where nothing can be obtained but by the irrefragable conviction
thereof; but also, to examine how deservedly this man is placed in that
extraordinary esteem wherein we find him in the world, even amongst the
greatest men; which is as much as to say, whether Fame be not in great part out
of his debt. As for his Dioptriques and his Geometry, I can pass no other
censure upon them, then what Socrates passed on a Book of Heraclitus in these
words; (...). But for his doctrine of the Nature of Light, which he inserts in
his D^optriques, and the Hypotheses he has at the beginning of his Meteors, he
must pardon me, if in stead of calling them (...). I name them (...). And
seeing he prostitutes them in their nakedness, without the least shadow of
proof, he is unjust according to his own rule: For how can he expect I should
receive them as true, when he has tied me to this general rule, viz. Never to
admit any thing into persuasion, but by the sufficient evidence of Reason? And
though he have made a handsome superstructure of doctrine upon them, (as may,
and ought to be acknowledged) yet have they no dependence on those principles,
nor is any thing that is said advanced out of any design to prove them. But I
shall not at the present give you my particular opinion of them, but shall
content my self to send you certain REFLECTIONS on the same Authors DISCOURSE
of a Method, as he calls it, for the wellguiding and conduct of our Reason, in
the discovery of truth in the Sciences. The Piece, resembling the great Author
that brought it forth, must be noble and excellent; and if there be any thing
deficient, it is the more excusable, in regard he protests that he has only
advanced it as a proposition, which he exposes to the battery of other men's
judgments. And therefore whatever I shall say of it, shall carry that reverence
as shall witness I have done no violence to that deserved respect which the
world bears him, and shall calmly give my judgment of it, which is that he
himself desires all men should do, who any ways conceive themselves able to be
contributors to the Commonwealth of Learning.

To the first Part.
THe first Part of his Discourse may be reduced to these heads. That that which
(according to the French word) is called bon sens, that is to say, Reason, or
sound judgment, or (as the English Translation of the said Discourse has it)
Right understanding is naturally equally distributed among all men, so that one
man ought* not to be called more rational or more understanding then another;
yet with this restriction, That all had not the same conduct of their reason;
and that therefore it were necessary there were a certain Method contrived for
the regulation and conduct thereof. That he had formed to himself an Idaea of
such a Method, as if there be any thing solidly good and of importance, it must
be that; and by the assistance thereof his progress in the Sciences has been
mightily advanced; That he has been so liberal as to communicate this Method
unto us, that we might judge of it. That having studied in the most famous
Universities in Europe, and arrived to as great reputation of Learning as any
of his Contemporaries whatsoever; when yet he came seriously to cast up his
accounts, he found the summa totalis to amount to this, that all the advantage
he had made, was, That he had only more and more discover d his own ignorance;
That he had not found any thing in Philosophy (though cultivated by the most
excellent wits that have lived these many ages) which was certain and
indisputable, nothing but doubt, ambiguity and sophistry: And, That in regard
there were so many different opinions about the same thing, he thought himself
sufficiently disobliged from any further prosecution of his studies, and
consequently resolved to seek no other knowledge but what he should find in
himself and the great volume of the world.

It has been ever generally observed, that those men who either out of
restlesness of humor, or contempt of what is past, have been most busy and
agitating in the introduction of any new doctrines or opinions, have ever
observed this rule, to make their advances very gradual at the first, and to
temper their propositions with so much plausibility, as a doctrine which comes
to quarrel with the common Tenent can bear, so for a while to support the
spirits of those they have to deal with. But Monsieur des Carts, to my great
astonishment, begins his Discourse with a Paradox* which not only causes the
Reader to make a halt at the first step, but is withal so slenderly proved,
that I wonder it could proceed from one who admits nothing for current but what
has undergone the grand test of Reason, and desies all persuasion which is not
induced by irrefragability and demonstration.

But that we shall here first examine, shall be these two Questions, which are
easily started out of the foregoing words.

1. Whether Reason, sound judgment, or right understanding be equally
distributed?

2. Whether there be not some presumption in that assertion of his; That there
is nothing in Philosophy which is not doubtful?

Since we must confess that all things that God has made are good, we cannot
without a quarrel with his providence doubt, but that Reason or right
understanding, or as the Author calls it elsewhere, The faculty of right judging
and distinguishing truth from falsehood, is excellently well divided and
distributed among men. This is one reason produced by the Author for the proof
of the first question; but how strongly, we shall see anon: At present it shall
suffice to say, that it does not hence follow, that right understanding is
equally distributed. The omnipotence of God may be as much or more acknowledged
and admired in the great inequality which there is of right understanding among
men, as if it were equally weighed to everyone. And therefore this proposition
lies open to the battery of 1. The common opinion of all men. 2. Experience. 3.
The Author himself.
First, That it crosses the common opinion, we need but consider what we say of
those men whom we desire to commend or prefer before others: we say they are
rational, knowing, understanding men; or they are such as can judge or
distinguish so rightly of things, that they will not be easily surprised by
misrepresentations. Now, if the right understanding were equal in all, this
manner of speaking were impertinent and ridiculous, and would signify as much,
as if being to commend a Beauty, we should say that she had two eyes, and that
her nose were in the midst of her face.

2. That it stands not the charge of Experience, we are only to look on our
selves as men. Some have such and such endowments and excellencies, others have
others: Some are of a quick and nimble ratiocination; others are so dull and
phlegmatic, that they seem not to reason at all; and these are they which
Aristotle in his Politics calls (...), as if nature for want of ratiocination
had designed them for slaves and subjects to others. There are others* that are
more discoursive and understanding by the simple liberality of Nature, then
some others, who with all the assistance and advantages of Books, Study,
Precepts, etc. can hardly arrive to mediocrity.

3. The Author in this very point is as unfortunate as other men that maintain
Paradoxes; that is, when they have racked their wits and inventions to make
good a Paradox, they in treating of some other question insensibly contradict
their former Hypothesis. For in another place of this discourse he says, Page
9. according to the English Translation, printed 1649.
That Philosophy us the means to speak of all things with probability, and makes
herself to be admired by the least knowing men. Here while he is wrapped into the
exaltations of those reasonings which a man of right understanding may
naturally arrive to, he presupposes that all have not that right understanding.
Besides he also allows that men's knowledge or right understanding may admit of
comparison (which utterly destroys equality) and according as it is more or
less in men, accordingly do they more or less admire Philosophy. In another
(page 11.) he says, That those who have the strongest reasoning faculties, and
who bestdigest their thoughts to render them more clear and intelligible, are
more fit to persuade then great Masters of Rhetoric. Here he admits and
applauds the strength of reasoning faculties, which he certainly would not, did
he not suppose there were some weaker reasoning faculties; and this I think
makes against the equality of Right understanding. Nor does he only commend the
subtle ratiocinations which a man of right understanding, or a right judging
man may have, but elsewhere, viz. page 25. he confesses that some have reason
and modesty enough to judge that they are less able to distinguish truth from
falsehood then others, and that they ought much rather to follow others men's
opinions then seek after better themselves. In another place he says, Some men
are stupid, dull and insensible. If this does not evince a graduality of
understanding in men, I know not what does; or else we must say that stupid and
dull men are very good understanding, and very right judging men.

Now to prove this equal distribution of right understanding, the Author of the
Discourse, besides what is above alleged, insists on two other reasons. The
first immediately follows his proposition in these words: For that every one
believes himself so well stored with it, that even those who in all other
things seem the hardest to be pleased, seldom desire more of it then they have.
This reason to me seems to want many grains to make it weight; for a
distribution may be very good and well done, though all are not content with
their shares. But that which he subjoins, I much more wonder at, where he says,
that it is not likely all men should be deceived in this; but that this is the
very thing that witnesses that the faculty of right judging and distinguishing
truth from falsehood (which is properly called reason or understanding) is
naturally equal in all men. But to answer this, I deny that all men are so well
contented with their portions of right understanding; nay it may be affirmed
that they would willingly have more if they could; nor want there those, were
the division to be made again, who would be glad of more then they have, though
they do not openly complain of their deficiencie at the present. Besides, there
are many that will not complain, only to avoid the contempt which may be
consequential to the want of right understanding: As we see diverse who are very
sensible of their poverty and exigencies, and privately bewail their wants, who
yet set the best face on it to the world, because they will not be slighted and
treated below themselves. It Is upon this account, that it is natural to women
to wear black patches, and to hide their other deformities by all the artifice
humane invention can furnish them with.

The other reason which the Author makes use of, seems at first sight to be
more forcible to his purpose. For, page 4. he says, That Reason or right
understanding is the only thing which makes us men, and distinguishes us from
Beasts; and this he believes to be entire in every man. To which my answer
peremptorily is this, That right understanding is not that which makes us men,
as he affirms; for we may be men without it; and I believe no man will deny but
that the stupid, the dull, nay the distracted are equally men with others.

But to disperse those clouds of imaginations which may darken this question,
we are to distinguish the cause and principle of this Rationation from the
state or condition wherein a man ought to be when he is to execute his
functions. He that has his eyes bound about with a cloth, can make no use of
them till the cloth be taken away: In like manner he that has good legs is not
in a condition to walk if he be fettered, unless you take away the fetters. The
principle then of this ratiocination, which the Philosophers call (...), is
that which distinctively makes us men, and in that I do confess that all men
are equal; but right understanding is not absolutely that principle, but is the
state or condition wherein our understanding ought to be for to exercise its
functions. Now for an interemptory conclusion to this point, I need say but
this, That the state or condition before mentioned, which is the constitutive
and distinctive difference between man and beast, has no dependence on the
understanding* but on the disposition and temperament of the Body, whereof
there being a great diversity, it will follow, that the Author, to prove an
equal division of right understanding among men, should have built it upon this
Paradox, That the disposition and temperament of all men's bodies is one and the
same.

Before I break open the other question, I shall beg the Authors favor to tell
him, that though he had made it his design to* bring Philosophy into disrepute
as much as lay in his power, yet cannot he do it without commending it, and
that more then he intended. For first of all, he confesses that by the
assistance of it He has discovered his own ignorance, that is to say, it has
been his Collyrium whereby he has seen the difficulty which is in the
acquisition of the knowledge of things. But there are many degrees of
Ignorance. For the present it shall suffice us to observe* that there is a kind
of gross beastly ignorance, which Philosophy abhors; and another kind which in
respect of this may be said to be knowing, and such as wherein Philosophy many
times leaves us. The first is in those who are utterly ignorant of the state of
a Question; the second is in those that know it well enough, but finding that
many things may be brought both for, and against it, they are not convinced
whether opinion to cleave to. As for example, to make a square to a circle,
would be thought by those that are not acquainted with the Mathematics, a very
easy thing to do, and that a Carpenter or a Bricklayer would not stick at it;
but a good Mathematician will tell you he cannot do it, nay happily will
question whether it can be done at all.

Secondly, the Author confesses that Philosophy affords us the means to speak
of all things with probability. If it do so, then certainly it hinders us from
advancing propositions that are ridiculous or impertinent. To which I may add
this, that as in consultation or deliberation, though we cannot be assured of
the success of what we design, we ought not to hold our arms across, but put
that in execution which seems most conformable to reason; so in the speculative
Sciences we must not always suffer our minds to be gravel'd in an indifferency
or aequilibrium as to all opinions like Scepticks, but embrace that which
carries with it most probability.

But what shall we say of the procedure of the Author in this case? As soon as
he had gone through the ordinary course of Philosophy in the Schools, because
he found not the satisfaction he expected, he persuades himself, that there is
nothing in all Philosophy which is not disputable, and by consequence not
doubtful; and thereupon quits the reading of all books of Philosophy, resolving
to seek no other knowledge but what he could find in himself and the great
volume of the world. But is not this resolution a little too precipitate? I
would gladly ask him, whether when he had finished his course of Philosophy, he
had read all Aristotle's works leisurely, and with that attention of mind which
were requisite, and with the necessary helps for the understanding of them?
When he had done this, whether he had consulted Alexander, Themistius,
Simplicius, Philoponus, and other Greek Philosophers, for their opinions
concerning what he thought of most importance, to see whether they agreed among
themselves, and with their great Master? I am confident he will not affirm that
he had done all this at that time. Besides that, I know these books are not so
common among young Students, nay many times their Tutors and Professors read
them not but upon the reputation of others.

But let us put the case, that Aristotle and his disciples should never have
done any thing but gulled us, I do not perceive how a man could thence infer
that there is nothing certain in all Philosophy, before he had read Plato's
works, were it only to see whether the Antiens had with just reason entitled
him divine: but especially before he had deciphered his Timaeus, to see if
there were any thing more solid in that then in the works of Aristotle And when
both Aristotle and Plato should have been deceived, had it been amiss, or was
it not necessary to have sifted the Philosophy of Epicurus, as also that of the
Stoics, before the pronouncing of this severe sentence against all Philosophy?
Not to mention, that it had not been any crime to have turned over the writings
of Hippocrates, to see on what princiciples of Philosophy he had built his
Physics.

But to rip up the bottom of the question: If the Author had contented himself
to say that there were but few things in Philosophy that were certain and
indisputable, he would have had that advantage of ground of me, that I durst
not have set upon him; but since he flies so high as to declare absolutely and
without any exception, that there is not any thing in all Philosophy which is
not doubtful, I think there needs no great forces to encounter with him.

I shall say nothing of the certainty and clearness of the Demonstrations of
Geometry, because he seems not to reckon it as any part of Philosophy; but as
for Logic, he does her the honor to make her one of the children, or at least
the handmaid of Philosophy. When I seriously consider it, I cannot but wonder
how he should, without any exception, say that there were nothing certain in
Philosophy. For not to speak of the other parts of Logic, those very precepts
which Aristotle gives us of Opposition, Conversion, and the Transposition of
the three Figures of Syllogisms, and the manner how to reason in any of them,
and of the Reduction of the Syllogisms of the second and third figures to the
first* all which are as firm and indisputable as any Demonstrations of
Geometry, and so generally received, that no man has hitherto called them into
the least question: And to produce one conclusive proof hereof, let us see what
the Author himself confesses page 28. of his Discourse, where he says, That
Logic contains diverse most true and good Precepts, and teaches us to speak
with judgment of the things we are ignorant of.

To pass from Logic to Moral Philosophy, which forasmuch as it may be treated
of two manner of ways, the one Parainetick, the other Dogmatick, the former he
honors with those elogies and commendations it deserves; but for the latter,
he taxes it with a deficiencie as to the teaching of the virtues, and lays it
to his charge, that many times it bestows that fair name on what might more
properly be termed Insensibility, Pride, Despair, or a Parricide. Wherein I
confess I have no great quarrel with him, if we speak of the moral Philosophy
of the Stoics which indeed sometimes would make us too insensible, sometimes
equals us to God, nay in a manner prefers us before him. But as for Aristotle,
in the writings he has left us of this part of Philosophy, he has so
excellently well described the Virtues and Vices, and has been so fortunate in
it, that there are very few things to be carp'd at in him, unless it be this
one grand omission, Not to have left any one word of man's duty toward God. As
for his Politics, it cannot be denied, but that the rules and maxims he gives
are fallible, the nature of the thing being such as will not admit
infallibility: yet shall I not stick to say, that he that shall find nothing in
them that satisfies him, is a man of a very odd stomach.

But it may be it is his Physics that the Author particularly quarrels at. I
must indeed confess that it is like a great Forest, where there are so many
cross paths, that it is no hard thing for a man to lose his way in them. Truth
may be compared to those birds which build their nests on the tops of the
highest rocks, such as are almost inaccessible by reason of their horrid
precipices, and such as it is very hard, if not impossible to climb up to. Or
if you will have it, suppose Truth scattered and lost in a great Forest, it
may be presumed some Huntsmen may be so fortunate as to give her a start^ but
in their chase of her they must expect to meet with bushes and quicksets, which
are so thick, that it is none of the easiest things to make way through them.
It is the pleasure of God to keep Nature under a cloud undiscovered, the more
to oblige us to humility by a sense and an acknowledgment of our ignorance. Yet
all this supposed and granted, it is not to be thought that so many great and
eminent personages, who made it their only business in their several ages to
study and find out Nature, should have taken all that pains to no purpose, and
after all their pursuit to have discovered nothing at all. And it is on the
other side an injurious and dishonorable disesteem of reverend Antiquity, and
an overweening opinion of our selves, to imagine that one of us now living,
contracting all study into himself, and thence directing it to the great volume
of the world, (which yet must be acknowledged to have been equally open at all
times and in all ages) can without the least external assistance or advantage
do more then all others, though furthered and advanced by mutual helps and
endeavors. Nor shall I stick to say, that the fairest stones of this our
Authors new building, will be found to be such as he shall have reserved out of
the rubbidge and ruins of Aristotle's Physics.

Nor is it hard to make this appear, if by a pattern we may judge of the whole
piece. For let a man but read his explication of the Motion of the Heart, which
we have in the fifth Part of this Discourse; There he would maintain the moving
of the Heart to proceed from the heat which is within it. Now this great point,
which he conceives to be grounded upon the evidence of Reason, is borrowed from
Aristotle. But that we may exempt so great and eminent a person from the
indiscretion of holding any thing which is inconvenient or incoherent, I am
persuaded that, however he may speak of the Philosophy taught in the Schools,
as slightingly and disadvantageously as may be, he intended to assume no more
then I am willing to grant him.

But to come yet a little nearer, let it be granted that there is nothing but
what is doubtful in Philosophy, yet the Author proves this assertion but very
weakly. There is nothing, says he, in Philosophy which is not disputable,
therefore nothing which is not doubtful. Do we not know that there are many who
endeavor to persuade others to what they themselves believe not? And there
want not those who will dispute about what they nothing at all doubt of. To
which I shall add thus much to make it overweight; That to say that any thing
is doubtful, because some men doubt of it, argues a not full understanding of
the definition of doubtful. For as all that is admitted into the creed and
approbation of some certain men, is not for that reason esteemed probable, but
only that which has passed the approbation and allowance of the most learned,
or greatest part of the wisest and most knowing men, or at least the most
eminent among them.

To the second Part.
THat which we shall think fit to epitomize out of the second Part, amounts to
thus much. There is not, says he, so much perfection in those works whereto
diverse have contributed their helps and endeavors, as in those wherein one
particular man has disposed of all things: As may be observed in t^ose
edifices which have their designations and perfection from one particular
Architect, as being commonly more regular and uniform then those wherein diverse
have endeavered to reedifie, who happily have been obliged to make use of old
walls to such or such purpose, which had been built for some other different
purposes. He consequently is of opinion, that he should more fortunately
advance into Philosophy, if he should first raze out of his Creed all those
opinions which he had received in the Schools, then if he should build on those
old foundations. That being a private person, his design is not to reform the
body of the Sciences, nor to offer any violence to the Method established in
the Schools of the delivery* and tradition of them, but only to reform his own
thoughts. That in enquiring after a fit method for the advancement of his
design, he has found out that as to Logic, and the most part of its
instructions, he knew no other use of them, then that they served only to
explicate to another those things which one knows, or rather to discourse
without judgment those things whereof we are ignorant, then to attain the
knowledge of any thing not known before. And though it contain a many most true
and most necessary instructions, yet there were so many other things
intermingled which were hurtful or superfluous, that it was as difficult a
matter to distinguish the one from the other, as to draw a Diana or Mercury out
of an unhewen stone. So that in stead of the great and infinite number of
Logical precepts, he contented himself with these four following.

1. Never to admit any thing for true, but upon evident discovery that it were
so indeed.

2. To divide each of the difficulties that occurred, into as many parcels as
could be, and as was requisite, the better to resolve them.

3. To begin with the most simple objects, and the most easy to be known, and
so to proceed by little and little to the knowledge of such as were most
opposite.

4. To make such exact and perfect calculations, as to be assured to have
omitted nothing.

It must indeed be acknowledged, that this design is high and noble; and it is
extremely to be wished, that one particular man had at first laid the
foundations of Philosophy, and consequently built it up to its perfection. Nor
can I but with the Author heartily wish, that some one man would undertake the
reformation of Philosophy, whereof he having conceived so noble and heroic a
design, I wish him so much life, and that vigor of body and mind, as that he
may see it accomplished. But in case he leave his work imperfect, can he expect
any better handling from those that shall come after him, then he has afforded
those that have gone before him? Is it not probable that some eminent wit, like
his own, may even in his edifice find somewhat which his understanding should
not admit for good contrivance, and consequently would not oblige himself to
his designations, but after his example would build upon new foundations.

But whereas he says, that being a private person, he does not undertake the
reformation of the Sciences, nor intends to invert the established Method of
the Schools for the dispensation of them; he should have remembered, that not
only those who actually embroil a State into seditions and disorders are guilty
of treason, but also those who by libellous writings calumniate the present
government thereof. If therefore there be reason to blame any particular man
that should undertake rashly to reform the Schools, he surely cannot be
altogether exempt from censure, who shall, Medea-like, cut in pieces the
Philosophy commonly and universally received in the Schools, and not propose
any means to recompose it.

But to come to an examination of the particular charge he has against Logic,
we must in every Art or Science distinguish the truth and certainty of its
precepts from the use of them. He does not condemn any of its precepts of
falsehood, nor indeed could have done with reason, but he censures the most part
as superfluous and hurtful. If he had contented himself to have said that there
were many superfluous, I should not have had much to say to the contrary; for I
acknowledge that Aristotle had sometimes reason to compare Logic to a feast of
Crabs, where there is much shell, and little meat, but that little is both
delicate and wholesome. But if this be admitted of Logic, all other Arts and
Sciences will fall under the same lash. Those hardy dashes and circumvolutions,
and the cadences of the Pen, wherewith Writing-masters do incircle the Copies
they give to their Scholars, are of little or no use at all; and I have heard
say, that those who learn Academical Horsmanship are taught many tricks, which
happily they will never have occasion to make use of in a battle; yet both these
have their several, though it may be insensible helps and advantages. By the
same reason may Nature it* self be taxed with superfluity, because men must
sow, thrash, winnow and grind the grain* before it can be made into bread for
their nourishment. And after all this, neither the bread nor any thing else we
eat is so clearly converted into nourishment, but that there must be some
excrement^ This doctrine should also reduce the houses of great men to a
wonderful simplicity, if they should be indulged nothing which were
superfluous, and were not of present use, nor should admit of more dishes of
meat on their tables then were necessary for the pure satisfaction of those
they have to entertain.

But above all, I am somewhat amazed that the Author should say, that the
Syllogisms and other instructions of Logic should serve us to no other purpose
then to discourse without judgment of those things whereof we are ignorant.
Certainly he cannot forget that Logic gives us this precept, That we should
not admit as principles of a ratiocination, any Propositions which were not
true, or at least probable. Now I cannot believe, that to discourse probably of
a thing, is the same thing as to speak of it without judgment. If therefore one
that has read Logic, discourse without judgment of a thing whereof he is
ignorant, the fault is not to be imputed to Logic, but to the Logician; and
it is the same case as when a musty cask spoils good wine.

Moreover, how can he deny but that the Syllogisms assist us in what we are to
learn, and not only enable us to teach others what we already know? Can we
attain the Sciences without Reasoning, or can we reason without Syllogisms?
Those demonstrations of Geometry, by the means and aid whereof he has learned
so much, are they not Syllogisms? But he will say, Nature has taught ns to
reason: But it does not thence follow, that the Precepts which Nature has
furnished us with for the direction and conduct of our reasoning, are
superfluous and unprofitable. By this kind of reasoning, he shows us by his own
example that we do not reason well. And therefore are we so much the more
obliged to those wise men and Philosophers, who reflecting both on their own
and other men's reasonings, have observed the faults which might happen in them,
and have left us instructions to shun them.

In the last place, it seems to me very strange, that he should say that
Syllogisms should assist us rather in explicating to another what one knows,
then to learn what one knows not; for to explicate to another what one knows,
is nothing else but to suppose it to another in such a manner as that he may
learn it. But it being granted, that Syllogisms stand us in no stead but to
explicate that to another which we know, it follows they are helpful to him
that does learn of us: But it may be rahter said, that as the same light serves
me to show something to another which I see my self, and serves him to perceive
that which I show him, so may it be said of Syllogisms.

But can we believe he is serious with us, when he would only oblige us to four
Precepts of Logic, seeming to esteem the rest as worth nothing; since it will
appear that these four precepts cannot be put in practice, but only by such as
have learned for the most part all the other which Aristotle and his
Interpreters have delivered? I may with as much reason say, that for a man to
approve himself to be a good and able Physician, he shall need observe but
these three precepts; To expel diseases, abate the violence of their symptoms,
and never undertake the cure of any incurable disease. But now to put these
precepts in practice, it must first be enquired what are the causes of every
disease whereto man is subject, as also what their symptoms are, by what
remedies they are to be overcome, and by what means it may be known whether the
Patient be desperate or no, which I take it is a business of longer breath. It
is certain there is nothing so unworthy a Philosopher, as to be too credulous;
and therefore Epicharmus, with much reason, said, Nervos atque arcus sapientia
esse, nihil temere credere. Now there are two sorts of Propositions, whereof a
man may arrive to a clear and distinct knowledge. Some are clear and evident in
themselves, as being the first; others have need of proof: As it is in bodies,
some are perceived by that light which they have in themselves, as the Sun and
the Fire; others, that they may be seen, have need of some exterior light, and
such are all colored and illuminous bodies. The first Propositions, as they
are but few in number in every Science, so they cause us no great trouble, but
are acknowledged by all those that are arrived at discretion* in which state
being proposed to us by our masters, and we understanding only the sense of
them, and considering it attentively, they force us to acknowledge them for
true. The number of the Propositions of the other kind is infinite; and though
they depend of the first by certain concatenations which are most strong, nay,
such as are impossible to be broken, yet the links of that chain whereby they
are tied together, are in a manner imperceptible, unless it be to those who are
very clear-sighted; and the reasonings whereby we discover them are called
Demonstrations. Whence it may be inferred, that that which makes the greatest
difficulty in the Sciences, is to find out the demonstrations of this sort of
Propositions, and to proceed methodically in the search of them: Whence it is
to be inferred, that it must be known what Demonstration is, and how many sorts
there are of it, and what are the qualities and conditions of their Principles.
And this is it that Aristotle teaches us in his Analyt. posterior.

For what concerns the Division he speaks of; it is certainly a thing very
necessary, to divide the matters which we would treat of into many words, that
so we the more easily come to a clear understanding of what we are to enquire
into. As we find there is a necessity of cutting our meat before we put it into
our mouths, and besides of chewing it with our teeth, so to ease our stomachs,
which otherwise would have the harder task to digest it. But it is a hard
matter to divide well; and for that reason Plato in his Phaedr* said, that if
he met with one that could divide well, he would follow his steps as those of
some God; (...). The search of truth would therefore be so much the harder to
one that has not learned the art to divide; for a thing must be divided into
as many words as it may possibly, and the denumeration of the parts must be
perfect. Otherwise it will be all one, as if at a table where there were much
Fowl, they should entreat one to carve, who should understand so little in
carving, as that by reason of his ignorance of the joints, he should endeavor
to cut athwart the bones.

To the third Part.
THe third part of the Authors discourse contains nothing but that Platform of
Moral Philosophy which he has framed to himself: which I do not pretend to
examine, seeing he professes that he has not set it forth but with a proviso;
for happily when he comes to his second or after-thoughts, or to the definitive
sentence whether they shall stand or no, he will raze it down, not leaving one
stone upon another, and afterward build up another a new. And that this is not
improbable, may be presumed out of his own words. For, says he, I should have
thought my self guilty of a great fault against right understanding, if because
then I approved any thing, I were also afterward obliged to take it for good,
when perhaps it ceased to be so, or that I had ceased to esteem it so.

To the fourth Part.
IN the fourth Part of this Discourse he entertains us with the first fruits of
his Metaphysical meditations: And to the end we might be our own Judges,
whether the foundations he has laid be not strong enough, he discovers even
the cornerstone of it. He says therefore, that he could not safely build any
thing upon the testimony of the Senses. But because they sometimes deceive us,
he supposes they deceive us always; and because there are some men who mistake
themselves in reasoning, that therefore he was obliged to reject all those
reasons as false, which he had before received as demonstrations. And lastly,
because that the same thoug his which we have waking may happen to us sleeping,
and yet not any of them be true, he resolved to imagine that all those things
which ever entered into his mind, were no more true then the illusions of his
dreams. But a while after, reflecting on the judgment he had made that every
thing is false, he observed that this truth, I think, therefore I am, was so
firm and immovable, that he might lay it down for the first Principle of his
Philosophy. And this is the summary of the first part of this Part of his
Discourse.

According then to the Authors judgment, To appeal from the testimony of the
senses, is to quit the quick sands and the quag*mire, and to come to the rock
and solid ground. But I cannot but say with Lucretius, that this is rather
violare fidem primam, and convellere tota fundamenta, quibus nitatur vita
salusque. The testimony of the Senses is the true and natural foundation of all
Philosophy, and that in two manner of ways.

First, the Senses judge of all objects which are presented to them, and their
judgments are registered among the records of Memory, where Reason makes a
review of them, (which the Schools call Induction) by the way of universal
propositions. Just as if there were no written Law in France, and that a
Lawmakers should turn over the Parlament-Rolls, and from the Acts and
Ordinances which had been enacted at several times and upon several occasions,
should extract certain laws, which being conformable to the common practice of
the Courts of Justice, would not cause any trouble to the State in general, nor
incommodate any particulars in the possession of their respective rights and
privileges.

Secondly, The effects of all natural things being for the most part sensible,
and the senses having taken cognizance of them, the Reason, without controlling
the judgments made by the senses, besets it self to the search of their causes.
For the proof of this assertion, we will content our selves with what the force
of truth has wrested from the Author himself; who having forgoten his
Hypothesis of the uncertainty of the judgment of the Senses, is strangely
surprised: For in the last part of this Discourse he speaks of nothing so much
as of those experiences which are necessary for the perfection of Philosophy,
and professes that he has need of an infinite number more then he has, which
he could not compass without the assistance of some other. And elsewhere, he
invites all those who profess any tenderness or affection to Virtue, to
communicate unto him those which they have made. Now I humbly conceive these
experiences are not reasonings, but sensitive observations. How came he to know
that the heart has motion within it self, if not by the senses? And to what
purpose does he take so much pains to teach us to make spectacles for to assist
us in the contemplation of the stars, if after all our stargazing we may not
give any credit to our senses? To what has been said, I dare presume to add
thus much; That to reject altogether the testimony of the Senses, is to be
ungrateful and injurious to God and nature who have bestowed them on us,
certainly out of a design and knowledge that they were necessary, and that we
should find employment for them. For every sense has its proper and peculiar
object, whereof it is the sole and absolute Judge without appeal. As for
instance, it is only the Sight that can judge of colors, and reason in that
judgment concurs not nor contributes any thing at all. In like manner, the
Hearing only distinguishes the diverse tones and accents of the voice, and the
greatest wit in the world could never do it by ever so many reasonings.

But, says he, the Senses deceive us sometimes; and to strengthen his Argument
I will add, That whosoever is once convinced of having borne false witness,
may never again be admitted to bear any. To which it is easy to answer. For if
they deceive us sometimes, they afterward undeceive us again, and suffer us
not to continue long in our error. They are not like the false witnesses who
witingly and willingly speak against their consciences, but would always render
a true testimony if they could, and they always can do it, when the question is
of their proper objects; for all that wherein one of our senses is deceived, is
not its particular object.

For there are some objects which are common to diverse senses, as Quantity,
Figure, Motion and Rest, Unity, Multitude, Continuity or Discontinuity. There
are moreover some things which considered in themselves cannot move the Senses,
which yet are sensible, by how much as they have a relation to those things,
which of themselves and according to their proper nature operate on the Senses.

I say therefore, that those things which operate not by election, but by that
invincible inclination which they receive from Nature, and as they express it
in the Schools, ex necessitate naturae, do always operate as strongly as they
can, and they are by Natnre provided of those forces which shall be sufficient
to make them attain the end whereto they aspire in operating. But it is most
evident that our Senses do not operate by election or choice, but by that
invincible inclination which Nature has bestowed on them; and consequently
Nature having assigned to each of them its proper and peculiar object, whereof
it should be alone able to discern, it is impossible but that they should judge
thereof, if there happen not some hinderance or impediment in their operations.

These hindrances are either internal or external: Inrernal I call the defaults
and indispositions of the Organs; the external can consist but in two things;
the one, when the object is at too great a distance, and that the organ which
it should smite is out of its just reach, and that the object is not
represented but as it were ttansiently, so that the sense has not the leisure
to discern it. The other is, when the space between the sense and the object is
not well disposed; as when we look through a colored glass, or when the air is
not clear enough. Whence it may be inferred, that it is impossible that our
senses should deceive us in the discernment of their proper and particular
objects, if their organs are well disposed, and that the objects are well and
duly represented unto them, and lastly when the space is in the requisite
condition. If therefore the eye when it is hurt does not perfectly discern the
colors, we must expect the judgment it shall make of them when it is well. If
it cannot distinctly discern them by the light of a candle, or in the twilight,
we must suspend our censure till we see how it will judge of them when it has
full day*light. And if it be not able to discern the objects when they are at
too far a distance, we must endeavor to bring them nearer to it. When
therefore the sense is to judge of its proper object, it is the charge of the
intellectual faculty to judge whether there want not any of the requisite
conditions; and if any of them be awanting, it ought to suspend its
satisfaction until there be a concurrence of them altogether. The understanding
therefore never pretends to any jurisdiction over the senses, unless it be that
it enjoins them to repeat their judgments about their proper objects, which
hinders not at all but that they are always the sovereign Judges thereof: As
when the King enjoins the Parliament to take a review of any business which
before had past their votes, he does not by that action take away from it the
quality of a sovereign Court.

Whereas he says, that because those things which we imagine being asleep are
false, we can have no assurance but that those thoughts which we have when we
are awake are also to be rejected as equally false, we shall examine it more
fully anon.

For the present we shall take into consideration, how the chief cornerstone of
this Philosophy is laid. He says, that he has at last observed this truth, I
think, therefore I am, to be so firm, that it only deserved to be received for
the first principle of his Philosophy. However I take no great pleasure to
pnnctiliate and criticize about words, yet I cannot but take notice by the way,
that it is not handsomely nor properly spoken to call this either a verity or
principle. For there are certain truths which he himself formally
distinguishes, making use of some for the demonstration of others. Therefore to
speak properly, this proposition, I think, is a principle, and I am, is a
proposition: I think, is the first principle; and I am, is the conclusion which
he thence infers. Yet can I not be assured that this proposition* I think, may
be made a first principle, according to the Author's own doctrine, seeing all
the force of the consequence depends on another principle mentioned afterward,
that is to say, on this universal proposition, That for to think, there is a
necessity to be. Methinks an excellent Metaphysitian, such as is the Author,
should not have put it down nakedly for a first principle, for the truth of it
does not proceed from its own nature, or from the specifical difference of
thinking, but generally every action whatsoever presupposes the existence of
the Agent. He should therefore, in my judgment, have gone a little higher to
the mother-truth (as I may so call it) and say, that to act, there is a
necessity to be. Just as when we would clear the pretension of any man's
succession, we ascend upwards, and examine whence he derives his right.
Moreover the Reader may take notice, that in laying down the proposition, I
think, for a first principle, he unawares founds his Philosophy upon the
testimony of the Senses. For notwithstanding that to judge of the truth or
falsehood of a Proposition, it is necessary to understand well the terms whereof
it consists, yet I would withal gladly ask him what he means when he says, I
think; and I am confident that he will not deny, but that the first knowledge
which he has had of the difference between me and thee* has proceeded from
the Sense. Lastly, this way of reasoning, I think, therefore I am, cannot any
way be acknowledged for a Demonstration; because this Principle, I think, is
not more clear and evident, then the conclusion which he draws from it; for as
my existence has preceded my thinking, so the assurance which I have of my
existence is upon the credit and testimony of my Senses, and that without any
assistance of my Reason, and before I had made any reflection at all on my
thoughts. But the Author being in this manner assured of his existence, he
undertakes to show wherein the nature and essence of man consists. Seeing says
he, I can fain that I had no body at all, and that there were no world, and
that there were no place wherein I was; yet I cannot imagine I should be able
to think, unless I were. And thence he would infer, that his thinking was the
only means wherehy he was assured of his being; and from thence, says he, I
learned that MY SELF, that is to say, my Soul, whereby I am what I am, was a
substance whose essence consists only in thinking, and which, as concerning its
being, does not depeud of any thing that is material. Nay, he advances yet
farther, where he affirms that the Soul is more easily known then the Body.

In this ratiocination methinks there are many things lie very open to censure.
First he seems to Platonise, and to make the soul of a man to be the man,
without alleging any thing for the proof thereof. If that be granted, we
cannot call a man a rational creature, since the soul cannot be called a
creature. By the same reason we may not say that a man is mortal, seeing the
soul is immortal. But though sometimes the soul of a man be called the man, yet
is it not properly spoken, but Synechdochically, which is a manner of speaking
whereby we give the name of the whole to some part, especially to the more
principal part. And it is in this sense that Aristotle in the 10 book of his
Ethics says, that the understanding of a man, (...), is principally the man:
(...), says he, (...). And if the Scripture in one place says, This day shall
thou be with me in paradise, it says in another, that God formed man of the
dust of the earth, and that he shall return into the earth. For if in the
former of these passages the denomination of man be given to the soul, as the
more noble part, in the latter the name of man is attributed to the body,
though it be the more ignoble part: And it is in this sense that we say that
such a one is interred, meaning that his body is so. But this error were in
some sort tolerable in some other person who should not make so severe a
profession, not to acknowledge any thing upon the account of any man's
authority, how great soever he may be, as the Author pretends to do, though
Plato had obtained that esteem and opinion of infallibility amongst the
Ancients, that Cicero blushed not to say, That he should not be ashamed to err
with Plato. But this assertion methinks is more strange, That the whole nature
or essence of the Soul consists in thinking. If the essence of the Soul
consisted altogether in thinking, it has thence forward neither existence nor
essence. Moreover, if thinking, which is the action of the soul, be not a thing
different from its essence, the soul must be thought to have attained the
highest degree of simplicity, which appertains not but to the highest
intelligence, and by consequence we may say that Anima est actus purus.

But granting that it were true that the whole essence of the soul consisted
only in thinking, yet we may say that the proof which the Author brings for it
is weak and insufficient; for from this principle, That thinking is the only
thing which assures us of the essence of the soul, it does not follow that the
whole essence of the soul is nothing else but thinking, unless it must be also
granted that I cannot assure my self of the existence of any thing but by that
thing wherein consists its essence; which is a proposition so remote from
reason, that I believe the Author will not presume to maintain it. Moreover he
lays down for a Principle a Proposition which I cannot by any means grant him,
which is, that thinking is the only means whereby I can assure my self of the
existence of my soul. I would gladly know of him whether these reasonings, I
rejoice, I love, I hate, I fear, therefore I am, be not as firm and immovable
as that of his, I think, therefore I am? For when I rejoice, or when I love, I
am assured that I think: And these propositions, for to rejoice I must needs
be, and to love I must needs be, are as certain as this, To think I must needs
be.

The second part of his doctrine of the essence of the soul, to wit, that it
depends not on the body, nor on any other material thing, is true; but the
reason whereby he pretends to prove it, is not satisfactory. For from that
supposition, that I can imagine that my soul is not clothed with any body,
there does not follow any other thing, but that it depends not of the body by
any essential and absolutely necessary dependence. For there is another kind of
dependence between natural things, which yet God by his omnipotence may
dissolve; such is the dependence of my life on the air which I breathe, on the
earth which bears me up, as also of the other elements which concur to my
composition. Now that which has puzzled the Philosophers in this business,
has not been to know whether the soul of a man depends in such a manner on the
body, that it is altogether impossible that it can subsist without it; but to
prove by demonstration clearly and evidently, that it can naturally subsist,
and that in effect it does subsist after its separation from the body. And here
it was that the Author should have shown whether he knew any thing more then
others who have entangled themselves in that question. Nay further, when I
should have granted him that the essence of the soul were nothing but to think,
the controversy were not thereby decided, because our thoughts ordinarily
depend on the body; in as much as we cannot think on any thing, if the
imagination, which is fastened to the organ of the Body, do not represent to
the understanding the image of some material thing, as we shall prove anon.

The last part of his discourse of the essence of the soul has this assertion;
That the soul is more easily known and discovered then the body: A Paradox
which he offers not to prove by any reason at all. If all what is above spoken
were granted him, yet could he not from thence draw this conclusion, but the
contrary rather, that is, that men have but a very confused knowledge of their
bodies, even before they have once considered whether they have any souls or
no. And as to the distinct and perfect knowledge of the soul, I do not think
the Author will presume to boast he has attained it.

In the next place he makes it his task to find out and determine that which is
requisite in a Proposition to make it true and infallible, and gives us this
rule, That those things which we conceive the most clearly and most distinctly
are all of them true. The clear and distinct knowledge which we can have of a
Proposition, consists in two points. The first is, when we conceive clearly and
distinctly the parts whereof it is composed. The second, when we clearly
perceive their alliance and union, or their antipathy and incompatibility. If
the Author speak of the former manner of conceiving, I shall presume to declare
his rule utterly false; for we can as well, and as clearly conceive the parts
of a Proposition that is false, as those of one that is true. As for example, I
have a clear and distinct knowledge of the parts of this Proposition, though it
be a false; Latus and diameter Quadrati sunt commensurabilia. But if his
meaning be of the second manner of conceiving and knowing, his rule signifies
no more then this, viz. That those Propositions which we conceive clearly and
distinctly to be true, are indeed and really true, whereof never any man yet
doubted. But it were only to fight with shadows to bestow any further
examination on this rule of the Authors, since he himself confesses elsewhere,
That there is great difficulty to discern certainly those Propositions which we
conceivc most clearly and distinctly. For every man that is fully convinced
that such a proposition is true, how false soever it may be, will say that he
conceives it clearly and distinctly in one of these two manners.

But the Author proceeds, and entertains us with an essay of his Philosophy
concerning the nature of God: wherein I must ingenuously confess I have found
no more satisfaction then in what he has delivered of the nature of man. And
here he advances this Proposition, making it his business to find out whence he
had learned to think anything more perfect then himself; and at last he
evidently discovers, that it must have proceeded from some nature that were
effectually more perfect then his own, whereof the Idea should be infused into
him; and in a word, that that Nature can be no other then God, because, says
he, that I could not entertain within my self the Idaea of a Being more perfect
then my own, and that that which is more perfect cannot proceed from that which
is less perfect. Now from hence in my opinion it should rather have been
inferred, that the contemplation of things which were less perfect then
himself, should have given him occasion to examine whether there were not some
nature more perfect then his own. For considering that the Plants are more
perfect then inanimate creatures, and among animals Dogs and Horses are more
perfect then Shelfish, and Men arrive to a higher degree of perfection then all
the other creatures; he might by the consideration of such a dependence have
been induced to consider and examine whether there were not yet some other
nature more perfect then this rational nature of ours: And to bring him to
this, he needed but only have compared himself with the other creatures. For, I
conceive my self to know some things, and I doubt of many others, nay there are
an infinite number of things whereof I am utterly ignorant. There are others in
the world who know less then I do, and there are those also who know much more;
but there is not any man who doubts not of somewhat. Now this consideration I
should think sufficient to excite any rational soul to examine whether there
were not some intelligent nature altogether exempt from all error, doubt and
ignorance, and that for to advance into such an examination, there should be no
need that God should infuse into me the Idaea of any thing more perfect then my
self, nor should I have wanted any more particular assistance of God in this,
no more then in any other ratiocination. For as it is as natural to us to lift
up our eyes to heaven to contemplate the sun and moon, as to look down upon the
earth; in the same manner, it is as natural for a man to endeavor to find out
the most perfect nature in the universe, as to entertain his mind with things
below; just as when we see a river, it is as natural for us to seek out the
source from whence it springs, as the place where it disembogues it self. But
it being admitted that the Proposition were true, yet is the proof of it weak
and insufficient: for though it be true, that a thing which is more perfect
cannot depend of a thing which is less perfect, yet it is not equally true that
the Idaea of a nature more perfect then mine may not depend on mine; for the
Idaea which I have of a thing which is more perfect then my self, is not more
perfect then I. All the Idaea's whereof my mind is susceptible, whencesoever
they proceed, are but accidents are representations, and therefore cannot come
into the balance, as to perfection, with the rational soul, which is a
substance. Moreover, if to know God, it be necessary that he must have infused
into us some Idaea of his nature, I demand whether he have bestowed that Idaea
on all, or only on some in partieular? If he have bestowed it equally on all,
how comes it to pass that so many have such extravagant thoughts of God, and so
disproportionable to his nature? If this indulgence of heaven reaches but some
in particular, it makes nothing to the present purpose, it being here a
question of Philosophy, and not of visions, inspirations, revelations, or any
other such lights.

But how then shall we satisfy or convince the Author in this point? Certainly
it cannot be, but he well understands the doctrine of the Schools touching the
necessity which the Understanding has of the senses and the imagination, in
all things whereof it undertakes the consideration. Or is it that he dissembles
it, out of the aversion which he bears to that more then any other Tenet of the
Schools; and does as the French do, who can never be persuaded that the plot of
a Play is well laid, if a Spaniard be not introduced in some extravagant and
ridiculous posture? Hour it may be, I doubt not to make it appear that he has
not had reason to speak so disadvantageously; nay, and what is more, that all
the Idaea's which we have of the nature of God, do but too much betray and
discover the imperfection of the nature whence they proceed; so far are we from
having any cause to affirm that God should infuse them into us.

Our Savior calls God Creator, Preserver, Lord, Judge, Revenger, Rewarder, etc.
But all those attributes do not discover what he is in himself, but only denote
him such as he expresses himself toward us, and consequently make no
representation of his essence, seeing he may be without us. We call him most
good, most wise, almighty, and in like manner attribute to him all the other
perfections, which are not in us but imperfectly: but in so doing we employ
diverse thoughts to represent, that all these in him are but one; and further to
rectify all these Idaea's and notions, we must add, that he is all these
incomprehensibly. So that the most proper notions we can have of him are
negative, as that he is invisible, incomprehensible, infinite, incorruptible:
All which give us to understand what he is not, but acquaint us not what he is.
For as concerning the affirmative notions we have of him, a day will come when
we shall find how gross and rustic they were, and shall do as Tityrus in
Virgil, who when he came to see Rome, condemned all the Idaea's which he had
conceived of it before, saying, Urbem quam dicunt Romam, Melibaee, putavi
Stultus ego huic nostrae similem, etc.


As for the rest of his ratiocinations concerning God, they seem to me good and
solid: but I must withal tell him, he is not the first Author of them, but
Scotus and most Authors who have written of Metaphysics have made use of them.
If he have borrowed them of others, he is justly censureable, since he affirms
that he found nothing that was firm and certain in Philosophy. If he have been
ignorant that any others before him had made use of them, he must needs
acknowledge that he has been guilty of some precipitation in condemning the
writings of the Philosophers without any previous perusal of them.

In the fifth Section, where he speaks of Geometrical truths, I have not
observed any thing remarkable; unless it be, that in speaking of a Sphere, he
has unawares let slip this, That all the parts are equally distant from the
center.

In the sixth Section, he says that the reason why there are so many who
persuade themselves that there is much difficulty to know God and the Soul, is
because they are so accustomed never to consider any thing but through the
imagination, that they conclude that whatsoever is not imaginable, is not
intelligible: Which is manifest, says he, in that the Philosophers themselves
hold, That nothing enters into the Understanding, which before had not passed
through the Sense. Where it is to be observed, the Idaea's of God and the Soul
have never been admitted. To which he adds* That those who would make use of
their imagination to comprehend them, are of the same opinion.

Although it be on all sides confessed that the soul of man is immortal, yet in
regard it is, in such a manner as it is, joined to the body, the sovereign
faculty thereof, which we call the intellect or the understanding, cannot, in
its operations, be without some dependence on the senses and the imagination.
And that is it which has given occasion to the Philosophers to say, that there
is nothing in the understanding, which has not before been in the sense; and
that the understanding does not know nor comprehend any thing without the
assistance of the imagination. As concerning the former of these Maxims, I
could wish that those whose authority first brought it into reputation, had
bethought themselves of some other manner of expression, and that they had
contented themselves to have said with Aristotle, that he which had no sense
could never comprehend any thing. But the interpretation which they give of it
is indubitably true. Now in my judgment there is nothing less becoming a
Philosopher, then to be too nice and critical about words, when it is fully
agreed about the things themselves. The authors therefore of this Maxim, That
there is nothing in the understanding, etc. did not mean thereby, that there is
nothing intelligible but what is sensible, but hold forth two things for us to
observe. The first is, that the understanding cannot think of any thing, unless
somewhat have before smitten the senses; and consequently, that the first
thoughts of the understanding have for their object something that is sensible.
For the understanding, before it have conceived any thing, being of it self
indifferent as to all sorts of objects, it cannot be determined to one object
rather then to another, but by the mediation of the senses.

The second thing is, that the notions which we have of sensible things do
produce in us others, being as it were the seed which is cast into the ground,
nay leads us to the knowledge of immaterial things which are not under the reach
of our senses. And so by consequence, all the Notions and Idaea's which the
Understanding can have of the nature of God and the soul, and all other things
which fall not under our senses, have had their conception of these former,
after the same manner as the Conclusions are said to be in their principles, or
a great tree with its fruit and its leaves may be said to be contained in a
kernel. Now the understanding multiplies its first discoveries two manner of
ways, that is to say, by Abstraction, as when from the notion of Individuals,
which are material and sensible, it advances to the occult causes of things;
and when in Geometry, from a small number of principles it draws so many
admirable conclusions.

As concerning the second Maxim, it is capable of two interpretations. The
first is, that nothing is intelligible but what is imaginable; or, that the
understanding cannot conceive any thing, whereof the imagination does not
furnish it with a representation. The second is, that so often and whenever
the understanding is busied about any thing, the imagination also acts its part
by presenting it with the image of the same thing or some other. And this
sense, and not the other, is held by the Schools of this opinion. Now this
sense may yet be divided into two; the first is, that the imaginative faculty
always accompanies the Understanding, as a Dog follows his Master every where,
though he be not every foot called to that duty, nay sometimes whether the
Master will or no, so far is it from that there should be a necessity. And that
is it which Philoponus says; (...). The other is, that the understanding
cannot comprehend any thing without the assistance of the imagination. Now here
we are to make a difference between the state of the Understanding while it is
as it were in its apprentiship, and its state of perfection: For the
Peripateticks hold, that to the learning of any thing, the Understanding stands
in need of the Imagination. But some of them have been of opinion, that the
Understanding may arrive to such a degree of perfection, that it may dispense
with this assistance of the Imagination. Like as the scaffolds are necessary,
while the walls of an edifice are a raising; but those being once perfected,
there is not any further need of them, nay they hinder the outward appearance
of the walls: Or as young swimmers make use of bladders for some while, whereof
they afterward slight the assistance.

By this time it may be easily discovered whether the Author have dealt justly
with the Schoolmen in this particular. For if there are some people who
understand not any elevation of their spirits above sensible things, and who
believe that that which is not imaginable, is consequently not intelligible; the
Schools reprove them as much as may be; and the manner how it is understood,
that whatsoever enters into the understanding, has before been in the senses,
cannot be any more civilly called into doubt. As to the objection which he
proposes in the last place, where he says, that to make use of our imagination
to comprehend immaterial things, were as if to hear sounds we should make use
of our eyes, is, without any great difficulty avoided: for who does not see the
disparity that is between these things? Of the outward senses, some have not
been made to exercise the functions of the others, and their proper and
peculiar objects are different; so that what is discerned by any one, falls not
under the discernment of another. But the imagination has been bestowed on man
for the service of the Understanding; and though the imagination cannot advance
to whatever is intelligible, yet the understanding judges of whatever is
imaginable. Now this proposition, That the imagination assists us in the
comprehension of immaterial things, may be interpreted two manner of ways;
whereof the one is true, the other false. For, to see my self, I make use of my
eyes, not of a looking-glass, yet I see my self in the glass, and without it I
cannot behold my self. In like manner, for to comprehend immaterial things, I
make use of my understanding and of my imagination too, but in diverse manners;
for it is by the help of my understanding th at comprehend them, and not by the
imagination: but my understanding would not be able to comprehend them without
the assistance of my imagination, nay stands me in no stead, if the imagination
should not represent to the understanding standing the Idaea's of material
things. For when I cast my eyes on the Picture of the King of Sweden, which
represents to me no more then the lineaments of his face, my mind goes beyond
that, and entertains it self with his generous and heroic actions. I see no
more in a book but figures, letters and characters; but my mind contents not it
self with that, but is carried to the consideration of the words and things
which those letters are designed to signify. In like manner, when I read the
fables of Aesop, I do not acquiesce in the literal sense, as children use to
do, but I thence make moral inferences. Why therefore should we say that the
representation of a material thing presented to the understanding by the
imagination, may not be helpful to it, to make it understand an immaterial
thing? From what has been said it may be easily gathered what is the true and
natural cause why immaterial things are not so easily known as material. For,
the understanding not being able to comprehend any thing without the
imagination, and the representations wherewith it constantly furnishes the
understanding being but the images of material things, it follows that it is
more easy to comprehend material things then immaterial: just as when one
proposes a riddle, the explication is difficult, but the literal sense is
easily understood.

In the seventh Section he continues to discredit the testimony of our senses,
and calls the assurance they give us of the existence of our bodies, a moral
assurance. A moral assurance is that which is grounded upon moral reasons, or
such as a man must content himself withal in moral matters, although those
reasons are not receivable in Physic. Now I think I may say, without incurring
the censure of an unreasonable man, That the testimony of our senses, when our
reason does not any ways contradict it, is more satisfactory then a hundred
moral reasons, and is receivable in Physic; nay, which is more, is the
foundation thereof, as we have showed before. As for example, I am obliged to
believe what a many persons of credit (who have no design to surprise or
deceive me) do unanimously affirm they have seen; this is to me a moral
assurance that such a thing is true; but I should be more indubitably assured,
if I had seen the same thing with my own eyes. In like manner, because I have
not known nor heard of any dishonest actions in such a man whom I have long
conversed with, I have a moral assurance that he is an honest man: but the
assurance that I have that he is crooked-nos'd, or that he is of a red
complexion, is without comparison greater, and cannot well be called moral.
But, says the Author, the senses do not give us a metaphysical assurance of
things. Now there is a threefold assurance. The moral assurance is the least
considerable in things, and that is when we cannot contradict a thing without
some injury done to good manners, although we know well enough that it is
possible the thing may be otherwise. The greatest is that which the Author calls
metaphysical, which also may be called mathematical. There is yet another which
we may call physical, and that is, when we know that a thing must absolutely be
so or so, because it is impossible it should be otherwise then we affirm it to
be, that is to say, when we know that according to the course of nature, and
without the intervention of a miracle, the thing cannot be otherwise. As I am
assured, if I put my hand into the fire, and continue it there some while, it
will be burned: And that the Sun never goes backward, nor ever stands still.

But to proceed, after he had thus invalidated the testimony of our senses, and
made the assurance which we have of what they dictate to us very weak and
uncertain, he has observed that a man may imagine being asleep, that he has
another manner of body, and that he sees other kinds of stars, though there be
no such thing. And in consequence of this he asserts, That the greatest wits
that ever have been in the world could not give any rational account whence men
came to know, that the thoughts which we are entertained with being asleep, are
more false then our others, seeing that oftentimes they are as lively and
expressed as the others, unless it be in presupposing the existence of God. But
we see what he means by this question, namely, that the solution of it should
depend upon this rule, viz. That those things which we most clearly and
distinctly know, are all true. Which Rule yet he confesses is not infallible
out of any reason; but because that those idaea's and notions, inasmuch as they
are clear and distinct, proceed from God, who is all wisdom and all perfection;
and when there remains in them somewhat of obscurity or confusion, they proceed
from us, because we are not arrived to such a degree of perfection: And so
consequently, by how much they are more clear, by so much are they the more
true; and if there be any falsehood, it must be only said of those notions
which have somewhat of obscurity or confusion. Having therefore thus proved the
Rule, he answers the Question in this manner. Whether we sleep, or whether we
wake, we ought not to suffer our selves to be persuaded to any thing but by the
evidence of our own Reason, and not of our imagination or our senses. And
because our ratiocinations are not always so evident and perfect while we
sleep as they are while we wake, (although sometimes our imaginations may be
equally, if not more lively and effective) if there be any thing of Truth to be
expected in our thoughts, it must be found in those which we have when we are
waking, rather then in our dreams.

In the first place, the Author must pardon me if I deny him this consequence,
viz. That because the imaginations which we have when we sleep are false,
therefore we may not be fully assured of what our senses dictate to us when we
are awake. For I shall presently take occasion to show that there is no
proportion or similitude between these two things.

Secondly, it is true, and well advised, that we should not suffer our selves
to be persuaded by our imagination, if it be not it self conformable to Reason,
or the testimony of our Senses. But seeing all that is in us proceeds from God,
our imaginations as well as our thoughts; if the thoughts of our understanding
are true so far as they are clear and distinct, wherefore is it that our
imaginations may not by the same reason be all true, when they are lively,
affective and distinct?

Thirdly, where he says, That our ratiocinations are never so clear and
perfect while we are sleeping, as when we are waking; he speaks too generally,
for it happens sometimes that in our sleep we make most excellent
ratiocinations.

Lastly, I conceive it is not enough to say, that in the time of our sleep our
ratiocinations arrive not to that evidence and perfection which they may come
to when we are awake; but the reason thereof should have been assigned. For it
may seem that in the time of sleep the rational soul has a greater and freer
enjoyment of her self, and, as being so much the less diverted by exterior
objects, she ought the better to acquit herself of her noblest function.

But to treat this matter a little more tenderly, and to penetrate to the
bottom, here are three Questions so linked together, that he that answers one
of them, answers all.

1. Why the imaginations which we have when we are asleep, are false rather
then those we have awake?

2. Why our imaginations, whether we sleep or wake, are more likely to be false
then the judgment of our senses?

3. Why our ratiocinations are neither so evident nor so perfect in the time of
our sleep, as in the time of ou^ waking?

I shall endeavor to answer these questions upon other ^y^otheses then those
of the Author, that is, without meddling with the existence of God, nor with his
nature; submitting my self to the Learned, who may judge whether I have hit the
mark or no.

I say then, that our imaginations are rather false when we sleep, then when we
wake: because in the time of sleep, our imagination strays up and down without
any thing to guide or conduct it. But when we are awake, our Senses and our
Reason hinder it from being extravagant, and either keep it from wandering, or
reduce it when it has. For we have imaginations of two sorts: some are
voluntary, others have no dependence at all on our will, but on some other
natural causes, which are yet naturally in our power. Which causes may be
reduced principally to three kinds, and they are

1. The objects which smite our senses

2. The passions of our souls, and

3. Certain dispositions of our bodies.

The voluntary imaginations are very frequent to us when we are awake: as when
an Architect imagines within himself the Idaea of an edifice for to imitate it,
or when a Painter imagines some chimaera or other fiction to make a picture of
pleasure, or when we apply our imaginative faculty to some wholesome idaea's,
such as may assist us in the understanding of any thing, whereof we have
proposed to our selves the contemplation But in our sleep, we have no voluntary
imaginations; for though some of our dreams please us, and others displease us
and afflict us, we can neither invite the one, nor avoid the other. As
concerning the imaginations which are not in our power, according to the
natural order of things, in the time of our waking, they are but attendants and
dependants on our senses. But sometimes the idaea's of certain things which are
absent, that have raised strong passions in our minds, cast themselves in the
way, and do in such a manner possess and divert the imaginative faculty, that
we perceive not what is before our eyes, nor hear the sounds which smite our
ears. And in that posture, our imaginations, though we are awake, are in a
manner dreams. In the same manner, the indispositions of our bodies do work in
us sometimes very strange imaginations, as it daily appears in Phrenetick
persons, and such as are hypocondriacal. Now these disorders and irregularities
happening while we wake, fall not out very often, nor to all persons. But while
we sleep, all our imaginations are nothing else but illusions, as when false
idaea's are represented to the imaginative faculty, that is to say, the idaea's
of things that are not, or in another manner then they are, or some other
circumstances: As if a man that is in love should in his sleep imagine that he
saw his Mistress, such as she is indeed; but with this false circumstance, that
she lay close by him, there being no such thing. In like manner, when in
sleeping we imagine and dream of somewhat that was past the day before, or
somewhat that shall happen the day after, it is but an illusion, because we do
not imagine the thing as past, but as if it were present, and in effect before
our senses.

As to the second Question, I say that our imaginations are more likely to
deceive us then our senses, because that those things which smite our senses
must be truly real and exist; but they are but things in picture, as it were,
which smite our imaginative faculty, when it operates alone and without the
senses; for external things cannot move the imaginative faculty but by the
interposition of the senses. From hence it may be inferred, That when the
Senses are at rest, the imagination must necessarily be at rest too, or it must
contemplate those images which had at other times been represented to it by the
senses, those images having remained imprinted in the memory, though perhaps
the things themselves which they represent have ceased to be, or at least are
absent or far distant from the sense. There is further this difference between
the imaginative faculty and the senses, that the senses cannot change any thing
in their object, nor in their operation. But when we are awake, and that we
would beset our selves to contemplation, the imagination disposes and
disciplines the images as we will our selves; but when we are asleep, they are
always represented in the same manner, and in the same order as they had
passed by the senses; but most commonly without order, inconsequently, and many
times making monstrous and ridiculous figures, as when the image of a Goat is
represented with the head of a Lion. It is evident therefore, that however our
imaginations may be lively and affective, we never ought to suffer our selves
to be persuaded by them, but in as much as they keep harmony with our senses
and with our reason; and if they do so, it is not a persuasion of our
imaginations, but of our senses and our reason. Nor does it avail any thing
against us, to say, That the imaginative faculty is of greater excellence then
the senses; for its excellence does not consist in the truth of what it
represents, but in the perfection of the Representation; as it is the
excellence of a Painter, not to represent any thing in a picture but what is
truly and really so, but to represent any thing to the life that he has a mind
to represent. In like manner has Nature bestowed the imaginative faculty on
man, not for to discern what is, or what is not, nor to judge of what is
possible or impossible, but to be serviceable and subject to the Understanding
upon the default of the Senses, which is when it represents unto it the images
of things past or absent, or abstracted from our senses.

From what has been said it is easy to answer the third Question. For it
being once granted, that the Understanding cannot work without the aid and
assistance of the Imagination; and that all the imaginations which we have when
we are asleep, are false either in their substance, or at least in some
circumstance, they are not so fit to be the foundations of good ratiocinations,
the subsequent imaginations having no alliance, nor holding correspondence with
the precedent, hinder the understanding to finish its work, and before it has
ended one, cause it to begin another.

All that now lies on my hands to examine, is what the Author treats us with in
the eighth Section, where he would prove that we should never suffer our selves
to be persuaded by the evidence of our senses, no more then of our lively and
affective imaginations. Our senses, says he, deceive often enough, though we
be not asleep; as when to those that have the yellow jaundies all things seem
yellow; and though we see the Sun very clearly, we ought not thence to judge
that he is no bigger then it seems to us.

To ruin the reputation of the Senses, he should have shown that they are
sometimes deceived in judging of their proper objects, the organs being sound
and in their natural state and condition, the objects being well and duly
represented unto them, and the space between well disposed, according to these
three requisites I mentioned before: But that he does not so much as offer or
pretend to do. Those, says he, who have the Yellow jaundies see all things
yellow; and consequently the sight is deceived in discerning colors, which are
its proper objects. It is indeed a proverb of no small standing, that the
Yellow jaundies causes all things to appear yellow to them that have it; but
ordinarily the reason of it is, because Melancholy, which causes that the
Jaundies diffusing it self through all the skin, nay even through the white of
the eyes, does fasten on the horny tunicle. But let it be granted that this
common saying is always true, I presume the Author will grant me that the eye
is not then in its natural condition. But there is a great deal more to be
said. I deny that in the case proposed, the eye is deceived in the discerning
of colors, for in effect it sees nothing but what is yellow; it is only
deceived in not discerning where the yellow is which it sees. For it is the
horny tunicle, which naturally not being of any color, but is absolutely
diaphanous and died with the Melancholy, that causes the objects to seem
yellow; as when we look through a yellow glass, everything seems yellow, and if
the glass be red, all things will appear red. In like manner when a web begins
to form it self in the eye, we seem to see little flies in the air, yet they
are nothing but thin and obscure vapors, or clouds which are raised between the
horny tunicle and the chrystalline humor. And if sometimes we conceive that we
see somethings which are not at all, as it happens to frantic persons, it is
not the sight which deceives us, but the imagination.

As concerning what he says of the greatness of the Sun and other celestial
bodies, what matters it if the sight be deceived therein, seeing the celestial
bodies are not at the distance requisite to be seen distinctly. But above all,
methinks it is a strange assertion which the Author advances, when he says
that the Sun is most clearly seen: For, his light is so great, that it dazles
and so overcomes our sight, that we can see it but very confusedly and
imperfectly. Too much light is no less injurious to the sight then too little;
and generally the proper objects of every sense being excessive in the highest
degree, is insupportable to the organ, and does violence to the temperament,
whereby it is what it is.

To conclude, I would gladly ask the Author whether he has composd this
Discourse awake or asleep? If he have done it asleep, I would entreat him to
review itbeing awake, because it is not reasonable that we should suffer our
selves to be persuaded to credit his dreams. If he have done it awake, how
knows he that he was then awake? It is indeed true, that our Reason dictates to
us that we are awake, when we do effectually see and hear, and have all our
senses open and attentive to the exterior objects: But that he then saw and
heard, and felt actually, and not only by imagination, he could not any ways
be assured but by the testimony of the common Sense, which judges whether the
particular Senses do their duty or no, as being their center and mark. If he
unravel this skain, he will very much undeceive me, -- Et erit mihi magnus
Apollo.


FINIS.

