A RELATION OF Diverse Remarkable proceedings betwixt the Kings Majesty and his
loyal Subjects, expressed in these particulars following.

1. His Majesty's Speech to the Gentry of the County of York, attending his
Majesty at his Court at York the 12. of May. 2. The Answer and Resolution of
the Gentry, and Commonalty of the County of York, to his Majesty's Speech. 3.
A Letter of thanks from the Lords in Parliament assembled, to the County of
York. 4. A Declaration of both Houses of Parliament, as it was ordered to be
printed the 12. of May. John Browns, Cler. Parl. 5. Staffordshire Petition,
presented to the Honorable House of Commons by the Knights Esquires,
Gentlemen, Ministers, Freeholders, and other Inhabitants of the County of
Stafford.
London, Printed for F. Ceules, and T. Bates. 1642.

HIS MAJESTY'S Speech to the Gentry of the County of York, attendng his
Majesty at the City of York, on Thursday the 12. of May. 1642.
Gentleman,
I Have cause of adding not altering, what I meant to say, when I gave out the
summons for this days apperance I little thought of these Messengers, or of
such a Message as they brought, the which, because it confirms me in what I
intend to speak, and that I desire you should be truly informed of all
passages between me and the Parliament, you shall hear read. First, my Answer
to the Declaration of both Houses concerning Hull the answer of the Parliament
to my two Messages concerning Hull, together with my Reply to the same, and my
Message to both Houses declaring the reasons why I refused to pass the Bill
concerning the Militia.

All which being read, His Majesty proceeded.

I Will make no Paraphrases upon what ye have heard, it more benefitting a
Lawyer then a King, only this observation, since Treason in countenanced so
near me, it is time to look to my safety: I avow it was part of my wonder,
that men (whom I thought heretofore discreet, any moderate) should have
undertaken this employment, and that since the-came (I having delivered them
the Answer: you have heard, and comdmanded them to return personally with it
to the Parliament) should have flatly disobeyed me upon pretense of the
Parliaments command. My end in telling you this, is to warn you of them, for
since these men have brought me such a Message, and disobeyed so lawful a
Command, I will not say what their intent of staying here is, only I bid you
take heed, not knowing what doctrine of disobedience they may preach to you,
under color of obeying the Parliament. Hitherto I have found and kept you
quiet, the enjoying of which was a chief cause of my coming hither (Tumults
and disorders having made me leave the South) and not to make this a seat of
War, as malice would (but I hope in vain) make you believe; Now if
disturbances do come, I know whom I have reason to suspect.

To be short, you see that my Magazine is going to be taken from me (being my
own proper goods) directly against my will; The Militia (against Law and my
consent) is going to be put in Execution: And lastly, Sir John Hothams Treason
is countenanced; All this considered none can blame me to apprehend dangers.
Therefore I have thought fit (upon these real Grounds) to tell you, That I am
resolved to have a Guard (the Parliament having had one all this while upon
imaginary Jealousies,) only to secure my person. In which I desire your
concurrence and assistance, and that I may be able to protect you, the Laws,
and the true Protestant profession from any Affront or Injury that may be
oftered, which I mean to maintain my self without charge to the Country,
intending no longer to keep them on foot, then I shall be secured of my just
Apprehensions by having satisfaction in the particular before mentioned.

An Answer to His Majesty's Speech, by the Gentry of the County of York,
attending his Majesty at the Court of York on Thursday the 12. of May, 1642.
May it please Your most Excellent Majesty.
YOur Propositions delivered to Us yesterday from your Majesty are of so high
concernement to the Weal and peace of the whole Kingdom, and do so nearely
touch upon the affection and fidelity of all your Subjects in General, and we
being but a part of one County only, do not conceive it safe for Us to advise
therein, but rather humbly to beseech. Your Majesty to impart the ground of
Your Majesty's fears and jealousies. to Your high Court of Parliament, (of
whose most loyal care and affection to your Majesty's Honor and safety, and
the prosperity of Your Subjects and Dominions, we are most confident) and
whatsoever shall be advised by your Great Counsel, therein we shall most
willingly embrace, and give our concurrence and assistance to it as shall
become us; In whose fidelity your Majesty has often declared especial trust,
and albeit we do not presume to advise Your Majesty to that particular, it
being of transcendent consequence.

Nevertheless, in the behalf of those Members of Parliament, lately employed
to attend your Majesty, from both Houses, being all Gentlemen of quality and
estate in this County and trusted to serve in that most Honorable Assembly, we
humbly crave Your Majesty's leave to express our corfidence in their unstained
loyalty and affection to Your Majesty to be such as Your Majesty may securely
admit their attendance to Your Majesty to be such as Your Majesty may secarely
admit their attendance to negotiate their employments until they be recalled
by the Parliament, and for their fidelity we do all engage our selves to Your
Majesty, and we are most assured that Your Royal Person shall be secured in
the real fidelity of Your Subjects of this County without any extraordinary
Guard.

Die Jovis, 12 Maii, 1642.
The Declaration of both Houses of PARLIAMENT.
THE Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament do declare, That they are
resolved to maintain those Lords and Gentlemen, Committees of both Houses of
Parliament, residing at York, in those things they have done, and shall
further do, in obedience of their commands, for the preserving the peace of
the Kingdom.

The Lords and Commons do declare, That if any person whatsoever shall arrest
or imprison the persons of those Lords and Gentlemen, or any of them, or any
other Member of either House, that are, or shall be employed in the service of
both Houses of Parliament; or shall offer violence to them, or any of them, for
doing of any thing in pursuunce of their commands, or the instructions of both
houses, given unto them, shall be held disturbers of the proceedings of
Parliament, and public enemies of the State. And that all persons are bound by
their Protestation, to endeavor to bring them to condign punishment.

The Lords and Commons do declare, that those of the City of London, and all
other persons that have obeyed the Ordinance for the Militia, and done any
thing in execution thereof, have done it according to the Law of the Land, and
in pursuance of what they were commanded by both Houses Houses of Parliament,
and for the defense and safety of the King and Kingdom, and shall have the
assistance of both Houses of Parliament, against any that shall presume to
question them for yielding their obedience to the said command in this
necessary and important service; and that whosoever shall obey the said
Ordinance for the time to come, shall receive the same approbation and
assistance from both Houses of Parliament.

A Letter of thanks from the Lords in Parliament assembled to the County of
York.
THis House has read the Petition from the County of York, the expressions
wherein are so full of affections to the public good of the kingdom and
Parliament, that they receive it with much content, and satisfaction, and assure
you by me, that your zeal to the Commonwealth, has added much to the honor
of your Country; commanding me in their names, to return their very hearty
thanks; the House concurres with you in opinion, that the only remedy for this
distracted Kingdom to recover its ancient strength, happiness, and luster, is
unity; which as it has ever been the aim and scope of all their proceedings,
so shall it ever be the chiefest of their endeavors. And for this purpose they
are already upon framing their humble desires to his Majesty, wherein they
shall request such things as they conceive do chiefly tend the honor of God,
the greatness and prosperity of his Majesty, and the public good of this
Commonwealth, these were almost perfected before the receipt of your Petition,
and will very speedily be to the King, which had been done ere this, but that
his Majesty withdrawing himself so far from the Parliament, and those many
denyalls, they have had in those things they have desired, have necessitated
them to spend much of their time in Messages, and diverted them from their
other more necessary businesses, but they doubt not but in these desires they
will make such clear demonstrations of their duty to the King, and love to his
people, who have entrusted them, that they shall fully acquit themselves
thereof, both to him and them. Sir, this is what at this time I am commanded to
write to you, only adding, that I am, etc.

Ioh. Banks.

Staffordshire Petition, To the Honorable, the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses of the Commons House of Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, Ministers,
Freeholders, and other Inhabitants of the County of STAFORD.
Shows
THat in their own names, and in the names of many thousands of the
Inhabitants of the County of Stafford, your Petitioners with hearts fuller of
thankfulness, than their tongues can be of expression, humbly acknowledge their
sensiblenesse of the unparalelled travail and indefatigable endeavor of this
Honorable House, already spent in the discharge of that trust deservedly by
the Commons of all the Land vested in you, whereby an ample Testimony is given,
as of your faithfulness and courage, in the exposure of your selves and
fortunes in these desperate times; So likewise of the good hand and providence
of God, carrying you through many difficult straights, and dangerous
conspiracies of the Popish and Malignant party, who have hitherto way laid
your proceedings.

All which your Petitioners take as very promising beginnings, and fair
Pledges of the healing of the insupportable grievances, both Ecclesiastical
and Civil, which the Church and State groan under; And do concurrently and
freely profess their Contributions to the work under your hands, not only by
their prayers, but also by the devotement of their lives, power, and estates,
according to that wise and Religious Protestation set forth by you; concerning
their own lives and safeties to be shipped in one bottom with yours.

And your Petitioners further show, That it is not the least part of their
comfort, that you have continued the Militia of the County unto so Honorable
Lord, in whom we may safely confid^

And your Petitioners do humbly pray, That the unexampled miseries and almost
expiring state of our Brethren in Ireland, m^ be considered by an expedite
dispatch of seasonable succor; An that they may from time to time during their
miseries be look, upon by you, not only as English, and fellow subjects; but
as Protestants and Professors of Gods truth, under which Notion they suffer
these extremities; and that the Insurrection of the Papists there may be
reckoned of, not only as a Rebellion, but a horrid persecution of Christ in
his Truth and Members, that so the interest of God and his cause may quicken
your sympathy with, and endeavors for them.

That the Papists (who are a great number in this small County) may be
thoroughly and speedily disarmed, and so disposed of; That they be not formidable
to your Petitioners, by being able, either to keep us in jealousies by their
practices at home, or to soment that fire kindled by their party in Ireland.

That the Church in her government, Officers and worship, may be ordered
according to the Rule of Gods holy Word, the particular accommodation of which
we humbly leave to the wisdom of this Honorable House to determine, by the
assistance of an Assembly of godly and learned Divines.

That the present state and condition of the Church may be thought upon for
Ministry maintenance, and supply of an able Preaching Ministry, Pluralities
suppressed, the Fountains of Learning cleared; All insufficient for the work of
the Ministry, All grossly scandalous and negligent in their sunctions,
removed, that they may no longer remain a burden to keep out others.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.

FINIS.

