A RELATION OF THE TAKING OF CICESTER IN THE COUNTY OF GLOUCESTER, On Thursday,
Febru. 2. 1642.

By 7000. of the Cavaliers, under the command of Prince Rupert, Prince Maurice,
the Earls of Northampton, Carnarvon, Denbigh, and Cleveland, the Lord Digby,
Lord Andevour, Lord Wentworth, Lord Taffe, Lord Dillon, Lieutenant General
Willmot, Sir John Byron, Colonel Gerrard, Colonel Kyrke, Colonel Dutton, and
Captain Leg, and diverse others.

Sent to a friend in London, by one who was present at, and some days after
the taking of it.

Published because of the many false reports that were in Print concerning that
business.

Feb: 20th Printed at London, 1642.

A Realtion of the taking of CICESTER, in the County of GLOUCESTER, on Thursday,
February 2. 1642.
SIR,
I Shall endeavor to give you a birefe and true account of the state of the
miserable Town of Cicester, in the County of Gloucester, from the first
troubles to the taking of it, and do request you to acquaint those Parliament
men you have interest in, what we have suffered for desiring to stand and fall
with them; not doubting but they will so resent our sufferings, that they will
expedite such succors into our County, as may relieve Gloucester, and procure
some little refreshment to the poor Town of Cicester, and our wasted County
adjoining.

Our greatest enemies from the first have been our own Countrymen, our first
troubles began about August last, when the Lord Chandoys (having accepted
from the Parliament the charge of being Lord Lieutenant of our County, and
betraying both his Country and his trust) attempted to execute the Commission
of Array, and to that purpose summoned all the Gentry of our County to meet
his Lordship at Cicester, but what entertainment he and his Array-men had
there, I presume you know, having heard how the Lord Chandoys hardly escaped
from being taken prisoner by the Country that rose in Arms to resist his
illegal Commission, and how the next morning after his escape, the surious
people hewed his Lordships Coach in pieces which he had left behind him, so
much they abhorred to be betrayed to slavery by one of their own Country.

Hereupon Cicester, (though the Townsmen were a means to save the Lord
Chandoys life, who else might have been torn in pieces by some of the enraged
Country people) was much threatened with fire and sword, and indeed so was the
whole Country for resisting the Commission of Array; and it was thought fit by
the Deputy Lieutenants of our County, that a Garrison should be kept in
Cicester, it being always feared that that Town would be the first attempted
in the County of Gloucester.

Thus we continued in Arms, not doing or suffering much till January, only
the Cavaliers, when they came within twelve miles of us to Burford, were twice
beaten out of their Quarters there, by some parties that went out from our
Garrison of Cicester, we being very impatient of such bad neighbors.

On Saturday, the last of December, the Lord Marquess Hartford, with his Welsh
Regiments, and Sir John Beaumont with his forces came up from Worcester to the
Town of Stow in our County, and on Tuesday following marched thence to
Burford, where finding his entertainment scanty, his Lordship presently
repaired to the King at Oxford, and there advised his Majesty, that unless he
might have contribution and Quarter for his Army in Glocestershire and
Wiltshire, (which he affirmed would never be had till the Town of Cicester was
taken) they could not long subsist, the stores of all places (where they were
masters) being near spent and exhausted. His Lordship also, with much
confidence, offered his Majesty that he would take the Town, if he might be
assisted with some great horse and Dragoones: hereupon as he desired, a
Commission was granted to him and Prince Rupert with two Regiments of horse,
and one of Dragoones, and Prince Maurice with all his horse and Dragoones was
sent to aid him.

In pursuance whereof, his Lordship with his Army, (as some of their own
reported) to the number of 6000. horse and foot, upon Saturday the seventh of
January, about noone, drew up his Forces almost round about the Town, and
where they made their first stand, they made a pause for above two hours, in
which time they only sent out scouts to view our Guards, and then summoned
those in the Town in the name of Marquess Hartford, Lord General of those
Forces, by a Trumpet, to deliver up the Town and Arms to his Lordship, upon
promise of his Majesty's free pardon for all bygone offenses, with assurance
of safety of their persons and estates; which if it were refused, no mercy
might be expected. Before the first Trumpet was dispatched, a second came in
the name of Prince Rupert, with the same message in effect; adding only, That
they came to vindicate and maintain the Kings Rights and Prerogative. The
answer returned to both, was the same, and in substance this. We do heartily
acknowledge and profess our selves to be his Majesty's loyal and faithful
Subjects, and shall be ever as ready with our lives and fortunes to maintain
his just Rights and Prerogatives as they were, or the best of his Majesty's
Subjects; and as we are so, we ought likewise to enjoy his Majesty's peace, and
the just Rights and Liberties of the Subjects of England, according to the
Laws of the Land, in defense whereof and the true Protestant Religion only we
stand to our Arms, and are resolved with Gods assistance to defend them with
our estates and lives. This answer being returned; the enemy kept their stand
on all sides until it began to grow dark, and then it pleased God of his
mere mercy so to discourage them, that they all retreated to their night
Quarters in the Villages round about, where they did eat up all the provision
of victual, and spoiled much Corn and Hay. The next morning they only showed
themselves before the Town, and so departed without making one shot at it,
Prince Rupert and his Troops to Oxford, Prince Maurice to his Quarters at
Farrington, and Marquess Hartford and his Forces to Burford, and the Villages
adjoining While they lay before the Town, our Forces took Master John
Villiers prisoner, who was Brother to the Lord Grandison, and Captain of a
company of Dragoones, and is still in prison at Gloeester; when they went away
they took with them all the horses of the Villages round about us, and did
threaten a sudden return with more force, and as much fury and revenge as they
could send to us with the best Cannon they could bring.

So we waited a fortnight for the return of the enemy, who we heard was
marched into Northamptonshire, and in the mean time our Garrison was
increased, and the Town better fortified on all sides, and we had four great
Iron pieces sent from Bristoll, besides two Brass pieces we had before from
Gloucester.

On Thursday, January 26. a party from Cicester of some four or five hundred
great horse and Dragoones, (who were to meet with more strength from Gloucester
and Tewksbury, marched hence, to besiege Sudely Castle, 14. miles from
Cicester, because it was reported, that certainly strong Malignant party was
rising in that part of Gloceshrshire; and it was feared that Sudely Castle (the
strongest hold in those parts) would become a receptacle both of the Malignants
Arms and Treasure.

On Friday, our Forces sat down before it, and after summons assaulted it,
and being reinforced from Cicester with 200. choice Musketeers, and one Brass
piece, they took the Castle by composition.

On Monday being the 30. day of Jan. Prince Rupert (having the week before
fetched a compass from Oxford by Northamptonshire and Warwickshire, where he
plundered some Towns, and took away all the Arms and horses of the Country,
with which he armed and mounted all his men, except a few Pikes to guard his
carriages) appeared before the Castle, and most of his men lay all night on the
hills. But in regard there fell that night a great Snow, the Cavaliers rose from
before Sudely, and the next day being Tuesday, they marched toward Cicester,
and quartered within seven miles of it, almost round about us. And yet this
being known to our Forces at Sudely Castle (who were the greatest part of our
strength) they carried there, (I will not say by whose neglect it was) till the
Town of Cicester was utterly lost.

On Wednesday, Febru. 1. the enemy was reinforced with some fresh Troops from
Oxford, and two whole Culverings, besides four small Brass field pieces, and
two Mortar pieces, and so on Wednesday night some of them quartered within a
mile of the Town, and gave us Alarm's all that night.

On Thursday morning, Febru. 2. they were discovered some two miles from the
Town, where under a hedge they stayed some two hours, till all their Forces
drew together into one body, from their several Quarters in the Villages, and
so they divided themselves, Prince Rupert, and the greatest part of the Army
drawing near the Town on the West and South part: and the Earl of Carnarvon,
and his Troops and some other forces, on the North and North part of the Town.
About nine or ten of the clock they came some of them within the command of
our Cannon, which played at them two or three hours, and often caused them on
the West side of the Town to retreat behind a little hill, and all that
while diverse parties of our Musketeers went out under the shelter of hedges
and walls, and skirmisht with the enemy.

About twelve a clock, two or three Regiments of foot being kept in, and
forced on by the horse behind them, began a furious assault on the Barton, a
great Farm which lay not far from the Town Westward, where they were
valiantly entertained by some hundred Musketeers that lay under the Garden
wall.

So there continued at the Barton, a very hot fight for some two hours, our
men lying under the shelter of the wall, notably giving fire at them, within
less then Musket shot, and our Cannon being little more off then Musket
shot, all the while furiously playing point blanke on their whole body, which
lay in an open rising field. Here the Welshmen were seen to drop down apace,
but still the horsemen behind them, cried On, on, and drove them forward till
they had gotten quite under the Garden wall. But before that, the enemy had
fired some Barnes and Ricks of Corn and Hay that lay quice behind those
hundred Musketeers, so that the enemy being at the wall, and breaking of it
down, and the fire so behind them, that it took away all possibility of
retreating if they stayed any longer, and they being so few, (and yet as many
as could be well spared from other Guards) our men were forced out of that
work after two hours valiant resistance of that furious charge of the enemy;
during all which time, we lost but one man, who after the Guard was entered,
could not find his way forth through the fire and smoke.

Our men retreating to the second work, which was hard by, being so hotly
pursued by the enemy, fire and smoke, which the wind drove directly upon them;
they and the Guards of that work without any resistance made, very disorderly
fled into the Town, and were furiously pursued by the enemy, who without
quarter killed those they met withal or overtooke: which so desperately
enraged our men, that in the Market place, and from windows they shot at the
enemy almost, an hour together, purposing to sell their lives and liberties as
dear as dear as they could.

Whilst the enemy was assaulting the Town on the West side at the Barton, The
Earl of Carnarvon and his Forces, seeing the Barton fired, and our men beaten
from their works, sought to enter it on the North side, where there was a sore
charge valiantly received by our men with little loss, who yielded not, till
the enemy, who had entered the Town on the other side, was on their backs. Thus
about four of the clock the Town was wholly won, and shooting was ended on
all sides, and then they took prisoners, and fell to plundering that night, all the next day, and on Saturday, wherein they showed all the barbarous insolency
of a prevailing enemy, and I am confident, they (it seems being grown more
skillful in mischief) not only acted over, but out-did their former cruelties
and spoil of Braineford and Marleborough; they spared not to plunder their
best friends; for I can assure you, some of the notorious Malignants was the
most notably plundered of all the Town.

I tremble to write of their Blasphemies, they tauntingly asked some godly
people, Where is now your God (you Rounhead rogues?) you prayed to the Lord to
deliver you, and you see how he has delivered you, ye Rebels, etc.

The number that the enemy lost, is altogether unknown, by reason none durst
go forth to see the slain. Of the Town forces, both townsmen and Countrymen,
there were not above twenty killed as can yet be learned. It is much feared
they slew a very godly Minister, who was seen taken by them, and yet cannot be
heard of. There lay some of our men naked four days after they were killed,
near the place where the enemy after the taking of the Town kept his outmost
Guard, and none durst bury them.

The number of Prisoners that they took and carried to Oxford was betwixt
eleven and twelve hundred, amongst which there were some Gentlemen of eminent
estates and affections to their Country. Two very godly Ministers, diverse
Commanders, and others, which were very religious and of good account.

They stripped many of the prisoners, most of them of their outmost garments.
They were all turned that night into the Church, and though many of them were
wounded and weary, yet their friends were not suffered to bring them a cup of
water into the Church that night, but what they thrust in at the backside of
the Church, having broken the windows; and the like cruelty I hear was showed
unto them when they lay in Witney Church, in their passage to Oxford.

They tied all the prisoners, Gentlemen, Ministers, and all in Ropes, and made
them all go afoote through the dirt in the streets and way to Oxford, which
in regard of the many horses, was up to their knees sometimes, and in this
manner they used a very worthy Gentleman, who had been very lately high
Sheriff of our County, an aged Gentleman, of an infirm health, though of an
undaunted courage in this cause.

They shamefully abused the two Ministers, reproachfully imitating their manner
of preaching, etc.

The Captain who took the Ministers, upon the earnest solicitation of their
friends for their releasment, promised them that for fifty or sixty pounds
apeece he would release them: which money being procured and paid them, He
scoffingly answered, that they might well pay as much more to him for not
killing them, as he might have done, and they deserved; and so after that they
were more straightly imprisoned, and worse used, and one of their friends that
had a free pass promised him into the Town with the money, had very much ado
to escape killing and imprisoning.

We lost five pieces of Cannon, near upon 1200. Muskets, and other Arms, 14.
Colors, and some Ammunition, for most of our Powder and Bullet was sent unto
them before they entered the Town.

The value of the Pillage of the Town is uncertain, but very great, to the
utter ruin of many hundred families, and besides the burning of some
particular men's houses, which were purposely set on fire after the Town was
won. The Barton Farm with very much buildings in it, and all the Corn, Hay,
and other goods and Cattle of one Gentleman's, which amounted to 3000. pounds
and upwards, was burnt to the ground.

On Friday they went into the Country, and took away all the Horses, Sheep,
Oxen, and other Cattle of the well-affected that inhabited near Cicester.

On Saturday, Febru. 4. they took away Cloth, Wool, and Yarne, besides other
goods from the Clothiers, about Stroudwaler, to the utte^ und^ing, not only of
them and theirs, but of thousands of poor people, whose very livelihood depend
on that trade.

Now Sir, before I close up all, I shall give you a hint of what I conceive,
besides our sins, concurred with the irresistible will of God, to hasten our
ruin^.

1. The want of our Horse, which made them confidently brave our men at their
very works, as also the want of Cannoneers, which were at Sudely Castle. 2.
The slow raising of moneys out of the Country, which made some of our men, for
lack of pay, to depart the Town, and left many of the rest heartlesse, and
our works but thinly manned. 3. The treachery of our Malignant Gentry round
about us, who constantly gave the enemy intelligence, and entertainment in
their houses, made provision for their Armies, and some of them appeared in
Arms before their neighbor Town, which they could endure to see both fired
and spoiled.
It is Ordered this eighteenth day of February 1642. by the Committee of the
House of Comm^ns in Parliament concerning Printing, that this Book entitled A
Relation of the taking of Cicester, be Printed by Michael Spark senior.

John White.

FINIS.

