A RELATION Of the Actions of the PARLIAMENTS FORCES, Under the command of the
Earl of Bedford General of the Horse, against those which came from Shirbourn
unto Babell-hill near un^o Yerrell, upon Wednesday the 7th of this instant
September, 1642.

Which was extracted out of a Letter sent to the Parliament from Dorchester the
10th of September: 1642.

Signed by Bedford, Denzill Hollis, John Northcot, George Chudley, Walter Earl,
Tho: Wroth, Alex: Popham, Charles Essex, William Strode, John Pine, Cle: Walker,
Hugh Rogers, To: Hartin.

Together with The Copy of Captain AISCOGHS Letter to a Friend of his in LONDON.

London, Printed for E. Husbands and J. Franck. Sept. 13.

A Relation of the Actions of the PARLIAMENTS Forces, under the command of the
Earl of Bedford, General of the horse, against those which came from Shirbourn
unto Babell-hill, near unto Yerrell, upon Wednesday the 7th of this instant
September, 1642.
UPon Tuesday the sixth of September, the Parliaments forces did rise from
before Shirbourn, and went that night unto Yerrell a Town being four miles
distant from Shirbourn; where we lay on Wednesday to refresh our selves, upon
which day it pleased God to give us a great taste of his goodness, to the
great shame and loss of the Enemy: About two of the clock in the afternoon
there appeared a great body of their horse and foot upon a great hill within a
little mile of the Town called Babell-hill, and so was it truly to them a Babel
of Confusion. Upon which we presently put our selves in Array as well as we
could, to make good all the out-wayes, and guard the Magazine, which to do we
found but very few men, and more Pikemen then Musketeers, for the Musketeers
found themselves to be most employed upon all occasions, and therefore they
principally shifted away, and we sent out to that side where the Enemy
appeared, three Troops of horse, and some Musketeers, they standing still at
the top of the hill, braving of us, and calling us Rogues and Round heads; our
men went up the hill to charge them, Captain Arscogh one way, Captain Tomson
another way, a little after him, and Captain Balfour a third, and our
Musketeers after as fast as we could; Aiscogh came up to them first, and
charged one of the Troops through and through, and charged the second, but then
was glad to wheel about; by that time Tomson came in to him, and upon the sight
of him all the Enemies horse began to shog a little, and our two Troops coming
to charge, they turned and ran away, disbanded and routed, and ours followed
upon the execution, and killed many of them, they think about eighteen or
twenty, some very well habited, who seemed to be persons of quality, and their
foot who had played upon our horse and foot coming up the hill, were left to
our mercy, our foot and norse killing them, and they running away like dogs; He
that commanded them was one Bamfield a Sergeant Major, who is taken prisoner,
and with him about a score of his common Soldiers, the rest that commanded the
foot are believed to be slain; amongst them one Hassey a Captain, for his
Commission was found in his pocket, himself clad in plush, Balfoures Troop was
forced to fetch a great compass, for it is a very high hill, and ill way who
could not come in soon enough; if the night had not come on and a very dark
on, we had made a great execution amongst them, for their whole strength of
horse was there, five or six Troops and most of their foot, Sir Ralph Hopton
was there with his Troop, Captain Digby, and Sir Francis Hawley with theirs,
and the Lord Paulet, Sir John Paulet, Sir John Stowell, Sir Thomas Lunsford,
Colonel Asburneham, Sir John Barteley, Colonel Lawdy, and Lieutenant Colonel
Lunsford were there: we do verily believe that some of them are come short of
home, for they came in the night before the Moon rose with lanthorns and
candles, and fetched away the bodies of them of quality, we only found the next
morning twenty or thirty of our men; there were but five lost in all, and a
very few, not above three hurt, all but one of the slain, are of Captain
Aiscoghs Troop, who has showed himself a very valiant yong-man; We desire to
know what must be done with the prisoners, whom, till we receive order, we will
take care shall be safely kept: Thus it has pleased the good God of heaven,
who is the great God of Battles to bless us, whose name we cannot sufficiently
magnify for his goodness to us, bringing on the Enemy in their great jollity
and strength, to be so shamefully defeated by a handful of us, and those who
were tired out with extraordinary sufferance of watching and cold; Blessed be
his name for it.

This was extracted out of a Letter sent to the Parliament from Dorchester, the
10th of September, Signed by Bedford, Denzill Hollis, John Northcot, George
Chudley, Walter Earl, Thomas Wroth, Alexander Popham, Charles Essex, William
Strode, Jo: Pine, Cle: Walker, Hugh Rogers, To: Hartin.

A Copy of Captain Aiscoghs LETTER TO A Friend of his in London.
THis day after our coming from Sheiburne, the Enemy did us the favor to come
to Babell-hill which is a little off Yerrell, the Town where we lay, so news
was brought that the Enemy was come, and orders given that we should sound to
horse, and then directions came to us from my Lord who should stay to guard the
Town, and the rest should go, Pretty and Ducet was to stay, and the rest was to
go; And truly Sir when we came to see them, every body did judge them to be at
least a thousand, besides they were upon the top of a great hill, which was a^
^xtream disadvantage to us; yet praised be God we got very well off, and indeed
better then was expected by any body that did see what danger we were in, the
way that I went was so narrow, that we did march but two a breast, and when we
came to the topp almost, we had an Ambuscado of six Musketeers of each side
the way to entertain us, but they mist us all, and at the top of the hill there
was young Stowell my fellow traveller with his Troop; so after we had changed
two or three brase of Bullets together with a little slashing, they began to
retire; No man can justly tell how many we slew of theirs because we dispersed
them so; but we were forced to retreat into the Lane, because there was no body
to second me, and then came two Troops of fresh horse on us: I lost five of my
own men, it was Gods great blessing we were not all cut off, but I trust in him
that he has preserved us for to do him more service: My men were very resolute
and valiant, I thank God, as soon as we had charged we went up again, and they
were all run away. This is all that I have to trouble you with at this present.

Dorchester the 9. of September.
FINIS

