A RELATION OF THE SIEGE LAID and RAISED again BEFORE MALMOO, BY THE Danish
Army In the Year 1677.

(...)

A Relation of the Siege Laid and Raised again before MALMOO, etc.
WHen his Excellency the Field-Marshal and General Governor Van Fersen was
safely returned the 28th day of May into Malmoo, from the Camp at Ronneberga,
and well knew that His Majesty of Sweden had an intention to draw himself
something back toward the old Limits of Swedeland, for to join with his other
Troops, that had kept there their Winter Quarters, made immediately his
estimate, that the Enemy would lay hold on such an advantageous a time; having
fresh Men and great Forces, for the conquering of Malmoo, the most important
Place of the Dukedom of Schonen: And therefore immediately dispatched his
Orders into the Country about Ystad and Trelleborg, for those Troops that as
yet stayed there in their Quarters, to come in to him, and to avoid a surprizal
by the Enemy: Whereupon some of the said Troops came in, but some neglected to
do it; which, if they be come to our Army, or have been intercepted by the
Enemy, we as yet do not know: And his Excellency having brought along with him
into Malmoo Garrison the Garrison of Borby, sent also his Order to the
Lieutenant of the Gedinger Fort to come into him which he also readily obeyed
unto: This being done, his Excellency mustered all the Forces, as well Foot as
Horse, that were in the Fortress, and formed certain Troops thereof, under the
Command of such Officers, as then were in Malmoo, distributed the several Posts
upon the Castle and in Town amongst them, and recommanding to them as well the
reparation as the defense thereof, exhorted them altogether to an undaunted
Courage and Loyalty to their King and Sovereign; and furnished all the Posts
with a sufficient and requisite a quantity of all sorts of Ammunition and Arms,
that so by an un^expected Attack no want might be in any place: After this he
ordered the Burghers with all sorts of Engines to have a care of any firing,
and put every where things in so regular a way and order, tha^ every man, as
well by day as by night, could know his station, and what he was to do: Further
more did he engage all those Officers, that were in Town, by an Obligation
under Oath, not to think of any Capitulation, much less to speak thereof, or to
suffer, that any body should speak about it, but to defend the place to the
utmost for His Majesty's service. His Excellency also did dispose, in case of
mortality, about the succession in his Command, for to avoid any confusion and
neglect of due defense. On the 6th day of June the Enemy did appear upon
Kirsberg before Malmoo, early in the Morning, with Eight Squadrons, under the
Command of Major General Walter, and took some Cattle away; continued his
station till Noon by Skereweling, and about Evening drew up toward
Hukansdorff, where he lodged himself and distributed his Sentinels. The 7th of
June came more Troops down by the way of Lunden, with whom was the
Generals-Staff, and did seek out the approaches of the Castle, and about
Limhambn. In the Afternoon Major General Walter sent a Trumpet to our
Horse-Guard, and demanded in the King his Masters name the exchange of
Prisoners; whereupon our Governor sent back to him by a Trumpet a project of
the desired Exchange. On the 8th ditto did most of their Troops by break of day
draw up to Limhambn, and some other Troops came down from Lunden: About 7 a
clock in the Evening came one Danish Manof War before Malmoo. The 9th ditto
^ame the Enemies whole Army, Cavalry, Artillery, and Infantry, con^isting in 23
Battallions, marching down from Lunden, and encamped from Skrewelingen up till
Holle. The 10th ditto, in the Morning, did ^he Enemy fire nine Guns upon the
Castle and Town, which was an^wered with four of ours from the Bastion of
Malmoo, against their ^amp under the Long Mountain: The same day came another
Da^ish Man of War to anchor before Malmoo, and in the Evening a Da^ish Cavalier
was brought in Prisoner. On the 11th ditto the Enemy ^^dged himself before the
Castle and the East and South Gates, open^d his Trenches, and made his
Batteries upon all the Posts. In the ^orning, the Adjutant of Duke de Croy's
Regiment was brought in ^isoner, who made large speeches of the Enemies great
Forces and ^esigns. In the Afternoon there was another Prisoner brought in,
be^^nging to the Munster Troops; and about the same time did the ^nemy fire
some Guns into the Town before the South Gate, and wrought very hard about all
them three places; causing many Fassins to be carried by the Countrey-people
for their purpose. On the 12th ditto did the Enemy advance with his Works very
notably. On the 13th he did the like, and all the night over was continually
fired upon their Workmen. On the 14th advanced the Enemy with his Work upon all
the Posts very considerably, and there was a terrible shooting on both sides:
By break of day did the Enemy endeavor to make himself Master of our hidden
way, but was repulsed with loss. The Enemy continued his Works on the 15th
ditto, but the Governor caused a Sally to be made by 150 Horse upon their
Workmen about the Castle, who killed many of them, and returned without any
loss. In the Morning there were thrown before the South-Gate some Grenades out
of little Mortar-pieces, and some Pieces of Cannon brought up to the Batteries
before the South and East Gates. On the 16th ditto the Enemy continued his
Works before the said Gates, and made a Redout about the Shore: In the Evening
they did beset their approaches a great deal stronger than ever they had done
before. On the 17th the Enemy did approach very hard, chiefly about the
South-Gate, and flung diverse Grenades; but about the Castle and the East Gate,
did our Horse-guard often allarm him, and hinder him in his Works: Besides,
there was continually fired from the three Posts, and stones flung by the
Mortar-pieces upon the Workmen: To day did the Enemy very furiously fire into
the Town, but, God be praised, without doing any harm. On the 18th at night,
when the Enemy began to work, his Excellency gave order to allarm him by our
Cavalry before the Castle and Eastgate, but before the South-Gate he caused a
Sally to be made by the Regiments-Quarter-Master Williamson with 60 Cavaliers,
who were a foot, and provided with Pistols and Short-Pikes; and this was done
with so good a success, that they beat the Enemy out of his Lines, killed very
many of them, and brought Major Rockling, with Lieut. Bulow and four Common
Soldiers, Prisoners into the Town. In the Morning did the Enemy begin to throw
Grenades out of three Mortar-Pieces into the Castle, and threw this day 42
Grenades and 6 Fireballs, but without doing any harm. On the 19th ditto there
was little done, only the Enemy ^id stregnthen his Lines, and beset them more
than ordinary, fearing a further Sally. In the Morning about five a Clock did
our Governor at the Shore by the Eastgate, make a Sally with 250 Horse and
150 Musketeers, under the Command of Lieutenant Colonel Wachmeyster, upon
Major General Bibow's Post, and beat them out fo their Lines and one Redout,
killed above one hundred, amongst whom there were many Officers; the
Musketeers took Captain Ropstorff of Prince George's Regiment, and some Common
Soldiers Prisoners: On our side was slain Captain Lieutenant Crutsch of the
Vickish Regiment, one Cavalier, and one Musqueteer. On the 20th ditto the Enemy
continued very eagerly his Works upon all the Posts, strengthened his Lines,
and flung several Bombes into the Castle, but without any hurt. The 21th ditto
the Enemy did still go on with his Works, began early in the Morning to fire
upon the Bastion of Malmoo, and threw 14 Grenades into the Castle, but without
doing harm. On the 22th ditto, about Midnight, the Enemy having given the
Signal with Cannons upon all their Posts, fell with great violence and fury
upon the Counterscarps; but was beat off with a great loss in all the places:
yet they did lodge themselves before Stockholm-Bastion upon the Esplanade,
before the South-Gate they ran with their Line out of the Traverse into the
Meadows. By break of day the Enemy did fire from all the Batteries very hard,
and flang very many Bombes into the Castle. In the Afternoon came two French
men running over from their Camp, and informed that* they had lost upon their
Post before the Castle in this Attack above 300 men, and that every Night very
many had been killed in their Works. The 23th ditto did the Enemy fling in the
Night 42, and in the Day time 32 Bombes, but without any effect, fired from all
the Batteries, and continued his Works. On the 24th they threw again in the
Night 27 Bombes, shot from the Batteries, and very hotly pursued their Works
against the Castle and the South-Gate: About the Eastgate, under the
Stockholm-Bastion they lodged themselves upon the Breast-work of the hidden
way, and made a Buttery there. On the 25th ditto did the Enemy work very hard
at Night before the Castle, and drew a New Line from the Shore against the
Damm, and threw 12 Bombes, but without doing any harm. About the South-Gate
they drew yet a New Line before the Right Face of the Ravelin, and played hard
with their Cannons. Before the Stockholm-Bastion we did not perceive any New
Works, but they strengthened their other Works, and advanced toward the Ditch.
In the Daytime did they throw 20 Grenades into the Castle, but without any
considerable harm. This Evening was Captain Norman shot through his head with
two Bullets, whereof he immediately died. In the Night the Enemy was observed
to march hard in all the Approaches, and to be extraordinary busy in all
Preparations, whereby our Governor did conclude, that the Enemy designed a
general Attack and Storm; and therefore according to his custom, which he kept
Day and Night, did ride about all the Posts, and having disposed the Artillery,
Infantry, and Cavalry in a good order and posture, encouraged them all to a
stout and brave resistance: About Midnight the Enemy began upon all the Posts
round about the Town and the Castle, on eight places at once, with all his
Infantry and Dragoons to storm; and shot during the said Storm 42 Grenades
into the Castle. The Storm was very obstinate, and lasted till the Morning; and
although the Enemy had made himself Master of the Works about the Shore-Gate
(wherein Captain Matherne courageously fighting, was killed) as also had taken
Post by the Counterguard and before the Stockholme-Bastion, and besides had
already passed the Ditch betwixt Gothenborough and Malmoo, and between Malmoo
and Norkioping, and climbed up the Wall with several hundred men, and also made
himself Master of the Caponiere before the Ravelin of the Castle, yet by the
Divine assistance, and by our Governors great ca^e, and the Officers and
Common Soldiers good Conduct and Courage, has he been beaten off and repulsed
from all the Posts with a very great Loss as well of Men, as also of many Tinn
and Wooden Pontons, which are now laid up in the Castle. In the Afternoon the
Enemy did desire a Truce, for to bury the Dead, which our Governor, for that
time, for certain and important reasons, did refuse to grant. The next
following Day, viz. the 27th ditto, they again desired an Armistice for to bury
their Dead, which then accordingly upon certain Conditions was granted; and
there were a great number of Dead Corpses from the Wall; the Ditch, and the
Hidden Ways delivered to them, which they took and presently buried: amongst
whom there was many Officers. By those that are taken Prisoners, and by the
Deserters, We are informed, that Major General Duke Van Croy and Major General
Bibow, as also Colonels Bush, Keller, Warnstett, Meldom, and Ramstett, and the
Lieutenant Colonels Pless, Bruneker, and some others, whose Names we not as
yet do know; and many Majors, Captains, Lieutenants, and Ensigns, are killed;
Colonel Brokhousen, Colonel Schulenburg, and several others are sore wounded.
The Regiments of Guards, Prince Georges, Weyhers, Walters, Schonberghs,
Shulenburghs, Baudises, Grandvillers, and Count Tecklenburghs, are totally
ruined; wherefore also, according to the Deserters report, they have been fain
to make a reduction of their Foot, and ^o form one Battalion out of three.
According to their unanimous report, we hear that the Enemy has lost above
4000 Men in that ^torm, and that all his Foot is ruined. It is to be wondered
at, that ^he Enemy had persuaded himself so firmly about the good success of
that general Storm, that the next Day after (by break of Day) above 60
Galliots, Yachts, and Ketches, has been seen on the Shore ^ide, which were
arrived for to carry the hopes Booty to Copenha^en; but meeting with no other
than the sharp Salute of our Guns, ^hey were obliged to go back as empty as
they came. On the 28th ^itto was observed a great noise in the Enemies
Approaches, when ^hey carried off their Cannon: About the Evening they drew
their ^^sen out of the Approaches before the South and East Gates, and ^ept
only at the end thereof their Sentinels. The Munster Troops ^ept as yet their
Posts beset, but did not continue in their Works. On the 29th ditto there was
likewise observed much noise of Wag^ons going to and fro in the Night. On the
30th did the Munste^ans burn their Approaches, and quitted them; the Camp as
yet ^^d stand, and we were hard at work, for to raze the Approaches. ^he 5th of
July about Noon the Enemy broke up for good and all, ^^t fire to the Camp, and
bent his March toward Lunden; but ^^d left some Regiments about Lamhambn,
which likewise the ^ext following Day in the Morning, with all the Vessels that
lay ^^ere, removed and followed the Army.

FINIS.

