A WARNING from the Lord to the City and Nation, in Mercy to the People, to see
if they will yet seek him.
WAtch and Repent, Repent and turn to the Lord with Fear and Trembling, cease
from all Evil, for the Lord is greatly at work amongst the Nations, and will
yet bring the loftiness of Man low, and all Nations to bow and tremble before
him, for distress of Nations is come, and yet coming as sure as the Lord has
both gently and terribly shook the Earth, and has appeared yet and again for
the Honor of his great Name, by his Judgments that are in the Earth; if the
Inhabitants thereof would yet bow, in Mercy the Lord has, I say, gently shook
the Earth in our parts, as a Warning and Call to Repentance, and if there be
not a repenting, the Spirit of the Lord will not always strive with Man, he
will yet terribly shake the Earth, as he has done in Nations abroad; the Vials
of his Wrath is almost full, and the Angel of his Presence stands ready to pour
them forth, therefore bow in Mercy, and come to a search, for the Lord will
yet, and again try the Standings and Foundations of Men, and they that trust in
the Lord, they shall see his great Salvation, but they that join with Babylon
which is Confusion, thus says the Lord, they must both fall together, and they
shall be made a Scourge one to another, for the Lord is come, and yet coming to
make War with the Beast and false Prophet, that would not that Christ should
Reign in his peaceable Kingdom; and the deadly wound in the Head of the Beast
shall not be healed in some, and the Lord has warned and is warning all
Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People, that are joined in a Warlike Spirit, by
his Judgments from his own Almighty Power and Arm, as he did when he gently
shook the Earth, that all might come to see his Judgments in Mercy, and not
partake of the mark of the Beast, which is Confusion, Bloodshed, Sin and
Wickedness, which is the cause of Calamity upon Calamity: and how the Lord has
pleaded with this City, is yet in remembrance, the great Plague, when the cry
was bring forth your Dead bring forth your Dead. And after that, our great City
in Flames very dreadful to behold, and the Sword also which is not yet
departed; and, it is much to be feared, will conclude with greater Sorrow than
is yet seen, if there be not a speedy Care and Repentance. Go forth as Niniveh
did, not such a Fast to smite with the Fist of wickedness, to the destruction
of their fellow Creatures, but that they may be one in Love, for God is Love,
and if not found in this, then the Lord is yet at work amongst the Rocks, and
will lay desolate great and high Mountains, and as he has done great and
fenced Cities; and he is also at work at work amongst the Hills, and there will
be no Hill too high for him, and he will yet cleave and rent the Rocks in
sunder, and universally the vail of the Temple shall come to be rent, and
Christ's peaceable Kingdom shall be set up, and all shall come to see him whom
they have pierced, and they that stand upon great and high Mountains and Rocks
will be cast down: and the little Stone which Daniel's Saw cut out of the
Mountain without Hands, which should become a great Mountain, and fill the
whole Earth; this little Stone will yet fall upon many till they are ground to
Powder; and great will be yet the desolation that will be in the Earth,
therefore, Oh Remember! The Angel of God's presence has fled through the midst
of Heaven, and gently shook the Earth, and we have felt it, and now the cry is,
fear God, give glory to his Name, for the hour of his Judgment is come, and yet
coming; fear him that made the Heavens and the whole Earth, the Sea and
Fountains of Water, fear him, give glory to him, worship God in Spirit, watch
and repent, for the Lords dreadful Judgments is at hand, and as we have felt
his gentle stroke and warning, if there be not a speedy repenting, we shall
feel as other Nations has done his terrible stroke, for the Lord will yet
visit again and again, till the displeasure of the Almighty is seen by the
Sinners in Sion, and they come to obey our Lord Jesus Christ, whose Command is,
love one another, that the Covenant of his precious Blood to them may not be
shed in vain; for our Lord came not to destroy Men's Lives, but to save them
that obey and are willing to bow to him, in Mercy to themselves, and that his
other Sheep may be gathered into the one fold in peace, to worship God in
Spirit and in Truth; that his Israel may be comforted; to gather as many as
obey the Truth, and so brought forth to shine as Lights to the whole World: But
methinks I hear some say, who do you call Israel? To that I answer with my
Souls satisfaction, all they that fear God and work Righteousness shall be
excepted, and are willing to cleanse their Hands from shedding of Blood, and
keep themselves unspotted from the World, for the Blood that is shed in the
Earth is displeasing the Lord, and a great account there is to give, for the
creation of God in whom he has breathed the Breath of Life, and Man thereby
became a living Soul, and the Seed Christ is sown in them, and that Law written
in their Hearts, that will be read against those that are instrumental and
leading such poor Souls by thousands to destruction, and to destroy their
Fellow Creatures, sheathing their swords in one another Bowels, till the stink
of their Camps comes up into their Nostrils, and for all this, there is no
compassion as Man to Man, therefore the Lord by his Judgments, since the name
Christian is doing one to another as the name Turk does; therefore I say, the
Lord by his Judgments is getting himself a Name amongst the Heathen, and such
as know not God, shall be brought to know him that Rules by his invisible Arm
and Strength, and those shall enter the Kingdom before many that have a name to
live and are dead, and this word further is to all professions, under what name
soever it may be; that is, whereas Men are making a destinction between Silver
and Silver, and Coin and Coin, and in the end, both by their appointment
accounted Reprobate, so that the best of their old Coin will be good for no
more then as it is found in substance, so no more will the highest outside
profession when it comes to be tried, for there is nothing can make a Man live
to God, and be serviceable to Man, but that which stands in God's Power, which
all the dwellers of the Earth shall come to be tried by, and they that are
found too light, Jer 6.32
to be accounted as the Prophet saw in his day Reprobate Silver shall Men call
them, therefore hasten, hasten; for your lives Backsliders and Hippocrates,
although under never so large a profession and appearance to Men, that will not
do nor go for Current, but will be found Reprobate, as is the false Coin and
diminished Silver, and that which has been laid up for posterity is not now
good, but as it is now found in substance and fineness, when come to a Trial,
will fall short of that Riches it was laid up for, and too many are trusting in
uncertain Riches, but the Lord has many ways to work, and they that are
trusting in such Riches the Lord can turn and overturn their Treasures, till he
comes to reign in them whose right it is, and they come to be faithful, and
also come to see him whom, they have and are piercing: Therefore this is the
warning that every one come to a search in themselves, that the cause may be
taken away, and the effect cease, that Calamity upon Calamity may not come, but
that all may come to buy Milk and Honey without Money and without price, and
then come to the Supper of the Lamb, and to drink of the new Wine of the
Kingdom, and to taste of that Heavenly Banquet that is prepared for all those
that is found worthy to enter the Kingdom in Peace, being made partakers of
that pure Faith, that works by Love, for many Warnings has the Lord sent in
Mercy to this City and Nation, for his great Care, Love and Compassion is to
them, and the Lord will be clear of you and his Servants will be clear also in
that they deliver their Message faithfully, and this Remember, that many were
invited to the Marriage Supper, but because of their other Business, being
preferred before that of God, such were not found worthy, and the King he sent
his Armies, and destroyed those Murderers, and for their unfaithfulness in not
answering their call, burnt their City, because the Wedding was ready, but they
that were bidden were not worthy to enter the Kingdom in peace, (therefore
Backsliders under what Name soever have a care,) and the King sent his Servants
into the Highways, to gather together as many as they found, and the Wedding
was furnished with Guest, but he that had not on the Wedding Garment (which is
something in his Heart to offer to the Lord of the Supper) he was Speechless,
and bound Hand and Foot, and cast into utter Darkness, and this is lamentable,
many are called but through Disobedience, which is their loss, few is chosen,
that when the Midnight cry comes, such as have not Oil in their Lamps, the Door
will be shut against them, and they not be able to enter. I say for
Disobedience, and because Man has found out many inventions, the Lord
destroyed the old World; and the great cause of Men's Misery in all Generations
is, they are not living up to what they do believe, as they ought, not trusting
in the sufficiency of that Arm, which only can bring Salvation, and preserve
both within and without; therefore the Lord has shook the Heavens, and will
yet shake the Earth also, and I say, will yet try the Standings and Foundations
of Men, therefore let every Mortal living, dread and fear before the Great
Jehovah, the Living Almighty God, that it may be well with you, is the real
breathing of my Soul; for his other Sheep, that they may be gathered into
Christ's peaceable Own fold, for he is the peaceable Shepherd. So recommending
you to him. I rest,

Elizabeth Redford.
The Five and Twentieth day of the Tenth Month, in the Year, 1695.

