The RELATION Of the Trial and Condemnation of Edward Fitz Harris, AND Oliver
Plunket Who were Tried at the King's Bench on the 8th. and 9th. of this Instant
June, 1681. And there found guilty and Condemned for HIGH TREASON: For
Conspiring the Death of the KING, and to Subvert the Protestant Religion and
Government, by raising Rebellion and Leavying War.

With their last Speeches and Confession at the place of EXECUTION.

Printed by H. Brugis, in the Year 1681.

The Relation of the Trials of Edward Fitz-Harris, and Oliver Plunket, who were
tried at the King's Bench. etc.
EDward Fitz-Harris (the Debate about whose Trial has filled all people with a
longing expectation to know the Event.

It being a matter of a more than ordinary Nature, and attended with
circumstances not usual.) having his Plea overruled: by which he pleaded to
the Jurisdiction of the Court of King's Bench last Term, and then ordered to
prepare for his Trial the first Thursday in Easter Term; was by a Rule of Court
brought from the Tower to Westminster Hall, where being set to the Bar: It was
moved by Council, That he might be examined as to some particular points of
Discovery, before he entered upon his Trial; but the Court declared it could
not then be granted: and if he would have made any discovery, he should have
done it when he was upon Examination for that purpose: So that silence being
proclaimed; the Jury were called, who were all Freeholders in the County of
Middlesex, and after some exceptions (both for the King and the Prisoner)
twelve were sworn, and then his Indictment was read, which contained such
Treasons as are scarcely fit to be so much as mentioned; As to particulars, but
in general to this Effect, that Edward Fitz-Harris the Prisoner at the Bar, as
a false Traitor to our Sovereign Lord the King, had Maliciously and
Traitorously conspired against His Crown and Dignity, intending Him to depose
and murder by raising Rebellion and Leavying War to enslave the Nation to a
Foreign Power, to introduce Popery and Arbitray Government: in order to the
effecting which he had written, or caused to be written and designed to be
dispersed amongst His Majesty's Liege Subjects, a Scandalous and Treasonable
Libill, Entitled, The true English Man speaking plain English. etc.

As for the Treasons mentioned in the Libell, upon which the Indictment was
grounded, (which likewise was produced and read in Court) I shall forbear to
mention, because I do not imagine them fit to be published: but their designed
Effects (had not Heaven prevented) were to create a misunderstanding between
the King and His people; to stir up fears and Jelousies, to render Him odious
and contemptable to His Subjects, to terrify them with apprehensions of
Arbitrary Government Popery and slavery; not only to degrade His Majesty's
Royal Ancestors (of blessed Memory) to lay a blot upon His Majesty and His
Posterity, and in fine to blow up a flame of Civil War amongst us: that the
French and the Papist to be raised in England might have fallen upon when
divided, and have put us all to the Sword; this was Jesuitick Policy to the
Life, and out did (if it be possible) Hell it self.

To this Indictment he pleaded not guilty, and for his Trial, put himself upon
God and the Country, when as Mr. Atorney General opened the Indictment to the
Jury, telling them the Heighnousness of the Crime, and that not only the Kings
Life was concerned in it, but likewise theirs, and every Protestants in
England, Scotland, and Ireland: and that we had all been immediately destroyed,
had it taken Effect after him; the Kings Soliciter, and Sr. George Geffery the
Kings Counselor opened it to the same Effect, when as Mr. Edmund Everard one
of the Kings witnesses, was called and sworn: who testified that Fitz-Harris
the Prisoner at the Bar, about the 21. of Feb. 1681. Came to him at his
Chamber in Grays Inn: and having had some small acquainttance with him in the
French Army, he saluted him, and desired that they might renew it: after which
he fell into a discourse how hardly Mr. Everard had been used since he left the
Catholic to espouse the Protestant interest: telling withal, that if he would
join with the Popish Party, and be asisting to them, he should be well provided
for, and that it would be very advantageous to him; to this the witness
seemingly consented to, after which he grew bolder in his discourse, that he
had a design to have something writ, and knowing him a man Capable to undertake
it, he would communicate it, which proved to be the Libell or Horrid Treason:
for which he was afterward apprehended, and now tried; the which Mr. Everard
consented too and took his Instructions, appointing a time when the Prisoner
should call for it: but in the mean time he acquainted several worthy Gentlemen
with what had passed; who advised him to be secret, that so he might find out
the bottom of the design, which he promised to do: and thereupon went to Sr.
William Waller, and Mr. Smith one of the Discoverers of the PLOT, who promised
him their assistance, who coming by themselves at two several times when
Fitz-Harris had appointed to be there: Mr. Everard placed them so that they
might not only see the Prisoner, but overhear every word, yet they remain
undiscovered; by this means the whole design was laid open? for the Prisoner
not in the least mistrusting any: who peeping through a Crevice, heard him
discourse about the Libell, and seem somewhat displeased that it was not done.
As likewise the said Mr. Smith heard him promise Mr. Everard a great reward,
which should be given him by the French Ambassador for his better
encouragement, and that he should be entered a Pensioner under the French King,
and some thousands of Crowns besides an Anuall Pension: for said he that King
cares not what Moneys he disbursts, so he can accomplish his Designs, and that
he was to have Forty Guineys from the French Ambassadors Confessor as soon as
he had completed the Libell: which Libell this Evidence saw him take up and
read, crossing out and putting in as he thought fit, and that when this Libell
was finished and dispersed, so that it had set the people a madding, that Mr.
Everard should go to Common Council and Citizens of London to Incence them
against the King, and persuade them to offer some Hundred Thousand of Pounds to
the Parliament to sit at Oxford, to promise to stand by him with their Lives
and Fortunes, to rise all as one Man, and not to Disband till their (pretended)
grievances were settled.

These and such like Treasonable Practices were used by this Impious Traitor,
to overthrow the Government and introduce a French Power: which he said would
first Conquer Flanders and the low Countries, and then falling upon us, divided
amongst our selves, would devour us at a Morsel. For so were his Expressions.

The next which gave Evidence was Sr. William Waller, who was likewise placed
by Mr. Everard to over-hear his discourse, who saw the Papers before
Fitz-Harris came: to which he gave a private mark that he might know them
again; then he saw Fitz-Harris come in and heard him ask for um, the which when
Mr. Everard delivered, he perused, and after having crossed out what he thought
fit, and Incerted several Sentences, he returned them to be fair written over:
and when Mr. Everard began to boggle; Saying, That it was a Treason of a very
high Nature, and he knew not what to think of it. Then Fitz-Harris replied, the
more Treason the better, am not I as deeply concerned in it as you, have you
not part of it under my Hand.

Mr. Everard being again Examined what was to be done with them, he said
Fitz-Harris told him they were to be dispersed in Penny Post Letters, and put
into peoples Pockets and especially into some of the Protestant Lords, who
thereupon were to be apprehended as Traitors, etc.

There were two more Evidences against him, but those not very Meteriall,
therefore I shall omit, only Sr. Phillip Floyd gave testimony that the Prisoner
had confessed a Treasonable paper to be his own Hand writing.

After these and many other tedious Circumstances had possessed, the Kings
Council summed up the Evidence, laying open the Heighnousness of the Crime in
all its particulars? after which the Court gave the Jury their charge, and
having satisfied them in some Scrupulous Queries they started in Relation, the
Prisoner having been Impeached by the House of Commons, they went out, and
after an hours Debate And on the 15th. of this instant June 1681 Oliver Plunket
and Fitz-Harris were generally sentenced to be drawn hanged and quarted.

Mr. Fitz-Harrys's Speech at his Execution at Tyburn July 1. 1681.
GOod People, This Infamous kind of Death is much more irksome to me than Death
it self: Such a Judgment as this my Sins against God may justly bring upon me,
and I do most humbly submit unto it. But as to the Crimes which I now die for,
I take God to Witness, I was no further concerned in the Libel, than to
discover to the King what Practices of that kind were against him, being
employed for that end, though those that employed me refused to do me Justice
at my Trial. And I call God to witness I never had a Farthing of Money of the
King in my life, but on the Account of the like Service. And as to the
Witnesses that have Sworn against me I do here solemnly declare, now at my
Death, that I have not seen the French Ambassador since the beginning of the
breaking out of the Plot, neither have I had any acquaintance with him. And as
to his Confessor, I never spoke with him in my life; neither have I had any
dealing, either directly or indirectly in my life with them, though Sir Will.
Waller and the rest Swore most falsely to the contrary. And how like it is that
the French Ambassador would give three thousand Crowns for Writing that Libel,
I leave the world to judge. I forgive all the World, and do hope that God will
forgive me. I beg the Prayers of all good People for a happy Passage into the
other World.

EDWARD FITZ-HARRIS.

The last speech of Mr. Oliver Plunket Titular Primate of Ireland, who was
Executed at Tyburn on Friday the 1st. of this instant July, 1681. Written by
his own hand.
I Have some few days past abided my Trial at the Kings Bench, and now very
soon I must hold up my hand at the King of King's Bench, and appear before a
Judge who cannot be deceived by false Witnesses, for he knows the secrets of
Hearts, he being all goodness, and a most just judge, will infallibly decree an
Eternal reward for all good works, and condign punishment for the smallest
transgression against his Commandments. Which being a most certain and
undoubted Truth; it would be a wicked Act, that I should now by declaring any
thing contrary to Truth commit a detestable sin, for which within a very short
time I must receive sentence of everlasting Damnation, after which there is no
Reprieve or hope of Pardon. I will therefore Confess the Truth, without any
Equivocation, and I protest upon the word of a Dying man, and as I hope for
Salvation at the Hands of the supreme Judge, that I will declare the Naked
Truth with all Candor and Sincerity: And that my Affairs may be better known to
all the world. It Is to be observed that I have been Accused in Ireland of
Treason and Praemunire, and that there I was Arraigned and brought to my Trial;
but the Prosecutors (men of Flagitious and Infamous Lives) perceiving that I
had Records and Witnesses who would evidently convince them, and clearly show
my Innocence, and their wickedness; they voluntarily absented themselves, and
came to this City that I should be brought hither to my Trial: Here after six
Months close Imprisonment I was brought to the Bar the 3d of May, and Arraigned
for a Crime for which I was before Arraigned in Ireland: A strange Resolution,
a rare Fact, of which you will hardly find a Precedent these 500 Years past:
But whereas my Witnesses and Records were in Ireland, the Lord Chief Justice
gave me five weeks time to get them brought hither, but by Reason of the
uncertainty of the Seas, of wind and weather, I could not get them hither, I
therefore begged for 12 days more which the Lord Chief Justice denied. so I
was brought to my Trial, Accusing me of these following points. First that I
have sent Letters by one Nial O Neal who was my Page to Monsieur Baldeschi, the
Popes Secretary, to the Bishop of Aix, and to Principe Colonna, that they might
solicit Foreign Powers to invade Ireland, and also to have sent Letters to
Cardinal Bullion to the same effect. 2ly. to have employed Captain Con O Neal
to the French King for succor. 3ly. To have Levied and Exacted Moneys from the
Clergy of Ireland to bring in the French, and to maintain 70000 men. 4ly. To
have had in readiness 70000 men, and Lists made of them. 5ly. To have
surrounded all the Forts and Harbors of Ireland, for the Frenches Landing. To
all which I answer, as I hope for salvation I never sent Letters, raised sums,
or Plotted against my King and Country.

You see therefore what a Condition I am in, and you have heard what
Protestations I have made of my Innocence, and I hope you will believe the
words of a dying man; And that you may be the more induced to give me credit, I
assure you, That a great Peer sent me notice, That he would save my life, if I
would accuse others. but I answered, That I never knew of any Conspirators in
Ireland, but such (as I said before) as were publicly known Outlaws; And that,
to save my Life, I would not falsely accuse any, nor prejudice my own Soul. Quid
prodest homini, etc. To take away any man's Life or Goods wrongfully, ill
becomes any Christian, especially a man of my Calling, being a Clergyman of
the Catholic Church, and also an unworthy Prelate, which I now openly confess.
Neither will I deny to have exercised in Ireland the Functions of a Catholic
Prelate, as long as there was any Connivance or Toleration; and by Preaching,
and Teaching, and Statutes, to have endeavored to bring the Clergy (of which I
had a care) to a due comportment, according to their Calling; and though thereby
I did but my duty, yet some who would not amend had a prejudice for me, and
especially my Accusers, to whom I did endeavor to do good; I mean the
Clergymen, (as for the four Laymen who appeared against me, viz. Florence
Mac-Moyer, the 2 Neals, and Hanlon, I was never acquainted with them;) but you
see how I am requited, and how by false Oaths they brought me to this untimely
death; which wicked act being a defect of Persons, ought not to reflect upon
the Order of S. Francis, or upon the Roman Catholic Clergy. It being well
known, that there was a Judas among the 12 Apostles, and a wicked man called
Nicholas amongst the seven Diacons; And even, as one of the said Diacons, to
wit, holy Stephen, did pray for those who stoned him to death; so do I, for
those who with Perjuries spill my Innocent Blood, saying, as St. Stephen did, O
Lord lay not this Sin to them. I do heartily forgive them, and also the Judges,
who (by denying me sufficient time to bring my Records and Witnesses from
Ireland) did expose my Life to evident danger. I do also forgive all those who
had a hand in bringing me from Ireland to be tried here, where it was morally
impossible for me to have a fair Trial. I do finally forgive all who did
concur, directly or indirectly, to take away my Life, and I ask forgiveness of
all those whom I ever offended by Thought, Word, or Deed.

I beseech the All-powerful, That his Divine Majesty grant our King, Queen, and
the Duke of York, and all the Royal Family, Health, long Life, and all
Prosperity in this world, and in the next everlasting felicity.

To the final satisfaction of all Persons, that have the Charity to believe the
Words of a Dying Man; I again declare before God, as I hope for Salvation, what
is contained in this Paper, is the plain and naked truth without any
Equivocation, Mental Reservation, or secret Evasion whatsoever; taking the
Words in their usual sense and meaning, as Protestants do, when they discourse
with all Candor and sincerity. To all which I have here subscribed my Hand,

OLIVER PLUNKET.

FINIS.

