A RELATION IN Part of what passed through a true and faithful Servant and
Handmaid of the Lord, Mary Page, when she lay upon her bed of Sickness, as
follows. With an Exhortation to all Friends to wait, to dwell in the Cross of
Christ Jesus, given forth by the same Spirit, though through another Vessel.
DEar Friends, we cannot but communicate part of the inlargedness of spirit
which remains upon us to our great refreshing, which flowed forth in the
eternal power, through the handmaid of the Lord Mary Page, Wife to William Page
of Wellingborough in the County of Northampton, when she lay upon her bed of
sickness at Warwick, where she had been (and then was) a Prisoner, during the
space of one year, eleven months and upwards, for the Testimony of the Name of
the Lord; which faithful Testimony she had sealed with her blood, to the joy of
all that beheld her innocent passage in the power of the eternal God. Oh! Dear
Friends, we can express but little of what our eyes did see, and our ears did
hear of the enlargedness of the pourings forth of the Spirit of the Lord
through his Handmaid; who in great power exhorted all to be faithful in abiding
in the Covenant of Light, and to be truly obedient in the meek, lowly, humble,
and self-denying Spirit of our Lord Jesus, that in the pure love and
Righteousness of God all the dear Babes and Children of our Father might live
in pure union with the Lord, and one with another, to bear a bold and faithful
Testimony for the Lord, what ever become of the body, it would be well every
way, both to the inward and outward man, and to the praise and glory of the
Lord for ever. And many times when she ended her Exhortation, she poured forth
her spirit in supplication to the Lord, with great fervency. Oh! thou powerful
God who is the searcher of all hearts, behold thy Handmaid, and if there be any
thing that is not upright before thee in the heart of thy Handmaid, make it
known unto me thou searcher of Hearts, for thou know I delight to stand
approved in thy sight in all my ways; for thou art my dear Father, and have not
failed thy Handmaid in what ever thou have called me to unto this day; but thy
Presence has attended me and comforted me through every trial, and besetment,
that the enemy of my Soul has compassed me about withal. Oh! blessed God how
have thou kept and preserved me to thy self, and through the power of the Lord
Jesus Christ has made me to trample upon the enemy of my Souls peace:
Therefore, in the name and power of the Lord Jesus Christ does my Soul praise
thee O my God for my preservation, in the power and authority of thy spirit, to
bear my faithful Testimony for thee my God, all my days until I have finished
my course in thy will, Oh Lord my strength and life for ever and ever. And dear
Father look upon thy poor oppressed ones that have no life, but in thee; Oh how
do they cry in the sense of their misery; Lord help o^ we die: Oh! Lord thou
knows their necessities, and their wants are not hid from thee whose
Righteousness without thee is as filthy rags; therefore do they cry unto thee,
nothing will satisfy them but thy presence: Oh! powerful Father raise up thy
own begotten in the power and authority of the Lord Jesus Christ, to reign over
all its besetments, that the Mourner may rejoice, and the bowed down head may
be lifted up, and every hungry and thirsty Soul satisfied with the bread and
water of Life, which thou freely handest forth by the hand of our Mediator
Christ Jesus our Lord; not for any thing that we have done or do, but for thy
own name sake, that all flesh and boasting may be laid in the dust, and all
Crowns cast down before thee, that thou alone may have all the glory, whose
right it is over all says my Soul, for ever and ever: and yet notwithstanding
that all we have, or receive is in thy free mercy in Christ Jesus, yet this
gives not any liberty to sin: Oh! Lord thou know, but rather engages us
that are born again, to abhor our selves and to stand upon our watch
diligently, that the enemy may not enter with any of his wiles to cause us to
abuse thy Grace and free mercies, which thou have so freely manifested to us in
the name of the Lord Jesus, when we had not any power to help our selves:
therefore does my soul with the souls of thy dear and faithful Children cry
unto thee to keep us pure in thy holy power, that in meekness and true
sincerity of heart we may wait upon thee, and he obedient in what ever thou
calls us unto, even to the loss of Husband, or Wife, or Children, or what ever
else thou requirest, if it be to the laying down of the outward man for thy
glorious Truth; it will be well every way with all that have not any comfort or
help but in thee, thou everliving God, to whom be all Glory and Honor for
ever. And holy glorious Father of life, bless and preserve all thy people that
make mention of thy holy and eternal truth, here and here away, and all my
fellow Prisoners, with all thy suffering memb^^^ every where, and my dear
Husband and Children, God bless and preserve them, and take care of them; Oh!
my God do well for them every way, in keeping them faithful with my own soul
unto the end of our days, whether they be few or many, thy will be done. Oh!
thou holy eternal God keep thy dear Children from whence I came; Oh! Lord then
knows how dear they are to me, but I commit them wholly to thy care Oh my God;
whom I know certainly will never fail them that are of an upright heart, and
cannot be satisfied but with thy living eternal presence in the Lord Jesus, to
whom I commit them all if I never see their faces in the outward any more; I
know it will be well both with me and them, as we give up unto thee, to be
ordered according to thy will, our little time we have here to be upon the
Earth; to the glory and honor of thy great name, thou everlasting glorious
Father of life, to whom alone it does belong, says my soul with the souls of
all thy beloved and faithful Children and servants that thou have chosen to
glorify thee, who alone is God over all blessed for ever, and for evermore.

And when she had done, a Friend asked her how she did? She said, I am weak,
but I would go home. What to thy Eternal home? She smiled and said, yea, when
it pleases my Heavenly Father. Her tender and loving Husband being there with
her drew near unto her, and she in much love stroked him on the face with her
hand, when tears trickled down his cheeks; but after a little time put him from
her; and Friends weeping by her, she said, give me up freely into the arms of
my Heavenly Father: And she spoke no more but within a little time finished her
course with joy, and laid down her body in peace near to the fourth hour in the
morning the 17. day of the tenth Month, 1665.

We who were with her when she finished her days and are witnesses of what is
here written, and of much more that passed through our dear Sister; we are much
pressed in our Spirits that this might be sent amongst Friends* that you might
be comforted as we have been very largly in the time of her weakness in the
body; yet God renewed his life (we may say) hourly in her, to her great
refreshment, and also to all that came about her, and to us who was much with
her all the time she lay weak in body. Whose Names are under written,

Bridget Nichols. Hanna Whitehead. Anne Clabin Elizabeth Nichols.


An Exhortation to all Friends to dwell in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.
ANd I in some measure being sensible of the sore travel and deep exercises
that this Handmaid of the Lord passed through with joy and a willing mind to
serve the Lord in all true obedience, what ever she endured outwardly; and she
has often said that would be enough to her; and I cannot but desire that I may
wait upon the Lord to finish my days in the same faithfulness, dwelling
continually in the pure self-denying life; and also exhort all who have in any
measure tasted of the goodness and tender mercies of our God to wait to dwell
in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, which will lead perfectly into the way
of self-denial, where for ever as we dwell and walk, we shall lay down our
heads in peace in the appointed season of our God, as his dear servant and
faithful handmaid has now done.

Oh! you dear and tender ones, wait ye diligently upon the Lord, that you may
feel a true growth in the same life; for I know right well it was ever the
desire of the soul of the Handmaid of the Lord, who is now gone to rest with
him, that all might partake of the same comforts and true refreshings that she
was comforted and refreshed with; yea, and much more abundantly it has often
been her cry unto the Lord in the earnest desire of her soul and spirit, that
all the Children of the Lord might be filled with his blessed eternal Presence:
But dear Babes it is known unto you all, as you wait diligently upon the Lord in
the light of his Son, you will see that it is through great tribulation that the
Kingdom is to be entered; therefore you dear ones, let the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ be willingly taken up unto all self and every selfish desire: Oh!
let not the cumbers of this World, nor the delights nor pleasures thereof (I
dearly beseech you) hinder you of this blessed peace and large possession which
is laid up in Christ Jesus our Lord, for all those who is willing to deny
themselves, (mind that, we must deny our selves) and take up the Cross unto
every selfish action, word and thought, and take no liberty, because the Lord
is and has been large in his loving kindness, and tender mercies unto us. Oh!
let not the profession or show, or likeness satisfy any of us, for surely that
will stand in no stead, when trials come and exercises are felt on every hand;
Oh! then it is known unto you my dear and tender Friends that there is nothing
can then stand but what is assuredly built upon the Rock of Ages; so in tender
bowels of love I entreat and beseech you let not lukewarmness be found in any
of you, for that is loathsome to our God: Oh! wait, yea wait ye diligently upon
the Lord; yea, watch and pray continually least at any time ye enter into
temptation: Oh! the danger that there is on every hand, and the bypath that
the enemy lies ready to lead into continually; surely when I behold them, the
sight thereof makes me ready to tremble, least I should at any time be betrayed
and drawn aside from the Presence of the pure God; and surely I know no other
way to walk in safety, but in the daily Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
will lead truly all that are willing to walk therein into the way of
selfdenial, and then assuredly Friends as we are established or wait upon the
Lord to be established therein, nothing can harm us. Oh! let the Cross be as
dear unto us now as ever, and let not the wisdom of flesh any ways hinder us,
or any thing whatsoever prevent us for walking therein. Oh! let not any thing
that has been done by any of us, suffered or passed through in any exercise or
trial whatsoever for the name of our Lord Jesus and his blessed truth sake, be
accounted of any value by us, for surely if it be it will stop our passage and
become a great hindrance of our entrance into the Land of rest, so it is good
for us all to press forward on our journey, leaving all behind as a thing of
naught, that we may feel the incomes of Gods pure precious life daily, that
thereby our strength may be renewed in him day by day; for as the Manna in the
days of old could serve the Children of Israel no more but for the day, no more
will now the feeding of the eternal food yesterday serve the true child for to
day; therefore there is a great necessity for us to wait diligently upon the
Lord to receive every day from his own hand, of the bread which never fails,
those who are willing to wait upon the Lord to feed thereon; but truly the
enemy lies so exceeding near to draw forth the mind into one thing or other,
that if we keep not diligently upon our watch, that the fear and dread of the
Lord God may be truly placed in our hearts and be continually before our eyes.
Oh! the looseness of life yea and lightness of words and foolish actions, if
liberty be taken that the enemy will draw into I can say it of a truth to the
grief of my soul, but my dear and tender Friends, do but consider a little, and
in the cool of the day you will hear the true birth cry, and feel it sorely
grieved, because of its great oppression and great want, yea and because its
ready to be famished with hunger, for surely there is not any thing that can
satisfy the true child, but the streams of the love of our God which runs
freely unto it, except it be damm'd from it by our yielding to the enemy of our
souls peace, for want of true watchfulness to the light of the Lord Jesus, and
not walking in the daily Cross; but surely its the desire of my soul that I may
walk in the daily cross of our Lord Jesus Christ whilst I am, and I know it was
the true desire of the soul of the servant of the Lord who is gone to rest with
him, that she might all her days wait and walk therein, that she might follow
the Lord in the leadings of his pure precious life, what ever became of her
body, and as for her own soul (I can say of a truth) her desires were really
for all Gods dear and tender Children. Oh! you dear and tender ones the true
breathings of my life is truly unto the Lord for you, as for my own soul
likewise, whose breathing thirstings, and true hungrings has been after the
Lord, that they might be continued, and that we might dwell together in the
true poverty of our spirits, and then our wants will be known unto the
all-seeing God, and he will relieve according to every necessity, and then
shall we travel on our journey with cheerfulness, submitting to our God in all
things, with joy and a willing mind, to bear forth our faithful testimony for
him in what ever he calls unto, having our eye continually set toward him, and
to know the eye to self truly put out: Oh surely Friends this is the way to
eternal rest, and there is no other besides it: So ye dear and tender babes wait
ye diligently to walk therein, that the Lord our God may be glorified; surely
this was the very end for which we were called and gathered out of the
pollutions of the World, that we might serve our God in truth and singleness of
heart, and not that we should count the Cross of Christ of no value, or that we
should return again to any manner of thing which we were gathered from, or take
liberty to the flesh, or the desires or delights thereof, more then at the
first, when our faces were turned toward our maker, but that the same dread and
fear of the Lord should be placed in our hearts, for assuredly the Cross is the
same, and the power is the same, and the Word is the same, which says, seek
the Kingdom of God and the Righteousness thereof, and all other things shall be
added unto you. Oh! you dear ones what need is here of having an eye to self,
surely we may be willing that that should be put out, and that the Lord our God
may be glorified in all that we do, and we his Children comforted, and in his
dread and pure fear preserved whilst we have a being, and then assuredly shall
we lay down our heads in peace (as our dear Friend and the true Handmaid of the
Lord has done) in the appointed season of our God; so to the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, where the desire of my soul is to dwell I commit my self and you
all therein to walk, dwell and abide, wherein is our true safety, and our soul
satisfying life poured forth abundantly, that when it is felt, we can s^y I
know in the authority and strength of the Almighty; O man where is thy strength
or power now, or what can it reach unto, surely here are we foulded up in the
arms of our God, where none that seek to destroy can reach us, and as we dwell
here, there is not any can touch a hair further then our God permits them;
surely what ever comes to us here, it is but for the trial of our faith and
patience, and then surely says my Soul, I will dwell with my Redeemer, I will
not part from him, what ever the body suffers, I will follow the Lord in the
Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, which will lead me truly to deny my self, and
then my God cannot deny his own as I wait singly upon him therein: So the Lord
God of Heaven and Earth keep me to watch unto him, and to wait in the true and
naked simplicity of my heart upon him: and you dear ones; the same breathings
unto the Lord my God is for you all, that in the power and blessed authority of
his own life, we may for ever be bound up together in the unity of his blessed
eternal Spirit, to the Glory, Honor and Praise of the name of our God, and to
the exalting of his pure, e^^rnal, blessed truth, says the Soul and Spirit of
your Friend, and a Brother to all that is born or waits to be born into the
pure self-denying life of our God.

Daniel Wills.

THE END.

