A RELATION OF THE Miraculous Cure OF Mrs. LYDIA HILLS OF A Lameness of
Eighteen Years continuance, and extraordinary Pains attending it, on Saturday
the 17th of November 1694.

With her DEPOSITION of the Same before the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Lane,
Lord Mayor of the City of London.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1695.

December. 6. 1694.
The TESTIMONY of Lydia Hills concerning her wonderful Cure, and Restoration
from Lameness, and Pains extraordinary.
THE God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ knows, that I lie not; but do
deliberately utter the certain Truth, and in serious Consideration of the
Account I must shortly make to the great Judge, for all that I speak and do.

I am about 40 Years of Age. By a Fall near 22 Years ago, I received a Bruise
in my right Hip, (which had been before disaffected) causing a great Lameness.
For the Removal whereof, about 17 Years ago I was taken into St. Thomas's
Hospital in Southwark, under the Care of Mr. Pierce Surgeon. After Means used
about two Years, I was dismissed; being as well as it was thought, that by the
Surgeon's Art I could be made; though at that Time I could not go without two
Hand-crutches. Upon occasion of Pains recurring, I was taken into the said
Hospital two several times afterward: But came forth, still, Lame and in Pain.
In the Revolution of a few Years, I was under the Hands of another Surgeon
named Mr. Maschal, of or about Southwark. Who also left me Pained and Lame,
after much Torture given me.

Pained and Lame also I continued for several Years; though no Surgeon was
called for my Relief, till about three Years ago, Mr. Tompson of
Fanchurch-street, London, was employed for my Help under extreme and
extraordinary Pains. Who, as the former Surgeon had done, opened the Wound to
the Bone; declaring the Bone to be foul, as the former Surgeon had declared.
And, as the former, told me there was no Hope of a Cure; nor was ought to be
expected but a Mitigation of Pains.

From that Time I have been in continual Pain, more or less, and oft-times
violent; but never able to go without Crutches, and often unable to stir with
them. About six Years also a Shaking Palsy has afflicted my Head; and till
lately, was growing on me.

Never felt I any considerable Change for the better, until the 17th Day of
November last past. Upon which Day, about 9 or 10 of the Clock in the Morning,
after Reading God's holy Word, and Praying to God, and a second time Reading
his Word, I found upon a sudden a wonderful Ease and Strength given to me.

The Scripture which I read the second time, was, that, (which opening the
Bible did light to my Eye) Matthew. 15.28. Jesus said to her, O Woman, great is
thy Faith: Be it unto thee, even as thou will. And her Daughter was made whole
from that very Hour.

Having begged the Holy Ghost to enable me, I did act Faith so, as I could
never before do. And, as soon as my Doubts were vanquished, my Pains and my
Weakness were removed. Upon trial made, I found my self able to walk with much
Ease, as to the Day of the Date hereof I do continue. The Fistula, which I had
in my Hip, running, much about 18 Years, from that time abated, and is now
dried up. Insomuch, that through the wondrous Mercy of God, I am blessed with
such Ease and Strength, as I had been many Years far from the Expectation of.

Through his blessed Grace, I have above twenty Years since devoted my self
unto him, to be his, according to my holy Baptismal Covenant. And have waited
on him, under the Ministry of Mr. Wells, Mr. Cooper, Mr. Lambert, and Mr.
Burgess, successively. Insomuch, that I hope there will not be wanting those,
who will vouch for the Credibility of this my Testimony.

I add, therefore, this only: That by the wonderful Cures reported in
Westminster and Morefields, I was awakened, and put upon the Exercise of Faith
aforesaid. But I had great Doubts, which very long held about me. And, before
the Removal of them, as to the very Time of my Cure, I had not, that I know of,
any Amendment.

The Publication hereof has been judged necessary, by those whose Judgments do
and ought to sway me. As also this Advertisement; that, if any Stranger shall
be together incredulous of what is written, and desirous of farther
Confirmation, he may have it in my Neighborhood. I Iodg at the Widow Ellis's,
a Broker, in Vinegar-yard near Russel-court, not far from Drury lane.

The Prayer of Faith shall save the Sick, Jam. 5.15. -- O that Men would praise
the Lord for his Goodness, and for his wonderful Works to the Children of Men,
Psalm. 107.8, 15, 21, 31.

Lydia Hills.
Testified in Presence of us, Israel Mayo, William Castellaw, Daniel Burgess,
William Tailor, Jeremy Smith, Eliezer Heywood, Zachary Merrel.




According to the Contents of this Narrative, I have made Oath before my Lord
Mayor as follows;
LYdia Hills Spinster, aged 40 Years or thereabouts, makes Oath, That she this
Deponent has for the Space of 17 Years now last past, or thereabouts, been
lame in this Deponent's Hip, so that this Deponent could not go without the
Assistance of some Persons to lead her: And that on or about the 17th of
November last, she this Deponent received such perfect Strength in all her
Limbs, that she can now walk about very well, without the Help of Crutches, or
any Person whatsoever. And this Deponent says, That she this Deponent did not
use or apply any outward Means for the said Cure.

Lydia Hills.
Jur. 12. die December. 1694.
Coram Me

Tho. Lane, Mayor.



POSTSCRIPT,
By Mr. Burgess.
A Daughter of Mr. J. M. of H. since this Cure was wrought, has received one
no less wonderful: Being in exquisite Pain and Torture, the pious Gentlewoman
exclaimed; O Lord, I am sure, that if thou please THOU CAN give me PRESENT
Ease! Upon which Words uttered, she was immediately at perfect Ease, and had a
Night of sweet Rest; to the Wonder as truly as the Joy of a numerous and
gracious Family.

Lord, Increase our Faith!
FINIS.

