IN DEFENSE

HONI SOIT Q^I MAL Y PENSE DIEU ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms ACT
For a Company Tradeing to Africa, and the Indies. June 26. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Taking into His Consideration, That by an Act past in this
present Parliament, Entitled Act for encouraging of Foreign Trade; His
Majesty for the Improvement thereof, Did with Advice and Consent of the Estates
of Parliament Statute and Declare, That Merchants more or fewer may contract
and enter into such Societies and Companies, for carrying on of Trade, as to
any subject of Goods or Merchandise to whatsomever Kingdoms, Countries, or
parts of the World, not being in War with His Majesty, where Trade is in (use
to be) or may be followed, and particularly, beside the Kingdoms and Countries
of Europe, to the East and West- Indies, the Streights, and to Trade in the
Mediterranean, or upon the Coast of Africa, or in the Northern Parts, or
elsewhere as above: Which Societies and Companies being contracted and entered
into, upon the Terms, and in the usual manner, as such Companies are Set up,
and in use in other Parts, consistent always with the Laws of this Kingdom: His
Majesty with Consent aforesaid, did Allow and Approve giving and granting to
them and each of them all Powers, Rights and Privileges, as to their Persons,
Rules and Orders, That by the Laws are given to Companies allowed to be erected
for Manufactories; And His Majesty for their greater Encouragement, did promise
to give to these Companies, and each of them his Letters Patent under the great
Seal, confirming to them the whole foresaid Powers and Privileges, with what
other Encouragement His Majesty should judge needful, as the foresaid Act of
Parliament at more length bears. And His Majesty understanding that several
Persons as well Foreigners as Natives of this Kingdom, are willing to engage
themselves with great Sums of Money in an American, Affrican and Indian Trade,
to be exercised in and from this Kingdom, if enabled and encouraged thereunto
by the Concessions, Powers and Privileges needful and usual in such Cases.
Therefore, and in pursuance of the foresaid Act of Parliament, His Majesty with
Advice and Consent of the said Estates of Parliament, Does hereby make and
constitute John Lord Belhaven, Adam Cockburn of Ormistoun, Lord Justice Clerk,
Mr. Francis Montgomery of Giffin, Sir John Maxwell of Pollock, Sir Robet
Chiesly present Provest of Edinburgh, John Swintoun of that Ilk, George Clarke
late Baillie of Edinburgh, Mr. Robert Blakewood, and James Balfour Merchants in
Edinburgh, and John Corss Merchant in Glasgow, William Paterson, James Foulis,
David Nai^n, Thomas Deans Esquires, James Cheisly, James Smith, Thomas Coutts,
Hugh Frazer, Joseph Cohen D' Azevedo, and Walter Stewart Merchants in London,
with such others as shall join with them within the space of twelve Months
after the first day of August next, and all others, whom the foresaid Persons
and these joined with them or the major part of them being assembled, shall
admit and join into their Joint Stock and Trade, who shall all be Repute, as if
herein originally insert to be one Body Incorporate, and a free Incorporation,
with perpetual Succession, by the Name of The Company of Scotland Trading to
Africa, and the Indies: Providing always, Likeas, it is hereby in the first
place provided, that of the Fond or Capital Stock that shall be agreed to be
advanced and employed by the foresaid Undertakers and their Copartners; the
half at least shall be appointed and allotted for Scottish men within this
Kingdom, who shall enter and subscribe to the said Company, before the first
day of August, One Thosand Six Hundred and Ninety Six Years: And if it shall
happen, that Scots Men living within this Kngdom, shall not betwixt and the
foresaid Term, subscribe for, and make up the equal half of the said Fond or
Capital Stock, then and in that case allannerly, It shall be, and is hereby
allowed to Scots Men residing Abroad, or to Forraigners to come in, Subscribe
and be assumed for the Superplus of the said half, and no otherwise: Likeas,
the Quota of every man's part of the said Stock whereupon he shall be capable
to enter into the said Company, whether he be Native or Forraigner; shall be
for the least one hundred lib. Sterling. And for the highest or greatest, three
thousand lib. Sterling. and no more directly nor indirectly in any sort; with
Power to the said Company to have a common Seal, and to alter and renew the
same at their pleasure, with advice always of the Lion King at Arms; as also to
Plead and Sue, and be Sued; and to purchass, acquire, possess, and enjoy
Lordships, Lands, Tenements, or other Estate real or personal, of whatsoever
nature or quality, and to dispose upon and alienate the same, or any part
thereof at their pleasure, and that by Transferrs and Assignment, made and
entered in their Books and Records without any other formality of Law,
Providing always, that such Shares as are first subscribed for, by Scots Men
within this Kingdom, shall not be alienable to any other than Scots Men living
within this Kingdom; That the foresaid Transfers and Convoyances as to Lands
and other real Estate (when made of these only and a part) be perfected
according to the Laws of this Kingdom anent the Convoyance of Lands and real
Rights, With Power likewayes to the foresaid Company, by Subscriptions or
otherways, as they shall think fit to raise a joint Stock or capital Fond of
such a Sum or Sums of Money, and under and subject unto such Rules, Conditions
and Qualifications, as by the foresaid Company, or major part of them, when
assembled shall be limited and appointed to begin, carry on and support their
intended Trade of Navigation, and whatever may contribute to the advancement
thereof. And it is hereby declared, that the said joint Stock or capital Fond,
or any part thereof, or any Estate, real or personal, Ships, Goods, or other
Effects of and belonging to the said Company, shall not be liable unto any
manner of Confiscation, Seizure, Forfaulture, Attachment, Arrest or Restraint,
for and by reason of any Embargo, breach of Peace, Letters of mark or reprisal,
Declaration of War with any foreign Prince, Potentate, or State, or upon any
other account or pretense whatsomever; but shall only be transferable,
assignable, or alienable in such way and manner, and in such parts and
portions, and under such restriction, rules and conditions, as the said Company
shall by Writing, in and upon their Books, Records and Registers direct and
appoint, and these Transfers and Assignments only, and no other shall convoy
the Right and Property, in and to the said joint Stock, and capital Fund and
Effects thereof above mentioned, or any part of the samen; Excepting always, as
is above excepted, and that the Creditors of any particular Member of the
Company may by their real Diligence affect the share of the Profit falling, and
pertaining to the Debtor, without having any further Right or Power of the
Debitors Part and Interest in the Stock or capital Fond, otherwise than is
above appointed, and with this express provision, that whatever charges the
Company may be put to, by the contending of any of their Members Deceased, or
of their Assigneys, Creditors, or any other persons in their Rights: The
Company shall have retention of their Charges and Expenses in the first place,
And the Books, Records, and Registers of the said Company, or authentic
Abstracts, or Extracts out of the same are hereby Declared to be good and
sufficient for evidents in all Courts of Judicator, and elsewhere. And His
Majesty with advice foresaid, farther Statutes and Declares, that the said John
Lord Belhaven, Adam Cockburn of Ormistoun, Lord Justice Clerk, Mr. Francis
Montgomery of Giffen, Sir John Maxwell, of Pollock, Sir Robert Chiesly present
Provest of Edinburgh, John Swintoun of that Ilk, George Clarke late Baillie of
Edinburgh, Mr. Robert Blakewood, and James Balfour Merchants in Edinburgh, and
John Corss Merchant in Glasgow, William Paterson, James Foulis, David Nairn,
Thomas Deans Esquires, James Chiesly, James Smith, Thomas Coutts, Hugh Frazer,
Joseph Cohen D' Azevedo, and Walter Stewart Merchants in London, and others to
be joined with, or assumed by them in manner abovementioned, and their
Successors, or major part of them assembled in the said Company, shall and may
in all time coming by the plurality of Votes agree, make, constitute, and
ordain all such other Rules, Ordinances, and Constitutions, as may be needful
for the better government and improvement of their joint Stock, or capital Fond
in all matters and things relating thereunto: To which Rules Ordinances and
Constitutions, all Persons belonging to the said Company as well Directors as
Members thereof, Governors, or other Officers, civil or military, or others
whatsoever shall be subject, and hereby concluded; as also to administrate and
take Oaths de fideli, and others requisite to the management of the foresaid
Stock and Company. And the said Company is hereby empowered to Equip, Fit, set
out Fraught and Navigate their own, or hired Ships, in such manner as they
shall think fit, and that for the space of ten years from the date hereof,
notwithstanding of the Act of Parliament one thousand six hundred and sixty one
Years, Entitled Act for encouraging of Shipping and Navigation, wherewith His
Majesty with Consent foresaid dispenses for the said time allanerly, in favors
of the said Company, and that from any of the Ports or Places of this Kingdom
[or, from any other parts or places in amity, or not in Hostility with His
Majesty in Warlike or other manner to any Lands, Islands, Countries, or Places
in Asia, Africa, or America, and there to plant Collonies, build Cities, Towns
or Forts in or upon the places not Inhabited, or in or upon any other place, by
consent of the Natives and Inhabitants thereof, and not possessed by any European
Sovereign, Potentate, Prince, or State; and to provide and furnish the foresaid
Places, Cities, Towns; or Forts with Magazins, Ordnance, Arms, Weapons,
Ammunition, and stores of War, and by force of Arms to defend their Trade and
Navigation, Collonies, Cities, Towns, Forts, and Plantations, and other their
effects whatsoever; as also to make Reprisals, and to seek and take reparation
of Damage done by Sea, or by Land, and to make and conclude Treaties of Peace
and Commerce with the Sovereigns, Princes, Estates, Rulers, Governors, or
Proprietors of the foresaid Lands, Islands, Countries, or Places in Asia,
Africa, or America, Providing always, Likeas, It is hereby specially provided,
That all Ships employed by them shall return to this Kingdom with their
effects, under the pain of Confiscation, Forfaulture, and Seizure of the Ship
and Goods, in case of breaking of Bulk before their Return, excepting the case
of Necessity, for preserving the Ship, Company and Loading allanerly. And His
Majesty with Consent foresaid, does farther Statute and Ordain, that none of the
Leidges of this Kingdom shall, or may Trade or Navigat to any Lands, Islands,
Countries, or Places in Asia, or Africa, in any time hereafter, or in America,
for, and during the space of thirty one Years, to be counted from the passing
of this present Act without License and Permission in writing from the said
Company; certifying all such as shall do in the contrair hereof, that they
shall Forfault and Amit the third part of the Ship or Ships, and of the Cargo
or Cargoes therein Employed, or the value thereof, the one half to His Majesty
as Escheat, and the other half to the use and benefit of the said Company: For
the effectual execution whereof, it shall be lawful to the said Company, or any
Employed by them, to sieze the said Ships and Goods in any place of Asia, or
Africa, or at Sea, upon the Coasts of Asia or Africa, upon the transgression
foresaid, by force of Arms and at their own hand, and that without the hazard
of incurring any Crime or Delinquencie whatsomever on account of the said
Seizure, or any thing necessarly done in prosecution thereof, Excepting always,
and without prejudice to any of the Subjects of this Kingdom to Trade and
Navigat, during the said space to any part of America, where the Collonies,
Plantations, or Possessions of the said Company shall not be settled. And it is
further hereby enacted, That the said Company shall have the free and absolute
Right and Property, only relieving and holding of his Majesty, and his
Successors in Sovereignty for the only acknowledgment of their alledgeance, and
paying yearly a Hogshead of Tobacco, in name of Blench-duty, if required
allanerly, in, and to all such Lands, Islands, Collonies, Cities, Towns, Forts,
and Plantations, that they shall come to Establish or Possess in manner
aforesaid; As also to all manner of Treasures, Wealth, Riches, Profits, Mines,
Minerals, Fishings, with the whole product and benefit thereof, as well under
as above the Ground, and as well in Rivers and Seas, as in the Lands thereto
belonging, or from or by reason of the same in any sort, together with the
Right of Government, and Admirality thereof; And that the said Company may by
virtue hereof, grant and delegat such Rights, Properties, Powers and
Immunities, and permit and allow such sort of Trade, Commerce and Navigation
into their Plantations, Collonies, Cities, Towns, or Places of their
Possession, as the said Company from time to time shall judge fit and
convenient, with power to them to impose and exact such Customs, and other
Duties upon and from themselves, and others Trading with, and coming to the
said Plantations, Cities, Towns, Places, and Forts, and Harbors thereof, as
the Company shall think needful for the maintenance and other public uses of
the same, Holding always, and to hold the whole Premises of his Majesty, and
his Successors Kings of Scotland, as Sovereigns thereof, and paying only for
the same their acknowledgment and allegiance with a Hogshead of Tobacco yearly,
in name of Blench-Duty if required, for all other Duty, Service, Claim or
Demand whatsoever. With power and liberty to the said Company, to Treat for,
and to procure and purchase such Rights, Liberties, Privileges, Exemptions and
other grants as may be convenient for supporting, promoting and enlarging their
Trade and Navigation from any foraign Potentate or Prince whatsoever, in amity
with His Majesty; for which the general Treaties of Peace and Commerce betwixt
His Majesty and such Potentates, Princes, or States shall serve for sufficient
Security, Warrant and Authority, and if contrair to the said Rights, Liberties,
Privileges, Exemptions, Grants or Agreements, any of the Ships, Goods,
Merchandise, Persons or other Effects whatsoever, belonging to the said
Company, shall be stopped, detained, embezled, or away taken, or in any sort
prejudged or damnified; His Majesty promises to interpose his Authority to have
restitution, reparation and satisfaction made for the Damage done, and that
upon the public Charge, which His Majesty shall cause depurse, and lay out for
that Effect. And farther, it is hereby Statute, that all Ships, Vessels,
Merchandise, Goods and other Effects whatsoever, belonging to the said Company,
shall be free of all manner of Restraints or Prohibitions, and of all Customs,
Taxes, Cesses, Supplies, or other Duties Imposed, or to be Imposed by Act of
Parliament, or otherwise, for, and during the space of twenty one Years,
excepting alwise the whole Duties of Tobacco and Sugar, that are not of the
growth of the Plantations of the said Company. And farther it is Enacted, that
the said Company by Commission under their common Seal, or otherwise as they
shall appoint, may make and constitute all and every their Directors,
Governors, and Commanders in chief, and other Officers civil or military by
Sea, or by Land; as likewise that the said Company may Inlist, Inroll, Agree
and Retain all such Persons Subjects of this Kingdom, or others whatsoever, as
shall be willing and consent to enter into their Service or Pay, providing
always that they Uplift or Levy none within this Kingdom to be Soldiers,
without Leave or Warrant first obtained from His Majesty, or the Lords of His
Privy Council, over which Directors, Governors, Commanders in chief, or other
Officers civil or military, and others whatsoever in their Service and Pay, the
Company shall have the power, command and disposition both by Sea and Land. And
it is farther Statute, that no Officer civil or military, or other Person
whatsoever within this Kingdom, shall Impress, Entertain, Stop or Detain any of
the Members, Officers, Servants, or others whatsoever, off, or belonging, to
the said Company; and in case the said Company, their Officers or Agents shall
find or understand any of their Members, Officers, Servants, or others
aforesaid to be Impressed, Stopped or Detained, they are hereby authorized and
allowed to take hold of, and release the foresaid Person Impressed or Stopped
in any part of this Kingdom, either by Land or Water; and all Magistrates and
others, His Majesty's Officers civil or military, and all others are hereby
required in their respective Stations, to be aiding and assisting to the said
Company under the pain of being liable to all the Loss, Damage, and detriment
of the said Company, by reason of the foresaid Persons their neglect. And
farther that the said Company, whole Members, Officers, Servants, or others
belonging thereto, shall be free, both in their Persons, Estates, and Goods
employed in the said Stock and Trade, from all manner of Taxes, Cesses,
Supplies, Excises, Quartering of Soldiers Transient or Local, or Levying of
Soldiers, or other Impositions whatsoever, and that for and during the space
of twenty one Years. And lastly, all Persons concerned or to be concerned in
this Company, are hereby declared to be free Denizons of this Kingdom, and that
they with all that shall settle to inhabit, or be born in any of the foresaid
Plantations, Collonies, Cities, Towns, Factories, and other Places that shall
be purchased and possessed by the said Company, shall be repute as natives of this
Kingdom, and have the Privileges thereof. And generally without Prejudice of
the Specialities foresaid, His Majesty with consent foresaid, gives and grants
to the said Company, all Power Rights and Privileges, as to their Persons,
Rules, Orders, Estates, Goods and Effects whatsoever, that by the Laws are
given to Companies allowed to be erected for manufactories, or that are usually
given in any other civil Kingdom, or Commonwealth, to any Company there
erected for Trade and Commerce. And for the better Establishment and greater
Solemnity of this Act and Gift in favors of the said Company, His Majesty does
farther Ordain, Letters Patent to be expede hereupon, containing the whole
Premises under the Great Seal of this Kingdom, for doing whereof Per Saltum:
Their Presents shall be sufficient Warrant both to the Director and Chancellor,
or Keeper of the Great Seal, as use is in like Cases.

Extracted forth of the Records of Parliament, by TARBAT, Cls. Registri.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, 1695.


