ACT Anent Pole Money.
August 30. School.
THe Estates of Parliament taking to their Consideration, how much it concerns
the Honor and Justice of the Kingdom; That the Officers who served in the late
War be paid of their just Arrears: As also, that the Captains and their
inferior Officers, and Seamen who served aboard of the Friggots, appointed for
defense of the Coast during the said War, be paid of the Debts found due to
them by the Commissioners of the Admirality, have not only resolved that they
will be careful to have the foresaid Arrears and Debts paid, in so far as they
are still resting, but do also toward payment of the Arrears due to the
Officers of the Regiments lately disbanded, or still in Garrison by the late
Establishment, as they shall be stated by the Lords of His Majesty's Thesaury,
and of the foresaid other Debts, as they are already declared to be due; Freely
and Cheerfully offer to His Majesty an Subsidy to be uplifted by way of
Pole Money, and for making of this Offer effectual: His Majesty with Advice and
Consent of the said Estates of parliament, does Statute and Ordain, that the
persons following be liable to, and make payment of the pole money
after-mentioned, in manner after prescribed. Viz. That all unlanded Gentlemen,
and all Merchants, Seamen, Schop Keepers, Schopmen, Tradsmen and others, whose
free Stock and Means, not including Workmens Tools, Houshold-plenishing, nor
Stocks of Tennents upon their Ferms and possessions, is one thousand Merks, and
does not extend to five thousand Merks, shall be subject and liable to two
pound ten shilling of Pole, and that all the foresaids persons whose free Stock
and Means, not including as above, is five thousand Merks or above, and does
not extend to ten thousand Merks, shall be subject to four pound of Pole; That
all the forenamed persons whose free Stock and Means, not including as above,
is ten thousand Merks or above, in Worth and Value, shall be liable in ten
pound of Pole; That all the forenamed persons whose free Stock and Means, not
including as above, is twenty thousand Merks, or above fifteen pound of Pole;
That all the forenamed persons whose free Stock and Means not including as
above, is thirty thousand Merks or above, twenty pounds of pole; That all the
forenamed persons whose free Stock and Means, not including as above, is
forty thousand Merks. or above, twenty four pounds of pole money; That all
Heretors of sixty pounds, and below two hundred pounds of valued Rent, be
subject and liable to three pounds of pole; That all Heretors of two hundred
pounds, and under five hundred pounds of valued Rent, be liable to nine pounds
of pole money; That all Heretors of five hundred pounds, and under one thousand
pounds of valued Rent, be liable to twelve pounds of pole money; That all
Heretors of one thousand pounds of valued Rent, and above the same, and all
Knights, be liable to twenty four pounds of pole money; That all Lords pay
forty pounds of pole money; That all Viscounts pay fifty pounds of pole money;
That all Earls pay sixty prunds of pole money; That all Marquisses pay eighty
pounds of pole money; That all Dukes pay an hundred pounds of pole money; That
the Sons of Noblemen foris-familia^ pay according to their Ranks, viz. All
Dukes eldest Sons as Marquisses, and their younger Sons as Earls. All
Marquisses eldest Sons as Earls, and their younger Sons as Viscounts; All Earls
eldest Sons as Viscounts, and their younger Sons to pay twenty four pounds of
pole money; All Viscounts and Lords Sons to be liable in twenty four pounds of
Pole. That Widows whose Husbands would have been liable to two pound ten
shilling of pole, or above, be subject and liable to an third part of their
Husbands pole, except Heiress who shall be subject to the same pole as their
predecessors would have been. That all Nottars and procurators before inferior
Courts, and Messengers at Arms, be subject to four pounds of pole money; That
all Writters, not to the Signet, Agents, and Clerks of inferior Civil Courts,
and Macers and Under-Clerks of Session, pay six pounds of pole money; That all
Advocats, Clerks of Sovereign Courts, Writers to the Signet, Sheriffs and their
Deputs, Commissaries and their Deputs, Doctors of Medicine, Apothecaries,
Chyrurgeons, and others repute Doctors of Medicine, pay twelve pounds of pole;
That all Commissionat Officers of the standing Forces, be liable in four days
pay for their pole. That all persons liable in the foresaid pole, if poled in
different Capacities, are only to pay their highest pole. And for the better
stating, Ordering and Uplifting of the said pole. His Majesty with Advice
foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, that the Commissioners of Assessment, or their
Quorum, shall meet and conveen at the ordinary place of their Meeting, upon the
second Tuesday of October next, and there shall divide the whole Commissioners,
whether present or absent, into such Divisions, and for such Bounds as they
shall see convenient, to meet the first Tuesday of November thereafter, at the
respective places to be appointed, Impowering the said Commissioners to take
up Rolls and Lists of the said poleable persons within the respective Bounds
appointed to them, containing the Names, Qualities and Degrees of the several
persons, and of the value of the Estates belonging to them, conform to the said
Act; And Ordains the Magistrates of Burghs Royal, to meet the third Tuesday of
October next, and to take up Rolls and Lists of all the poleable persons within
the respective Burghs, containing their Names, Qualities and Degrees, and the
value of their Estates; And which Commissioners and Magistrates of Burghs are to
give Intimation at the Kirk-door, upon a Lords Day, upon three Days warning at
least to the persons to be poled, to compear before them at the said respective
places to be appointed, and give up their Names, Qualities and Degrees. and
values of their Estates to the Effect the respective Poles may be stated and
set down by the Commissioners or Magistrates, and which Rolls the said Persons
are to give up or send under their Hands, or if they cannot write their Name,
Quality Degree, and Estate, shall be marked by the Clerk; With Certification,
that such as does not compear, or send under their Hands their Names, Qualities
and value of their Estates, or do give up the same otherwise than it should be,
they shall be liable in the Quadruple of their Pole, one half to the Informer
who shall make the same appear: And which Lists and Rolls being so made up
within the respective Sub-divisions, shall be recorded in a Register of the
Shire or Burgh for that purpose, whereof there shall be an abstract sent to the
Lords of the Thesaury, betwixt and the third Tuesday of December next,
containing the Number of the persons in the several Classes and Ranks
above-specified with the extent of their Pole: And His Majesty with Advice and
Consent foresaid, Ordains the said Pole-Mony to be paid the first Day of
January next to come, or within thirty days thereafter, to the Collector of the
Cess, or to the Collector to be appointed by the Farmers, in case the same
shall be set in Farm at the respective head Burghs of the Shires where the
Persons concerned dwell, For which Discharges are to be given to the Payers
gratis: And requires the Commissioners of Assesment and Magistrates of Burghs,
or the said Farmers, to cause Intimation to be made for the payment thereof at
the Kirk-door of the several Paroches upon the second LORDS Day of December,
certifying such as shall not make punctual payment at the said first Day of
January, or within the said thirty Days thereafter, they shall be liable in the
double, if paying within other thirty days thereafter, or if failing after both
the said thirty Days, in the Quadruple of their pole; and Ordains Execution to
be used against them for the same, either by the Collector of the Shire, or the
Collector to be appointed by the said Farmer, by poynding of their readiest
Goods, or Imprisoning their persons, the foresaid poynding and Imprisonment
alwise proceeding upon the Sentence of one of the Commissioners for Assessment,
or any other Inferior Judge where the person lives, at the instance of the
said Collectors, who are hereby declared Comptable for the said pole, viz. The
Collector of the Shire as for the Cess, or the Collector of the Farmer to the
Farmer. Likeas His Majesty with Advice and Consent foresaid, hereby impowers
the Lords of privy Council, to order and appoint such further Methods and
Courses as they shall judge fit for Stateing and inbringing of the pole Money
aforesaid, and to allow out of the said Pole Money such Charges and Expenses as
shall be necessary for Execution of this Act; And His Majesty and Estates
foresaid, do hereby strictly destinate, appropriat and appoint the Sums to be
raised by this Act for the Ends and Uses above-specified and none other, and to
be distribute and proportionally paid to the persons having Interest by the
Orders of the Lords of Thesaury, as they shall find their Debts to be due: With
this Declaration, that any of the said Officers who have clothed their
Regiments or Companies in Garrisons, shall be paid of their said clothing
Money; And the said Captains of the Frigots who advanced for provision to their
said Seamen and Frigots shall be paid of their respective Advances both in the
first place; And the Estates of parliament having considered the petition
presented to them by the Officers of the Scots Regiments that served in
Flanders and are now disbanded, do humbly recommend to His Majesty, to appoint
out of the foresaid pole imposed by this Act, not exceeding the fourth part
thereof to such of the said Officers such part of their Arrears after the
first of February 1691. and preceding 1693. As His Majesty shall think fit.
And lastly, it is hereby declared, that no persons liable in payment of the
pole shall be holden to produce their Discharges or Receipts of the same two
years after the Term of payment,

ACT Continuing the Pole.
September 1. School.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Considering, that the Imposition of a pole granted by the
Act of the twenty ninth day of August of this parilament, will not be
sufficient for the ends therein-mentioned; Does therefore with Advice and
Consent of the Estates of parliament, add to the foresaid Imposition, a farther
Imposition of the like pole, mentioned in the said Act of pole, for a second
year, in its several Classes; and for the ends, and in the Terms specified in
the said Act: And Ordains the Stating, Uplifting, payment and Application of
this second years pole, to be in all respects the same as for the said first
pole, the Year, and Terms of Meetings and payments only changed. And His
Majesty with Advice foresaid, does hereby expressly Burden this second pole,
with the payment in the first place preferable to all others of the
Cloathing-Money due to the Officers, who were in Service preceding the year
One thousand six hundred ninety one, in so far as the same shall be found to be
still resting unpayed: And also of what shall be found due to patrick Hepburn
as Chyrurgeon to the Lord Strathnavers and Grants Regiments in that time,
either upon the account of Droggs, or Service, as the Lords of Thesaury shall
determine.

Extracted forth of the Records of parliament, by ALL. GIBSON.

Edinburgh, printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. School.


