A REMONSTRANCE AND DECLARATION OF The Knights, Gentry, and Commoners, within
the respective Counties of England, and Wales, touching the late Writs of His
Highness the Lord Protector for the choosing of a new Parliament.

With the several Arguments and Observations, truly denoting and setting forth,
the fundamental Laws of the Land, and the privileges of the people, for the
free election of their Members, without being overawed, or forced thereunto.

And certain Rules touching the Government of a Nation, prescribing a way of
limitation for those in power, according to the Law of God, the Law of Man, and
the Customs of a free born Nation.

Imprinted at London by Robert Wood, 1654.

THE REMONSTRANCE OF England and Wales, Touching the free election and choice
of the next Representative, etc.
WHereas upon the Writ and, Summons of his Highness the Lord Protector to the
^h^ri^s of each County throughout England and Wales, etc. For the electing and
choosing of new members, for the next Representative, several Boroughs have had
sundry meetings about a free and lawful election; whose Debates, at last,
produced these Observations and Arguments, to wi^, That he which rules without
Law, or he that lives without Law, is not a god, but a Tyrant. In order
whereunto, it was conceived expedient to declare and show what was Law, and
what was not Law; and thus they remonstrate, That is Law which a people,
Nation, City, or Commonwealth do entirely and unanimously consent unto; not
being forced or overawed to consent thereto. For, that is not law that is
imposed upon a people, when neither they, nor those deputed by their lawful
election, have given their consent thereunto, without being awed to such
consent, or invited by expecting reward, or fearing, displeasure if not
consenting. To evince and make this obvious, there needs no more then a
reciting of what Sir Edw Cook reports of the ancient Custom of England, which
without question was most commendable, wise, and prudent, and so plain and
evident, That by the ancient Law, and Custom of the Parliament, Proclamation of
old time used to be, the which ought to be published at Westminster in the
beginning of Parliament, That no man, upon pain of losing what he (...) don,
Westminster, or the Suburbs thereof, wear any Coat of Armor, or privy Coat, or
go a med; nor any Games or strange Plays used, By reason that the High Court
of Parliament should not be thereby disturbed, or the members thereof, which
are to attend the business of the Commonwealth. And he further says, That it
was the custom of the Parliament, when any new device used to be moved in
behalf of the King for his aid, or the like, the Commons might answer, That they
tendered the Kings estate, and are ready to grant aid to the same, only in
this new advice they dare not agree without conference with their Countries.
Whereby it appears, that such conference is warrantable by the Law of the
Land, and Custom of Parliament. Indeed, this is so plain, it needs no
exposition, but rather commendation, being drawn by the curiousest Pen that
ever drew the lines of praise to prudence and Wisdom. And these Customs being
followed, would make any Nation or People under Heaven happy. Man is but a
creature, and is to be limited and bounded by Reason and Laws. Hence many great
rivers lose themselves, and become formidable, by the smallest creatures, for
that they have swelled over their banks and bounds to seek new Channels, or
would not be bounded by their banks.

It is the like with them in power, when they swel, and exceed the ordinary
bounds, Law and Reason, then they become lost, contemptible, weak, and the
worst of Creatures: for is it not as great an evil for those that have power,
to live above Law, or out of the reach of Law, as for those that are not in
power, to live or act contrary to Law, as disobedient refractory evil doer?
Nay, says a learned Philosopher* Armed improbity (which is leudness and
dishonesty, as hy^ocrisie, deceit, covenant breaking, Covetousness ambition,
and pride) is intolerable. Indeed the Nature of man is such when it is
unlimited and many of those, that have aimed at great power, have (whilst they
have been rising) checked and limited their exorbitant Lust, and have clothed
themselves with piety: but after they have obtained such power, then they have
broke forth; as Nero, who whilst he was rising, and til he had been seated in
the Empire five years, restrained and limited himself, removing all that might
stand in his Way: the which being done, his lust and cruelties broke forth. For
at the first, he altogether avoided meddling with public affairs, and saluted
the people with all due respect, as having in them the supreme power: he would
not act or do in the Army any thing without a Council of War: he admitted free
addresses: he feasted the people of Rome at a thousand tables. Upon Augustus's
death he seemed unwilling to take upon him the Empire (the which was notably
reproved by one of the Senate, in that he refused the Name, but usurped the
Power.) He continued in a gentle and orderly carriage, accepting only the Title
of Right Honorable, and would not be called Sacred; but instead thereof,
Laborious and painful servant of the Commonwealth. If any called him Traitor
or Usurper, he would not have them prosecuted, nor that the Senate should take
notice thereof, to hinder the other affairs of the Commonwealth. He made an
Oration in the Senate, to this effect, That a Prince is no other, nor ought to
be no other then a servant to the people. But after he had settled the power in
his own hands, he then made use of the soldiery to be the Keepers of the
peace, and laid aside the people; for he dealt cruelly with Kings, imprisoned
the Commons, and put them to excessive charges. The way for a people therefore,
to prevent the receiving of evil from absolute Neroes, is, that limitations be
upon those that have power; and that is the way for a people to preserve their
liberties, privileges, and immunities.

FINIS.

