REMARQUES Upon the NEW PROJECT OF ASSOCIATION:
In a Letter to a Friend.
SIR,
YOU would have me give you the sense of the Town, together with my own Private
Thoughts upon the Subject of your Last. The Former would be Tedious and
Extravagant, in a Case where People, either through Passion, or Interest, are
so Extremely divided. And the Latter (with Submission) would be as Unsafe: But
I shall, however, Gratify your Curiosity in as full, and as Particular an
Answer to the Sum of your Demands, as the Quality of the Matter in question,
and the Compass of a Letter will conveniently bear.

You are so far in the Right; as that the Paper you speak of, is said, by some,
to be the project of a Bill for an Association; And grounded upon the Precedent
of an Association 27. Eliz. It is said further, that it is no more then what
was moved in the last Westminster Parliament; and only a short draught, or
Scheme of an Association, for a General Defense against a Popish King. But one
the other hand, it is cried out against as the Instrument of a Treasonous
Conspiracy against his Majesty, and the Government, under the Countenance of a
Religious Association.

Thus far, Sir, you are rightly informed, as to the Business of Ordinary
Conjecture, and Discourse; but your Intelligence afterward runs a little too
large: for the paper was barely found in my Lords Closet; And any man may have
Papers perhaps in his possession that he does not approve of. How far the
Members of that Parliament (which is the next point) will find themselves
concerned in Honor to search farther into this Affair, I am not able to Divine.

It will be both for your Ease and mine, to consult, and compare the Pieces
themselves, and to see how far this late Draught of Association agrees with the
Ends, and Intent of the Former: And after that, to Examine it is Consistency
with it self: To which purpose I shall (in their due place) lay both the
Associations before you, with such Notes upon, and concerning them, as may
serve in some measure to Explain the Matter in hand: And therein I shall speak
to the several Points of your Letter, as they fall in my way. The Words of the
Former are as follows.

The Paper which was Seized in the E. of Shaftsbury's Closet by Francis Gwin
Esquire, One of the Clerks of His Majesty's Privy Council, and Read November
24. 1681. at the Old Bailey, before His Majesty's Commissioners of Oyer and
Terminer.
1. WE the Knights, etc. Finding to the grief of our Hearts, the Popish
Priests and Jesuits with the Papists, and their Adherents and Abetters have for
several years last past pursued a most pernicious and hellish Plot, to root out
the true Protestant Religion as a pestilent Heresy, to take away the Life of
our Gracious King, to subvert our Laws and Liberties, etc. to set up Arbitrary
Power and Popery. NOTE, That the Style of the First Clause, in these Words, [
We the Knights, etc.] Imports an Act of the Commons, Exclusive of the Lords;
and Rege Inconsulto: The Dread and Danger of the Popish Plot, is made the
Inducement to it: The Papists Adherents and Abettors, ranged with the Papists
themselves; and joined in the same Design of Murdering the the King, etc.

2. And it being Notorious that they have been highly encouraged by the
Countenance and Protection given and procured for them by J. D. of Y. and by
their expectations of his succeeding to the Crown, and that through crafty
Popish Councils his Designs have so far prevailed that he has created many and
great Dependents upon him by his bestowing Offices and Preferments both in
Church and State. In the Second Clause, his R. H. falls under the same
Accusation; and the Government, Effectually, put into his hands, toward the
Gaining of his Ends. Now the meaning of Adherents, and Abetters, is Expounded
by the Author of Smith's Quaeries upon the Duke's Bill, where he says that [
the Pleaders for a Popish Successor, ought to be Esteemed no other then
Betrayers of their King and Country, Renegado's from their Religion, ( if ever
Protestants at all) and the worst of Papists; and so to be dealt with all in
City and Country.] Here Is an Anathema pronounced already against all Men under
that Qualification; and the Invalidating of the Kings Witnesses is One
Condition of the Sentence; which does most Expressly conclude all the Present
Defamers of the Kings Witnesses under the same Condemnation.

This way of Exposing the Kings Loyal Subjects of the English Communion, under
the Notion of Papists, (or in truth, beyond them,) and that, not only in
Libellous Papers, but in some Councils also, is too Notorious to need any
Instances to confirm it: And what is the drift of these practices, but under a
General Scandal, to Stigmatize that Party that will not Close with the Faction,
and to set them up as a Mark to the Fury of of the Rabble? And this is only a
Preparatory toward a greater Work that is to follow; and whosoever is not
wilfully Blind, cannot but see the Design to be all of a Third.

From this Aversion toward a sort of people (in general) represented under such
a Character; the next Step is the Naming of particular persons, the
Discriminating of parties; the Computing of Numbers, and Intrests, and so from
Listing, to Pass on into Associations, and Levies. Let not this be taken for a
Trivial Speculation upon the Common Methods, and Preliminaries to Rebellion:
for I have heard, (and I do as firmly believe it, as a Man can believe any
thing that he never saw) that there is Extant a Calculation upon all the
Counties of England and Wales, Alphabetically Digested; Dividing the Men of
Interest, and Consideration, in each Respective County into Two Columns, One
against another; The One under the Title of Worthy Men; and the Other, of Men
Worthy (to be Hanged, that is) Ranging the Country Party (as they call it)
under the Former, and the Court-Party under the Other: Which appears, (as I am
assured) by the Transporting of Names from One to the Other, as any Man is
found to Change his Side and Opinion. By the Benefit of this Roll, it is not
above a Week, or Ten Days Work to take a Muster of the Nation; To Communicate
Orders; To know whom to Impeach, and whom to Trust; And they that have Money
shall never want Evidence. There is a Wonderful Correspondence betwixt the
Tendency of this List, and the paper of Association; betwixt the Dictates of
the Factious pamphlets, and the matter of Fact, in Evidence, and it were little
less then a Miracle, if all this should come by chance.

3. It appearing also to us, That by his Influence Mercenary Forces have been
levied and kept on Foot for his secret Designs contrary to our Laws; the
Officers thereof having been named and appointed by him, to the apparent hazard
of His Majesty's Person, our Religion and Government, if the danger had not
been timely foreseen by several Parliaments, and part of those Forces with
great difficulty, caused by them to be Disbanded at the Kingdoms great Expense:
And it being Evident, that notwithstanding all the continual endeavors of the
Parliament to deliver his Majesty from the Councils and out of the power of the
said D. yet his Interest in the Ministry of State and others have been so
prevalent, That Parliaments have been unreasonably Prorogued, and Dissolved
when they have been in the hot pursuit of Popish Conspiracies, and ill
Ministers of State their Assistants. 4. And that the said D. in order to reduce
all into his own Power has procured the Garrisons, the Army and Ammunition,
and all the power of the Seas and Soldiery, and Lands belonging to these Three
Kingdoms to be put into the hands of his Party and their Adherents, even in
opposition to the Advice and Order of the last Parliament. In the Third and
Fourth Clauses, the Kings Guards are pronounced to be Contrary to Law; The
Officers chosen by thc Duke, Subservient to his Designs, and Dangerous to his
Majesty's Person, etc. The King himself Charged with following Popish Councels;
Unreasonable Prorogations, and Dissolutions, in favor of Popish Conspirators,
and Ill Ministers of State, their Assistants; The Garrisons, Army, and
Ammunition in the hands of the Dukes Party, and their Adherents.

It is not my Work to amplify upon these Falsehoods, and Slanders, in this
place; so that I shall proceed.

5. And as we considering with Heavy Hearts how greatly the Strength;
Reputation and Treasure of the Kingdom both at Sea and Land is Wasted and
Consumed, and lost by the intricate expensive management of these Wicked
destructive Designs; and finding the same Councils after exemplary Justice upon
some of the Conspirators, to be still pursued with the utmost devilish malice,
and desire of Revenge; Whereby His Majesty is in continual hazard of being
Murdered to make way for the said D 's Advancement to the Crown, and the whole
Kingdom in such case is destitute of all security of their Religion, Laws,
Estates and Liberty, sad experience in the Case, Queen Mary having proved the
wisest Laws to be of little Force to keep out Popery and Tyranny under a Popish
Prince. The Fifth Clause Deplores the sad Estate of the King and Nation, by
reason of the same Council. And after this Remonstrance upon the whole matter,
(We the Knights, etc.) come to a point, in that which follows: That is to say,

6ly. The King will not agree to Bar and Exclude the Duke in a Parliamentary
way; and therefore we will enter into a League and Invite the Kings Subjects to
Join with us in a Vow of Mutual Defense and Assistance (in an Vn-Parliamentary
way) to the Intent of a Declaration in the Form Ensuing

6. We have therefore endeavored in a Parliamentary way by a Bilifor the
purpose to Bar and Exclude the said Duke from the Succession to the Crown, and
to Banish him for ever out of these Kingdoms of England and Ireland. But the
first Means of the King and Kingdoms Safety being utterly rejected, and we left
almost in Despair of obtaining any real and effectual security, and knowing our
selves to be entrusted to Advise and Act for the preservation of his Majesty
and the Kingdom, and being persuaded in our Consciences that the Dangers
aforesaid are so eminent and pressing, that there ought to be no delay of the
best means that are in our power to secure the Kingdom against them. We have
thought fit to propose to all true Protestants an Union amongst themselves by
solemn and sacred promise of Mutual Defense and Assistance in the preservation
of the true Protestant Religion, His Majesty's Person and Royal State and our
Laws, Liberties and Properties, and we hold it our bounden Duty to join
ourselves for the same intent in a Declaration of our United Affections and
Resolutions in the Form ensuing. Now put all together, and the sum of it, in
short, is this. There Is a Plot upon the Kings Life, etc. The Duke is in it; And
preferrs Ministers of State, Officers Civil and Military, for his purpose;
Prorogues and Dissolves Parliaments, Saves the Popish Lords; makes the King a
Cipher; And therefore since he will not agree to Exclude and Banish his Brother
by Act of Parliament, [We the Knights, etc.] will join with all True
Protestants in a Sacred promise to destroy him, and his Adherents, without
exception to His Majesty himself, who for Refusing to Exclude his Royal
Brother, is declared to be one of the Party. To what Ends, and purposes, will
be seen in the Association it self.

THE ASSOCIATION.
I A. B. Do in the presence of God solemnly, Promise, Vow, and protest to
maintain and defend to the utmost of my Power, with my Person and estate, the
true Protestant Religion against Popery and all popish Superstition, Idolatry,
or Innovation, and all those who do or shall endeavor to spread or advance it
within this Kingdom.

I will also as far as in me lies maintain and defend His Majesty's Royal
Person and Estate; as also the power and privilege of Parliaments, the lawful
Rights and Liberties of the Subject, against all Encroachments and Usurpation
of Arbitrary power whatsoever, and endeavor entirely to Disband all such
Mercenary Forces as, we have reason to believe, were raised to advance it, and
are still kept up in and about the City of London, to the great Amazement and
Terror of all the good people of the Land.

Moreover I. D. of Y. Having publicly professed and owned the popish Religion,
and notoriously given Life and Birth to the Damnable and Hellish plotes of the
papists against His Majesty's person, the protestant Religion, and the
Government of this Kingdom; I will never consent that the said J. D. of Y. or
any other, who is or has been a papist, or any ways adhered to the papists in
their wicked Designs be admitted to the Succession of the Crown of England, But
by all lawful means and by force of Arms, if need so require, according to my
Abilities, will oppose him, and endeavor to Subdue, Expel and Destroy him if
he come into England, or the Dominions thereof; And seek by force to set up his
pretended Title, and all such as shall Adhere unto him, or raise any War,
Tumult, or Sedition for him, or by his Command, as public Enemies of our
Laws, Religion and Country.

To this end we and every one of us whose hands are here underwritten, do most
willingly bind our selves and every one of us unto the other jointly and
severally, in the Bond of one firm and loyal Society or Association, and do
promise and vow before God, That with our joint and particular Forces we will
oppose and pursue unto Destruction all such as upon any Title whatsoever shall
oppose the Just and Righteous ends of this Association, and Maintain, Protect
and Defend all such as shall enter into it in the just performance of the true
intent and meaning of it. And lest this Just and pious Work should be any ways
obstructed or hindered for want of discipline and Conduct, or any evil minded
persons under pretense of raising Forces for the service of this Association,
should attempt or commit disorders, we will follow such Orders as we shall from
time to time receive from this present Parliament, whilst it shall be sitting,
or the Major part of the Members of both Houses subscribing this Association:
When it shall be prorogued or Dissolved, and obey such Officers as shall by
them be set over us in the several Countries, Cities, and Buroughs until the
next meeting of this or another parliament, and will then show the same
Obedience and Submission unto it, and those who shall be of it.

Neither will we for any respect of persons or Causes, or for Fear, or Reward,
separate our selves from this Association, or fail in prosecution thereof
during our Lives upon pain of being by the rest of us prosecuted, and
suppressed as perjured persons, and public Enemies to God, the King, and our
Native Country.

To which pains and punishments we do voluntarily submit our selves, and every
one of us without benefit of any Color or pretense to excuse us.

In Witness of all which promsies to be Inviolably kept, we do to this present
Writing put our Hands and Seals, and shall be most ready to accept and admit
any others hereafter into this Society and Association.

THis form of Association is only the Covenant Revived, with the same License,
Limitations, Reserves, and Equivocations; And to the very same End and purpose:
And all Schismatiques, and Heretics whatsoever, Taken, and Invited into the
Combination, under the Color of preserving the True protestant Religion, (the
papists only excepted.) The Guards to be Disbanded, as Illegal; His R. H. to be
Expelled or Deposed; and all his Adherents (even the King himself) to be
destroyed by Force of Arms, That is to say, The King is to be allowed no other
Ministers, Officers, but what the Associates shall vouchsafe to afford him, and
he himself likewise upon his Good Behavior, under the pain of Immediate
Insurrection, Tumult, and Revolt.

Being engaged by this Vow, promise, protestation, (or what else you please) to
a downright Rebellion, (unless the King will deliver up his Crown without
Striking a Stroke for it) the Oath is carried on, even to the Manner, and
Method, by which the Nation is to be Governed, after such Violence Acted upon
the person, and Authority of the King. And this Confederacy is Extended even to
the Devolving of the Sovereign Power upon the House of Commons, during Sitting
the Parliament; and upon the Major part of the Members of both Houses,
Subscribing this Association, after the Prorogation or Dissolution thereof: And
they never to Recede, upon any Consideration whatsoever. So that here is a King
Deposed, a Monarchy Destroyed; a Commonwealth Erected; a Free People Enslaved;
And all in a Trice, by the help of this Pious Union if ever it should come to
take Effect: And in Conclusion the Supreme Power Vested in the Two Houses to
Prepetuity. This is the Fairest Construction can be made on it; the paper calls
it the present Parliament, in a Complement, it is only the House of Commons, in
Effect.

Now look back upon the whole, and take notice how Frivolous all those Colors,
and pretensions are, that have been produced in Favor or Excuse of this Paper
[We the Kinights] do Declare, and Swear, that what we connot Compass in a
Parliamentary way, we will endeavor to bring about by force of Arms. Here Is
the very Constitution of Parliaments overthrown at a Dash: And pursuant to this
Resolution, so many Members that were Chosen, and Entrusted to serve their
Countries, and (as much as in them lay) to uphold and maintain the Laws of the
Land, and the Liberties of the people, have now propounded to set up themselves
by this project, without either King, or House of Lords; as a Standing
Commit, and to Exercise an Arbitary power over their Fellow Subjects, to the
Subversion of the Common Rights. and in Defiance of the Fundamental privileges
of King, parliaments, and people. So much for the pretended project of a BILL.

Now to this Scheme of an Association for Defense against a popish King. The
paper begins with Exclamations against a popish plot, and concludes in an Oath
of Conspiracy against a protestant prince. It begins with a pretended
Tenderness of Religion, and ends in a peremptory Sentence and Determination of
State. For fear of a popish King, here is a Certain provision that we shall have
no King at all; and under pretext of Opposing an Arbitrary power in the Crown,
here is an Expedient offered (as for the Avoidance of it) by Swearing Allegiance
to the Unlimited will and pleasure of a Committes of Disbanded Members of our
own Fellow Subjects.

But this is no more, they say, then was propounded, and Debated in the House
of Commons. There was an Address of the Commons, ('it is true) bearing date May
10. 1679. [That His Majesty would be graciously pleased to give Order for
raising the Militia and keeping of it up for some certain time] and the Lords
were afterward reminded of it; To which (as I remember) His Majesty's Answer
was, That He would not part with it, so much as for an horu; But here was no
Associating to take possession of it by Force, in case it should be refused.

It is True likewise, that the Commons, December 15. 1680. passed a Vote that a
Bill should be brought in for an Association of all his Majeistes Protestant
Subjects, etc. And that upon the one and twentieth of the same Month, they
presented an Address to the King, desiring therein, that his Majesty would be
Graciously pleased to assent to an Act, whereby his Majesty's Protestant
Subjects might be Enabled to Associate themselves for the Defense of His
Person, etc. Which very Word (Enabled) Imports a Concession and Acknowledgment
that without the Kings Passing such a Bill, they had no Right to Authorize such
a Combination.

But that which has misled people into a mistake, so Derogatory to the Honor
of the House of Commons. I presume may be this. There were several Questions
put by the Foreman of the Jury; First to Mr. Gwin; and afterward to Mr.
Secretary Jenkins, that carried some sort of Countenance, as if This
Association had been Debated, and This very Paper, Read in the House of
Commons. It Is a short Passage and I Will recite it, as you will find it in the
Printed proceedings, Page 34.

Foreman. Don't you know, Sir, there was a Discourse in the Parliament of an
Association.


Mr. Gwin. Sir I was not of the last Parliament, I know nothing of it.


Foreman. You have not heard then that there was such a Thing in Parliament
concerning an Association?


Mr Gwin. I have heard of an Association Talked of.


Foreman. Mr. Secretary, I would ask you some Questions, If you did not know of
a Debate in Parliament of an Association?


Mr. Secretary. I was not present at the Debate; but there was a Talk in Town
of an Association.


Foreman. Did you not hear of it in Parliament?


Mr. Secretary. Indeed there was an answer to a Message from the House of
Commons that had something in it that did strongly Imply an Association; but
this particular Association I do not remember to have heard proposed.


Foreman. Don't you remember in the House of Commons, Sir, it was read, upon
Occasion of that Bill?


Mr. Secretary. I heard such a thing spoken of; but at the Reading of it I was
not present, to the best of my rememberance.


I know nothing to the contrary, but that the form of this Vow and
protestation, (meaning the three first Clauses of it) might possibly be read in
the House; But to imagine, that the Honorable House of Commons would ever have
endured the starting of a project to overturn the very Foundations of
Government, were to do them the greatest indignity in the world. The late
Usurpers themselves were half way through the Rebellion, before they arrived
at that degree of Boldness. If any man should Interpret these Glancing
Interrogatories in such manner as to take this project for an Act of the House;
The Jesuits themselves could not have done the Popish plot a greater piece of
service, then the promoting of such an Error as might creat a Jelousie of
Treason within these Walls: But on the other hand there may be Scandals Taken
as well as Given.

If it were not for Tiring of you out, I could show ye the Originals, both of
this Draught and Design, and Trace the very footsteps of our Reforming Hero's,
from His Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects with their Outcrys of plots
and popery, and Eyes and Hands lifted up unto the Lord in a Holy Covenant; to
the severing of his Majesty's Sacred Head from his Body, upon a scaffold; But
it is too Copious a Theme, and there needs no more then Dipping any where in
the Records of the Late Times to famish the parallel.

There remains yet another Abuse to be cleared, wherein they impose upon the
people, that this Association is founded upon the same Grounds and
Considerations with that of the 27th. of the Queen. You will better judge
whether it be so or no, upon a view of the Instrument it self, and some few
Remarques thereupon.

The Instrument, or Writing of Association, that the Protestants of England
entered into, 27. Eliz.
FOrasmuch as Almighty God has Ordained Kings, Queens, and Princes, to have
Dominion and Rule over all their Subjects, and to preserve them in the
Pessession and Observation of the true Christian Religion, according to his
holy Word and Commandment: And in like sort, that all Subjects should Love,
Fear, and Obey their Sovereign Princes, being Kings or Queens, to the utmost of
their power; at all times to withstand, pursue, and suppress all manner of
persons that shall by any means intend and attempt any thing dangerous or
hurtful to the Honor, States, or persons of their Sovereigns.

Therefore we whose Names are or shall be subscribed to this Writing, being
Natural Born subjects of this Realm of England, and having so Gracious a Lady,
our Sovereign Elizabeth, by the Ordinance of God, our most rightful Queen,
Reigning over us these many Years with great Felicity, to our inestimable
Comfort: And finding lately by diverse Depositions, Confessions, and sundry
Advertisements out of Foreign parts from credible persons, well known to her
Majesty's Council and to diverse others; That for the furtherance and
advancement of some pretended Title to the Crown, it has been manifested that
the Life of our Gracious Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, has been most
dangerously exposed to the peril of her Person; if Almighty God her perpetual
Defender, of his Mercy had not revealed and withstood the same. By whose Life,
we and all other her Majesty's True and Loyal Subjects, do enjoy an inestimable
benefit of peace in this Land; do for the Reasons and Causes before alleged,
not only acknowledge our selves most justly bound with our Lives and Goods for
her defense, in her safety, to persecute, suppress, and withstand all such
Intenders and all other her Enemies, of what Nation, Condition, and Degree
whatsoever they shall be, or by what Council or Title they shall pretend to be
her Enemies, or to attempt any harm upon her Person; but do further think it
our bounden Duties for the great benefit of peace, and Wealth, and Godly
Government, we have more plentifully received these many Years, under her
Majesty's Government, than any of our Forefathers have done in any longer time
of any other Progenitors, Kings of this Realm.

Do declare, and by this Writing make manifest. our bounden Duties to our said
Sovereign Lady for her safety. And to that end, We and every of us, First
calling to Witness the Name of Almighty God, do Voluntarily and most Willingly
bind our selves, every one of us to the other, jointly and severally in the
Band of one Firm and Loyal Society. And do hereby Vow and promise by the
Majesty of Almighty God, That with our whole Powers, Bodies, Lives, and Goods,
and with our Children and Servants, We, and every of us, will faithfully serve
and humbly obey our said Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, against all States,
Dignities, and Earthly powers whatsoever; and will as well with our joint and
particular Forces during our Lives withstand, offend, and pursue, as well by
force of Arms, as by all other means of Revenge; all manner of persons of what
state soever they shall be, and their Abetters, that shall attempt any Act,
Council or consent to any thing that shall tend to the harm of her Majesty's
Royal person, and will never desist from all manner of forcible pursuit against
such persons, to the utter Extermination of them, their Councillors, Aiders,
and Abetters.

And if any such wicked Attempt against her most Royal Person, shall be taken
in hand and procured, whereby any that have, may, or shall pretend Title to
come to this Crown, by the untimely death of her Majesty so wickedly procured
(which God for his Mercy sake forbid) may be avenged; We do not only bind our
selves both jointly and severally never to Allow, accept, or favor any such
pretended Successor, by whom, or for whom any such detestable Act shall be
Attempted or Committed. as unworthy of all Government in any Christian Realm or
Civil State.

But do also further Vow and Protest as we are most bound, and that in the
presence of the Eternal and Everlasting God, to prosecute such person and
persons to Death with our joint or particular Forces, and to ask the utmost
Revenge upon them that by any means we or any of us can devise and do, or cause
to be devised and done for their fitter Overthrow and Extirpation.

And to the berter Corroboration of this our Loyal Band and Association, We do
also Testify by this Writting, that we do confirm the contents hereof by our
Oaths corporally taken upon the Holy Evangelist, with this express condition;
that no one of us shall for any respect of persons or causes, or for Fear or
Reward, separate our selves from this ASSOCIATION, or fail in the prosecution
thereof, during our Lives, upon hasard of being by the rest of us prosecuted,
and suppressed as perjured persons, and public Enemies to God, our Queen, and to
our Native Country. To which punishment and pains we do voluntarily submit our
selves, and every of us, without benefit of any color and pretense.

In Witness of all which Promises to be inviolably kept, we do to this Writing
put our Hands and Seals; and shall be most ready to accept and admit any others
hereafter, to this Society and Association.

You may be pleased to Compare this Association with the other, which pretends
(Effectually) to write after this Copy. You have in this, an Ample and Solemn
Acknowledgement of Sovereign Power in the Queen, and Indispensible Obedience in
the Subject: but in the other not only a Disclaimer of the Kings Authority, and
the Subjects Duty, (unless his Majesty will Comply with whatsoever his People
shall Impose upon him) but a Total Abdication of his Imperial Power; And a Vow
of Conspiracy to Oppose him by Force; and set up an Inconsiderable part of the
people, Masters of the Government.

You have here ane Association to defend the Queen against any pretendent
whatsoever upon a false Title. The other is a Conspiracy for the Destruction,
even of the present King, brcause he will not Consent to the Dispossessing his
Brother of a Just and Legal Title, both before God and Man. This Engagement
Extends only to a Remote Prospect of Injury to the Crown, with a Resolution to
Employ Violence when the Occasion requires it, and not before: But the other is
a Confederacy to offer Violence to the Crown themselves, and to Embroile the
Nation forthwith in a Civil War, upon a pretended Fear of Danger at a Distance.
This is a Combination against the Queens Enemies, with Her Royal Approbation,
and consent. The other is a Confederacy against the Kings Brother, and his
Friend, and against his Majesty's Approbation and Consent. The one (in short)
is for a Submission to a Lawful Authority; The other for the Final and
Irreparable Extirpation of it. To Conclude; whoever lays both Ends together of
this Late Association, will find that it begins in the Name of God, for the
Preservation of Religion, and Ends in the Divils Name with the Total Extinction
of King and Government.

Imprimatur WILLIAM PATERSON.
December 20. 1681.
Edinburgh, Reprinted by David Lindsay. 1681. Cum Privilegio


