ACT anent the QUARTERINGS.
St Andrews, January 27. 1646.
THe Estates of Parliament now conveened, in the fifth Session of this first
Triennial Parliament, Taking to their consideration the great burden under
which the Country groneth, through the exorbitant Quarterings of the Forces
Horse and Foot, that have been this long time bygone, and still is, And how
unreasonable it were that the Lieges should both be liable to the said
Quarterings, and also in payment of the Monthly Maintenance imposed upon the
Kingdom; Have therefore thought fit to Statute and Ordain, Likeas by their
presents they Statute and Ordain, That all the Quarterings within this Kingdom
yet unpaid preceding the first of March last in Anno 1645. Be duly satisfied
and paid out of the first and readiest of the Excise, and that upon count,
Conform to the Act of Parliament made thereanent, and out of the rest of the
Taxt and Loan, if any be as yet undisponed upon: And does Declare and Ordain,
That the Quarterings restand awand since the first of March last and preceding
the first of December, the samen being proven, Conform to the probation
contained in the Act of the date the twenty tua day of Februar 1645 years, as
well to Heretor as Tenant shall be allowed to the Heretor, he producand the
Tenants warrant for that effect, out of that which rests unpaid of the first
seven Months Maintenance, and what is restand unassigned of the other tua of
the nine Months, and where it is totally exhausted to be out of the Excise
which is not already disposed upon: And Ordains the super-expences of the
General Commissar in his accounts fitted in the Month of Januar instant; And
the Meal furnished by certain Noblemen and others since the said first of
March and before the first of December, for Maintaining of the Army and
Garrisons in Scotland, To be paid out of the Maintenance of the Shires that are
not exhausted with Quarterings: And Ordains five hundred Bolls Meal to be sent
to Argyle, to be out of the first end of the byrun Maintenance of Galloway and
Kircudbright. And Ordains the remanent of the said seven Months Maintenance
(the allowance of the Quarterings and payment of the particulars foresaids
being first made) to be employed for the relief of such Shires and Burghs as
shall be farther overburdened with Quarterings nor their Maintenance will pay.
And because there be many who through want of Billets attested under the
Officers hands, may sustain great prejudice and loss, unless remeid be
provided: It is therefore Enacted and Ordained, That the Officers of such
Regiments and Troops as are within the Kingdom, shall compeir upon the first
Tuesday of Februar next, either be themselves or any for them in their name:
And the Officers or any for them, for the Regiments and Troops in England, and
which were in Scotland upon the last Tuesday of March next to come thereafter,
at the head Burgh of each Shire, or the ordinary places of meeting of the
Committees of War within the samen, Or such place as the Committee of the Shire
shall appoint; To hear and see the accounts of the Quarterings taken up by
them, as well for the Officer as Soldier, made and fitted, and probation led
therein before the Committee of War of ilk Shire, or any tua of them, with
certification, if they, or some in their names compeir not at the days and
places respective above written, probation shall be led against them and ilk ane
of them: Which probation shall be led before the Committees of War in ilk
Shire, or any tua of them, who are hereby fully authorized for that effect, To
deduce the said probation either be Writ or Witnesses in Communi Forma, which
probation being so closed and made shall be ane charge upon ilk ane of the
said Regiments, Troops, and Companies pro tanto, and a sufficient Warrant to
the party to receive payment or allowance, Conform to the establishment after
the count fitted, and no other ways.

And for the more orderly Quartering and relief of those who may be
overburdened thereby, It is Statute and Ordained, That where any Quarterings
are within any Shire or Burgh, or have been since the first of March last to
the first of December, upon particular persons or Paroches, That the remanent
Heretors and others of that Shire or Burgh shall contribute for relief of those
Paroches or Persons upon whom the Quarterings are, sua far as the nine Months
Maintenance will extend, viz. Fra the first of March to the last of November.
And sicklike those who shall be overburdened fra the first of December to the
first of August following, to have the like relief. And where the Maintenance
of the Shire will not relieve the Quarterings thereof, that relief be made out
of the Maintenance of the remanent Shires.

And for Quarterings in time coming, It is further Statute and Ordained, That
whatever Officers of the Army within this Kingdom shall not give Billets or
Notes for their Quarterings, That it being proven that they Quartered in such
and such places, and did not leave Notes or Billets for the samen, Conform to
the just numbers Quartered, both Officers and Soldiers, That then, and in that
case, no pay shall be given to the said Officers and Soldiers so failzeing,
until the Notes and Billets be given to the persons, Paroches, and Shires upon
whom they were Quartered, as said is.

And it is likewise Enacted and Ordained, That the first Tuesday of every
Month shall be appointed at the ordinar places of meeting for making of the
Quartering compts within ilk Shire, and leading the probation as said is; And
it is Ordained that the Collector of ilk Shire be warned to be present, either
by himself or some in his name, at the said times and places respective.

Alex. Gibsone Cler. Regist.

Printed at Edinburgh by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1646.


