A LETTER From the Commissioners of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND Residing here at
LONDON, To WILLIAM LENTHALL Esquire, Speaker of the House of COMMONS.

Concerning the present Proceedings in this Kingdom, against Religion, the
King, and Government:

TOGETHER, With their Declaration and Protestation, against the taking away his
Majesty's Life.

Printed ANNO DOM. 1648.

SIR,
THe Committee of Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, understanding, that the
honorable Houses of Parliament, were proceeding in a Treaty for Peace, with
his Majesty, did about the beginning of the last Month, Authorize Us to
present Propositions to his Majesty; And Particularly to deal with him, and
the honorable Houses; for establishing the Covenant and Presbyteriall
Government, the Confession of Faith, Directory for Worship, and Catechism; For
preventing the toleration of Idolatry, Popery, Prelacy, Superstition,
Blasphemy, Heresy, and Schism; And for perfecting the great work of
Reformation and Uniformity, according to the Covenant: the substanee whereof
has been formerly communicated in a letter from the Committee of Estates, to
both Houses, and by one of our Number, upon his reception at the Committee of
Derby-house, by Order from the Houses of Parliament. But to our great grief we
do perceive; That the distractions of this Kingdom are, beyond our
expectation, grown exceeding high; That a force has been placed on the
passages to the Houses; Which during transactions of highest concernment, has
imprisoned and secluded a great number of Members of Parliament; and given
occasion to many others, to withdraw, because they find they cannot act as in
a Free Parliament. That applications are made to You, for proceeding against
the King, to take away his life, And for changing the Government of this
Kingdom; And strong endeavors are used to Overturne the whole work of
Reformation, to cast off the Ministry, and introduce a toleration of all
Religions and Forms of Worship; And so in effect, to destroy the Cause wherein
both Nations have been engaged; And frustrate all the ends of the solemn
League and Covenant, which both Kingdoms have sworn with up-lifted hands to
Almighty GOD sincerely, really, and constantly to perform. The consideration
of these things does exceedingly trouble us, and fill our hearts with fears;
That, as they are for the present, matter of great provocation of the wrath of
God against us, dishonorable to his Name, and a reproach to Religion; So, if
persisted in, That they shall greatly weaken and divide us amongst our selves;
Unite foreign Enemies against us; Advance the Popish interest; Loose Ireland;
and, in the end, prove destructive to the reformed Religion, and to the Peace
and happiness of these Kingdoms.

In the year 1640. When these Kingdoms were oppressed under the Yoke and
tyranny of the Prelates, who then were far advanced in the design, to
introduce Popery; The Kingdom of Scotland did join their endeavors with this
Kingdom to procure a free Parliament here; looking upon it, as the chief
mean, by the blessing of God, to give a check to the designs of the Prelates,
who were studying the change of Religion; and to the enterprises of evil
Counselors about the King, who were endeavoring to establish an Arbitrary and
tyrannical Government. And afterward, when through the power and prevalency of
Papists, Prelates, and Malignants, this Kingdom was distressed; The Kingdom
of Scotland, did enter into a solemn League and Covenant with this Nation: For
reformation and defense of Religion, the Honor and happiness of the King; and
the Peace and Safety of the three Kingdoms; And Particularly, for bringing the
Churches of God therein, to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in Religion,
Confession of Faith, form of Church government, Directory for worship, and
Catechizing: For extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy,
Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found contrary to found
Doctrine: For mutual preservation of the rights and privileges of the
Parliaments, and liberties of the Kingdoms: For discovering of Incendiaries,
Malignants, and evil Instrument, that hinder reformation of Religion, divide
the King from his people, or one of the Kingdoms from another, or make any
faction or party among the people, contrary to this League and Covenant, that
they might be brought to public trial and punishment: For preserving Peace
and union betwixt the Kingdoms, and defending one another in this Cause, and
continuing therein all the days of our lives Zealously and constantly, against
all opposition, and for promoting the same, according to our power, against all
Lets and Impediments whatsoever.

In pursuance of the Solemn League and Covenant, both Houses of Parliament
have often declared, That they will establish the reformation of Religion;
Extirpate Popery, and Prelacy, and suppress heresy and Schism; And that they
will maintain the fundamental Government of this Kingdom, by King, Lords,
and Commons. And when the common Enemy being subdued, the Scottish Army was to
go out of this Kingdom, in the beginning of the year 1647. And his Majesty
by consent of both Kingdoms was to come to Holdenby; The Houses of Parliament
did declare both to the King, and to the Kingdom of Scotland; That respect
should be had to the safety and preservation of his Majesty's Person, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms,
according to the Covenant. And when the King should be at Holdenby, and the
Scottish forces gone out of this Kingdom, That they would join with the
Kingdom of Scotland, in employing their best endeavors, to procure his
Majesty's assent to the Propositions agreed on by both Kingdoms. And in case
the King should not give his assent thereunto, That the Houses were resolved
still to maintain the happy Union already settled between the two Kingdoms,
according to the Covenant and Treaties. The Parliament of Scotland did at the
same t^me also, publish a Declaration of their intentions (whereof one copy
was delivered to his Majesty, and another to the Houses of Parliament.) That in
the interim (until his Majesty should give satisfaction to both Kingdoms, in
the Propositions of Peace) there should be no harm, prejudice injury, or
violence done to his royal Person; That there should be no change of
Government, other then had been for the three years preceding; And that his
Posterity should be no ways prejudiced in their lawful succession to the
Crown and Government of these Kingdoms.

These being the engagements of both Kingdoms jointly together, and severally
one to another, for the ends aforesaid; We hold it our duty to endeavor, That
reformation of Religion be settled and established, as is before expressed; And
Especially, that the toleration of Idolatry, Popery, Blasphemy, heresy and
Schism, be prevented: least we partake in other men's Sinn^s; and thereby be
in danger to receive of their plagues; That the rights and privileges of
Parliament may be preserved; That there may be no change of the fundamental
Government; And that there be no harm, injury, or violence offered to his
Majesty's person; the very thought whereof, the Kingdom of Scotland has
always abhorred, as may appear by all their proceedings and Declarations: And
the Houses of Parliament, have upon several occasions, expressed a detestation
thereof in their Declarations.

Wherefore, we do expect, that their shall be no proceeding against his
Person, which cannot but continue and increase the great distractions of these
Kingdoms, and involve u^ in many difficulties, miseries, and confusions: But
that by the free Councels of both Houses of the Parliament of England, and with
the advice and consent of the Parliament of Scotland, (which is now sitting)
Such course may be taken in relation to him, as may be for the good and
happiness of these Kingdoms; both having an unquestionable interest therein.
We are

Covent Garden the 6th of January, 1648./9. Your affectionate Friends and
Servants, Signed, LOTHIAN. IO: CHEISEY, WILL: GLENDONING.


For the Hon: Will. Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons.
SIR,
UPon the sixth of this instant, We sent to you a Letter, with a copy of our
Commission enclosed; and delivered another Letter to be therewith communicated
to the House, which were directed, as usually letters from the Commissioners of
Scotland, to the House of Commons, have been. And when upon the delivery
thereof, the Sergeant of the House was sent to enquire of us; whether the
letters were to the Speaker himself, or to be communicated to the House; We
answered that they were to be communicated to the House. And although we have
diverse times fithence, solicited you for the reading thereof; yet we
understand, that our letters do still remain in your hands, and have not been
communicated. Wherefore, we hold it our duty hereby to represent our sense of
this delay; expecting that we shall be enabled to give an account of our
endeavors to the Parliament of Scotland. And so we rest,

Covent Garden the 19. of January 1649/8. Your affectionate friends and
servants, Signed, Lothian, Io. Chiesly, William Glendoning.


For the Hon. will. Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons,
SIR,
WE were exceedingly surprised upon Saturday in the afternoon, when we heard
that His Majesty was brought before this new extraordinary Court; and that
there should be such have and precipitation, notwithstanding the resolution
taken by the House, upon reading of our Letter of the sixth of this instant, to
take into consideration what we have therein pressed; as was signified by you
to some of our Number. Wherefore, we have sent you this enclosed Paper to be
forthwith communicated unto them. And in pursuance of the directions which we
have received from the Kingdom of Scotland, we do desire, That they will take
effectual course, that we may have free access to His Majesty this day, and
afterward upon all occasions, as we shall think fit, without any interruption
or molestation whatsoever. And so we rest,

Covent Garden the 22,th of January 1649/8. Your affectionate friends and
servants. Lothian, Io. Chiesly, William Glend^^ing.


For the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the house of Commons.
BY our Letter of the sixth of this instant, We represented unto you; what
endeavors have been used, for the taking away of his Majesty's life; for
change of the Fundamental Government of this Kingdom, and introducing a
sinful and ungodly Tolleration in matters of Religion. And therein, we did
express our sad thoughts and great fears, of the dangerous consequences that
might follow thereupon. And further, we did earnestly press, that there might
be no proceeding against his Majesty's person; which would certainly continue
the great distractions of these Kingdoms; and involve us in many evils,
troubles, and confusions: But that by the free Counsels of both Houses of the
Parliament of England, and with the advice and consent of the Parliament of
Scotland, such course might be taken in relation to him, as may be for the good
and happiness of these Kingdoms; both having an unquestionable and undeniable
interest in his Person, as King of both: which duly considered, we had reason
to hope, should have given a stop to all proceedings, against his Majesty's
Person. But we understand; That, after many of the Members of the House of
Commons have been imprisoned and Secluded; And also without and against the
consent of the house of Peers, by a single Act of yours alone, power is given
to certain Persons of your own number, of the Army and some others, to proceed
against His Majesty's person; In order whereunto, he was brought upon Saturday
last in the afternoon, before this new extraordinary Court. Wherefore, we do
in the name of the Parliament of Scotland, for their Vindication from false
aspersions and Calumnies, declare. That though they are not satisfied with His
Majesty's Concessions in the late Treaty at Newport in the Isle of Wight,
especially in the matters of Religion; And are resolved not to crave His
Majesty's restitution to his Government, before satisfaction be given by him,
to his Kingdoms; yet they do all unanimously, with one voice (not one Member
excepted) disclaim the least knowledge of, or accession to the late
proceedings of the Army here, against His Majesty; And sincerely profess,
that it will be a great grief unto their hearts, and lie heavy upon their
Spirits, if they shall see their trusting of his Majesty's Person, to the
honorable Houses of the Parliament of England, to be made use of to his ruin;
so far contrary to the declared intentions of the kingdom of Scotland, and
Solemn Professions of the kingdom of England. And to the end it may be
manifest to the world, how much they abominate and detest so horrid a design,
against his Majesty's Person: We do in the name of the Parliament and kingdom
of Scotland, hereby declare, their dissent from the said proceedings, and the
taking away of His Majesty's life; And protest, That as they are altogether
free from the same; so they may be free from all the evils, miseries,
confusions, and calamities that may follow thereupon, to these distracted
Kingdoms.

22. th Ian. 1648. Signed Lothian Io. Chiesly William Glendoning.


FINIS.

