A LETTER From The Commissioners OF SCOTLAND, Representing the hard usage of
the Earl of LAVDERDAILL by the Soldiers of the ARMY at WOOBURN: AND Desiring
his Majesty's speedy coming to LONDON in Safety, Honor, and Freedom.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Bostock at the Kings Head in Paul's Churchyard.
MDCXLVII.

Right Honorable,
THe Committee of Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland having sent us frequent
directions since these late commotions, to give them a true account from time
to time of his Majesty's condition: In pursuance thereof, we desired the Earl
of Lauderdail to repair to his Majesty at Wooburn, where we expected that he
should have been used with that respect which is due to a Commissioner of the
Parliament of Scotland; but we are herein extremely disappointed: for on
Saturday morning early, before his Lordship was out of his bed, a great many
soldiers rushed into his chamber, and coming to his bedside, desired him
speedily to be gone without any delay. He represented unto them his employment,
that he was there in the capacity of a Commissioner of Scotland to attend his
Majesty, that he had resolved to go away that morning and entreated he might
have the liberty first to speak with his Majesty: Which they would not grant,
but violently insisted, that what they demanded might forthwith be put in
execution, and would not hearken to any reason he offered unto them, telling
him it was past dispute, it was resolved upon what they did herein would be
owned by the Army, and they would maintain it; with other expressions of that
kind. We do acknowledge the civility of the Commissioners of both Houses, who
acted their parts in dissuading them from so unwarrantable an action, and one
of the Commissioners in particular represented unto them the danger thereof,
acquainting them that he had been an Ambassador abroad, and did very well
understand, that this injury done by them to a Commissoner of the Parliament of
Scotland was of a very high nature; entreating, that if they apprehended any
thing from Scotland, the breach might not be made upon the Kingdom of England's
part; and that they would not give just cause by this action to the kingdom of
Scotland to make was against England: but no argument did prevail; so at length
the Earl of Lauderdail was forced to depart, having publicly protested before
the Commissioners of both Houses, that he was debarred from access to the
King of Scotland, and his liberty taken from him, contrary to the Law of
Nations, and a particular agreement betwixt the Kingdoms. We have formely
represented unto the Honorable Houses, how his Majesty was carried away from
Holdenby by a party of Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army (which the soldiers before
mentioned did on Saturday last before the Earl of Lauderdail and some of the
Commissioners of both Houses, own to be the act of the whole Soldiery of the
Army). We did likewise acquaint the Houses how our Letters to Scotland were
intercepted by some of that Army. And now to complete these injuries, they
offered violence to a Commissioner of the Parliament of Scotland, debarred him
from access to his Majesty, deprived him of his liberty, and drove him away;
so that there remains no hope that there can be any application made hereafter
to his Majesty from the Kingdom of Scotland: Nor can we be able to give that
account of his Majesty's condition to that Kingdom, which is expected from us,
so long as he is in the power of that Army. Wherefore we do desire that the
Houses of Parliament will in their wisdom take such course herein, as
reparation may be made to the Kingdom of Scotland of these multiplied injuries,
and especially of the last, done against the person of a public Minister of
the Kingdom of Scotland in so violent a manner. And to the end there may be a
free and unrestrained application to his Majesty from the Parliaments of both
Kingdoms: we do earnestly desire the honorable Houses to invite his Majesty to
come to London: And to declare that he shall be here in safety, honor and
freedom, then which we see no other probable mean for the present to obtain a
safe and well grounded Peace: And so we rest

Worcester-House the 1 of August 1647. Your Lordships humble Servants,
Lauderdaill, Charles Erskine, Hugh Kennedy, To. Barclay.


For the Right Honorable the Speaker of the House of Peers pro tempore.
FINIS.

