royal blazon or coat of arms WM RR
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT ACT For taking the Oath of
Alledgeance and the Assurance.
Edinburgh, the Twenty third day of May, 1693.
FORASMUCH AS, the imposing and taking the Oath of Alledgeance, and the
Assurance, enacted in this current Parliament, as hereto subjoyned, will he a
further Security to the Protestant Religion and Their Majesty's Government, in
this present exigence: Therefore, the King and Queens Majesty's, with Advice
and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Statute and Ordain, that the said
Oath of Alledgeance be Sworn, and the same with the foresaid Assurance, be
Subscrived by all Noblemen, and their eldest Sons, being past Twenty one years
of Age, and by all persons in Offices and Places of public Trust, Civil,
Ecclesiastical and Military, to wit, by all Members of Parliament, and Electors
of Members of Parliament, all Privy Counselors, all Officers of State, and of
the Crown, all the Lords of Session, Advocats, and all others, Members of the
College of Justice, the Lords of Thesaury and Exchequer, Lords of Justiciary,
and all Members of these Courts, and all Officers, and Members of the
Admirality, and all Officers, and Members of the Chancellary, Writers, and
Under-keepers of the Privy Seal, Post-masters, and their Clerks, all
Commissioners to the Convention of Burrows, and their Clerk, and the Servants
who officiat under him, and the Agent for the Royal-Burrows, the Conservator of
the Scots Privileges in Holland, and the Factors at the Staple-ports, all
Colonels, and other Commissionat Officers of the Train-bands, all persons who
are, or shall be Commissioners for Valuation, Re-valuation, or rectifying
Valuation of Lands, and all persons having heretable Offices from the King, not
already mentioned in this Act, all Preachers and Ministers of the Gospel
whatsomever, and all Cerks in Church Judicatories and Precenters, and all
Heretors voting in the calling of Ministers, and all others whatsomever, giving
voice in the said calling of Ministers, at their Meeting for that effect, all
persons in this Kingdom named, or to be named Judges, in Commissions of
Justiciary, all Members of the Commission for Valuation of Tiends, and
Plantation of Kirks, or other Commissions of Parliament, all Sheriffs,
Stewarts, Bailies of Royalties and Regalities, Commissars and their Deputs,
Clerks and Piscals, Justices of Peace, Commissioners for the Supply and Excise,
Officers of the Mint, with their Clerks and Fiscals, all Procurators before any
of the Courts abovementioned, all Writers to the Signet, all public Notars,
and other persons employed in writing, or agenting, the Lion King at Arms, the
Lion Deput, Heralds, Macers, Pursevants, and Messengers at Arms, and their
Clerk, all Chamberlains, Collectors, Fermorers, Tacksmen, Sub-collectors of
Their Majesty's Crown-rents, Customs, Assessment, Excise, Bishop-Rents, Vacant
Stipends, or any other Moneys belonging, or that shall happen to belong to
Their Majesty's, all Surveyers, and Waiters for the Customs and Excise, and
Clerks in any of these Offices, or Employments, and Clerks of Cocquets, all
Magistrates, Deans of Gild with their Council, Thesaurers, Counselors, and
Clerks of Burghs-Royal, and of Regality, or such as officiat for them, all
Deacons of Trades, and Deacon-Conveeners in the said Burghs, and such as have
any voice in electing of Deacons of Trades, with all Clerks of Trades, all
Jaylors and Keepers of Prisons, and Under-keepers, and their Clerks, and all
Masters and Doctors in Universities, Colleges, or Schools, and Keepers of
public Liberaries, all Chaplains in Families, and Pedagogues, and Governors
to Children and Youth, all Officers in the Army, Forts and Garrisons, and all
Masters of Ships and their Mates. All which persons, and every one of them,
shall now, and in all time coming, publicly Swear the said Oath, and Subscrive
the same with the Assurance in manner following, viz. The Officers of State and
of the Crown, and Counselors before the Secret Council, all Noblemen and their
eldest Sons, past Twenty one years of Age, and the chief Commanders of the
Forces, before the Secret Council, or such as they shall appoint, all the Lords
of Session, and all Members of the College of Justice, and others depending
upon them, before the Session, or before the Privy Council, or such as the
Lords shall appoint, the Lords of Justiciary, and those depending upon that
Court, in the Justice Court, the Lords and others Members of the Exchequer,
before the Exchequer, the Lord high Admiral and the Judge, and other Officers,
and Members of the Admirality before the Court of Admirality, all Judges having
Commissions of Justiciary, at the first Meeting, before they exerce, by virtue
of these Commissions: the Officers and Members of the Chancellory, Writers to,
and Under-keepers of the Privy Seal before the Session, or such as the Secret
Council shall appoint, Commissioners to the Convention of Burrows, the Clerk
and the Servants who officiat under him, and the Agent for the Burrows, before
the Convention of Burrows: The Conservator before the Convention of Burrows, or
such as the Privy Council shall appoint: and the Factors, at Staple-ports
before the Conservator in his Court: Members of the Commission for the
Valuation of Tiends, and Plantation of Kirks, or of other Commissions before
those respective Commissions, Sheriffs, Stewarts, Bailies of Royalties and
Regalities, Commissars and their Deputs, Clerks and Fiscals, before these
respective Courts, Justices of Peace, Commissioners for the Supply and Excise
before their Conveener, he first qualifying himself in their Meeting, the
General of the Mint, before the Secret Council, and all other Officers of the
Mint, before the General thereof: all Advocats and Procurators, before the
respective Courts to which they belong: All Notars and other Persons employed
in Writing, or Agenting before the Lords of Session, or such as the Council
shall appoint: the Lion King at Arms, before the Secret Council: the Lion
Deput, Heralds, Pursevants, and Messengers at Arms, with the Clerk, before the
Lion in his Court: The Macers before the respective Courts wherein they serve,
or before these, whom the Council shall appoint: Chamberlains, Collectors,
Fermorers, Tacks-men, and Sub-collectors of the Crown-Rents, Customs, Excise,
and Bishop Rents, Surveyers, Waiters and their Clerks, before the Lords of
Thesaury and Exchequer, or before whom they shall appoint: Collectors of the
Supply and Excise, before the Commissioners of Supply and Excise, Magistrates,
Deans of Gild with their Council, Thesaurers, Counselors, and Clerks of
Burghs-royal and Regality, Deacons of Trades, and Deacon-conveeners, and these
who have a voice in electing of Deacons of Trades, and Clerks of Trades, before
the Council of the Burgh: Officers of the Army, before the Commander in chief,
or whom he shall appoint: And Officers of Forts, before the Secret Council, or
such as they shall appoint: Masters of Ships and their Mates, before the Court
of Admirality, or such as they shall appoint: And all the other Persons
above-ranked, without any special appointment, before such as the Privy Council
shall appoint. And Their Majesty's with Consent foresaid, Statute and Ordain,
that the whole Persons abovementioned, shall Swear the said Oath, and
Subscribe the same, and the Assurance in manner foresaid, betwixt and the
Twenty day of June next: for which end, all the Inferior Courts, are hereby
dispensed with, to Sit to the effect foresaid, excepting Electors of Members of
Parliament, and Members of the Commissions abovementioned, and these giving
voice in calling of Ministers, and such as have voice in Electing of Deacons of
Trades, who are hereby appointed to take the said Oath, and subscribe the same,
with the Assurance, as follows, viz. The Electors of Members of Parliament,
before they elect, members of Commissions, before they exerce the Commissions:
And such as have a voice in calling of Ministers, or electing of Deacons of
Trades, before they give voice in calling of Ministers, or electing of Deacons
of Trades, and also, excepting the Conservator, and the Factors of the
Staple-ports, who are to Swear the said Oath, and subscribe the same, and the
Assurance, betwixt and the fifteenth day of August next. And the said Oath and
Assurance, Sworn and Subscribed as above, are to be recorded in the Registers
of the respective Courts and Meetings, and the extracts thereof under the
Clerks hands, to be reported to Their Majesty's Privy Council, under the pain
of Deprivation of the Clerk, for such as are appointed to Swear and Subscrive,
betwixt and the twentieth of June, to be reported betwixt and the first of
August next, and for the rest, within twenty days after their said swearing and
subscribing. And it is further Statute and Ordained, that all Persons, who
shall hereafter be advanced to, or employed in any of the foresaids Offices,
Trusts, or Stations, shall at their Entry unto, and before their exercing
thereof, Swear the said Oath and subscribe the same, and the Assurance in
manner foresaid, to be Recorded in the Registers of the respective Courts, and
reported to Their Majesty's Privy Council, within the space of forty days
after taking of the same, and exercing the foresaids Offices, Trusts,
Privileges and Employments, which Reports are to be received, and taken in by
the Clerks of Privy Council gratis, And it is hereby Statute and Ordained, That
all Persons who shall obtain any free Gift, or Donations from the Lords of
Their Majesty's Privy Council, Thesaury or Exchequer, or shall present any
Signature of Pension, Remission, or containing a de novo damus, or of any other
casuality, except Gifts of Escheats, are to take the said Oath and Assurance,
before obtaining the said Gift, or passing the said Signature, certifying such
of the foresaids Persons as are, or shall be in any public Office, Trust, or
Employment, or who shall own, or exerce the same, without taking the said Oath
and Assurance in manner foresaid, they shall be deprived ipso facto of their
said Offices, Trusts and Employments, and Ministers provided to Kirks, shall
be deprived of their Benefices, or Stipends, and Preachers not provided to
Kirks, shall be punished by Banishment, or otherways, as the Council shall
think fit; and all the foresaid Tacksmen, shall be punished as the Privy
Council shall think fit. And farther that they and all other Persons, whether
above ranked or not, who shall not Swear the said Oath, and Subscribe the same,
and the Assurance shall not be allowed to keep any Horses, above an hundred
Merks-price, nor any sort of Arms, more than a Walking-sword; certifying, such
as shall be found to have Horses and Arms contrair to this Provision, either in
their own, or in the keeping of others, that both the Owner and the Keeper,
shall incur the Penalty of one Thousand Merks, the one half to the Informer,
and the other to their Majesty's: And Their Majesty's with Consent foresaid,
Authorizes and Impowers the Lords of Privy Council, to take such further
effectual Methods, for Disarming these Persons, and seasing of their Horses
above the foresaid value, as they shall judge necessary; As like ways, they
empower the Council to call before them, all, or any Heretor, or other Persons
of whom they shall think fit, whether above ranked or not, and to put the said
Oath and Assurance to them, and in case of their Refusal, to proceed against
them by Fining, Confining, Imprisonment, or Banishment, as they shall see
cause; the Fine if they be Heretors, to be the double of their Cess or Supply,
and further, (if the Council shall think fit,) not exceeding an years valued
Rent; and for others not Heretors, the third part of their escheatable Goods,
by and attour the other Penalties, contained in the thirty eight Act of the
second Session of this current Parliament; It is also hereby enacted, that the
said Oaths of Alledgiance and Assurance, are in no case to be imposed, or taken
severally, but jointly, declaring hereby, that these who refuse the one, shall
be holden as refusing both. And Their Majesty's with Advice foresaid,
recommends to their Privy Council, to see this Act put to due and vigorous
Execution, with all diligence: And it is hereby declared, that the foresaid
general Power granted to the Council, is to endure until the next Session of
Parliament allanarly: And Lastly, it is hereby provided, that such as have
already taken and subscribed the said Oath, and subscribed the Assurance, shall
not be obliged, by virtue hereof to take and subscribe the same again in the
same Capacity.

The Oath of Alledgiance.
I A. B. Do sincerely Promise and Swear, that I will be Faithful, and bear true
Alledgiance to Their Majesty's, King WILLIAM and Queen MARY; So help me GOD.

The Assurance.
I A. B. Do in the sincerity of my Heart, Assert, Acknowledge and Declare, that
Their Majesty's King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, are the only Lawful undoubted
Sovereigns of this Realm, as well de jure, That is of Right, King and Queen, as
de facto, That is in the Possession and Exercise of the Government: And
therefore, I do sincerely and faithfully Promise and Engage, that I will with
Heart and Hand, Life and Goods, maintain and defend Their Majesty's Title and
Government, against the late King James, and his Adherents, and all other
Enemies, who either by open or secret Attempts, shall Disturb or Disquiet Their
Majesty's in the Possession and Exercise thereof.

Extracted forth of the Records of Parliament, by TARBAT. Cls. Registri.

God save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno 1693.


