THE REMONSTRANCE OR DECLARATION Of Us The Inhabitants of the County Palatine
of Chester, whose Names are subscribed, and of many more.
WE most humbly declare and remonstrate, That we are, our lives, liberties, our
selves, and whatsoever we can style ours, (next to Gods infinite mcrcies) to
the goodness of His Majesty, and to the great care and indefatigable pains of
the Honorable Parliament; To the one for discovering the variety of
oppressions, that had almost overwhelmed us, and for preparing and advising
apt remedies; To the other, for craving their wholesome Counsels with a blessed
Fiat, wherein the joint Acts of a good King and faithful Council, have so
apparently concurred to the general good, that we cannot but look upon all
such (as unworthy of future happiness) who do admit for current, that
dangerous and disloyal distinction; viz. For the King, or for the Parliament.

Our loyal affections and judgments will not permit us to style them true
Patriots, and lovers of their Country, that are not cordially affected to our
Gracious Sovereign, nor them good Subjects, that disaffect Parliaments; The
King and Parliament being like Hipocrates twins, they must laugh and cry, live
and die together, and both of them are so rooted in our hearts, that we cannot
disjoyn them.

Wherefore we declare, That according to our Allegiance, and our solemn
Protestation (our voices being in Heaven) we are resolved to spend our lives
and fortunes, in the defense and service of both, in maintenance of His
Majesty's Royal Person, Honor and Prerogative, and in preservation of the
Parliament, and just Privileges thereof, of our true and undoubted Religion,
Laws, Proprieties, and Liberties, which are deposited for our use and avail in
that great and wise Council, we being confident, that neither King, nor
Subject, nor Religion, nor Liberty can comfortably survive the ruin and
destruction of that great Body.

And we further profess our selves Enemies to all those (whoever they be) who
shall be found Agents in making our wounds deeper, by festring and fomenting
the unfortunate Mistakes, and fearful Jealousies betwixt the head and body,
His Majesty and His Parliament; And which (continuing at this distance) does
threaten the fabric of this blessed Government, with the loss of all His
Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions.

London, Printed by L. N. and J. F. for E. Husbands and J. Franck, and are to
be sold at their shops in the Middle Temple, and the next door to the
King's Head in Fleetstreet. August 12. 1642.


