royal blazon or coat of armsA PROCLAMATION Anent Burying in Scots Linen.
JAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in
that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting,
Forasmuch, as by Our Act of Parliament of the date the 14 of June, 1686. For
the encouragement of the Linen Manufactories in this Kingdom, and prevention of
the Exportation of the Moneys thereof, by Importing of Linen; We did, with
Advice and Consent of Our Parliament, Statute and Ordain, that thereafter no
Corpse of any person whatsomever should be Buried in any Shirt, Sheet, or any
thing else, except in plain Linen, or Cloth of Hards, made and Spun within this
Kingdom, without Lace, or Point; Discharging thereby the making use of Holland,
or other Linen Cloth, made in other Kingdoms, all Silk, Hair, or Woollen, Gold,
or Silver, or any other Stuff whatsomever, than what is made of Flax or Hards,
Spun and Wrought within the Kingdom, and that under the pain and penalty of 300
Pounds Scots toties quoties for a Nobleman, and 200 Pounds Scots for each other
person: And for the better discovery of the Contraveeners, it is Ordained, that
every Minister within the Kingdom shall keep a Book, containing an exact
account of all persons buried within their said Paroches; As also, that sou^e
one or more of the Relations of the deceast person, or other credible person
(Tennents in the Country, and Cottars being always excepted) should within
eight days after the Interrment bring a Certificat upon Oath in Writing,
witnessed by two famous persons to the Minister, Declaring that the said Person
was woond or wrapped in manner therein prescribed; Which Certificats are to be
Recorded by the Minister gratis: And if no person shall bring such a Certificat
within the space foresaid, then the Goods of the deceast person to be liable to
the foresaid Forfaulture, as in the said Act is at more length expressed. And We
understanding that the same has not received that due obedience which was
required, and by Us designed to the end foresaid, Do with Advice of Our Council
of Trade, Revive and renew the said Act, and Ordain the famine to be put to due
and vigorous execution in all time coming; And for the better effectuating of
the famine, We do hereby Require all ^he Ministers within this Kingdom to send
in all such Certificats as they shall receive, in manner abovementioned, to
the Clerk of Our said Council of Trade, betwixt and the first of November next
to come, together with a List of the names of all such as are, or shall be
Interred before that time, without Certificats brought to them in manner
contained in the said Act, with Certification. And that Our pleasure herein may
be known, Our Will is, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and all other places needful, and there in Our Royal Name and Authority, by
open Proclamation, make Publication of Our Pleasure in the premises, that
punctual obedience may be given thereto, and none pretend ignorance.

Given at Edinburgh, the Fifteen day of August, One thousand six hundred eighty
eight years, and of Our Reign the Fourth Year. Per Actum Dominorum Concilii
Commer ci To: Maine Cls. Concilii Commercii.

GOD save the KING.
EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty: Anno DOM. 1688.


