Edinburgh 20.February 1647.
Act anent the Maintenance of the Army for nine Months, and for Retention of
one and a half of the Anualrent of eight of the Hundred.
THe Estates of Parliament now conveened, in this sixth Session of the first
Triennall Parliament, Taking to their serious Consideration the long
continuance of the present rebellion of our unnatural Countrymen, and of the
invasion from the Irish, and the great expenses that they must sustain for
suppressing of the same, and carrying on of the War; and how necessary and
incumbent it is to them, that some solid and settled way be provided for the
constant maintenance of the forces, Horse and Foot; Have therefore concluded,
that six thousand Foot, twelve hundred Horse, two hundred and ten Dragooners
shall be entertained and kept upon pay, toward the prosecution of the War
against these Rebels and Invaders, until the same, by the blessing of the God
of Hosts, he brought to an happy end; Have therefore thought fit to statute
and ordain, Like as for that effect they enact and ordain, that ilk Shire and
Burgh within this Kingdom, shall be liable and obliged, in payment of the
particular sums of money, and that Monthly, and with the Suspension
underwritten, for the intertainment of the Forces, Horse, Foot, and Dragooners
above written, and that for the space of nine Months, (whereof the most part
of the first Month is already assigned by a former Act, toward the payment of
the Regiments which served at Philip-Hauch) beginning the first terms payment
from the tenth of January last-by-past, and so forth, after the expiring of
that Month, to continue for other eight Months thereafter, until the tenth
of October next ensuing. But because the most part of that Months maintenance
is either assigned or paid, and that the Forces abovementioned is ordained to
pay all their intertainment, and take no free Quarters, which the Estates have
ordained to be refounded unto them at the end of the Month, after their
engagement: Therefore it is statute and ordained, that for payment of their
bygone Month, the Shires and Burrows shall readily pay, and deliver to Sir
John Weemes of Bogie, General Commissar, and Collector of this Kingdom, who
is hereby appointed to pay the Regiments their several proportions of
Monthly maintenance, according to the divisions after following, that portion
of the said first Months maintenance not formerly assigned, and also to pay
and deliver unto him the whole other eight Months maintenance, and that
Monthly, beginning the payment for the second Month upon the first day of
March, for payment of the present Army, betwixt the tenth day of February, to
the tenth day of March, in respect the said interveening days, are the least
which can be allowed for in-gathering of this maintenance, and so forth
Monthly thereafter from each first day of the Month to another, during the
continuance of this present maintenance, except what is suspended in manner
after mentioned.

Follows the sums payable by the Shires, which is underwritten, and that
Monthly, by the space of nine Months, from the tenth of January last bypast,
to the tenth of October next to come, viz. Orkney of Monthly pay, 1143. l.
Innernes, 4176. l.. Caithnes, 945. l. Cromartie, 99. l. Sutherland, 423. l.
Nairne, 315. l. Elgine, 1890. l. Aberdeene, 6543 l. Bamfe, 1431. l. Kincardine,
1566. l. Forfar, 5004. l. Perth, 8001. l. Fife, 6642. l. Striveling, 2538. l.
Kinros, 144. l. Clakmannan, 522. l. Edinburgh, 4167. l. Linlithgow, 1746. l.
Hadingtoun, 3384. l. Berwick, 3555. l. Roxburgh 5778. l. Selkirk, 1278. l.
Pebles, 1638. l. Lanerk, 5382. l. Air, 6066. l. Wigtoun and Stuartrie of
Kirkcudbright, 4374 l. Drumfreis, 4446. l. Renfrew, 2205. l. Dumbartan, 1233.
l. Argyle, 2907. l. Bute, 459. l.

Follows the sums payable Monthly by the Burrows, conform to their taxt Roll,
viz. Edinburgh, 5175. l. Perth, 810. l. Dundie, 1200. l. Aberdeene, 1260. l.
Striveling, 240 l. Linlithgow, 324. l. S. Andrews 780 l. Glasgow, 1530. l. Air,
342. l. Hadingtoun, 324 l. Dysert, 270. l. Kirkcaldie, 600. l. Monrose, 324. l.
Cowper, 216. l. Anstruther easter, 180. l. Drumfreis, 270. l. Innernes, 450. l.
Breechen, 120. l. Irwing, 252. l. Elgine, 135. l. Jedburgh 126. l.
Kirkcudbright, 80. l. Wigtoun, 135. l. Pettinweyme, 120. Dumfermline 162. l.
Dumbartan, 162. l. Renfrew, 90. l.. Lanerk, 162. l. Aberbrothok, 81. l.
Bruntiland, 216. l. Pebles, 108. l. Carrail, 216. l. Kinghorn, 108. l. Tayne,
90. l. Selkirk, 126 l. Anstruther wester, 54. l. Culros, 90. l. Dumbar, 180. l.
Bamfe, 72. l. Whithorn, 45. l. Forfar, 27. l. Rothesay, 60. l. Forres, 54. l.
Rutherglen, 45. l. Northberwick, 36. l. Culane, 27. l. Narne, 36. l. Lawder,
45. l. Innerkeithing, 90. l. Kilrynnie, 27. l. Annand, 30. l. Lochmaben, 18. l.
Sanquhare, 27. l. Galloway, 9. l. Dingwal, 18. l. Queensferrie, 108. l.
Dornoch, 10. l.

And for the better inbringing and collecting of the foresaids sums of money,
for payment and intertainment of the forces abovewritten, as well Officers as
Soldiers, The Estates of Parliament Nominates and Appointes the said Sir John
Weymes of Bogie General Commissar, Thesaurer, or Collector of this Kingdom
for the said Army, with power to him to appoint Deputes one or mo in each
Shire: And that other Collectors in such Burghs and Parishes be appointed by
him in suchlike manner, as is contained in the Act of Loan and Taxt; which
Collector deputes as well of Shires as Parishes, and Clerks of Shires for that
effect, shall have such Fees as is allowed in the Act of Convention, made anent
the in-gathering of the Loan and Taxt, and that to be uplifted out of the said
Shires and Parishes within the same, by and attour the Monthly maintenance,
and the Burghs to be free, in respect they collect their proportions upon their
own charges; And with power to the said General Commissar and Collector
foresaid, to appoint a Clerk of collection whom he shall be pleased to
nominate, and for whom he shall be answerable; Which Clerk of collection so to
be appointed by him, Shall have the sum of two hundredth Merks Sterling, to be
paid out of the said Monthly Maintenance for his pains and charges which he
must undergo in collection of the Months Maintenance above written: And it is
Declared, and Ordained, That the Letters and Charges to follow upon this
present Act, for imlpement of every Head and Article thereof, shall be raised
and direct at the instance of the said Sir John Weymes General Commissar and
Collector foresaid, against the Subcollectors of Shires, Magistrates of
Burrows, Collectors of Parishes, Heritors, Fewars, Liferenters, and others
adebted in payment of their several proportions of the Maintenance now
imposed, with reservation of the suspensions underwritten, in the same manner,
and with the same provisions and certifications as is contained in the Act of
convention of Estates made for the Loan and Taxt, and that they have Letters
of relief as is ordained by the said Act of convention.

And for the more speedy ingathering of this Maintenance: It is ordained, if
any Shire, Burgh, or Person therein designed, be deficient in paying of their
Monethlie proportion, That the said General Commissar shall have Power,
Authorite, and Warrant, to raise in each Shire eight or ten Troupers to be
entertained at the ordinary rates, and present establishment to be paid to
them by the deficients, by and attour their proportionable Maintenance; And
ordains the Committee of War within each Shire respective, to be aiding and
assisting to the said Thesaurer, both in furnishing of Troupers, and inbringing
the Maintenance: Or otherwise, The Estates of Parliament hereby gives him power
to require orders from the General Officers, that they would command such a
number of their nearest lying and adjacent Soldiers, Horse, or Foot, as he
shall demand, to repair unto him and be directed by him, for inbringing and
uplifting of that proportion of the said Maintenance which shall not be readily
paid, and these to have free Quarters by direction of the said General
Commissar or his Deputes in the several Shires, upon the Deficient Shires,
Burghs, or Persons, ay and while they make ready payment of their part of the
said Maintenance: And the Estates ordaines the General Officers, To readily
answer the said Thesaurer his desire foresaid.

And because it is conceived by the Estates of Parliament, That sundry Shires
or parts thereof, or Burghs, are burnt, wasted, or so ruined, That they are not
able to make real and ready pament of the aforesaid sums imposed upon them
for the Maintenance; Therefore until some trial be made of their true
condition, They have thought fitting to grant suspension: Likeas, they hereby
do suspend the exaction of the particular sums underwritten from the Shires
and Burghs following, In manner, and conform to the limitations
aftermentioned, viz. From the Shirefedome of Innernes, 2000. l. From the
Shirefdom of Sutherland, 200. l. From the Shirefdom of Nairne, 315. l. From the
Shirefdom of Elgine, 1000. l. From the Shirefdom of Aberdene, 6543. l. From the
Shirefdom of Bamf, 1431. l. From the Shirefdome of Kincardine, 400. l. From the
Sherifdome of Forfar, 500. l. From the Sherifdome of Pearth, 3000. l. From the
Shirefdome of Sterling, 1200. l. From the Shirefdom of Kinrose Shire, 72. l.
From the Shirefdome of Dumbartan, 633. l. From the Shirefdom of Argile, 2907.
l. From the Shirefdome of Bute, 459. l. Item, for the Burrows, viz. From
Pearth, 500. l. From Aberdene, 1260. l. From Strivling, 80. l. From Innernes,
450. l. From Breechen, 120. l. From Elgine 80. l. From Dumbartan, 162. l.From
Bamf, 72. l. From Rothesay, 60. l. From Culane, 27. l. From. Nairne, 36. l.
From Taine, 45. l. From Forfar, 27. l. From Forres, 54. l. From Dornoch, 18. l.

Of the which sums immediately abovewritten hereby suspended, It is declared,
That the General Commissar or his Deputes, shall suit no exaction nor payment
before the tenth of May next to come for such Shires and Burrows as are besouth
the water of Dee, and the tenth day of June next for the Shires and Burrows
benorth the water of Dee, Betwixt and the which time the Shires and Burghs who
have not already taken out Commissions, are appointed hereby to take out
Commissions from the Parliament, or any Committee established or to be
established by them, for cognition of the losses direct to such as they
respectively shall nominate to try and report; That the Lands and Burghs are
burnt and so wasted, that they are totally disabled to pay rent, or if they be
able to pay any rent, that they shall pay proportionable Maintenance, which
shall be reported to the Parliament or their said Committee; That accordingly
as they allow or disallow thereof, the foresaid suspended part of the
Maintenance may be paid or discharged. And incase of the delay or failie of
the Commssioners for Shires and Burghs, to take out the said Commissions and
make the report before the days prefixed, The General Commissioner is hereby
warranted to charge them for the whole Maintenance, without consideration of
the forefaid suspension: And for the greater evidence herein, It is ordained,
that betwixt and the first of April next to come, the valuers of these Shires,
whereof any part of the Maintenance is presently suspended, Shall deliver to
the said General Commissar, or any Collector whom he shall appoint in each
Shire respective, a particular list and account of these Lands, whereupon that
part of the Maintenance presently payable without suspension is imposed; With
certification to the said valuers in case of failie of performance hereof
before the said day, They shall be subject in payment of that part of the
Maintenance, which is payable without suspension.

Item, It is ordained, That the Months Maintenance payable betwixt the tenth
of Februar last by past, and the tenth of March next to come, Shall be really
paid, without any deduction for Quarterings in that time, But that the
Quarterings of the new modelled Army and no others disbanded, shall be allowed
in the first end of the Maintenance for the subsequent Months after the said
tenth day of March, and that the same shall be deduced and discounted by the
General Commissar to the Heritors, Fewars, or Liferenters of the first of
their Maintenance, payable by them respective, after the said tenth day of
March, and thereafter to be charged by the said General Commissar upon the
Regiment accounts, for the Months subsequent to the said tenth day of March:
It is always provided, That these Quarterings shall be proven and instructed,
conform to the Acts of Parliament made or to be made thereanent.

Further, It is enacted, statute, and ordained, That every debtor shall have
retention from the Creditor of the quantity of one and a half of each eight
payable for anualrent; So that the debtor shall only be liable in payment of
six and an half of anualrent of ilk hundredth of Stock, and that from the term
and time of Lambmesse, 1646. To the term of Lambmesse next to come, 1647. And
so forth proportionably thence to the last day of October next thereafter
following* With this declaration and provision always, That no Person Debtor
whatsoever, shall have the foresaid benefit of retention, who shall not pay his
anualrent to the Creditor within the space of ane year out run, after that ane
preceding years anualrent is fully restand awand unpayed: And it is declared
hereby, That whatsomever Debtor has been paid their anualrents at eight per
centum before the date hereof, at the feasts of Martimesse, or Candlemesse now
last by past, Shall have deduction of the Creditor in their next terms
anualrent, of so much as is ordained by this present Act to be deduced from
Lambmesse last bygone, to the said time of the payment of the said anualrent:
And it is also hereby specially provided, That whatsoever Creditor shall take
hereafter, Band, Promise, or Condition from his Debtor, for payment to him of
the haill anualrent at eight per centum, without retention or allowance of the
said deduction of the ane and a half for the hundredth, during the time
prescribed by this Act, Or shall not grant the retention foresaid, Shall be
conveened and censured as ane usurer, notwithstanding of any such paction by
word or Writ.

And sicklike, It is Declared, Statute, and Ordained, That no retention of this
present Maintenance shall be granted for any Debts, Cause, or Occasion
whatsomer, and that no exemption other nor is abovewritten for burnt or wasted
Lands as is formerly expressed, shall be granted from this present Act and
Ordinance to any Person or Persons; Except only for Lands, Rents, Anualrents,
and other duties mortified to Colleges, Schools, Hospitalls, Ministers and
Schoolemasters Stipends, and for upholding Kirks and Bridges; But that all
other Heritors, Liferenters, Taksmen, Titulars, Proper-Wodsetters, Pensioners,
Conjunctfiers, Ladytercers, and others subject to the valuation within Shires
and Burghs, shall be liable to their proportionable part of this Maintenance,
conform to the Act already made hereanent in this Session of Parliament, of
the date the tenth day of December last by past; And that the Lands and Teinds
shall pay as they lie locally in Shires or Burghs, Conform to the Act of
convention for the Loan and Taxt, and former Act of Maintenance.

And lastly, Where there is any wrong done in valuation, The said Estates
appoints the valuers of each Shire or Quorum thereof, or of so many as are on
life, and not censurable by the Act of Parliament anent the Classes, To meet
and rectify the same at any time and place as they shall appoint: Declaring
always, That this warrant for a new valuation shall be no hinderance nor
diminution to the Maintenance presently imposed: and where there is not a full
Quorum the valuers on life and not censurable, That the number be supplied by
the Parliament or Committee of Estates; And for the Burrows part, it shall be
rectified and changed according as their Taxt roll shall be altered, there
being no diminution of the total sum: And further, It is ordained, That no
suspension be granted without consignation, as is appointed by the Act of
Maintenance of the 27 of Februar, 1645. And that all Heritours within Burghs,
and Pendicles and Liberties thereof (including for Edinburgh Pendicles thereof,
the Houses, Tenements and Yeards, in Leith, Cannnogate, and Pleasance, Whereof
the Town is either Proprietors, or Superiors, and for the other Burrows all
that has been in use to be Taxt with them) Shall contribute with them for
payment of the Maintenance, conform to their two clauses of the said Act, which
are holden as insert, and repeated in this present Act; But prejudice of the
Lords of Session their Privileges, conform to the former Acts of Maintenance:
And ordaines this present Act to be Printed: As also, Ordaines the foresaid
Act of the convention of Estates, anent the Loan and Taxt to be reprinted.

Alex. Gibsone Cler. Regist.

Act of the Convention of Estates, Holden at Edinburgh the fifteenth of August,
1643. for the Loan and Taxt.
FOrsameikle as the Kings Majesty and Estates of this Realm* in the late
Parliament, taking to their Consideration the Rebellion in Ireland, and danger
upon that occasion threatened against the Protestant Religion, Did thereupon,
and out of their affection to the Kingdom of England, make offer to the said
Kingdom of a supply of ten thousand men from this Kingdom, for suppressing of
that Rebellion, To be entertained by the Parliament of England* according to
the Capitulation made thereanent by the Commissioners sent from the Parliament
of this Kingdom, With instructions sent from the Lords of Privy Council
thereof; And accordingly the said supply being put over upon the great Charges
of this King dome, such have been the great necessities and wants of that Army,
as well Officers as Soldiers, not only through default of their ordinary pay,
but also off victual in the sparest measure, and all other necessaries, That
the Lords of Privy Council, unto whom the care of that army was entrusted by
the Parliament, and who did accordingly undertake for the same, Have been put
to great trouble and charges, both by engaging themselves, and with them also
the Commissioners for the peace and common burdens, As also by their joint
invitation of the well-affected subjects of this kingdom to contribute sums of
money for entertainment of that Army, and payment of the arreares thereof,
which they are obliged to pay with the ordinary anuall rent; And howsoever
considerable sums have been by their painful ondevours received,
Notwithstanding, such have been the pressing miseries of that Army, in regard
of the unhappy distractions in England, disabling the Parliament thereof,
according to their obligement to entertian them, as they have expressed in their
several Declarations sent to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council; And
such have been the difficulties occurring to the said Lords of Privy
Council, Commissioners of Peace, and common burdens, touching the farther
entertainment of that Army, which they found unpossible for them any longer to
undergo, as they were moved from their affection to this Majesty's service, and
sense of the distress of their brethren; For this and other the like extreme
exigency, nearly importing the good of this Kingdom, to call this Convention of
Estates, by whose authority they might more warrantably proceed in matters of
so great importance: And the said Estates having accordingly taken to their
consideration the condition of the said Army, and the whole course and
procedure concerning the same, as is before expressed.

Therefore, and for diverse other considerations moving the said Estates, they
have thought fit, statute and ordained, Like as by their presents they statute
and ordain, The sum of twelve hundred thousand marks Scots money, together
with the sum of one hundred thousand marks money foresaid, as allowance for
charges of ingathering of the same, to Collectors, Clerks, and others necessary
members, and for allowance of exemptions for mortifications, and the Lord
Chancellor and fifteen ordinary Lords of the Session, persons exeemed, as is
after specified, To be uplifted by way of Loan, out of the several
Sherifdomes and Burrows of this Kingdom, in manner as is after divided: viz.
The said Burrowes one sixth part of the principal sum, extending to 200000.
marks, and the several Sherifdomes of this Kingdom to pay the remanent of the
said sums, conform to a particular roll made and set down thereanent, and
subscribed in presence of the said Estates by the Lord Chancellor, to remain
in Record in the books of Convention and Collection; Which whole sums of money
to be lent, as said is, as well to Burgh as landward, shall be delivered to the
Collectors, and others having power from the said Estates, betwixt the date
hereof, and the second day of February next to come 1644. years.

And because the sums of money presently to be lent, are not to be ingathered
aff the shires, as taxations have been, or by the divisions of Temporalities
and Spiritualities, But rather is thought fit that the same may be uplifted out
of the lands, teinds, and others, as they lie locally in every Sherifdome
promiscuously, conform to the said roll subscribed as said is.

Therefore it is thought necessary that several Sub-collectors be appointed
through the whole Kingdom, in ilk shire or shires one or more; Which
Sub-collector or Collectors, so to be appointed, shall be charged with the
whole sums of moneys to be lent by the shire or shires where he or they shall
be Collector.

And to the effect the said Sub-collectors may have letters of relief against
the several persons to be contained and set down in the Rolls after-mentioned:

Therefore the said Estates have nominate the persons following: viz. For the
Sherifdome of Orkney, Thomas Buchanan of Sound, Sherif of Orkney, and Patrick
Smith of Braco, Conveeners for the first meeting (and thereafter the rest of
the Shire to choose their own Conveeners) Jamis Baikie of Tankernes, Adam
Ballinden of Stanehouse, James Mudie of Melsetter, Patrick Balfour of Feary,
Edward Sinclar of Gyre.

For the Sherifdomes of Innernes and Cromertie, Sir John Mackenie of Tarbet,
Master Alexander Mackenie of Kilcowie, Conveeners for the first meeting (and
thereafter the rest of the shire to choose their own Conveeners) Walter Innes
of Innerbraiky, Coline Mackenie of Kincraig, (...) Monro of Obstail, Alexander
Dumbar of Bennetsfield, Robert Innes of Roskeene, Hugh Fraser of Belladrum,
John Grant of Lurgie, John Maccleud of Dunevegan, Neil Macneil of Baro, Sir
James Fraser of Bray, (...) Rosse of Pitcanie, Walter Rosse of Kindrosse,
Thomas Rosse of Priesthill.

For the Sherifdome of Caitnes, Sir James Sinclar of Murtill, David Sinclar of
Dun, Conveeners for the first meeting (and thereafter the rest of the Shire to
make choice of their own Conveeners) James Sutherland of Forse, David Cogle of
that Ilk, John Sinclar of Scrabster, James Sinclar of Brymnes, John Innes of
Stuister.

For the Sherifdome of Sutherland, Sir Alexander Sutherland of Duffus, Robert
Murray of Pulrossie, Conveeners for the first meeting (and thereafter the rest
of the shire to make choice of their Conveeners) Robert Gray of Creich, Walter
Murray of Pitgourdie, Alexander Gordoun of Carrell, Hugh Mackye of Skowrie,
Robert Gray of Boltoun.

For the Sherifdome of Nairn, George Campbel brother to the Lord of Caddel,
William Dollace of Contra, Conveeners for the first meeting (and thereafter the
rest of the shire to make choice of their own Conveeners) Hugh Rosse of
Kilraok, Alexander Broddie of Lethin, John Grant of Moynes, William Rosse of
Clava, Thomas Dumbar Tutor of Grange, Patrick Paplay of Broomhill.

For the Sherifdom of Elgin, Sir Robert Gordoun of that Ilk, Sir Robert Innes
of that Ilk, Conveeners for the first meeting (and thereafter the rest of the
Shire to make choice of their own Conveeners) Sir Alexander Sutherland of
Duffus, Master John Hay Provest of Elgin, Alexander Dumbar of Westfield, Ninian
Dumbar of Grangehill, James Gram of Frewchie, John Cuming of Racowcas.

For the Sherifdome of Aberdeen, the Lairds of Drum and Phillorth to be
Conveeners for the first meeting (and thereafter those of the Shire to choose
their own Conveeners) Robert Farquhareson of Innercald, John Irwing of Beltie,
Alexander Straquhan of Glenkendie, Sir William Forbes of Craigievar, Mr William
Davidson of Cairnie, Sir Gilbert Meinies of Pitfodells Thomas Erskine of
Pittoddrie, M. Robert Farquhare of Munie, M. Robert Gordoun of Pitlurg (...)
Gordoun of Cokclarochie, John Owdnie of that Ilk, James Hay of Muryfauld,
Robert Irwing of Fedret, William Keith of Clakriach.

For the Sherifdome of Bamffe, Alexander Ogilvie Kempcarne, Thomas Abercrumbie
of Skeith, Conveeners for the first meeting (and thereafter those of the Shire
to choose their own Conveeners) James Stewart of Ordeins, Walter Grant of
Mellers, Alexander Ogilvie of Knok, James Barclay of Kinminnettie, Alexander
Lesly of Auchindoun, John Grant younger of Ballindalloch.

For the Sherifdome of Kincardin, Sir Alexander Falconer younger fiar of
Hackerton, Sir Alexander Carnegie of Pittaro, Conveeners for the first meeting
(and thereafter those of the Shires to make choice of their own Conveeners) Sir
Robert Grahame of Morphie, Six Gilbert Ramsay of Balmain, Robert Keith of
Whiterigs, Sheriff depute of Kincardin, Patrick Falconer of Newton, John
Barcley of Johnston, John Falconer fiar of Newton.

For the Sherifdome of Forfar, Robert Arbuthnet of Findowry, Sir Alexander
Carnegie of Ballnamoon, Conveeners for the first meeting (and thereafter the
rest of the Shire to make choice of their own Conveeners) John Lord Loure,
Peter Young of Seaton, William Ruthven Gairn, M. James Durhame of Pitcairo,
James Vicount of Dudop, William Durhame elder of Grange, M. William Durhame of
Omaquhie, (...) Maxwell of Telin, James Lord Couper, James Crichton of Ruthven,
Sir William Blair of Bagillo (...) Lion of Brigton, Henry Mauld of Melgume,
Thomas Fothringham of Dununne.

For the Sherifdome of Perth, The Lairds of Inshbrakie, and Inshture,
Conveeners for the first meeting (and thereafter to make choice amongst
themselves) Thomas Blair of Baltheyok, Sir Thomas Ruthven of Frieland, John
Oliphant of Bachilron, Peter Hay of Leyis, Six Patrick Ogilvie of Inshmartin,
Sir Robert Campbell of Glennorquhie, Alexander Menies of Comrie, Patrick Ratra
of Cuaighall, Gilbert Campbell of Keithik, John Blair of Ardblair, M. Patrick
Murray fiar of Ochtertyre, James Drumond of Milnab, Sir John Hadden of
Glenegies, William Sterling elder of Auchyle.

For the Sherifdome of Fyfe and Kinros, the Lairds of Scotscraig, and Danemilne
to be Conveeners for the first meeting (and thereafter to make choice among
themselves) Sir James Halket fiar of Pitfirrane, William Monteeth of
Randefoord, John Henderson of Fordell, Robert Dempster of Balbougie, Sir George
Hammiltoun of Blaikburn, Sir John Weymes of Boegy, M. Robert Ayton of
Inshdairnie, Sir Andrew Skeen of Halyeardis, Sir James Arnot of Fairnie, Sir
John Ayton of that Ilk, James Maegill of Rankelour elder, George Hay fiar of
Nachtoun, Sir Thomas Myreton of Cambo, M. James Reid of Pitlethie, William
Forbes younger of Rires, Sir William Douglas of Kirknes, and David Balfour of
Ballo.

For the Sherifdome of Sterling, (...) Murray of Polmaes John Rollok of
Bannokburn, Conveeners for the first meeting, and thereafter the rest of the
Shire to make choice of their own Conveeners, fir Thomas Nicolson of Carnok,
William Levingstone of Wastquarter, William Rosse of (...) John Sterling of
Harbertshire, sir James Levingston of Bancloth, (...) Stirling of Glorat, (...)
Kinked of Archinreach, (...) Hamiltoun of Baldoure, William Blair of Fenik,
John Lennox of Cairneshokle, M. William Cunningham ok Balindalloch, M. Robert
Naper of Kilcrewch, James Stirling of Balwill, Alexander Cunningham of Baquhane.

For the Sherifdome of Clakmannan, Sir Charles Erskin of Bandeth, Sir Robert
Bruce of Clakmannan, and Sir Alexander Shaw of Sauchie, Conveeners for the
first meeting, and thereafter to make choice amongst themselves, Master Robert
Bruce of Kennet, James Hadden of Myreton, William Graham of Hilton, William
Reid of Craigheid.

For the Sherifdome of Edinburgh, Sir Archibald Johnstoun of Wariston, and the
Lord of Libberton, to be Conveeners for the first meeting, and thereafter to
choose among themselves, Sir Patrick Hammiltoun of little Preston, Sir William
Scot of Clerkington, David Macullo of Guidtrees, M. John Inglis of
Nether-Cramond, M. David Andersoun of Hill, M. John Cant of Pentland, Mark
Kersse of Cokpen, M. Samuel Johnstoun of Scheans.

For the Sherifdome of Linlithgow, The Lairds of Daundas and Balbachlaw,
Conveeners for the first meeting, and thereafter to make choice among
themselves, William Drummond of Riccarton, Sir Walter Murray of Levingstoun,
George Dundas of Dudingstoun; Sir Robert Drummond of Medop, M. George Dundas of
Manner, M. James Hamiltoun of West-port, Samuel Drummond of Carlowrie.

For the Sherifdome of Hadingtoun, Sir Patrick Hepburne of Wachtoun, and Sir
Adam Hepburne of Humbie, Conveeners for the first meeting, and thereafter to
choose among themselves, M. (...) Hepburne of Smeitoun, Patrick Inglis of
Eivingstoun, M. James Sydserffe of Rauchlaw, John Hepburn of Craig, M.
Alexander Hay of Bara, William Cairnes of Pilmoore, George VVood Neumilnes.

For the Sherifdome of Berwik, The Lairds of Aitoun and Blaikader, Conveeners
for the first meeting, and thereafter to choose among themselves, George
Auchinlek of Cumledge, Alexander Home of Restoun, Alexander Home of
Rollandstone, James Home of Castell-law, M. Alexander Home of Saint Leonards,
M. George Home of Kymergem, William Home of Linthill.

For the Sherifdome of Roxburgh, The Lairds of Stobbs and Cavers, Conveeners
for the first meeting, and thereafter to make choice amongst themselves. Sir
Walter Riddell of that ilk, Master George Douglas of Bonne-Jedburgh, John Ker
of Lochtour, Robert Pringle of Stichell, John Scot of Gorranberrie, Walter Scot
Gaudielands, M. Gilbert Ellot of Craig end, James Pringle of Buckholme, John
Scot of Heidshaw, John Rutherfoord of Capehope, Robert Landlans of that ilk,
Walter Riddell portioner of Bewley, Andrew Bell of Mow, Andrew Ker of Sinles.

For the Sherifdome of Selkirk, The Lairds of Harden and Whitsleid Conveeners
for the first meeting, and thereafter to choose amongst themselves, James
Pringle of Torwoodlie, James Pringle of Whitebank, Neil Scot of Gallascheills,
William Scot of New-wark, Robert Scot of Hartwoodmyres, Robert Scot of Bowhill,
Francis Scot of Synton.

For the Sherifdome of Peibles, Sir Alexander Murray of Blakbarronie, Sir David
Murray of Stonehope, Conveeners for the first meeting, and thereafter to make
choice among themselves, Sir Michael Naesmith of Posso, M. James Lawson of
Cairnmure, Robert Hunter of Polmood, Andrew Hay of Hayston, William Govan of
Cardrona.

For the Sheriffdome of Lanerk, The Lairds of Belstane, and Dalserff,
Conveeners for the first meeting, and thereafter to choose amongst themselves,
Sir James Hamiltoun of Fingletoun, Edward Hamiltoun of Sillertonhill, Gavin
Hamiltoun of Raploch, William Baillie of Carphin, Robert Hamiltoun of
Aikinheid, (...) Crafurd of Kibbers, Andrew Hamiltoun portioner of Overtoun,
Sir William Baillie of Laminton, Sir William Carmichell fiar of that ilk,
George Weir of Blaikwood, John Bannatine of Corhous, James Hamiltoun of
Halcraig, James Winraham of Wolstoun, M. John Carmichell Commisser of Lanerk,
James Hamiltoun of Sandieholme, James Hamiltoun of Boigs.

For the Sheriffdome of Air, The Lairds of Rowallan, and the Lord of Corsby,
Conveeners for the first meeting, and thereafter to choose amongst themselves,
Hew Campbell of Cesnoke, James Chalmer of Gadgirth, Sir William Cochrane of
Coudoun, Allan Cathcart younger of Cairnehill, Robert Ferquhar of Gilmicroft,
Neill Montgomrie of Langshaw, Robert Montgomrie of Hisfilheid, John Crafurd of
Crafurdland, David Kennedie elder of Kirkmichell, Thomas Boyd of Pankill,
Gabriell Porterfield of Hapland, John Cunninghame of Bordland, Henry Kelso of
(...) John Mac-Alexander of Corsclayes, John Macclevin of Grimmet, M. Adam
Cunningham of Priviks.

For the Sheriffdome of Wigtoun and Stewartry of Kirkcudbright, The Lord of
Garthland, and the young Sheriff of Galloway, Conveeners for the first
meeting, and thereafter to make choice among themselves, Sir Patrick Makgie of
Large, John Makgie of Balmagie, William Grierson of Bargaltoun, Alexander
Gordoun, of Erlestoun, James Rosse of Banneill, John Mackulloth of Mertoun,
John Fullerton of Carletoun, Robert Mackullo of Drummorell, George Glendoning
of Mochrumi, William Gordoun of Crachlaw, Uchtry Mackdowgall of French,
Patrick Agnew of Sewchram, Richard Mure of Cassincarthy, Thomas Makclellan of
Colin, Patrick Agnew of Barneweil, John Stewart of Shambelly, William
Glendoning Provest of Kirkudbright, James Lafreis.

For the Sheriffdome of Drumfreis, The Lord of Lag and (...) Conveeners for
the first meeting, and thereafter to make choice among themselves, M. George
Douglas of Pymurie, Thomas Ferguson of Caitloch, John Creightoun of Crafoord
John, James Douglas of Mortoun, William Maxwell of Steilstoun, John Grierson of
Chapel, Hugh Charters of Glencorse, Alexander Ferguson of I Will, James Douglas
of Mousewall, Robert Charters of Douchra, James Iohnstoun of Corheid, Andrew
Iohnstoun of Locherby, Matthew Wilson of Greenhill, Francis Scot of
Cartertoun, John Kennedie of Halklaithes, Archbald Douglas of Dronock.

For the Sheriffdome of Renfrew, the Lord of Grenock, and (...) Conveeners for
the first meeting (and thereafter to meet and choose amongst themselves) Sir
Lodowick Houstoun of that ilk, John Birsbane of Bishoptoun, Alexander
Portetfield of that ilk, (...) Pook elder of that ilk, (...) Caldwall of that
ilk, John Maxwell of Southbarre, James Orr of Langfillie.

For the Sheriffdome of Dumbartan, the Lord of Fulwood, Conveener for the
first meeting (and thereafter to choose amongst themselves) Walter Makaula of
Ardincaple, John Naper of Kilmahew, Robert Hall of Fulbarre, Robert Cochrane of
Bellarmik, (...) Carshore of that ilk, John Colquhone of Kilmadymne, Hugh
Craford of Claverhill, John Dennestoun of Dalquharrie.

For the Sheriffdome of Argyle, the Lairds of Glenurquhie, and Auchinbrek,
Conveeners for the first meeting (and thereafter to choose amongst themselves)
James Campbell of Arkinelies, Archbald Campbell of Kilmure, Sir Lachlane
Makclene of Dowart, Archbald Campbell of Dunstaffnik, Sheriff depute of
Argyle, George Campbell, (...) Hector Makneil.

For the Sheriffdome of Bute, the Lord of Skelmorlie, Conveener for the first
meeting, Sir James Stuart of Kirktowne, Ninian Stuart of Kilcatton, Ninian
Stuart elder of Ashcock, Hector Bannatyne of Kaynes, John Stuart of Alismore,
Neil Makneil of Kilmore, John Campbell sometime Provest of Rothsay.

Who shall conveene with the whole Heritours, Life-renters, Taksmen, Titulars,
proper Wad-setters, Pensioners, Conjunctfiers, Lady tercers, and others, within
ilk one of their said Sheriffdomes respective, Or at least with so many of the
said persons as shall be conveened for the time, upon the first Tuesday of
October next, as the first day of their meeting appointed for the whole Shires
of the Kingdom: And to the effect the same may be known to the whole lieges:

It is ordained, that the Conveener or Conveeners of the shires before named,
shall cause intimate the said meeting at the Market cross of the head Burgh of
the shire with all convenient diligence, and at every Parish Kirk thereof,
immediately after Divine Service, upon any Sunday preceding the 22. day of
September next, and to meet ilk shire at the places following, viz. The
Sheriffdome of Orkney at the town of Kirkwall, the Sheriffdome of Caitnes at
the town of Thursay, the Sheriffdome of Sutherland at the town of Dornoch, the
Sheriffdomes of Innernes and Cromertie at the Burgh of Innernes, the
Sheriffdome of Narn at the Burgh of Narn, the Sheriffdome of Elgin at the Burgh
of Elgin, the Sheriffdome of Bamf at the Burgh of Bamf, the Sheriffdome of
Aberdene at the Burgh of Aberdene, the Sheriffdome of Kincardine at the town
of Stanehyve, the Sheriffdome of Forfar at the Burgh of Forfar, the Sheriffdome
of Perth at the Burgh of Perth, the Sheriffdomes of Fife and Kinros at the
Burgh of Cowper, the Sheriffdome of Clakmannan, at the town of Clakmannan, the
Sheriffdome of Sterling at the Burgh of Sterling, the Sheriffdome of Renfrew at
the Burgh of Renfrew, the Sheriffdome of Dumbartan at the Burgh of Dumbartan,
the Sheriffdome of Argyle at the Burgh of Innerara, the Sheriffdome of Bute at
the Burgh of Rothesay, the Sheriffdome of Lanerk at the Burgh of Lanerk, the
Sheriffdome of Air at the Burgh of Air, the Sheriffdome of Wigtoun and
Stuartrie of Kircudbright at the Burgh of Wigtoun, the Sheriffdome of Dumfreis
at the Burgh of Dumfreis, the Sheriffdome of Roxburgh at the Burgh of Jedburgh,
the Sheriffdome of Selkirk at the Burgh of Selkirk, the Sheriffdome of Peibles
at the Burgh of Peibles, the Sheriffdome of Berwick at the town of Duns, the
Sheriffdome of Haddingtoun at the Burgh of Haddingtoun, the Sheriffdome of
Edinburgh at the Burgh of Edinburgh, the Sheriffdome of Linlithgow at the Burgh
of Linlithgow. And there the said Conveeners, or any of them, with such other
Commissioners as shall be conveened for the time, shall cause call by name and
surname, the Heritours, Live-renters, Titulars, Taksmen of teinds, proper
Wad-setters, Pensioners, Lady tercers, and others within the said
Sheriffdomes, who bruike any benefit to landward, whereby any profit or
commodity arises, And by consent of them, or most part of them conveened for
the time, shall make choice of a select number of persons, to be joined with
the foresaids Commissioners, chosen by the Convention, to the number of eight
persons, in the foresaids shires where there are sixteen chosen by the
Convention, and to the number of three persons in the rest of the shires, being
judicious, conscientious, and understanding men, who shall (as well these
nominate as those to be elected) give their solemn oaths judicially at their
first meeting, in presence of the said Conveener or Conveeners, who are hereby
authorized to take their oaths, to do uprightly and impartially, according to
their best knowledge and information in the particulars following.

With power to the said Commissioners, or most part of them conveened for the
time, to make choice of a Clerk for writing and forming of the rolls after
specified, and doing every other thing incumbent to the charge after following.

Which Commissioners so nominate and elected, shall use all lawful means,
according to the time, and if need be, shall direct out summons at their own
instances against any person or persons within the said shire, to compeere
before them, and give them information upon oath or other ways, with
certification of a pecuniall sum, not exceeding forty pounds toties
quoties, in case of contempt and refusal.

And with power to the said Commissioners, to use all other legal way to
inform themselves of the just and true worth of every person or persons their
present years rent of this cropped and year 1643. to landward, as well of lands
and teinds, as of any other thing whereby yearly profit and commodity arises.

And that the worth of every person or persons, their lands, teinds and other
commodities, where gressums and enteresse have been paid, be valued and set
down, not only as they pay to the Heritors, Liferenters, and other their
Masters, but as the same are worth, and may pay presently, without respect of
gressums or enteresse, and to divide the said Rolls in particular Parishes, by
making a Roll for every selverall Parish within the said Shire; Which Roll
shall contain every particular Persons name, surname, and designation, with
their said years Rent, and Commodity within the said Parish, whether in
Victual, Money, or other Commodities.

And the said Victual and Commodities to be converted into money by the said
Commissioners, upon their former Oaths, according as in every Parish the
prices of selverall spaces of Victual and Commodities shall rule for the time;
deducing aff the said Rents and Commodities what is paid forth thereof to
Ministers, Schoolmasters, Superiors, Taksmen, Life-renters, Colleges, and
Hospitals; Which deduction aff the said Life-renters, Taksmen and Superiors,
shall be charged upon the said Life-renters, Taksmen and Superiors, by
Articles apart, together with any other Rent, any they have within the said
Parish.

As also because it is necessary to be known what the said deductions of
Ministers and Schoolmasters stipends and exemptions extends to, It is
appointed and ordained, that at the end of every one of the said Rolls,
Articles shall be set down thereof: viz. One for the said deductions of
Ministers and Schoolmasters stipends, and another for the said exemptions of
every Parish.

It is likewise appointed, that in the setting down of the said Rols, this
years constant land rent shall be distinguished from the other casual rent,
whereby yearly profit and commodity arises.

And for performing and perfecting of the said Rolls, the said Commissioners
and others foresaids, shall appoint their several diets of meeting, betwixt the
first Tuesday of October next to come, and the fifteenth day of November
thereafter, which is appointed to be the last day peremptorily for perfecting
and delivering of the said Rols.

And which rols so perfected and concluded, shall be subscribed by the said
persons nominate and to be elected as said is, or most part thereof conveened
for the time, and which particular rolls of every particular Person of every
Parish, shall be kept in retentis within the said Shire in some trusty person
or persons hands, not to be made public, nor shown, except to the Collector of
the said Parish, who must make use thereof, in uplifting of the sums due to be
paid by the said Parish, unless upon occasion of question betwixt party and
party, or betwixt the said Collector and party.

And after perfecting of the which rolls the said Commissioners shall draw up
aff the said particular rolls of Parishes a general roll containing as many
several Articles as there are selverall Parishes or parcels of Parishes (if
any be divided within several Shires) which Articles shall be set down in
manner following: viz. A. B. for himself and remanent Heritours, Life-renters,
and others within the Parish of D. for their proper rent of the said Parish,
extending to the sum of (...) (victual and others commodities being converted
into money) their part of the said Loan extends to (...) and so forth,
throughout the rest of the whole Parishes.

In the which roll there must be set down in cumulo the deductions of Ministers
and Schoolmasters stipends (if any be) in an Article.

Item, in another Article mortified and excemed rents, if any be.

And sicklike in setting down of the said Article for the whole Parish, it must
be distinguished what thereof is constant land rent, and what is casual rent.

Which general rolls, containing only an Article for every Parish within ilk
Shire, being so set down and subscribed by the Commissioners, or most part
thereof conveened for the time, and containing the said Articles of deductions,
and exemptions, and distinctions, in manner foresaid, shall be delivered by the
said Commissioners, or their Clerk, to the Sub-collectors of the said Shire
appointed, or to be appointed for that effect, betwixt and the said 15. day of
November next to come, and by the said Sub-collector, to the Clerk of the said
collection, that the same may be a ground and warrant for raising of Letters
thereupon against the said Collectors of several Parishes, or persons
nominate in the said general rolls for every Parish.

And if any of the said Commissioners hereby nominate, and to be elected for
setting down of the said roll, shall refuse to accept, or be negligent in doing
their faithful diligence therein; It is herefore statute and ordained, that
letters shall be direct to messengers of arms to command and charge every one
of the foresaids persons to accept the said Commission within 24. hours after
they be charged, and to do their exact diligence therein until the final
close thereof, and to deliver the said rolls subscribed by the betwixt and the
said 15. day of November next to come, under the pain of rebellion, etc. And if
they failie, to denounce and escheat, etc.

And incase the said stent rolls shall not be set down, perfected,
subscribed, and delivered betwixt and the said 15 day of November next to come;
In that case letters shall be direct against the said Commissioners nominate
and to be elected, to pay the whole sums of money to be lent by the said
shire, which Commissioners are ordained hereby to be the first payers thereof,
in case they shall refuse or failie to set down, perfect, and deliver the said
rolls betwixt and the said 15. day of November next to come, under the pain of
rebellion, etc. and if they failie to denounce and escheat, etc.

And it is hereby declared, that in the case foresaid of their neglect, as said
is, and of their first payment of the sum to be lent by the said shire, In
that case, and after payment thereof made by them, they shall have letters of
relief against the whole Heritours, Life-renters, and others of the said
Sheriffdome, conform to the roll when it shall be made up and subscribed by
them, or most part of them, as said is.

It is hereby also declared, that it shall be lawful and leisome to every
person or persons, (excepting the Commissioners nominate, and to be elected as
said is) interest in the sums to be lent by the said shire, who cannot
conveniently come to the said meetings, to send their Procurators authorized
by them in writ, who shall have such like power in doing every thing as they
might do themselves, if they were personally present.

It is hereby likewise declared, that incase any of the Heritours,
Life-renters, Titulers, Taksmen of Teinds, proper Wad-setters or others within
the said shire, shall not conveen at the day and days appointed, or to be
appointed for that effect, it shall be leisome to the said persons hereby
nominate, or most part of them conveened for the time, to make and set down
the said rolls, perfect, subscribe and deliver the same, in manner aforesaid.

And that the sums of money so to be lent by the said shires, may be uplifted
and inbrought, It is Statute and Ordained, that letters shall be directed for
charging the whole sub-collectours within ilk shire or shires, to make payment
of the whole sums of money, due to be paid by the said shires, whereof they are
or shall be appointed Sub-collectours, conform to the said roll, subscribed by
the said Lord Chancellor in presence of the said Convention, at the said Term
of Candlemas next, under the pain of rebellion, etc.

And for the said Sub-collectours their relief aff the shires, It is statute
and ordained that letters shall be directed, charging the several Collectours
of every Parochin within the said-shire or shires, or persons nominate in the
said particular rolls for payment to the said Sub-collectour, or his deputies,
of the sums contained in the said rolls, and that within twenty days next
after they be charged, if they be within this Kingdom: And if they be without
the same, by open Proclamation at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, Piere arid
Shore of Leith, upon threescore days warning, under the pain of rebellion,
etc. And if they failie, to denounce and escheit, and to poynd and distrenie,
etc.

And for relief of the said Collectour of every several parochine or persons
nominate in the said particular rolls, It is hereby statute and ordained, that
letters shall be directed for payment making to them of the sums contained in
the said particular rolls against every particular person or persons contained
in the said rolls, within eight days after they be charged, if they be within
this Kingdom: And if they be without the same, by open Proclamation at the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, Peire and Shore of Leith, upon 60. days warning,
under the pain of rebellion, etc. With power to poynd and distrinie their
readiest goods and geire that shall be found upon the ground of any of their
said lands, who shall not timously pay, whether the said goods pertain to
these liable in the said loan or not, which goods being so poynded, it shall
not be necessary to carry them to the Market Cross of the head Burgh of the
shire, but onlxy to use the ordinary way of poynding and apprising upon the
ground of the said lands, together with the sum of twenty marks for ilk
hundredth marks failie.

And for inbringing of the Burrowes part of the said loan, Ordains letters to
be direct, charging the Provest and Bailies of ilk Burgh, to make payment of
their part thereof (conform to one roll to be subscribed by the Clerk of the
Burrowes, or conform to the old roll,) To the said Collectour general, his
Deputies and officers in his name, having his power to receive the same at the
said term above specified, an if they failie, to denounce and escheat, etc.

And for their relief, that letters be direct, charging the Provest, Bailies
and Council within each Burgh to conveen and elect certain persons to stent
their neighbors, and the said election being made to charge the persons
elected to accept the charge upon them, in setting down the said stent upon the
said neighbors, and to conveene and set the same, and to make a stent roll
thereupon as effeires, within twenty four hours next after the charge, under
the pain of rebellion: And if they failie, to denounce and escheit, etc.

And sicklike, the said stent roll being made and set down as said is, to
charge the Burgesses, Indwellees, and Inhabitants within each Burgh, to make
payment of their part of the said loan to the said Provest and Bailies, Conform
to the said roll to be given out thereupon, within three days next after the
charge under the pain of rebellion; and if they failie to denounce and escheit,
etc. And if needs be that the said Provest and Bailies poynd and distrenie as
they shall think expedient.

It is always provided, that no person whatsoever be stented within Burgh, for
any lands or possessions which he has to landwart.

It is hereby likewise declared, that the charges to be given for payment of
the said loan, may be execute as well against these that are without the
Country, as these that are within the Country before the said term of
payment, but that the execution of denunciation and poynding shall not be
execute until the said term of payment be bygone, and the several days of
the charges respective foresaids be also by past.

And in respect that the foresaids whole sums of money so to be lent by the
said Shires and Burrowes, Is for relief of the great sums of money already
taken on, as said is, and to be advanced for supply of the said army in
Ireland, which should be repayed by the Parliament of England out of the first
end of the arrears due to that army.

Therefore the said Estates have not only ratified and approven the foresaid
act of Council, with concourse of the said Commissioners for conserving the
peace and Commissioners of the common burdens, but also have of new Statute
and Ordained, Like as they be their presents Statute and ordain, that as well
these who have already advan^ed money or victual, or who have engaged
themselves for payment of the prices of victual, money, and other provision by
warrant of the said Lords of Council alone, Or by warrant of them jointly
with the said Commissioners of peace and common burdens, but also the whole
foresaids sums (whereof the said former advancements are apart) are hereby
ordained to be repayed out of the first and readiest of the said arrears,
conform to the tennour, and upon the conditions mentioned in the said Act of
Council, with concourse foresaid,

And in case the same shall not be repayed by the Parliament of England, betwixt
and the said second day of February next to come, It is hereby statute and
ordained, like as the said Estates by their presents statutes and ordaines,
that the whole foresaids persons, who have by warrant foresaid advanced money,
victual, or other provision, to the said Army; preceding the date hereof,
conform to the particular count thereof registrate in the books of Convention
of the date hereof, shall be repayed ilk man of his several sums, together
with the interest thereof, conform to the tenor of the foresaid Acts, and that
out of the first and readiest of the sums of money to be uplifted by virtue of
this present Act, and that by the Collector, Sub-collector, and others having
warrant and power to receive the same, betwixt and the last day of February
next to come.

So that it shall not be leisome to the said Collectors or others, to dispose
upon any of the said moneys so to be lent, without the consent of those who
have lent the said money or victual, until they be first satisfied.

And in case the said Parliament of England shall happen not to pay and deliver
the said bygone arreares, at least so much thereof as shall repay the said
sums so to be lent, as said is, betwixt and the first day of June next to come,
in the year of God 1644. years.

And seeing it is agreed and condescended unto, that the burden be equally
according to every man's estate, In that case it is declared, that when the
whole valuations of the whole Kingdom shall be known in manner and conform to
the rolls above specified.

Therefore it is appointed and ordained, that a survey shall be made of the
whole foresaids Rols, and compared one with another, to the effect it may be
seen and known, if any Shire or Shires have paid more out of the hundred
marks (victual and others commodities being turned into money) then other
Shires have, and being so found, that some may be appointed before this present
Convention dissolve, or by the next Parliament, or by the Committees from
either of them, to see what is the just proportion, which according to their
foresaids rents, would fall upon every Shire, that these who have paid more
then their just proportion, may have repayment aff the Shires, who have paid
less, to be collected and inbrought by such persons as this present
Convention, the Estates of Parliament, or Committees from either, shall appoint.

And because the foresaids whole sums of money, as well to Burgh as Landward,
extends to a great sum of money, and will be a considerable burden upon this
Kingdom, and that the same is wholly paid out of the land rents, trade,
burrow-lands, and other land rent, and yearly commodity, without consideration
or laying any burden upon money, upon bank, or anuall rent: Therefore it is
statute and ordained, Like as the said Estates statutes and ordains, that
every debtour of money upon anuall rent, as well to Burgh as Landward, shall
have retention at the said term of Candlemas next, of six of each hundredth
marks or pounds wherein he is liable of annual rent, to his Creditors at the
said term: Providing that the remanent of the said annual rent, out of the
which the said Debitour shall crave retention, shall be thankfully paid at the
least within three months after the said term of payment of the annual rent,
otherwise no retention to be allowed.

And sicklike it is hereby declared, that this present Act, nor no Clause
therein, shall be any ground of suspension to any Debtour for retention of the
said principal sums addebted by him, and by-run annual rents, but that every
Creditour may suit, crave, and charge for the same, after the day of payment
thereof.

And it is hereby declared, that if any person or persons within or without
Burgh, shall upon their Oath declare to their Magistrates within Burgh, and
Commissioners of the Shires without Burgh, that they pay annual rent to
strangers, dwelling without this Kingdom, of whom they cannot have retention
foresaid, in that case the said Magistrates within Burgh, and Commissioners
without Burgh, shall defaulk proportionally to the said person or persons,
such a part of their loan, as they shall find agreeable to equity and reason.

And sicklike, in respect that the foresaids sums of money so to be lent, are
in hope of payment thereof from the Parliament of England:

It is hereby declared, that the whole creditours within this Kingdom, as well
to Burgh as Landward, who shall grant retention to their debtours, in manner
foresaid, shall have their proportional repayment with the rest of the
Country, and that either from his debitours, if it please the creditour to
trust him therewith, or otherwise to take assignation from the debitour upon
the Parliament of England, as a part of the same, due to the debitour for his
relief.

AND because the enemies to Religion and Peace of this Kingdom, are daily
making divisions, and waiting all occasions, whereby they may draw to factions,
make insurrections, and stir up others to the disobedience of the laws, and
common resolution for the good of Religion, His Majesty's Honor and Safety,
and the weal of this Kingdom:

Therefore, and for the reasons contained in the Act of the said Estates, made
anent the leavy of some Horse and Foot, for preveening of any such divisions,
distractions, insurrections, factions, and disobedience to the said common
resolutions:

The said Estates have voluntarily granted, statute and ordained, Like as they
by their presents voluntarily grants, statutes, and ordains, A taxt of 120000.
l. Scots money, to be uplifted for the entertainment of the said Men, Horse
and Foot to be levied, as said is, in manner, and for the use contained in the
said Act. Which sum of 120000. l. money foresaid, shall be paid to the said
general Collector, his Deputes and Officers, and others having power and
warrant from him, at the said term of Candlemas next: viz. one sixth part
thereof, extending to the sum of 20000. l. By the Burrowes of this Kingdom and
the remanent thereof, extending to 100000 l. by the several Shires of this
Kingdom, conform to a particular rool thereof, subscribed by the said Lord
Chancellor in presence of the Convention of Estates.

For in bringing and ingathering whereof, the same manner of way shall be
followed, and the same kind of letters direct, the like diligence used and
received, as for the foresaids sums of money hereby lent for the supply of the
Army in Ireland, conform to the preceding tenor of this present Act.

And it is statute and ordained, that no suspension shall be granted to any
persons whatsoever, without consignation of the sums charged for in the Clerk
of the said collection his hand, unless the reasons thereof can be instantly
verified or made notour at the passing of the said Bill, either in presentia in
the time of Session, or by four or five of the Lords of Session in time of
vacance, To the which suspensions the said Lords of Session shall be only
Judges, in such form and manner as they are, and have been in matters of
Taxation.

It is hereby statute and ordained, that the general Collector shall take
sufficient and responsall caution from every Sub-collector to do his exact
diligence in every thing committed to his charge, as well in bringing in of
money, as in all other diligence, conform to the bands to be made by them and
their Cautioners thereanent.

It is likewise statute and ordained, that the Collectors of every Parish shall
either be a sufficient and responsall man himself, or otherwise shall give
sufficient caution for his intromission and diligence, The which diligence to
be done as well by the said Sub-collectors, as by the said Collectors of
Parisnes reffective, is hereby understood to be ail ordinary execution of
horning registrate in due time, and poynding, until they be stopped by
deforcement, are to be received for diligence alannerly.

Likeas it is hereby statute and ordained, that the said Collector general
shall receive the said diligence of registrate hornings in due time, and
executions of deforcement from the said Sub-collectors and Collectors
respective, providing the same be delivered to the said Collectour general,
before the fifteenth day of March next to come, otherwise no diligence to be
received, but they to be liable for payment in solidum.

It is likewise ordained, that the Sub-collectors of every Parochine, shall not
be obliged to carry the money received by them farther then their own Parish,
and at farthest to the head Burgh of the Shire, and the Sub-collectour shall be
obliged to receive the same, and make payment thereof to the general
Collectour, as is above specified.

And because these who takes pains in the said collection, as well the said
Sub-collectors, Collectors of Parishes, Clerks in the Shires, Clerk of the said
collection, and others to be employed in the said service, will deserve to have
certain fees and allowance granted to them:

It is therefore statute and ordained, that ane roll be made thereof, either by
the said Estates, or by some to be appointed from them, which rolls being so
made and set down, the same shall be registered in the books of convention, and
extracts given forth thereof, to the effect every man may know his own due

It is hereby declared, that no exemption shall be granted to any person or
persons whatsoever, except only the lands, rents, annual rents, and others
duties mortified to Colleges, Schools, Hospitalls, and for upholding of Kirks
and Bridges, and the Lord Chancellor, and fifeteen ordiner Lords of Session
allannerly.

It is always declared, that this present manned of ingathering of the said
loan and taxation shall no ways prejudge any person whatsoever in succeeding
taxations, but that every man's right and claim, and all the prejudice that may
arise anent the samine or manner thereof, whereby any man may instruct enorm
lesion, and that he was unequally stented, is hereby specially reserved hinc
inde.

Alex. Gibsone Cler. Regist.

Printed at Edinburgh by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, 1647.


