ACT OF MAINTENANCE.
At Edinburgh, the third day of February, The year of God one thousand six
hundred and forty nine years.
THE Estates of Parliament, now presently conveened in this second Session of
the second Trienniall Parliament by virtue of an Act of the Committee of
Estates, who had power and Authority from the last Parliament for conveening
the Parliament, Considering the dangers now threatening Religion, the Covenant,
and the peace of their Kingdoms, And that they are thereby necessitate to keep
up the Forces within this Kingdom, and to provide for their entertainment; Have
therefore thought fit to prorogate and continue the monthly Maintenance, as it
was imposed upon the said Kingdom, by virtue of an Act of the Committee of
Estates of the 3. of November last bypast 1648. years, for one month after
the month of January contained in the former Act. Whilk month shall begin
upon the first day of February instant, and continue till the first day of
March next to come, with a deduction of the just third part of the said
monthly Maintenance, whilk was formerly established, Save that the said
Shires and Burghs shall be only liable in payment of the two part of the
Maintenance formerly imposed upon them for the said month of February, Whilk
two part shall be paid by them without any deduction or defalcation: And
therefore Statutes and Ordains, That ilk Burgh and Shire within this Kingdom,
are and shall be liable, and obliged in payment of the particular sums of money
underwritten for the said month of February, And that betwixt and the 15. day
of February instant, And Ordains the same to be paid, to Sir James Stewart,
Provest of Edinburgh, Treasurer of the Army, and Collector-Generall of the said
Maintenance, or his Deputies, or sub-Collectors: And that the sums to be paid
by the several Shires and Burghs, be as follows: viz. The Sheriffdom of Orkney
of monthly pay, 1143. Merks. Innernes 4176. M. Caithnes 945. M. Cromartie 99.
M. Sutherland 423. M. Nairne 315. M. Elgine 1890. M. Aberdeen 6543. M. Bamff
1431. M. Kincairdin 1566. M. Forfar 5004. M. Perth 8001. M. Fyfe 6642. M.
Stirling 2538. m. Kinrose 144. m. Clackmannan 522. m. Edinburgh 4167. m.
Linlithgow 1746. m. Hadingtoun 3384. m. Berwick 3555. m. Roxburgh 5778. m.
Selkirk 1278. m. Peebles 1638. m. Lanerk 5382. m. Air 6066. m. Wigtoun and
Kirkcudbright 4374. m. Dumfreis 4446. m. Renfrew 2205. m. Dumbartan 1233. m.
Argyle 2907. m. Bute 459. m. Follows the sums payable monthly by the Burghs,
conform to their taxt Roll: viz. Edinburgh 5175. m. Perth 810. m. Dundee 1200.
m. Aberdeen 1260. m. Stirling 240. m. Linlithgow 324. m. St. Andrews 780. m.
Glasgow 1530. m. Air 342. m. Hadingtoun 324. m. Daysert 270. m. Kirkaldie 600.
m. Monrose 324. m. Cowpar 216. m. Austruther eister 180. m. Dumfreis 270. m.
Innernes 450. m. Breichen 220. m. Irving 252. m. Elgine 135. m. Iedburgh 126.
m. Kircudbright 180. m. Wigtoun 135. m. Pittinweyme 120. m. Dumfirmling 162. m.
Dumbartan 162. m. Renfrew 90. m. Lanerk 162. m. Aberbrothok 81. m. Bruntiland
216. m. Peibles 108. m. Craill 216. m. Kinghorne 108. m. Taine 90. m. Selkirk
126. m. Austruther wester 54. m. Culrose 90. m. Dumbar 180. m. Bamff 72. m.
Whithorne 45. m. Forfar 27. m. Rothesay 60. m. Forress 54. m. Rutherglen 45. m.
Northberwick 36. m. Cullein 27. m. Nairne 36. m. Lawder 45. m. Innerkeithing
90. m. Kilrynnie 27. m. Annan 30. m. Lochmaben 18. m. Sanquhair 27. m. Galloway
18. m. Dingwall 18. m. Queensferrie 108. m. Dornoch. 18. For the better
In-bringing and Collecting whereof, The said Estates of Parliament, allows to
the said Sir James Stewart Deputies, one or more in each Shire and Paroch, in
manner contained in the Act for the Taxt and Loan; Which Collectors and
Deputies foresaids and Clerks to be appointed by him, shall have such Fee as is
allowed in the Act of Loan and Taxt: The Burghs always being free of the
aforesaids Fees. And the Estates Ordains that the Letters and Charges to follow
upon this Act for payment of the foresaid Maintenance shall be raised and
direct at the instance of the said Sir James Stewart and Collectors aforesaid
against the sub-Collectors of Shires, Magistrates of Burghs, Collectors of
Paroches, Heritors, Fewers, Life-renters, and others indebted in payment of
their several proportions of this monthly Maintenance now imposed, And with
power to the said Sir James Stewart, that if any Shire or Burgh be deficient in
payment of their parts of this Maintenance, to employ any Forces that shall
happen to be upon the bounds for the time, or in the next neigbouring bounds
adjacent thereto, for uplifting of the said months Maintenance from the
deficient Shires, Burghs and Paroches, which Troops are to receive their
entertainment from the deficients at the ordinary rates beside the payment of
their maintenance: And it is hereby Ordained that the Committees of War within
the several Shires shall be aiding and assisting the said General Commissary
herein, for inbringing of the said maintenance; And in regard of the
prorogating of the foresaid Maintenance on the Shires and Burghs for the said
month of February, It is Statute and Ordained by the Estates of Parliament,
that every debtour shall have Retention from the Creditors of one of each eight
payable for annual Rent for the said month above specified, So that the debtor
shall be liable in payment of seven of annual Rent of each hundredth of stock
proportionally according to the said month, With this provision always, that
no debtor whatsoever shall have the foresaid benefit of Retention who shall not
pay his annual Rent to the Creditor within the space of ane year after that one
preceding years annual Rent is fully resting, owing, unpaid: And in regard of
the present distressed condition of the Sheriffdoms of Argyle and Bute, The
Estates do exeem the whole Sheriffdom of Argyle from all payment of the
foresaid one months maintenance of February instant; As also exeems the
Sheriffdom of Bute, from all payment of the equal half of the said months
Maintenance; And Ordains the same Shire of Bute to be only liable in payment of
the whole half of the said months Maintenance, And to be proportionably paid
by the Heretors and others liable in payment thereof through the whole Shire of
Bute: As also the Estates declares this present Act to be without prejudice of
the Act granted in favors of the Town of Innernes of the fifth of January 1647.
years, That any Taxations or Impositions to be laid on that Town be allowed to
them in part of their losses conform to the tenor of that Act: And lastly, it
is Ordained that no suspension be granted without consignation; and that all
Heritors within Burghs, Pendicles and Liberties thereof shall contribute with
them for payment of the Maintenance, as is mentioned in the Act of the 27. of
February 1645. years. And the said Estates Ordains, that the Lands and Teinds
shall pay the foresaid Maintenance, as they lie locally in Shires and Burghs,
conform to the former Act of Maintenance; And it is hereby Declared, that this
Act is to be without prejudice of the Privileges of the Lords of Session,
conform to former Acts of Maintenance: And Ordains the same presently to be
Proclaimed, And thereafter Printed.

William Scot, Cler. Parl.

Edinburgh, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most excellent Majesty,
1649.


