A Remonstrance of the Case of the late Farmers of the Customs, and their
humble Petition to the Parliament;
Humbly showing,

THat the said Farmers about the year 1640, upon a contract with the late King
for the Farms of the Customs, did advance and engage for very great sums of
money for his service; Which contract could not be perfected nor enjoyed, by
reason of the Parliament intervening and disposing the Revenue thereof to the
then present occasions of the Public: And so their intended security was not
only diverted, but the said Farmers were made more miserable, by being
questioned in the House of Commons, and voted Delinquents for intermedling in
the Farming of the said Customs, as being illegal. In this great straight
they were advised, and did without dispute submit themselves to the mercy of
the House by Petition, and craved leave to make their composition, and expiate
their faults by a present sum to be paid for the then urgent occasions of the
Commonwealth; Whereupon a Committee was appointed to treat the same, who
agreed that upon payment of 165000 li. from the said Farmers, they should have
an Act of Oblivion passed for their Delinquency, and so was ordered by the
House accordingly; The Farmers hereupon submitted themselves thereunto. But
withal again petitioned the House, wherein they laid down the particulars of
their great Debts and Engagements for the late King, for provisions for the
Navy, and Ammunition of War for the Office of the Ordnance. All which was
afterward employed in their service; And that hereby they were so obstructed
in the procuring of moneys to effect this present composition, that they could
by no means raise any sum until such time the House would declare, that
when they fell upon the Kings Revenue, they would take care of the Farmers said
debt; And thereupon it was ordered that they would take the justness of the
said Petition into consideration in due time. By which engagement of the House,
the Farmers credits were renewed, and with much speed then procured the
aforesaid sum of 165000 li. and paid the same for disbanding the English and
Scotch Forces then in this Nation, which with many thankful expressions from
several Members, was accounted an extraordinary service, in their so sudden
and timely payment thereof.

And as the Farmers did move with the Parliament as aforesaid, so they did
likewise petition the late King for his directions how they might be otherwise
secured for his said Debt (their former security upon the Customs being
otherwise diverted) which Petition was by the late King referred unto his then
Commissioners of the H: Manchester. W: Say and State. Falkland, E. Newburgh.
John Culpepper, etc.
Treasury, to consider some way of satisfaction of the Debt.

Whereupon the said Commissioners of the Treasury did by their Certificate unto
the late King, dated the fifteenth of May, 1642. propose and advise him the
best and most advantagiovs way for the satisfaction of the Farmers said debt,
to be out of the sale of such his Forest Lands, Chaces and Parkes, as were
annual charges unto him, and served not for his disport, whereby he should not
only pay his debt, but much advance his Revenue.

And accordingly the said King by his Letter dated the first of June, 1642.
from York, directed unto his said Commissioners of the Treasury, in answer to
their Certificate of the fifteenth of May, 1642. aforesaid, and taking thereby
consideration of a Petition then exhibited unto him at York, with a Scedule of
the Farmers debt, together with interest incurred for the same, which he sends
to the Commissioners, signifying that for the reasons in the Certificate
mentioned, he was very much inclined to discharge the Farmers said debt, and
resolved by all possible ways and means speedily to satisfy the same; And
therefore did thereby require with all convenient speed, a List of all his
Parkes, Forests and Chaces to be presented unto him, to the end he might
speedily give further Order how to dispose of them. And his Surveyor general
was for the more speedy effecting his pleasure, required thereby to give
particulars and constats of the premises unto the said Commissioners: Which was
done accordingly by the said Surveyor general.

And now the Farmers business being brought to this maturity, upon the very
point of satisfaction to be settled for their debt, in the way aforesaid; the
difference with the said King and Parliament then arising, and so continuing,
and all addresses forbidden, did stay the Farmers from any further applications
unto the said King.

Yet notwithstanding the Farmers groaning under so great aburden of debt, did
endeavor all means before them offered, and being made more miserable by a
greater composition paid by them to the Parliament as aforesaid, by reason
whereof they were further engaged to sundry persons in greater sums of
moneys; Hereupon the said Farmers in May, 1645. did renew their request unto
the House of Commons by Petition, for Order and directions, that their debt and
engagements might be discharged and satisfied.

The House the fourteenth of May, 1645. thereupon Ordered that the said
Petition should be referred to the consideration of the Committee of the Navy,
who were to prepare an Ordinance for relief of the Petitioners, according to
the former engagements of the House, and they had power to receive such
Propositions as should be tendered unto them by the Petitioners; And privilege
of Parliament granted for their persons to attend the same.

In prosecution hereof, the Farmers did attend the Committee of the Navy
several days, and did by their Order present unto them an Account of the
Kings debt then due, (being 276146 li: 15 s. 11 d. and further did give an
Account of their proceedings, and former engagements of the late King, to be
satisfied their debt out of his Forests, Parkes and Chaces, as is
aforementioned; And delivered unto the said Committee a Copy of the Kings
Letter, of the first of June, 1642. Together with a particular List of the
names of the Forests, Parkes and Chaces which was formerly delivered by the
Surveyor general unto his Commissioners of the Treasury.

The Committee of the Navy after serious debate of this business, did in fine
come to a resolution, and Ordered this following Report to be made; viz.

Committee, Navy and Customs.
THe Committee have in prosecution of an Order of the House of Commons dated
the fourteenth of May, 1645. taken into consideration the Petition of the late
Farmers of the Customs, with the Propositions by them presented; And in regard
of a former special engagement of the House of Commons unto the Petitioners,
and the Kings more particular Assignation for their debt to be paid by his
Parkes, Forests and Chaces; Are of opinion that the House be moved to give
Order unto the Committee of the Revenue to cause a Survey to be made of the
several Parkes, Forests and Chaces mentioned in the annexed Schedule; And
after receipt of the particulars and constats of the premises, to enter into
consideration how the same may be advanced in the Revenue, to the advantage of
the Commonwealth and relief of the Petitioners.

Notwithstanding all these preparations and hopes of relief, and solicitations
daily made; yet by reason of the continuance of the troubles in this Nation,
the House being taken up with general and public business, would not admit
of an opportunity to hear this particular Report: And now at last, those
Members who had knowledge of the Farmers business are dissolved, and so could
never since find means to be heard, nor rightly understood, in this their sad
and miserable conditions; But their persons cast into prison, and Statutes of
Bankrup taken out against them, to the utter ruin of all them and their
Families, and death already of some, and not for their private but the general
debts as aforesaid; notwithstanding the engagements of Parliament for their
preservation, which they only depended upon as a sacred protection, and
thereupon exhausted all their Estates to support their credits, so long and so
far as they were able; And now have nothing left but hopes to find the justice
of their case, by this present Power to be commiserated, the engagements of
Parliament accomplished, and the poor oppressed relieved: which is the humble
Petition of the said Farmers, with their Creditors; And humbly pray speedy
relief, according to the truth, equity and right of their Case included in the
premises.

And now upon the whole matter of Fact herein, It is humbly desired that these
following Heads may be seriously and Christian-like considered.

First, the Farmers fault was the Farming of the Customs. Wherein consider
they were thereunto enforced by commands of a King; And then backed by an Act
of State of his Ministers; And confirmed by his Council at Law, and Judges of
the Land; And passed under the Great Seal of England for their Indemnity,
which then was the visible Government. Make this the Case of every honest and
well-minded man.

Secondly, Their punishment. Wherein consider it was the greatest Composition
that ever was paid by a Subject (the payment 165000 li.) And here further
consider their voluntary submission therein; their great and grateful
acceptance from the House in the sudden and timely payment thereof; And the
benefit the whole Nation received in the seasonable disbanding those Armies by
the means thereof.

Thirdly, Their engagements thereupon from the Parliament. Wherein consider an
Order made for an Act of Oblivion to pass for their Indemnity, and another
Order, that satisfaction should be made out of the late Kings Estate for the
debt contracted by him. And the Order of the House of the fourteenth of May,
1645. with the Report of the Committee of the Navy; wherein is acknowledged the
former engagements of the House of Commons, and the Kings more particular
Assignation for their debt to be paid by his Parkes, Forests and Chaces, all
thought just and fit to be passed for the relief of the Farmers by the
Parliament.

And lastly, consider that all the provisions of the Navy, and Ammunition,
Tents, Artillery, and materials of War, for which the Farmers did pay, and are
yet engaged, was employed by the Parliament to the defense and safety of this
Nation and also Ireland. And the moneys procured for the payment of their
Composition of 165000 li. yet owing unto sundry persons, was taken up only for
that occasion, and their Creditors encouraged thereunto by the Parliaments
Engagements unto the Farmers, as aforesaid: among whom are many poor Widows,
Orphants, and other necessitated persons involved.

All which is most humbly submitted to the further and more serious
consideration and commiseration of this present Supreme Authority the
Parliament, in and by whom is only left the expectation of their deliverance,
as their only refuge in this their great extremity.

And so shall ever pray, etc. John Jacob. Job Harby. Nicholas Crisp. John
Harrison.

July. 1653.

