ACT And PROCLAMATION, That none come from Ireland without sufficient
Testimonial.
Edinburgh, 22. February, 1661.
FOrasmuch as it is informed, That many Seditious and Turbulent persons,
Ministers and others, in the Kingdom of Ireland, finding that the
Administration of his Majesty's Authority and Government, which is now happily
established in that Kingdom, does not suit, nor will comply with their
Phanatick principles and factious practices, are comeing over into this Kingdom
expecting shelter, that they may be the more enabled to carry on their designs,
in perverting the Allegiance of the Subjects, and subverting the Peace of the
Kingdom: And the Estates of Parliament considering how much it does concern the
public Peace, that such Wasps and unworthy persons, enemies to all lawful
Authority, and to whom it is natural to stir up Sedition, and undermine the
Peace, wherever they are, and therefore cannot well be allowed in any well
constituted Government, should have no countenance in this Kingdom: Therefore
the Kings Majesty, with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament, does
hereby declare, That no persons whatsoever, coming from Ireland without a
sufficient Pass and Testimony in writ, from the Lord Justices Council, or any
having power from them, or from the Sheriff of the County, or Mayor of the City
where the said persons lived, of their peaceable carriage and conformity to
the Laws, shall be allowed any residence, resset, or stay within this Kingdom:
But that it shall be lawful to, likeas all Sheriffs, Magistrates and Justices
of Peace are required hereby to seize upon, and imprison all such persons,
wanting such Testimony; And who shall not willingly remove out of the Kingdom
within fifteen days after the intimation hereof unto them (excepting from this
clause all ordinary known Trafficking Merchants) And His Majesty, with advice
aforesaid, ordains, That all such persons as shall come over with any such
Testimony, that within fifteen days after their Landing, they make their
appearance before the Parliament; or in case of their not sitting, before his
Majesty's Privy Council, or such as shallbe warranted by them, and make known
the reasons of their coming hither, and give such surety as shall be thought
fit, for their peaceable carriage; otherwise, to remove off the Kingdom within
fifteen days: Wherein if they failie, Magistrates, Sheriffs, and all others,
public Ministers, are hereby ordained, as they will be answerable upon their
duty, to Apprehend, Secure and Imprison them, till such course be taken, as
shall be thought fit, with such Seditious and Factious persons. And ordains
their presents to endure for one year, and longer, as shall be thought fit by
the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council; And to be printed, and published at
the Mercat-Crosses of Edinburgh, Glasgow, Air, Irwin, Wigton, Kircudbright, and
all other places needful, where-through none pretend ignorance hereof.

A. Primerose, Cls. Reg.

Edinburgh, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1661.


