A Remonstrance, by way of Address from a Church of England-Man, to both Houses
of Parliament, upon the Account of Religion. Together with some Remarks upon
Dr. Sherlock's Sermon Preached the 29th. of May, 1685.
HIS Majesty having so often and so solemnly declared he would maintain Me as
by Law Established, I cannot but rely upon His Royal word, according to your
prudent and generous Vote, and think my self sufficiently secured by having the
Word of a King; who, whilst a Subject, was never known to break it: Yet
notwithstanding, seeing You My Children here assembled to consult and advise
about the most important matters of the Kingdom; I hope it may be lawful and
seasonable for Me to represent to your wise considerations my serious thoughts
concerning the means to establish my own and the Nations future Quiet and
Tranquillity.

You cannot be ignorant that ever since my Separation from the Church of Rome,
I have been attacqu'd by all sorts of Dissenters: So that my Fate, in this
Encounter, may be compared to that of a City besieged by different Armies, who
Fight both against It, and one another; where if the Garrison make a Salley to
endammage one, another presently takes an advantage to make an attacque. Thus
whilst I set my self vigorously to suppress the Papist, the Puritan seeks to
undermine Me; And whilst I am busied to oppose the Puritan, the Papist gains
ground upon me. If I tell the Church of Rome I did not forsake her but her
Errors, which I Reformed; my Rebellious Subjects tell me the same, and that
They must make a Through Reformation: And let me bring what Arguments I please,
to justify my Dissent, they still produce the same against me. If on the other
hand, I plead against the Puritan Dissenter, and show that He ought to stand to
Church Authority, where he is not Infallibly certain it commands a Sin; the
Papist presently catches at it, and tells me, I destroy my own Grounds of
Reformation, unless I will pretend to that Infallibility, which I condemn in
them.

Matters standing thus betwixt Me and Them: Why would it not be a point of
Prudence in Me (as I doubt not but you would esteem it in a Governor of that
City I lately mentioned,) to make Peace with one of my Adversaries, to the end
I may with more ease resist the on-sets of the other?

I am the easilier induced to believe this may be effected, because my Enemies
are at Mortal Feudes with one another, and would rather join with Me than
against Me. And what advantage such an Union would bring to this Nation, need
not be offered in detail to your view, who cannot but at the very first see
them.

Our next consideration then must be, to find out, whether of these two Parties
may be the sooner induced to sign these Articles of Agreement; and will give
the best Security for their performance of them.

In order to which, if I cast back my Eye upon the Transactions which have
happened in this Kingdom these last 50 years, I cannot but observe my Puritan
Dissenting Adversaries to be a company of People for the most part without
Justice, Loyalty, Conscience or Religion, though they pretend them all for a
cloak to their Villainies. I cannot but look upon them as Implacable Enemies,
and Tyranical too, where they once get the upper-hand. And if I admit them into
my bosom, I may assure my self of being Stung by them, when they are once warm,
and have recovered strength.

I need not mention all their Hellish practices against Me and Loyal Children
from 1641, till 1648. nor by what wiles they undermined Me first, and then
never ceased till they had ruined the three Kingdoms, and embrued their hands
in the Blood of the best of Kings. It is apparent enough what favor I may
expect from them, if once again (which God forbid) the Power should come into
their Hands, by the Liberty they denied Me in the Usurpers wicked reign. Have
they not also of late endeavored to play the same Game over again, and to
disturb mine and the Kingdoms quiet, by Plots hatched in their own Brains? What
was the Popish Plot, but a blind for a Presbyterian one? Were not all their
endeavors to Trepan us into an Ambush they had laid for us, whilst we, with
blind heat, were in pursuit of that Chymerical Phantome? Had they not at that
time all their Machines at work to involve us in a common ruin? Did they not
under pretense of securing the King from a Popish Gun and Silver Bullet,
endeavor to let fly at him with a True Protestant Bluderbuss? What did they
aim at, under pretense of securing the Protestant Religion, but to strike at
Episcopacy? At which time no person, that was either Dutiful to Me, or Loyal to
the King, but was presently branded with the Name of Papist, Popishly Affected,
Papist in Masquerade, French Pensioner, or the like. Had they not made a
Catalogue of all persons any ways eminent in the Kingdom, and ranked them under
two Heads, of Worthy men, and Men Worthy, meaning by the later, Men Worthy to
be made away, because true to their King and Country? When they were caught in
their Villainies, did they Repent, or did they not rather with their Dying Words
testify their Approbation of the intended Conspiracy. And (which is yet worse)
are they not still at work to Embroil the Nation, and by Rebellion disturb our
Quiet, and hinder the full enjoyment of that Happiness we have now the greatest
prospect of under the reign of a King, whose Example discountenances Vice and
teaches Virtue; whose Justice will not let him abandon His own, nor Invade his
Subjects Rights; whose Courage prompted him at all times to dare any thing for
his Countries Good, if it were not in it self Evil; whose Study is to render
His Reign both Easy and Happy to us: (...) Speech (...) 22.
And who has, A true ENGLISH Heart, jealous of the Honor of the Nation; and
pleases Himself with the Hopes, that by Gods Blessing, (...) Speech ^0.
and Your Assistance, He may carry the Reputation of it yet Higher in the
World, than ever it has been in the time of any of His Ancestors.

On the other hand, if with an Impartial Eye, we look upon the Papists, we
shall find them Honest, Just, Conscientious and Loyal in their Practices,
though we are frequently told their Principles are otherwise: But this (they
say) is not the only Calumny falsely laid upon them. And for my own part, as I
cannot think a man's Principles good, when I see his Practices otherwise: So am
I easily induced to believe that Good Practices proceed from Good Principles.
Neither would I have even my greatest Enemies accused of holding Ill
Principles, when they themselves Renounce them, both in Speculation and in
practice; for though it be a hard matter to wash off all the mire with which one
has been grievously bespattered, yet no doubt in time Calumny will appear to
the Credit of the Innocent, and Disgrace of the Calumniator. Wherefore I cannot
but condemn those Accusations with which that otherwise Ingenious and Loyal
Discourse made to You my Children of the Lower House was finished, viz. I deny
not, but some, who are Papists, in some Junctures of Affairs, may, and have
been very Loyal; but I am sure the Popish Religion is not; the Englishman may
be Loyal, ^herlocks on May 29 (...).
but not the Papist; and yet there can be no Security of those men's Loyalty,
whose Religion in any case teaches them to Rebel. For what reason has any man
to say their Religion teaches them to Rebel, when they who are so jealous of
their Religion, that they voluntarily suffer the loss of their Estates, their
Liberties, and their Lives, rather than renounce the least Tittle of it, do
both in their public Writings, and private Discourses, Declare and Maintain
that their Religion teaches no such Doctrine, and that they are ready to
maintain and practice True Loyalty with the hazard of their Lives and Fortunes.
It Is true, some persons in Communion with Rome, ^^na.
have broched Tenants inconsistent with Loyalty, but it is true likewise their
Books have been Condemned and Burnt (as they often tell us) by the Public
Executioner. Seeing therefore the Roman Catholics do frequently declare. That
it is an Article of Faith in their Church, and expressly declared in the Council
of Constance, that the King-killing-Doctrine, ^^^an-Cath. ^^^^^iples 3 (...)
1680.
or Murder of Princes Excommunicated for Hereresie, is Damnable and Heretical,
as being contrary to the known Laws of God and Nature: As also, that no
Cacholicks as Catholics believe, that the Pope has any direct, or Indirect
Authority over the Temporal Power, and Jurisdiction of Princes: So that if the
Pope should pretend to Absolve, or Dispense with His Majesty's Subjects from
their Allegiance, upon account of Heresy or Schism, such Dispensation would be
vain and null, and all Catholic Subjects (notwithstanding such Dispensation
and Absolution) would be still bound in Conscience to Defend their King and
Country, at the hazard of their Lives and Fortunes, even against the Pope
himself, in case he should invade the Nation. I say, seeing Roman Catholics do
thus generally declare their Loyalty, I think they ought no more in justice to
be charged with Disloyal Principles for the Extravigance of some few of that
vast Body, and those Censured and Condemned too by them, than I am to be
charged with Principles of the like Disloyalty and Injustice, because some of
my Children have been for the Bill of Exclusion, and others who Communicated
with me, have written Scandalous Pamphlets, Narratives, etc. tending to Treason
and Rebellion. But what, in one word, seems to Me a convincing Argument that
the Papists do not hold such Pernicious Doctrines, is, that I see so many Kings
and Princes in other Countries no less jealous of their Lives and Authorities
than others, who yet profess and maintain that Religion, and think themselves
secure by her Principles, when they dare not trust the Calvinist. And if we may
descend to particulars, can we imagine that His present Majesty, who could not
but know that the Roman Church was frequently taxed with Disloyal Principles,
would embrace her Faith without examining so necessary a Tenent: Or can we
imagine, after such an examination, that He who has promised to maintain Me (as
I may say) only because He knew I was for Monarchy and Loyalty, would himself
embrace a Religion which teaches the contrary Principles? So that to condemn
the Roman Catholic Religion of Principles of Disloyalty, is either to condemn
the King of Ignorance in his own Religion, or of carelessness of his own
Security. These things thus considered, I cannot but say it was a reasonable
Complaint of one of them in these words. ^^^^ace to Ro^^^-Catholick ^^^^ciples.
Is it not strange and severe, that Principles, and those pretended of Faith
too, should be Imposed upon men, which they themselves Renounce and detest? If
the Turk's Alcaron should in like manner be urged upon us, and we hanged up for
Mahumetans, all we could do or say in such a case, would be to die Patiently
with Protestations of our own Innocence. And this is the posture of our
Condition; (continues he) we Abhor, we Renounce, we Abominate such Principles;
we protest against them, and Seal our Protestations with our Dying Breaths.
What shall we say, What can we do mo^e? To Accuse men as Guilty in Matters of
Faith, which they never owned, is the same thing as to condemn them for Matters
of Fact, which they never did. It is sufficiently known to all the Ingenious,
who have either read or observed any thing, that in King Charles the First's
reign when so great a number of Englishmen Rebelled against their Prince, not
one Papist was observed who was not ready or actually did not hazard his Life
and Fortune for the support of Monarchy. How many of them in that wicked
Rebellion Sealed their Loyalty with their last Blood? And after the Martyrdom
of that Glorious King, were not They as well as My Dutiful Children, forced to
seek a Refuge in Foreign Countries; where (if I may eye their other Virtues)
they maintained a mutual Friendship with My Children, as being tied with the
common bands of Fellow Subjects, Soldiers or Sufferers? And after His late
Majesty's Happy Restoration, How long did we live together in Peace and
Tranquillity, till those, wicked Emissaries of Hell animated us against our
Brethren by Narratives and Informations of I know not what Plots and
Conspiracies, of which now at last we find them Innocent? During which very
time, with what Patience did the Romanists suffer all those Injurious and
Contumelious Proceedings, even to the very loss of their Estates, their
Liberties and their Lives, when we saw them go like Sheep to the slaughter, who
scarce Bleated all the time, unless it were to declare their Innocence, to Pray
for the King and Kingdom, and to fore-warn us of our Approaching ruin: In
which certainly they were our best Friends, if we could have been Friends to
our selves, and hearkened to their Advice which we found to be good and Solid,
though it was almost too late before we would believe it.

Let us likewise reflect how they beha^e themselves at present, now we look
upon them to enjoy the greatest Advantages they have had this many years, and
we shall find it to be with unexpected Moderation. We who were formerly almost
frighted into Bedlam for fear of a Popish Successor, find under JAMES the GREAT
and the JUST our Liberties, our Properties, our Rights, and our Religion
secured, and may expect to see our Kingdom become Glorious, and the old English
Bravery once more Flourish under so GREAT an ENGLISH KING, if His Subjects will
but show themselves True Englishmen, As His Majesty was pleased to express it
to some of You.

You see (my Dearest Children) that our Fears were vain, and our Jealousies
without grounds. This very Stone, which was once rejected by the Architects, is
now become the chief Stone in the Corner: We may truly see in it the Hand of
God, and look upon it with Admiration, and may expect (if Fears and Jealousies
hinder not) the greatest, Blessings we can wish for: An Union betwixt these two
Walls which have been thus long separated, and now in a fair way to be United
and Linked together by this Cornerstone, after which how Glorious a Structure
may we Hope for, upon such Foundations?

Shall we then (My Lords and Gentlemen) still wage a War against these our
Brethren, who would live Peaceably amongst us, and seek by all means to endear
us? shall we continue to put the Rigor of the Laws equally in Execution
against these who would live at Union with us, and not Disturb our Government,
and those whom we have so often, and do at present find to be Restless and
Implacable Enemies? Let it not be said we love Dissension, or that we delight
in Severity and Blood, least it be objected, our Cause is not to be sustained
unless the Rigor of the Laws be put in Execution, as if neither Truth nor
Justice were on our side. I cannot think those to be good Foundations which
must be cemented with Penalties and with Blood: Neither can I think those, who
are reduced to my Embraces, or retained in them by Rigor, will prove Faithful
to me in the conflict. They are rather Slaves than Sons, Hypocrites not
Converts, who having forsaken their God for Interest, cannot be true to Me or
Man. Let Truth sustain me, not Rigor; Truth will endure for ever, and shine in
the midst of Darkness, so that it is well compared to the Diamond, which
sparkles in the obscurest night, resists the File, the Hammer, and the Flame;
but yet may be softened with the Blood o^ Goats: This Truth flourished in the
greatest Persecutions, and prevailed, when the Professors of it suffered the
most horrid Torments, their Blood being the Seed of the Church, which brought
forth an hundred fold: But should a Church endeavor once to propagate her
Truth by Persecutions and by Blood, she may have reason to fear the Diamonds
Lot, and that Blood will Tarnish all its Luster, and destroy the Solidity, the
Splendor, and the value of it all at once. Let Truth then be my solid
Foundation, and let us leave the Sanguinary and the Penal Laws to those who are
not built upon It.

If we cannot assure our selves of a perfect Peace and Union with Rome, we may
hope for a Truce, a Cessation of Arms, a Happy Correspondence and mutual
Commerce.

Yet some Overtures of Peace have been frequently made by the Romanists, and I
may say with Truth, if it had not been for some Hotheaded Zealots, and other
Ignorant Polemicks, our Breaches had never been so wide; yea on the contrary,
would have been long since healed. Our Zealots cry perpetually against the
Idolatry of the Church of Rome; and yet the Romanists, it is well known, cry as
much against Idolatry as we. If they would paint a Papist, (...)-Cath. ^^les.
they besmear him with the ugly colors of Equivocations, Mental Reservations,
Dispensations to Lie, Forswear and Massacre their Neighbors; when on the
contrary the Roman Catholic recommends Simplicity and Godly Sincerity, as
truly Christian Virtues, necessary to the Conservation of Justice, Truth and
Common Society: And tell us, That all Pardons and Dispensations granted, or
pretended to be granted, in order to any such Ends or Designs, have no other
Validity or Effect, than to add Sacrilege and Blaspemy to the abovenamed
Crimes. And as for our common Controvertists, how often are we told they
mistake the Roman Catholic Tenants, mis-represent their Doctrines, fight
against Chimera's of their own Brains, and most commonly either spend whole
Volumes in refuting Errors, which They Condemn as well as We, or establishing
Truths which they Affirm? How often have they told us, We must separate their
Articles of Faith from their Theological Disputes, and take their Doctrines
from their Councils, not their Schools? And yet how little profit have our
Polemicks reaped from this Admonition? How often have they formerly urged us to
an Oral or Pen Combat, upon condition Security and Freedom might be given them,
the Questions rightly stated, and the other common Laws of Disputation strictly
observed; But still either the real or pretended Interest of State put a stop
thereto; Insomuch that in their Public Writings, they have often told us, We
behave our selves like persons diffident of our Cause, decline Disputes on
equal terms, and either mis-represent their Tenants ( as appears manifestly in
their Doctrines of Justification and Merit, Satisfaction and Indulgences) or
else play the Buffoons, Joaking, Scoffing, and relating Stories, which, if
true, would not touch Religion? I must confess many of our Young Divines (if I
may call them Divines, who have not spent above a year or two in the
Universities) are to blame in this, who having obtained a good Benefice, by the
Solicitation of Friends, and not by their Merit, are forced to Preach to
others, what they scarce understand themselves. Such as these, for want, it may
be, of Matter, are glad to fly to the common Toppick of Railing at Rome, and
Hell, the Pope and the Devil, for which being applauded by their Zealous and
Ignorant Auditors, and moved with an itch of being in Print, they publish their
own puerile Conceptions, or such as they have gleaned from others of the like
Learning, Judgment and Reading, and though it be all to no purpose, yet they
flatter themselves, as if from thence the downfall of Popery, and the utter
destruction of the Whore of Babylon must necessarily ensue.

Upon these considerations; My Lords and Gentlemen,

My humble request to you in this Assembly, is, that you would advise about
some means for our Order, Concord and Agreement^ and take care, that what may
widen our Breaches may be Rejected, and what may close the (...) Embraced. The
best way to effect which in My Thoughts are these.

First, That it may be provided that Those, who are known to be Faithful
Friends to the King and Kingdom's Good, may equally with Us enjoy those Favors
and Blessings we may Hope for under so GREAT and so JUST a KING, without being
liable to the Sanguinary or Penal Laws for holding Opinions no ways
inconsistent with Loyalty and the Peace and Quiet of the Nation. And that they
may not be obliged by Oaths and Tests, either to renounce their Religion which
they know they cannot do without Sacrilege, or else to put themselves out of
Capacity of Serving their King or Country.

Secondly, That for Healing our Differences, it be appointed that neither side
in their Sermons touch upon matters of Controversy with Animating Reflections;
but that those Discourses, may wholly tend to Peace and Piety, Religion and
sound Morality. And that in all Public Catechisms the solid Grounds and
Principles of Religion may be solely Explicated, and Established, all
reflecting Animosities being laid aside.

Thirdly, That some Learned, Devout and Sober Persons may be made choice of on
both sides, who may truly state matters of Controversy betwixt us, to the end
each one may know the others Pretensions, and the Tenants they cannot abandon,
without breaking the chain of Apostolic Faith. Which if it be done, we shall,
it may be, find that to be true, which the Papists often tell us; That the
difference betwixt Them and Us, is not so great as many make it, nor their
Tenants so Pernicious, but if we saw them naked, we should, if not embrace them
as Truths, yet not condemn them as Errors, much less as Pernicious Doctrines.
Yet if notwithstanding all this we cannot perfectly agree in some Points, let
us however endeavor to live together in the Bonds of Love and Charity, as
becomes Good Christians and Loyal Subjects, and join together to oppugn those
known Maxims, and Pernicious Errors, which destroy the Essence of Religion,
Loyalty and Good Government.

This is (My dearest Children) the Remonstrance I thought good to make you, and
I doubt not but Your Wisdoms will so order it, that if not by this Method, at
least by some other Efficacious means, all our Differences may be soothed; and
when Heats about Religion cease, we may hope for a future stable Quiet in the
Nation. This is what I shall daily Pray for, and that God would by his Grace so
Guide this Great Assembly, that all their Acts, Votes and Councels may tend to
his Honor and Glory, the Good of his Church, and the Prosperity and lasting
Peace of the Kingdom.

God save King JAMES the Second.
Amen.

