THE TRVTH OF THE PROCEEDINGS IN SCOTLAND.

Containing the DISCOVERY Of the late CONSPIRACY.

With diverse other Remarkable Passages.

Related in a Letter written from Edinburgh, the 19. of October, 1641.

WHEREUNTO Js Added, An Abstract of a Letter Written by his Majesty from
Edinburgh, to one of the Clerks of the Counsel, the 18. of October, 1641.

Printed Anno Domini 1641.

COZEN,
YOur Letter of the 12. of this instant came to my hands, upon the 18. enclosed
in my wives of the same date, you tax my long silence, which indeed J can
scarce pardon my self ia, but to thnt breach of faith you charge me with, I
must plead not guilty; I do not forget what promise you drew from me at our
parting, I think I have stretched it, but it is yet unbroken, you object my
carfulness in the discharg of my debts of this kind to my other friends, your
self being unremembred, give me leave to say this, J paid you but by d. the
satisfaction I shall give you for so long forbearance, is to pay you by ls. and
to bring in the gross sum at once.

The business of greatest weight which has bin agitate in this Parliament,
since my coming into these parts, is that of the election of Counselors,
Officers of Estate, and Lords of Session; which by the Treaty, are to be
nominated, and chosen by the King, with the advice and approbation of the
Parliament. The only man who has as yet bin chosen, according to that
agreement, is the Lord Lowdon, who was nominated to the Office of Lord
Chancellor by the King, and allowed by the Parliament, without the least
contradiction. And J believe there are others, whom before this time the Kings
favor, and the sense the Parliament has of their good deservings, would have
preferred to some of the places, now void, if the Devil had not stirred up
some turbulent and seditiovs spirits to interrupt their proceedings, that he
might disturb the settled peace, and turn all things here into confusion and
bloodshed. At the first, men only feared private quarrels, and feudes, (which
though they have formerly had lamentable and sad effects in this Nation) yet
had they not that general malignity in them, which these late troubles do
discover. It appears now, that the aim was not at particular persons, but at
the cause, which must needs have bin sorely shaken, if so great pillars had bin
pulled away.

At the first, there appeared only the Lord Carre, Son to the Earl of
Ropborough, and the Earl of Cranford was but his second: but now the Earl of
Cranford is a principal, and how many Seconds he has, is yet undiscovered. It
is now the judgment of most men, that the first business of the L. Carre, was
but an untimely birth of this Plot, which is now come to light: The first was
thus. The Earl of Cranford, the Lord Carre, and some others, being at Supper
in Master William Murrayes Chamber, there came in Sir James Hamilton, whose
company the Lord Carre disliking, because of his Relation to the Marquess of
Hamilton, after some exception taken to him, told him, his chief (meaning the
L. Marquess) was a Traitor, and had juggled with the King these 2 or 3 years.
These words he afterward backed with a Challenge, which he sent to the
Marquess by the hand of the Earl of Cranford. These passages coming to the
notice of the King and Parliament, they were so sensible of the unworthiness
of those carriages, that they ordered the Lord Carre to make this Submission.

I Henry Lord Carre,have already acknowledged my offense to his Majesty, and
asked his pardon, which I do now likewise to this Honorable House of
Parliament, and for the scandalous words, con^e^ning the Marquess of Hamilton,
which were spoken by me. I confess them to be rash, and groundless, and that
I am sorry for the same.

This Submission it was thought reasonable he should make at the Parliament
Bar, as a Delinquent in a very high nature. But the noble Marquis was so
affected with the sense, which both his Majesty, and the Parliament had of the
injury done him, and the reparation they had made him, that with a great deal
of earnestness he pressed, and did prevail, that the Lord Carre might not
give that satisfaction in a place of so much ignominy, but might have the
favor to stand in the middle of the house, there to obey what they had imposed
upon him. After this acknowledgment made by the Lord Carre, it pleased his
Majesty and the Parliament to make this Declaration, following.

WHereas there has bin certain scandalous words spoken of the Marquess of
Hamilton, tending to the prejudice of his honor, and fidelity to his Majesty,
and his Country, which are now acknowledged by Henry Lord Carre, speaker
thereof, in presence of his Majesty, and the Estates of Parliament, to have
been rash and groundless, For the speaking whereof, he is heartily sorry,
and since his Majesty and the Estates of Parliament, knows them to be so:
Therefore his Majesty and the said Estates declare, the said Marquess of
Hamilton to be free thereof, and esteems him to be a Loyal Subject to his
Majesty, and a faithful Patriot to his Country, and the said Estates remit
the further Censure of the said Lord Carre, to the Kings Majesty.

This business thus passed over, the Parliament returned to that which they
were formerly upon: which was, the election of Officers of Estate. And for a
fair accommodation of all things, they appointed- Committee, consisting of 6 of
every Estate: for the Lords, were the Lord Chancellor Lowdon, the Earl of
Argile, the Earl of Cassels, the Earl of Glencarne, the Lord Balmerinoth,
President of the Parliament, and the Lord Lindsey. And for the Barons and
Burgesses, six of either Estate, men of known wisdom and integrity: whom
they entrusted to make some over-turnes to his Majesty privately, and afterward
to impart them to the several Estates.

In few days, their consultations had this issue, that they delivered in a
paper to the King; which his Majesty approving, they after that, presented to
the several Estates. The tenor whereof: was,

THE Estates of Parliament considering, that albeit John Earl of Traquaire,
etc. are cited before them, and accused, as guilty, of diverse bainous, and
Treasonable Crimes, perpetrated, and commttted by them, against the
Commonwealth, contained in their several Ditties, which they have just reason
to prosecute.

Nevertheless the said estates of Parliament taking into their consideration
his Majesty's most gracious goodness toward this his native Kingdom, and his
fatherly care and wisdom in composing of all past differences, and providing
for the future, to the great joy and happiness of all his Subjects, do in
retribution thereof with an unanimous consent to testify their high respect
and thankfelnesse to his Majesty: And that his Majesty may joyfully return a
contented Prince from a contented people, to the settling of his royal affairs
in his other Dominions, believing that the same will be acceptable to his
Majesty, and most conducible to the peace and good of the Kingdom, Declare
that they will not insist further in the process intended against the said
persons, nor proceed to any sentence thereupon, but acquit and discharge them
freely of the same crime containd in their dittie libelled against them
respective and grants them liberty to repair to their houses, to attend their
private affairs, they always behaving themselves within the compass of their
private calling.

The estates considering, that whereas albeit James Earl of Montrose, etc. are
cited before them, and accused as guilty of diverse crimes and misdemeanors
committed by them to the just offense of the Estates of Parliament, and
derogatory to the great trust and confidence had of them; and albeit the
Parliament have just reason to persecute their process, yet nevertheless,
etc. as in the former.

The Estates of Parliament considering, that whereas there are diverse and sundry
persons indicted, and accused before this Parliament, as guilty of certain
Crimes committed against the State, and to the prejudice of the peace of this
Kingdom. Nevertheless, the said Estates of Parliament considering that by
Gods mercy and providence, and by his Majesty's great wisdom, and all our
tempests are turned into the calm of an happy peace, do hereby out of their
respect to his Majesty, to whom they know the same will be acceptable, declare
that they will not insist in any further Trial of the said crimes, but have
acquit and discharged, and hereby acquits and discharges all other persons
cited and called to appear before them, to answer for whatsoever crimes or
misdemeanors, during the late troubles. And declares the Act of Pacification
and Oblivion, and benefit thereof to be extended to them such like: as they had
not bin cited to appear before this present Parliament, without prejudice
always of the restitution to private parties, etc conform to the said Act of
Pacification, contained in the Treaty.

Upon Monday the 11. of this present, the several estates took this paper into
consideration and there was only this objection, by some made to it, that it
seemed to contradict the oath they had taken, which did oblige all the members
of that Parliament, to bring the in^endiaries to an exact trial. The noble
earl of Argile who had taken much pains, to bring their affairs into this
hopeful way of accommodation, did now very much labor to remove this block,
which lay in the way to it, and gave this answer.

That that Oath was but conditional, the intent of it being only the peace
and good of the Kingdom, and this way proposed did most conduce to that end,
and therefore, that clause might be dispensed with. In conclusion he prevailed
thus far, that they resolved some Ministers* should be advised with in point
of Conscience, whether they might dispense with their Oath in that particular;

When all things were in this fair and hopeful way of accommodation, and the
King and Parliament thus near a full agreement (they being assured that his
Majesty would condescend to them in those particulars they should propound to
him; as on their part they had omitted nothing that might be to his Majesty's
satisfaction) there was discovered a design to be put in execution that very
night, against the Marquess of Hamilton, and the Earls of Argile, and
Lanerick, whereupon they left the Court that night, where they were informed the
danger would be, and lodged in the Town, and the next day retired to Kineele,
an house that belonged to the Marquis, about 12. miles from Edinburgh, lest
their presence in the town should occasion any tumult to the offense of the
Kings Majesty, and disturbance of the proceedings of the Parliament. The
Parliament being that day made acquainted with the business sent for those 3
that were the first discoverers of it, which were Lieutenant Colonel Hume
Lieutenant Colonel Hurry, and Captain Will. Stewart, their depositions being
presently taken, they were in the afternoon read in full Parliament.

Captain Will. Stewart did depose, that the day before being Monday the 11. of
October. being in a Tavern with his cosen Leiutenant Colonel Stewart, he
desired an oath of secrecy of him, telling him he had something to imparte to
him, but he making answer; that he never found him unsecret, his cosen said
well, the Marquess of Hamiltoune, and the Earl of Argile have governed all
things at their pleasure this time past, but we have now got a strong party
against them, and this night W. Murray shall bring them into the privy
Chamber, as to a consultation, my Lord Amont, the Earl of Crauford and some
others shall come up the stairs out of the garden; and arrest them in the
King's name, and carry them to the Kings Ship, the Earl of Crauford advises
to cut them off, but my Lord Amont would have them tried by Parliament, the
Earl of Lanerike is to be taken with them, The Town and Channon-gate are
sure to us, and we have enough to defend the Court, until such time as the
Earl of Roxborougb, Hume, and others bring in their friends, who are all of
our party. Leiutenant Colonel Hurry did depose that on Monday the eleventh of
October, the Earl of Crauford told him, that if he would bring with him four
or five good fellows early in the morning he might make him a fortune,

Lieutenant Colonel Hume did depose that on Thursday the eighth of October,
Colonel Cockrane told him, if he would join with him, he would show him a
way to make himself a fortune. And the Monday following at the Earl of
Craufords house demanded an oath of secrecy of him, promising him to impart
something to him, but he answered, if it were any thing against his country or
his covenant he would not swear, whereupon the Colonel would not impart any
thing to him,

Upon these depositions the Earl of Crauford, Colonel Cockraine and
Leiftenant colonel Stewart were that afternoon committed, and are so to
remain until such time as they be examined, mean while the ports are shut up
and guards are appointed for the security of the town and Parliament, the care
of them is committed to the general Lesly, and Proclamation has been made
that all who have not special business in Parliament, nor are the necessary
servants of Parliament men, should presently depart the town, unless they be
licenced by the Lord General for to stay.

It is not yet resolved whether those that are accused shall be examined in
full Parliament, or before a Committee, To morrow the resolution is expected

Cosen, it it is time, J close, lest I weary both my self and you, I having
been so long silent, I cannot write less, and until further Discovery be
made, I shall not write more, but commit you to him who dwells in light, and
will in his due time bring to light all the hidden things of darkness, and
remain

EDINBURGH, October 19. 1641. Your Cousin that will ever love and serve you.
J.S.

An Abstract of a Letter written with his Majesty's own hand at Edinburgh,
October 18. 1641. To Mr. Nicholas Clarke of the Counsel.
I Hear it is reported, that I am resolved at my return to alter the Form of
the Church Government in England to this in Scotland. Therefore I command you,
to assure all my Servants there, that I am constant for the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church of England, as it was established by Queen Elizabeth,
and my Father: and resolve by the Grace of God, to live and dye in the
maintenance of it.

FINIS.

