THE REMONSTRANCE OF THE APPRENTICES In and about London.
AS we do no less wonder at the wise orderings and Government of God in these
many changes and vicissitudes, which within these twelve years have befallen
these miserable and destracted Nations, then those who pretend to be guided by
these leading Providence (as they call them) measuring and calculating by
them, not God, but by their own ends and interests of one another; so we hope
we shall not uncharitably be censured if we presume also (with reverence we
speak it) to construe some of these Dispensations otherwise then those men will
think fit or allow, being confident how e're we may err in the inscrutable
ways and counsels of God, we shall hardly err in the discovering and
investigating the practices and contrivements of those men, who have and do
exalt themselves by the depression and debasement of the whole Kingdom: And
therefore for the encouragement of one another in these our Just and Honost
Resolutions, we have presumed to publish this our REMONSTRANCE, to the end the
World may see that we are not totally degenerated (as our Enemies slander us)
from the Ancient Spirit of Honor and Gallantry, for which this Renowned City
has been so long and deservedly Famed. We could take an Estimate of our selves
from the repute the Parliament had of Us in the years 43, 44, 45, etc. were it
not that we take no pleasure in the remembrance of our unhappy Valor, having
wasted a great deal of brave Blood in the purchasing of our shame, and in
serving the ambitious Designs of some Grandees, which nevertheless we have seen
frustrated and disappointed as well as our good intentions deluded; But we
intend not to insist on our Reputation, thereby to raise any opinion or
expectation of us or our Abi'ities and Power, (we could please our selves
better in the remembrance of that peaceable and quiet posture this detestable
War found us in) further then to vindicate and assert this our REMONSTRANCE
from being deemed or censured frivolous, and our Concernments mean and
inconsiderable, whereas our share and part in either a well established or
subverted Government is of as much moment as any conditions of Englishmen
whatsoever; and that, were it the purpose of this Paper, we could plainly and
fully prove. Seeing therefore the many imminent and impendent dangers, which
highly threaten these Nations, and in particular Our Selves, both in the decay
and loss of Trade, and some other dormant wills, which time we fear will soon
bring to light, we do Declare and Remonstrate,

1. As for Religion we are not ignorant what a blind it has been to us in
preciptating us into very dangerous Actions, when we knew not what it was, nor
what a Cloak and Color it has been for the most enormous perpetrations, we
may sadly compare it (we mean here the name of it) to that Trojan Horse, which
that people with so much reverence and solemnity received and entertained,
being filled within with armed men, that presently sacked their City. We cannot
well say whether more Sects or Mischiefs have sprung merely from hence; and
therefore it is high time now we should consider how to attain the substance of
that whose shadow has cost so dearly. For our parts we do declare, That the
Religion established in this Kingdom by Law in the Reins of our three last
Princes, with some amendment in Discipline, is the only true and perfect
pattern of Divine Worship. We are very sensible what Inconveniences
Innovations bring with them, we shrewdly conj^cture that that cry of No Bishops
has been sadly ecchoed with the complaint of No Trade, especially to the
Rabble that were most clamorous in that Crucifige. We will not presume to
interpose our opinion in matters Ecclesiastical any further, we intend not to
give Laws to any, but this is generally our own private judgment, by which (as
God shall please) we are resolved to stand or fall.

2. We will assert with our Lives and Fortunes the Laws of this Land and
Liberty of the Subject, as for the subsequent clause the freedom of
Parliament, we will not be so ridiculous as to mention it, it being exploded
and hist like the Members themselves out of doors; yet we cannot but cast a
transient eye upon that business, and see how justly those men are repayed,
who for a pretended violation of their privileges so forwardly imbrued this
Nation in blood, and now cannot find any one that will expend a tear for their
total dissolution, Orphans and Widows tears they have too many. But to return
from this digression, we look upon the Laws as our Birthright, that
distributive part of Justice, that gives to every one his due, we have
therefore highly wondered at the strange Attemps of this late Parliament, who
by their forfeitures, sales, undue and arbitrary proceedings in all Courts of
Justice in erecting new ones, have left such a model of Tyranny, that we fear
it may be a Justifiable precedent for any exorbitant Practices of succeeding
Governors. We hope however that though our Laws have run so long in so bad and
corrupt a Channel, yet the freedom of the Air (more serene and quiet times
which we hope are approaching) may purge them of that ill smack they have
contracted in the conveyance, and that the filth will settle with themselves in
the bottom, and when we have rescued and secured our LAWS (as we will endeavor
to do if the same FORCE continue as has done for these many years last past)
from usurpation, we shall not need to trouble our selves concerning the LIBERTY
of the SUBJECT, that being bound up safe and secure in the Justice and due
execution of the LAWS.

3. We shall now speak more peculiarly in relation to the Estate and condition
we are now in, that is, in reference to TRADE so diminished and decayed, that
we know no fitter Heroglyphick of it than those seven Pharaoh's lean Kine;
since these seven years last past have almost devoured the Wealth and Credit
that this CITY had for seven hundred years before. The other two RELIGION and
LAWS are as the Esse but to us considered simply and abstractedly, as Citizens
TRADE is that been esse the prosperity and felicity of this place; and as the
Egyptians gathered the fertility of their Country by the increase of the River
Nile, so may we the Plenty and Riches of ours by the increase of TRADE. That
Maxim of keeping us poor and there will be the more Soldiers is none of the
falsest, but whose part such Soldiers will take is all the dispute; we think
the Advice of Henry the 4th to his Son the Prince was more prudential, where
speaking of this City, says he, keep their purses fast and you keep their
hearts; For though the ripe iniquity of the late times and that excess of
plenty (never known before in LONDON) accelerated this Judgment on us, yet are
we ready to redeem our Errors, and if God shall put an opportunity in our hands
will find or make away out of this Laborynth, into which by the cunning
insinuations of some desperate Persons among us we were formerly seduced.

But for what TRADE shall we now declare, or what means are there visible to
advance it, since the Spaniard hates us, the Dutch betraies us, the French
slights us, neither have we any security either of Persons or Estates in their
Dominions, further than their will and pleasure; and how can we reasonably
expect that abroad which we cannot promise to our selves at home; we cannot
hope like the Army to live by an Inland TRADE, sure we must not send all our
Commodities for Iamaca? what will be the issue? why before all is gone, as the
Parliament Dined with us, so the Army must Breakfast with us, and perhaps for
Supper may meet with the Sicilian Vespers.

There is only one expedient to recover and retreive our Religion, Laws, and
Trade, that is a returning to the Condition and State of Affairs where we
begun, in the doing whereof, it ^eing retrograde work, we hope to find our
Masters our Auxiliaries.


