A LETTER TO A NOBLE PEER OF THE REALM, About his late SPEECH and PETITION TO
His Majesty.
My Lord,
Though the great esteem I have always had as well for your Lordship^ Parts and
Prudence, as your Fathers Loyalty, inclines me to make a favorable
construction of your Words and Actions; yet the late Speech and Petition
published under your Name, are of so strange a Nature, and so ill an Aspect to
our present circumstances, that I cannot but acquaint you with my thoughts upon
that unseasonable subject; where, (did I not see my Sovereign so nearly
concerned) that many do construe this to be not so much petitioning, as
threatening His Sacred Majesty, I would have passed it over, and buried my
resentments in Oblivion.

I am sorry, my Lord, you begin with so weak an observation from Histories and
Records, as that many Parliaments have been unfortunate, when called at places
remote from the Capital City. Did you ever observe how unfortunate have many
Parliaments been, when called in this Capital City, or how many have been
fortunate when elsewhere conveened? Do not all Writers of the late Rebellion,
observe it a great oversight in His late Majesty, not to have called His Long
Parliament to York, or some other place remote from the City of London; where
so many Factious Cabals were held, and so many Pernicious Contrivances
hammered, together with the Rabbles tumultuous running to Westminster Hall, and
the Common-Councils Petitioning, or rather Advising the King, (Mechanics
turning Politicians, and leaving their Shops and Trade, to sit at the Helm of
Government) that all wise men conclude, thence came the Plague of War and
Desolation upon the whole Kingdom.

But your Observation is not so weak, as your Presidents are emphatical and
mysterious: You instance three unhappy Kings, and without the least ground in
History, you seem to suppose the places of calling their Parliaments, the cause
of their miscarriage. I am sure you know the contrary is manifest-by our most
authentic Monuments and Records. To popular fears and jealousies, fomented by
ambitious and discontented Grandees; These, as well as other Princes in
general, owed almost all their troubles, as now we do in a great proportion.

To these Henry the 2d. (by you mentioned,) owed the unnatural Broils and
Distractions of his Kingdom, when they, together with Lewis King of France,
incited the Son to rebel against the Father; in which they were thus far more
excusable than others, that the Son was no Bastard, but the undoubted Heir of
the Crown, and a titular King. These were in a great measure the chief causes
of all the mischiefs and miseries of H. 3. Reign, when under the color of
redressing the peoples Grievances, they brought upon the Nation the greatest
Grievance of all, an intestine Civil War for many years together; and though
they loudly pretended to fight for the Liberty of the Subject, yet themselves
were no better than so many Tyrants, as ancient and modern Authors testify,
Baker, p. 86.

And for H. 6th. His fate was the consequence of his Grandfathers Usurpation;
for, De male Quesitis vix gaudet tertius here is.

The people at last, weary of their change, began to open their eyes, and think
it better to submit to their lawful Prince, than to a violent Usurper;
Nevertheless this revolution could not be effected without a great deal of
difficulty, had not a gap been opened by the ambition of wicked Statesmen, who
to have the sole management of affairs to themselves, contrived the death of
the Kings Brother, and only support, the good Duke of Gloucester; as now some
conspire against his R. H. the better to enable themselves to dispose of the
King as they please.

Thus for your Speech, but your Petition runs a little further.

In the first place, you aggravate the dangers of Popery, of which all true
Protestants are sufficiently apprehensive; yet withal, My Lord, be not
deceived, we know too well the Proceedings of some Persons, who are influenced,
and often misled by those that hate the Name, but (as to themselves) love the
practice of Arbitrary Power; that pretended to stand for the Church of England,
but really advanced Faction; In fine, that would fain persuade us they love the
King, though by their actions any man of sense may perceive how little they
care for His Government.

You are troubled, it seems, that the next Parliament is to meet at Oxford,
where (you say) neither Lords nor Commons can be in safety, but will be daily
exposed to the Swords of the Papists and their adherents. Of whom too many have
crept into His Majesty's Guards. Do you know, my Lord, any such Papists now in
the Guards? If you do, it is all our duty to our King and Country to have them
secured: If not, it is a groundless surmise and a frivolous pretense, unfit to
be mentioned by Persons of Honor. Certain it is, we have more reason to
believe our Noble Petitioners inclining to Dissension, than His Majesty's
Guards inclined to Popery; for the latter do openly protest against all
Papists, the former do zealously solicit for the Phanaticks, endeavoring to
unite them to the Church of England, not by their coming to us, but ours to
them, we losing our Ground, and they still keeping their own. Besides, we know,
the latter have often taken Tests and Oaths against the Innovations of Popery,
but I could never find that the former took any against the Novelties of Schism.

If His Majesty thinks himself secure at Oxford, and doubts not to commit His
Sacred Person to his Guards; what reason have you to apprehend any danger?
Sure, it is his Majesty's Death, not yours, the Papists have hitherto designed;
how then can you be so apprehensive, while he is secure?

As for the Kings Evidence, I doubt not but they will cheerfully endure a
little inconvenience, to make an end of this execrable Plot. It Is an advantage
most of them have, to endure the greatest hardship, which now, I am confident,
they will not decline to consummate the great work they have so well begun.

My Lord, I wish as heartily as any one in England, the frequent meetings of
Parliament, and the good correspondence of King and People; I am perhaps as
much concerned as another, to have the Liberty of the Subject preserved
inviolable. Yet, when I see those that should be preservers of this Liberty,
first invade it, and endeavor to Monopolize Arbitrarie Power to themselves, I
think self-preservation allows me to oppose them. It Is a true saying, corruption
optimi pessima, and experience tells us, That Parliaments may err as well as
Kings.

I will conclude, with a short reflection on some transactions preceding the
Long Parliament, in the late Kings Reign; where it is observable, that his
Majesty finding his Parliaments still retrograde, and bent rather to foment
than compose the differences of the Kingdom, in September 40. He summoned the
great Council of His Peers, to consult about the weighty Affairs of the
Nation: But this (says a late Historian) was not very well liked by those who
favored the Scots, whose chief Design aimed at the calling of a Parliament,
which they feared the meeting of the Peers might prevent. Wherefore the Earls
of Bedford, Hertford, Essex, Warwick, Mouldgrave, Bullingbrook and Bristol, the
Lords Say, Brook, Paget, Mandavile, and the Lord Edward Howard presented a
Petition to the King, representing many great Distempers and Dangers,
threatening the Church and State, and His Royal Person; as sundry Innovations in
matters of Religion; Increase of Popery, by employing Papists in places of
Trust; The great mischief that might ensue, if the Forces raised in Ireland
should be brought into England, etc. For remedy whereof, they pray, that a
Parliament might be summoned, to redress these grievances, and punish the
Authors; and likewise to compose the War with Scotland without Blood, and unite
both Kingdoms against the common Enemy of the Reformed Religion.

And this was seconded by another Petition of the Common Council of London, to
the same effect, see Baker, p. 470.

These, my Lord, were as fair pretenses, and as plausible inducements, to have
a Parliament then called, as any can offer at present; and yet the world knows
what pernicious Designs were then a hatching against the King and Government,
by those very persons that promoted that Petition; and happy were His
Majesty, had he rejected their importunity. To every thing there is a season,
says the wise Man; and without doubt, there is a season for Petitioning. It Is
certainly our duty, with all humility, to beg of our Sovereign what we think
necessary or convenient for the public good; yet for to press him to it, when
he declares against it for good reasons, (as we ought to suppose) is a very
great presumption, not to be endured in a Subject. If the Laws have settled in
the King the absolute power of calling, adjourning, proroguing and dissolving
his Parliament, when, and where he pleases, shall we be wiser than the Laws,
and limit our Princes Will?

Besides, when discontented Statesmen are found the promoters of such
Petitions, it is natural to suspect they do it for some sinister Design, Timeo
Danaos and dona ferentes. If the great Politician Achitophel hanged himself
through discontent, because his Counsel was not followed, we cannot in prudence
but think others will leave no stone unremoved to satisfy their passion. There
are some Weathercocks in the World, who had a hand in all the Revolutions of
their time, modo harum, modo illarum partium, but never faithful to any; If
your Lordship be so far overseen as to join with these, they will undoubtedly
leave you in the lurch, when it is too late to repent. Therefore in time
consider the Wise man's advice: My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and
meddle not with them that are given to change; for their calamity shall rise
suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both? Prove. 24.21.

I am, Your Lordships real well-wisher, and humble Servant, L. S.


