ACT Asserting His Majesty's SUPREMACY over all Persons and in all Causes
Ecclesiastical.
At Edinburgh, the 16. of November, 1669.
C R HONI SOIT WUI MAL Y PENSE



THe Estates of Parliament having seriously considered, how necessar it is for
the good and peace of the Church and State, That His Majesty's Power and
Authority, in relation to Matters and Persons Ecclesiastical, be more clearly
asserted by an Act of Parliament; Have therefore thought fit it be Enacted,
Asserted and Declared, Likeas, His Majesty, with Advice and Consent of His
Estates of Parliament, does hereby Enact, Assert and Declare, That His Majesty
has the Supreme Authority and Supremacy over all Persons and in all Causes
Ecclesiastical within this His Kingdom; and that by virtue thereof, the
Ordering and Disposal of the External Government and Policy of the Church does
properly belong to His Majesty and His Successors, as an inherent Right of the
Crown: And that His Majesty and His Successors may Settle, Enact and Emit such
Constitutions, Acts and Orders, concerning the Administration of the External
Government of the Church, and the Persons employed in the same, and concerning
all Ecclesiastical Meetings, and Matters to be proposed and determined therein,
as they in their Royal Wisdom shall think fi^. Which Acts, Orders and
Constitutions, being Recorded in the Books of Council and duly published, are
to be observed and obeyed by all His Majesty's Subjects, any Law, Act or Custom
to the contrary notwithstanding. Likeas, His Majesty, with Advice an^ Consent
foresaid, does Rescind and Annull all Laws Acts and Clauses thereof, and all
Customs and Constitutions, Civil or Ecclesiastic, which are contrary to, or
inconsistent with, His Majesty's Supremacy as it is hereby asserted, And
declares the same void and null in all time coming.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, 1669.


