AN ACT OF PARLIAMENT, FOR Encourageing the Scots Affrican and Indian Company.
Edinburgh, June 26. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Taking into His Consideration: That by an ACT past in this
present Parliament, Entitled an Act for Encouragement of Foreign Trade; His
Majesty for the Improvement thereof, Did with Advice and Consent of the Estates
of Parliament, Statute and Declare, That Merchants more or fewer may Contract
and enter into such Societies and Companies, for Carrying on of Trade, as to
any Subject of Goods or Merchandise to whatsomever Kingdoms, Countries, or
parts of the World, not being in War with His Majesty, where Trade is in Use to
be, or may be followed, and particularly, beside the Kingdoms and Countries of
Europe, to the East and West Indies, the Streights, and to Trade in the
Mediterra^^^^, or upon the Coast of Africa, or in the Northern parts, or
elsewhere as above: Which Societies and Companies being Contracted and Entered
into, upon the Terms and in the usual Manner, as such Companies are set up, and
in use in other parts Consistant always with the Laws of this Kingdom: His
Majesty with Consent aforesaid, did Allow and Approve, giving and granting to
them and each of them all Powers, Rights and Privileges, as to their Persons;
Rules and Orders, That by the Laws are given to Companies allowed to be Erected
for Manufactories; And His Majesty for their greater Encouragement, did promise
to give to these Companies, and each of them his Letters Patent under the great
Seal, Confirming to them the whole foresaid Powers and Privileges, with what
other Encouragement His Majesty should judge needful, as the foresaid Act of
Parliament at more length bears. And his Majesty understanding that several
persons as Well Foreigners as Natives of this Kingdom, are willing to Engage
themselves with great Sums of Money in an American, Affrican and Indian Trade
to be exercised in and from this Kingdom; if enabled and encouraged thereunto
by the Concessions, powers and privileges needful and usual in such Cases.
Therefore, and in pursuance of the foresaid Act of Parliament, His Majesty with
Advice and Consent of the said Estates of Parliament, Does hereby make and
constitute John Lord Belhaven, Adam Cockburn of Ormistoun, Lord Justice Clerk,
Mr. Francis Montgomery of Giffen, Sir John Maxwell of Pollock, Sir Robert
Chiesly present Provest of Edinburgh, John Swintoun of that Ilk, George Clark
late Baillie of Edinburgh, Mr. Robert Blakewood, and James Balfour Merchants in
Edinburgh, and John Cross Merchant in Glasgow, William Paterson Esquire, James
Fowlis, David Nairn Esquires, Thomas Deans Esquire, James Chiesly, John Smith
Thomas Coutes, Hugh Frazer, Joseph Cohaine, Daves Ovedo, and Walter Stuart
Merchants in London, with such others as shall join with them within the space
of twelve Months after the first day of August next, and all others, whom the
foresaid Persons and these joined with them, or major part of them being
assembled, shall admit and join into their Joint Stock and Trade who shall all
be Repute, as if herein originally insert to be one Body Incorporate, and a
free Incorporation, with perpetual Sucession, by the Name of The Company of
Scotland Trading to Africa, and the Indies: Providing always, Like as, it is
hereby in the first place provided, that of the Fond or Capital Stock that
shall be agreed to, be Advanced and Employed by the foresaid Undertakers, and
their Copartners; the half at least shall be appointed and allotted for
Scottish men within this Kingdom, who shall enter and subscribe to the said
Company, before the first day of August, one Thousand Six Hundred and Ninety
Six Years: And if it shall happen, that Scots Men living within this Kingdom,
shall not betwixt and the foresaid Term, subscribe for, and make up the equal
half of the said Fond or Capital Stock, Then and in that case allannerly, It
shall be, and is hereby allowed to Scots Men residing Abroad, or to
Forraigners, to come in, Subscribe, and be assumed for the Superplus of the
said half, and no otherwise: Likeas, the Quota of every man's part of the said
Stock whereupon he shall be capable to enter into the said Company, whether he
be Native or Forraigner, shall be for the least one Hundred lib. Sterling. And for
highest, or greatest three Thousand lib. Sterling. and no more directly nor
indirectly in any sort: with power to the said Company to have a common Seal,
and to alter and renew the same at their pleasure, with advice always of the
Lion King at Arms; as also to Plead and Sue, and be Sued; and to Purchass,
Acquirb, Possess, and enjoy Lordships, Lands, Tenements, or other Estate real
or personal of whatsoever nature or quality, and to dispose upon and alienate
the same, or any part thereof at their pleasure, and that by Transferrs and
Assignment, made and entered in their Books and Records without any other
formality of Law, Providing always, that such Shears as are first Subscribed
for, by Scots Men within this Kingdom shall no^ be alienable to any other than
Scots Men living within this Kingdom; That the foresaid Transferrs and
Convoyancies as to Lands and other (...) Estate (when made of these only and a
part) be perfected according to the Laws of this Kingdom anent the convoyance
of Lands and real Rights, with power likewayes to the foresaid company by
Subscriptions (...) otherways, as they shall think fit to raise a Joint Stock
or capital Fond or such a sum or sums of Money, and under and Subject unto such
Rules, Conditions and Qualifications, as by the foresaid Company, or major part
of them when assembled shall be limited and appointed to begin, carry on and
support their intended Trade of Navigation, and whatever may contribute to the
advancement thereof. And it is hereby declared, that the said Joint Stock or
capital Fond, or any part thereof, or any estate, real or personal, Ships,
Goods, or other Effects of and belonging to the said Company, shall not be
liable unto any manner of confiscation, Seizure, Forfaulture, Attachment,
Arrest or Restrain, for and by reason of any Embargo, breach of Peace, Letters
of mark or reprisal, Declaration of War with any foreign Prince, Potentate, or
State, or upon any other account or pretense whatsomever; but shall only be
transferable, assignable, or alineable in such way and manner and in such parts
and Portions, and under such restriction, rules and conditions, as the said
Company shall by writing in and upon their Books, Records and Registers direct
and appoint, and These Transfers and Assignments only, and no other shall
convoy the right and Property, in and to the said Joint Stock, and capital Fond
and effects thereof abovementioned, or any part of the samen, Excepting always
as is above-excepted, and that the Creditors of any particular Member of the
Company may by their real Diligence affect the share of the profit falling, and
pertaining to the Debtor, without having any further Right or Power of the
Debitors part and Interest in the Stock or capital Fond, otherwise than is
above appointed, and with this express provision, that whatever charges the
Company may be put to, by the contending of any of their Members Deceased, or
of their Assigney, Creditors or any other Persons in their Rights: The Company
shall have retention of their Charges and Expenses in the first place, and the
Books, Records, and Registers of the said Company or authentic Abstracts, or
Extract out of the same are hereby Declared to be good and sufficient for
evidents in all Courts of Judicator, and else where. And His Majesty with
Advice foresaid farther Statutes and Declares, that the said John Lord
Beilhaven, Adam Cockburn of Ormistoun, Lord Justice Clerk, Mr. Francis
Montgomery of Giffen, Sir John Maxwell of Poll^ck, Sir Robert Chieslly present
Provest of Edinburgh, John Swintoun of that Ilk, George Clark late Baillie of
Edinburgh, Mr. Robert Blakewood, and James Balfour Merchants in Edinburgh, and
John Cross Merchant in Glasgow, William Paterson Esquire, James Fowlis, David
Nairn Esquires, Thomas Deans Esquire, James Chiesly, John Smith, Thomas Coutes,
Hugh Frazer, Joseph Cohaine, Daves Ovedo, and Walter Stuart Merchants in
London, and others to be joined with, or assumed by them in manner
abovementioned, and their Successors, or major part of them assembled in the
said Company, shall and may in all time coming by the Plurality of Votes agree,
make, constitute, and ordain all such other Rules, Ordinances and Constitutions
as may be needful for the better Government and Improvement of their joint
Stocks, or capital Fond in all matters and things relateing thereunto: To which
Rules, Ordinances, and Constitutions, all Persons belonging to the said
Company, as well Directors as Members thereof, Governors, or other Officers,
Civil or Military, or others whatsoever shall be Subject, and hereby concluded;
As also to administrat and take Oaths de fideli, and others requisite to the
management of the foresaid Stock and Company. And the said Company is hereby
empowered to Equipp, Fit, Set out, Fraught, and Navigate their own, or hired
Ships, in such manner as they shall think fit, and that for the space of Ten
Years from the Date hereof, notwithstanding of the Act of Parliament, One
Thousand six hundred and sixty one Years, Entitled an Act for encouraging of
Shipping and Navigation, wherewith His Majesty with Consent foresaid dispenses
for the said time allanerly, in favors of the said Company, and that from any
of the Ports or Places of this Kingdom, or from any other parts or places in
Amity, or not in Hostility with His Majesty, in Warlike or other manner to any
Lands, Islands, Countries, or Places in Asia, Africa, or America, and there to
Plant Collonies, build Cities, Towns, or Forts, in or upon the places not
Inhabited, or in, or upon any other place, by consent of the Natives and
Inhabitants thereof, and not possessed by any European Sovereign, Potentate,
Prince, or State, and to provide and furnish the foresaid Places, Cities,
Towns, or Forts, with Magazines, Ordinances, Arms, Weapons, Ammunition, and
Stores of War, and by force of Arms to Defend their Trade and Navigation,
Collonies, Cities, Towns, Forts, and Plantations, and other their Effects
whatsoever; as also to make Reprisals, and to seek and take Reparation of
Damnage done by Sea, or by Land, and to make and conclude Treaties of Peace,
and Commerce with the Sovereigns, Princes, Estates, Rulers, Governors, or
Proprietors of the foresaid Lands, Islands, Countries, or Places in Asia,
Africa, or America; Providing always, Likeas, It is hereby specially provided,
That all Ships employed by them shall return to this Kingdom with their
Effects, under the pain of Confiscation, Forefaulture, and Seizure of the Ship
and Goods, in case of breaking of Bulk before their Return, excepting the case
of Necessity, for preserving the Ship, Company and Loading allanerly. And his
Majesty with Consent foresaid, does farther Statute and Ordain, that none of the
Leidges of this Kingdom shall, or may Trade or Navigat to any Lands, Islands,
Countries, or Places in Asia, or Africa, in any time hereafter, or in America,
for, and during the space of thirty one years, to be counted from the passing
of this present Act, without License and Permission in writing from the said
Company: Certifying all such as shall do in the contrair hereof, that they
shall Forefault and Omit the third part of the Ship, or Ships, and of the
Cargo, or Cargoes therein employed, or the Value thereof, the one half to His
Majesty as Escheat, and the other half to the Use and Benefit of the said
Company: For the effectual Execution whereof, it shall be lawful to the said
Company, or any Employed by them, to Seize the said Ships and Goods in any
place of Asia, or Africa, or at Sea upon the Coasts of Asia, or Africa, upon
the transgression foresaid, by force of Arms, and at their own hand, and that
without the hazard of incurring any Crime, or Delinquency whatsomever on
account of the said Seizure, or any thing necessarly done in Prosecution
thereof, excepting always, and without prejudice to any of the Subjects of this
Kingdom to Trade and Navigat, During the said space to any part of America,
where the Collonies, Plantations, or Possessions of the said Company shall not
be settled. And it is further hereby Enacted, that the said Company shall have
the Free and Absolute Right and Property, only Relieving and Holding of His
Majesty, and His Successors in Soveraignity, for the only acknowledgment of
their Allegiance, and paying yearly a Hogshead of Tobacco, in name of
Blench-duty, if required allanerly, in, and to all such Lands, Islands,
Collonies, Cities, Towns, Forts, and Plantations, that they shall come to
Establish, or Possess in manner foresaid; As also, to all manner of Treasures,
Wealth, Riches, Profits, Mines, Minerals, Fishings, with the whole Product and
Benefit thereof, as well under as above the Ground, and as well in Rivers and
Seas, as in the Lands thereto belonging, or from, or by reason of the same in
any sort, together with the Right of Government and Admirality thereof; And
that the said Company may by virtue hereof grant and delegat such Rights,
Properties, Powers, and Imunities and permit and allow such sort of Trade,
Commerce, and Navigation into their Plantations, Collonies, Cities, Towns, or
Places of their Possession, as the said Company from time to time shall judge
fit and convenient, with Power to them to impose and exact such Customs, and
other Duties upon and from themselves, and others Trading with, and coming to
the said Plantations, Cities, Towns, Places, and Ports, and Harbors thereof,
as the Company shall think needful for the maintenance and other public uses
of the same, Holding always, and to hold the whole Premises of His Majesty, and
his Successors Kings of Scotland, as Sovereigns thereof, and paying only for
the same, their acknowledgment and allegiance, with a Hogshead of Tobacco
yearly, in name of Blench Duty, if required, for all other Duty, Service, Claim
or Demand whatsomever. With power and liberty to the said Company to Treat for,
and to procure and purchase such Rights, Liberties, Privileges, Exemptions and
other Grants, as may be convenient for supporting, promoting, and enlarging
their Trade and Navigation from any foreign Potentate or Prince whatsoever, in
amity with H^s Majesty; for which the general Treaties of Peace and Commerce
betwixt his Majesty and such Potentates, Princes, or States shall serve for
sufficient Security, Warrant and Authority, and if contrair to the said
Rights, Liberties, Privileges, Exemptions, Grants, or Agreements, any of the
Ships, Goods, Merchandise, Persons, or other Effects whatsoever, belonging to
the said Company, shall be stopped, detained, embazled, or away taken, or in any
sort prejudged or damnified; His Majesty promises to interpose his Authority,
to have restitution, reparation and satis^action made for the Damage done and
that upon the public Charge, which His Majesty shall cause depurse and lay out
for that Effect. And farther, it is hereby Statute, that all Ships, Vessels,
Merchandise, Goods, and other Effects whatsoever belonging to the said Company
shall be free of an manner of Restraints, or Prom^^ations, and of all Customs,
Taxes, Cesses, Supplies, or other Duties Impo^ed, or to be Imposed by Act of
Parliament, or otherwise, for and d^^ing the space of twenty one years,
excepting wi^e the wh^^e Duties of Tob^cco and Suggar, that are not of the
Growth of the Plantations of the said Company. And farther, it is Enacted, that
the said Company by Commission under their common Seal or otherwise is they
shall appoint may make and constitute all and every their D^^ectors,
Governors, and Commanders, in Chief, and other Officers Civil or Military by
Sea, or by Land; As likewise that the said ^ompany may Inlist, Inroll, Agree
and Retain all such persons Subjects of this Kingdom, or others whatsoever, as
shall be willing and consent to enter in their Service or Pay, providing always
that they Uplift or Levy none within the Kingdom to be Soldiers, without Leave
or Warrant first obtained from His Majesty or the Lord, of His Privy Council,
over which Directors, Governors, Commanders in Chief, or other Officers Civil
or Military, and others whatsoever in their Service and Pay, the Company shall
have the Power, Command, and Disposition both by Sea and Land. And it is farther
Statute, That no Officer Civil or Military, or other Person whatsoever within
this Kingdom, shall Impress, Entertain, Stop or Detain any of the Members,
Officers, Servants or others whatsoever, off, or belonging to the said Company,
And in case the said Company, their Officers or Agents, shall find or
understand any of their Members, Officers, Servants, or others aforesaid to be
Impressed, Stopped or Detained, they are hereby Authorized and Allowed to take
hold of, and Release the foresaid Person Impressed or Stopped in any part of
this Kingdom, either by Land or Water; and all Magistrates and others His
Majesty's Officers Civil and Military, and all others are hereby required in
their Respective Stations, to be Aiding and Assisting to the said Company,
under the pain of being liable to all the Loss, Damage, and Detriment of the
said Company, by reason of the foresaid persons their neglect. And farther that
the said Company, whole Members, Officers, Servants, or others belonging
thereto, shall be free, both in their Persons, Estates, and Goods, Employed in
the said Stock and Trade, from all manner of Taxes, Cesses, Supplies, Excises,
Quartering of Soldiers Transient or Local, or Levying of Soldiers, or other
Impositions whatsoever, and that for and during the space of twenty one years.
And lastly, all Persons Concerned or to be Concerned in this Company, are
hereby declared to be free Denizons of this Kingdom, and that they with all
that shall Settle to Inhabit, or be Born in any of the foresaid Plantations,
Collonies, Cities, Towns, Factories, and other Places that shall be Purchased
and Possessed by the said Company, shall be repute as Natives of this Kingdom,
and have the Privileges thereof. And generally, without Prejudice of the
Specialities foresaid, His Majesty with Consent foresaid, Gives and Grants to
the said Company, all Power, Rights and Privileges, as to their Persons,
Rules, Orders, Estates, Goods and Effects whatsoever, that by the Laws are
given to Companies allowed to be Erected for Manufactories, or that are usually
given in any other Civil Kingdom or Commonwealth, to any Company there Erected
for Trade and Commerce. And for the better Establishment and greater Solemnity
of this Act and Gift, in Favors of the said Company, His Majesty does farther
Ordain Letters Patent to be expede hereupon, containing the whole Premises
under the Great Seal of this Kingdom, for doing whereof Per Saltum. Their
Presents shall be sufficient Warrant both to the Director and Chancellor, or
Keeper of the Great Seal, as use is in like Cases.


