INSTRUCTIONS FROM THE COMMITTEE OF ESTATES, TO The Colonels and Committees of
war in the several Sheriffedomes of this Kingdom.
At Edinburgh October 20. 1643.
WHereas by the Instructions of the first of September 1643. the number of men
foot and horse are designed to come out of every Shire, for the encouragement
and enabling whereof there is allowed two Dollars to every footman, and one
hundredth pounds to every horseman, well mounted with a good Horse, and
sufficient Arms, and six shillings of transport-money for every twelve miles
to the footman; There is likewise allowed one carriage horse for every twelve
footmen, and one carriage man for every two horses, appointing fifty Marks to
be paid at the Rendezvous of the Shire for every one of the said carriage
horses (they being worth fifty pounds) and the horse to pertain to the owner:
As also there is to be allowed two Dollars for every carriage man, and a
Soldiers pay.

The Committee of Estates considering that by the said Instructions there is
no way prescribed when and how the said levy money and carriage horse prices
shall be paid, have therefore thought fit to declare the same to be in manner
afterspecified.

In respect it was the offer of all the Shires, rather to advance their Loan
and Taxt, then to borrow money, or send in band to the Committee; Therefore the
Comittee appoints the whole Loan and Taxt to be advanced by every several
Shire and Burgh within the same, betwixt and the 15. day of November next, to
the said Subcollector within the said Shire, for advancement whereof there is
two of the hundred to be rebated and allowed for annuall-rent to the advancers,
and no retention to be allowed to any particular person, for any cause
whatsoever.

Every one shall advance his own part, or otherwise one or more in every
Parish to undertake and advance the proportion of that Parish, to whom is
allowed the said two of the hundred for annuall-rent, and two of the hundred
for Collector fee.

The money being thus advanced, the said Subcollector is to pay to every
footman, who being sworn to their colors, shall march out of the Shire under
command by order, the said two dollars, extending to eight Marks Scottish
money; and to every horseman well mounted and armed, as said is, one hundred
pounds money foresaid: And to the owner of every carriage horse (worth fifty
pounds) fifty Marks: And to every carriageman eight Marks of levy money: And
to every footman, and carriage-man, six shillings for every twelve miles,
conform to the particular note and exact count thereof, subscribed by the
Clerk of the said collection, sent to the Subcollector of every Shire,
respective, the double whereof is herewith sent.

And because by Act of Convention, these who have lent money, advanced victual
or other provision for Ireland, are ordained to be paid by the said Loan; The
said Committee finds this way of advancing the same to the Subcollectors to be
most advantageous for the furtherance of the work in hand, and for satisfaction
to the said persons who have lent money, or advanced for Ireland, as said is.

And that each Shire and Burgh within the same, may be assured, that the
foresaid sum of money allotted for the Levies, price of carriage horses, and
transport-money, shall not be employed for any other use, then as is aforesaid;
The General Collector, with advice and command of the said Committee of
Estate, gives warrant and power to the Sub-collectors within ilk Shire, after
receipt of the money so to be advanced, to give band and security, to keep the
said proportion of money in his own hand, and not to dispose thereupon, until
further order come for marching or mustering of the said men, Foot and Horse,
with carriage horses, and men conform: At which time, he shall deliver the
same in manner above-written as the Colonels and Committees of War shall
appoint for the uses aforesaid, the remanent always of the whole sum being
advanced, as said is: To the effect these who have lent money, and advanced
victual and provision for Ireland, may be satisfied, conform to the renour of
the said Act of Convention.

And siclike the said Committees of War within the whole Kingdom are
entreated to have their Regiments and Troops of Foot and Horse, as well these
who are to come out upon advertisement, as these who stays within, (where the
same is not already done) formed, enrolled, put under command, exercised, and
made in readiness, That upon forty eight hours warning, their numbers
appointed may be ready to march, with their carriage horses, arms, and all
other provision contained in the former instructions of the first of September
last.

And the Colonels and Committees in every Shire are to take special care, as
they would make conscience of the Covenant, and regard the cause in hand, that
the said Loan and Taxt be advanced: And that the Soldiers appointed to come
forth, be of the ablest and most vigorous men in each Parish: And that they do
not upon any terms admit old nor weak men, nor young boys and naughty bodies
to come forth. And if any such person shall be offered to them, that they
refuse him, and unless the Heritor furnish an able man in his place, it shall
be lawful to the Committee and Colonel, to take the ablest man or servant that
belongs to the said Heritor. And the Committees are to cause the Heritors
provide them Soldiers with Arms, two part Muskets, and third part Pikes. And
that the Colonels cause their Captains to be busy in training and exercising
their Soldiers to handle their Arms: And also to be careful that as many be
made choice of, of these who served in the last expedition, both Officers and
Soldiers, as can be conveniently had.

And because every Regiment must carry their own Ammunition, and draw their own
fielding-pieces, and other materials; the Committee ordains that ilk Shire and
Division shall either buy 12. horses for every Regiment, upon the expenses of
the Shire or Division, or hire them to be paid by the public after they come
to the General Rendezvous, as other carriage horses of the Artillery, viz.
allowing a man for every two horse, who is to have pay as a common Soldier,
and for each horse twelve shillings. Every horseman is to have eighteen
shillings scots in their transport, for every twenty miles from their
Rendezvous in the Shire, to the General Rendezvous.

And it is ordained that report be made hereof by the Committees of War in
ilk Shire (to whom the same is recommended) as well anent the advance of the
Loan and Taxt, as anent the other particulars foresaids, with all convenient
diligence, after the receipt hereof.


