A Paper put in by the Commissioners of Scotland, concerning the last VOTES of
the House of COMMONS.
Right Honorable,
WE are informed that by order from both Houses the King is secured in
Caresbrook Castle, and We have seen some printed Votes of the House of Commons
to this effect: That they will make no further addresses or applications to the
King; That no applications or addresses be made to the King by any person
whatsoever without the leave and approbation of the Houses: That all persons
whatsoever which shall make breach of this Order, shall incur the penalty of
high Treason: That they will receive no more any Messages from the King, and do
enjoin that no person whatsoever presume to receive or bring any Message from
the King to either or both Houses of Parliament, or to any other person. By
which, as his Majesty is deprived of all comforts of freedom; so it gives us
occasion to ask, Whether it be intended, that it shall extend to his Majesty's
Subjects of Scotland, to debar such as are warranted by the Parliament of
Scotland (or others having their authority) from free access to, or
intercourse with the King; or that His Majesty shall be hindered from (and so
made incapable of) the exercise of any act of Government in relation to the
affairs of that Kingdom: to the end we may be enabled from the Answer of the
Houses to give an account upon our return to Scotland, of His Majesty's
condition, and the discharge of our trust to the Committee of Estates and
Parliament there, which is to meet the sixth of March next; And waiting your
speedy Answer, we rest

Worcester-House, Jan. 6. 1648. Your humble Servants, LOWDOUN. LAUDERDALE.
CHARLES ERSKIN. HUGH KENNEDEY. ROB. BARKLAY.


For the Right Honorable the Speaker of the House of Peers pro tempore.

