A LETTER From an Anti-Hierarchical DIVINE In the Country, To a Member of the
House of COMMONS. Concerning the BISHOPS Being restored to their Votes in
PARLIAMENT.

LONDON. Printed in the Year, 1661.

Will Boothby

header containing a Tudor rose, a French fleur-de-lis, and a Scottish thistle
A Letter from an Anti-Hierarchical Divine in the Country, to a Member of the
House of Commons, concerning the Bishops being restored to their Votes in
Parliament.
Sir,
IT must needs seem strange to you at the first sight, to receive any thing
from me in the behalf of those Persons, whom I have to blood constantly
opposed; and whom I yet think for all their unexpected, and as they say,
miraculous Restitution, to be neither Jure Divino, nor Jure Apostolico. Yet,
considering that his Majesty, in order to the support and keeping up his own
Interest in the State, as some conceive, has introduced Bishops again into the
Church, to our no small grief; who though at present they cannot exercise that
arbitrary and unlimited Power, by virtue of the High Commission, as formerly,
yet have Authority sufficient, by the assistance of the penal Laws, yet
unrepealed, in all places, and by their large Royalties and ample Possessions
in many places, to reinforce (that, which all godly men justly enough decried
formerly, as a soul-grieving Innovation, and little better than Popery it self)
a conformity to the (as we yet say) empty, and unsignificant Ceremonies of
their pretended Church: The very Thought of which (was it not for His Majesty's
Gracious Declaration, and the Connivance of many honest and discreet Justices
of the Peace, that are yet left in the Country) were sufficient to make us
despond of the comfortable enjoying of our nearest and dearest Relations. But
then here is the Misery, the King, as many say, can pardon, but for what concerns
himself, according to that received Maxim, The Legislater has Authority to
dispense with his own Laws for any Cause, provided, that no distinct Interest
be prejudiced or injured; and therefore he can reach no further in relation to
the Non-reading the Book of Com. Prayer (a thing that we can never with any
Credit or Reputation conform to) than the first time; for upon the second
Conviction, Vid. Stat. before the Com. Prayer.
the Patron may present, as if the Incumbent were already dead, and in that
case it may easily be guessed, what most of us may expect; Neither can we hope
for the Connivance of the Benchers long; for, as a little Leaven leavens the
whole Mass, so one peevish person upon the Bench, is able to do us more hurt,
than the whole number can do us good, and of this, there are some experiences
near us. It must therefore, Sir, from hence of necessity follow, that either we
must be brought to a carnal Compliance, which will be a Spirit troubling of
many precious Saints amongst us, or else, as the lesser evil, leave our Native
Courtrey, and go to those Protestant Churches, beyond the Seas, where we may
have the free exercise of Religion in its Primitive and Virgin-Purity. Now Sir,
the face of things, as you know, being thus, I shall humbly propose to your
wiser self, a thing that may enable us to a more comfortable support in a
transmarine condition, if Providence should so order it, or else to at home.
You see then that Bishops are restored to a power, (which I will not be
positive in to determine they will exercise) to do hurt, it would not be amiss
therefore, if the power whereby they may do good, viz their Pretenses to a
Third Estate, and so consequently to a Vote in Parliament, were taken into
sesonable and mature Consideration. It Is true, at the beginning of the War, the
King was confidently cried up by us to be the Third Estate, which some of them
undiscreetly granted, thereby to make the King a coordinate Power, by which,
to put the better, Gloss upon our Arming, for the asserting of the Authority
of the two Houses against His; and indeed much might yet be said, in
justification of the Late War, had the King been so. But now, Sir, upon second
thoughts, that Opinion appears to be very incongruous to the Fundamentals: For
not only my Lord Cook says, which is enough to confute any single Authority,
that the Bishops are a third Estate, but the express words of many Statutes
are, that the three Estates of the Realm, are the Lords Spiritual, well be
denied, but that the Bishops are a Third Estate, and accoringly they have acted
since Magna Charta, and in the Saxon times too, as many say: But the Stories of
those times being uncertain, as filled up with Monkish Tales, much resembling
the Theomachi, of the Giants before the Theban War, amongst the Grecians, I
shall wave, as not much material to the purpose. Well then, the Bishops being
an Estate, and likewise the Assent of all being as necessary too, as the Veult
le Roy, to the completing of an Act that shall be binding, against what may
happen to Futurity, it must then follow, that it is requisite for us, in order
to our sure and certain Peace, that they, as well as the other Lords, should be
restored to that which has so long been their R^ghts; otherwise the President,
may, in time to come, be of d^ngerous Consequence; for by the same Rule, that
the Lords Temporal and Commons, by the Royal Assent, excluded the Bishops; may
the Lords exclude the Commons; nay, more justly may the King exclued all, and
after the manner of the Turkish and Russian Emperors, reduce our bravely
Constituted M^narchical, into a Despotical Government. Mistake me not all this
while, for what I say, is not out of any respect to them, but to our selves:
For we shall have as much, if not more advantage than any by their Restitution.
For to say the Truth, at the beginning of the War, we were, you know, so
transported with Zeal, of doing our Duty to God, as some holy men then thought,
that we quite forgot our Allegiance to the Prince, and therefore we stand as
much in need of a firm Act of Oblivion, in relation to the secure Enjoyment of
the things of this Life, as of Gods Mercy, in order to the Fruition of a
better. It will be therefore very unsafe for us, to have that Charter, under
which we claim all that we have, or may pretend to, so ill fortified, as by an
Act that may be liable to a just Exception, as every Act must be, that is not
ratified according to the Fundamental Constitutions of this Land: And who do
you think can be well satisfied with so contingent a security, as you see all
security is, without the Bishops Assent? I know in Answer to this, it may be
Objected, that there has been several Acts of Parliament past, the Bishops
being absent, the Authority of which was never yet disputed, as, 24 Ed. 1.11.
R. 2. and diverse others, but then the Bishops neither by force, nor any
pretended Act or Order from the other Estates, were kept out: But they being
then in subjection to the Scarlet Whore, were kept out by a Canon or Command
from the Sea of Rome, or else were absent upon Choice, and therefore none of
those Examples can in reason be alleged, to vindicate the forcible exclusion
of them. Besides, it may deserve some Consideration, that the Act made 2 H. 4.
Contra Haereticos, and ex assensu Magnatum and aliorum Procerum, the Commons
either Absent, or excluded, was for that very reason long after, 25 H. 8. C.
14. repealed, as Bagshaw says in his Reading, whither I refer you. By this,
you may see, Sir, that there is some possibility of hazard, though many years
after, in relying upon any Act that is not made by the consent of the three
Estates. All this considered, I shall propose this following, as the most
convenient Expedient: Before you confirm the Act of Oblivion, let the Bishops
be called in, that so there may be no just occasion of Cavil for the future:
otherwise those men that will not bow the knee to Baal, that cannot conform to
vain Habits and impertinent Ceremonies, cannot make a convenient Sale of their
Lands, to enable to a Livelihood, amongst the French or Helvetian Churches: To
which, if they do not forsake their first Love, and make shipwreck of their
Faith, they must in reason be forced. For it is plain, if hereafter, the Act,
for want of due Form be made null, all Estates that now are, or for many years
ago were in our hands, will by the Letter of the Law be forfeited to the King,
and we are not sure always to have good Kings; but we are pretty sure, that
there will always be such Persons about the Court, as will be willing enough
for their own Concerns, to find a Flaw in that Act, or any else. Besides, the
Lawyers tell us, that no Obligation can be binding, that is entered into per
dureose or Minas: Well then if at any time hereafter, a Prince should happen
among us, that has a mind to quarrel with all Acts made since the exclusion of
the Bishops, and allege, that his Predecessor Charles the First was threatened
and forced to assent to that Act; and therefore the Act null: we have reason to
think, that there will be Lawyers enough found, to justify any Authority, in a
more unreasonable thing, and so our Posterity may hereafter be forced to buy
their Lands at the King Price, if they have them: But least I exceed the length
of a Letter, I shall conclude in this, that the total Abolition of the
Hierarchy is not so necessary, in order to a through Reformation in point of
Discipline, as the restitution of the Bishops to their Votes in the Upper
House, and their Consent to the Act of Amnesty, is to the freeing of us from
those Jealousies and Fears that otherwise may justly arise in relation to our
Lives and Estates. Pardon me Sir, I am Yours,

P S.

FINIS.

