THE ANSWER OF THE COMMISSIONERS OF THE Kingdom of Scotland, To both Houses of
PARLIAMENT, Upon the New Propositions of Peace, AND THE Four Bills to be sent
to his MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed for ROBERT BOSTOCK, dwelling at the sign of the Kings head in
PAUL'S Churchyard. 1647.

The Answer of the Commissioners of the Kingdom of Scotland to both Houses of
Parliament, etc.
WE have, with much patience, for diverse years together, in pursuance of the
Solemn League and Covenant, and Treaties betwixt the Kingdoms, used our best
indevors for settling Religion and a happy Peace. Propositions were first agreed
an ^n Anno 1644. with advice and consent of the Parliaments of both Kingdoms,
presented to his Majesty at Oxford by Commissioners of both, and treated upon
at Vxbridg, in Anno 1645. We did earnestly and frequently press the sending of
those Propositions again to his Majesty, wherein the Houses would not concur
with us; but on the contrary (after very long delay) thought fit to make
several alterations therein, which were principally in matters that did concern
the near Union of the Kingdoms. Yet were we so earnestly desirous of putting an
end to the long continued distraction and troubles of these Kingdoms, as
(waving what might be conceived to be for the particular interest of the
Kingdom of Scotland) we did join with the Houses of Parliament in presenting
Propositions to his Majesty at New Castle; though, as we then declared, we had
just reason to be unsatisfied with diverse things contained in those
Propositions.

When it was agreed upon betwixt the Kingdoms, that the same Propositions
should be again presented to his Majesty, at his coming to Holdenby, the
performance thereof being delayed by the Houses, for diverse months, we did
patiently wait then leisure. Yet upon the sudden they did appoint a peremptory
day for sending the Propositions to his Majesty; and gave order to their
Commissioners, in case we were not precisely upon that day at Hampton Court,
that they should present the Propositions to the King alone by themselves,
contrary to the Treaty betwixt the Kingdoms; which was so strange and unequal a
way, as we might have justly denied our concurrence, had not our love to Peace
prevailed with us to join in that Message. but after all this, finding no
success in that way of sending Propositions to the King, and insisting upon his
positive Assent thereunto, without giving any reasons for the justice of our
desires, or hearing any Proposition from his Majesty: We did, in November last,
propose to the honorable Hous^s, and with much earne^^ness desire, that there
might be a personal ^^^ty with his Majesty here at London, it being in all
probability, the best (...) to obtain a Peace.

About the time of his Majesty's withdrawing from Hampton Court, the Houses did
communicate to us new Propositions, resolved on by them to be presented to his
Majesty; after receipt whereof, we did in our Paper of the 17. of November,
insist on our former desire for a personal Treaty with his Majesty. But
receiving no Answer to that, nor to our paper of the 5. And our positive Answer
being demanded to the new Propositions; upon the 23. of November. we resolved
once again to desire an Answer to our former Papers; A personal Treaty being,
in our judgment, a readier way to compose all differences, then the sending of
these new Propositions, wherein there are so great and essential differences
from what was formerly agreed on by both Kingdoms. And to the end there might
be no let or delay on our part, which might hinder the settling of a Peace; We
desired a conference with a Committee of both Houses concerning the expediency
of a personal Treaty with his Majesty, and the alterations made in the
Propositions, that so according to the Treaty of the 29. of Novem. 1643. there
might be, with the advice and consent of both Nations, a speedy Agreement in
those things, which are to be the foundation of the Peace of both. To all
which, the Houses have been pleased to return no Answer. However, it is no small
satisfaction to us, that we leave no means of Agreement unes^ayed; and that the
retardment of the settling of the Peace of the Kingdoms, cannot be charged on
us. And least our further silence, in expectation of an Answer, should be
mistaken, We have thought fit to represent our sense, concerning a personal
Treaty, and the Propositions, to the Houses in writing; which, had our desires
been granted, we did intend to have done by a verbal conference.

There be some things which properly concern the Kingdom of England, their
Rights, Laws, and Liberties. But there be other matters, which in their own
nature, as being common to both, or by Covenant, or Treaty, concern both
Kingdoms, wherein, unless we would forget our duty to God, to the Kings
Majesty, to our Native Kingdom, and to this Nation, Our common concernment and
interest, cannot be denyd. For as Scotland was invited and engaged in this War,
upon grounds and reasons of common interest; So we trust it will not be
offensive, that in making of Peace we claim from the Houses an Improvement of
the very same principles, and a performance of the Treaties they have made with
us; that the same measure of conjunction of interests be given to us which was
had of us, and promised unto us; wherein the very Law of Nations, and the rule
of common equity, does plead for us. Yet in the application of this rule, we
shall not stretch our selves beyond our line, the express conditions of our
Solemn League and Covenant, the duty of our Allegiance, and the Treaties and
Declarations between the Kingdoms, which are so many strong obligations, as,
all who have honor or conscience, must acknowledge should be inviolably observed.

Having laid this as a most just and solid ground of our proceedings, we shall
first speak of the best and most probable means to procure a good Agreement
with the King for settling Religion and a lasting Peace: And next of the
Propositions, which are to be the foundation of the peace and safety of both
Kingdoms. And it is still our Opinion and Judgment, that the most equal,
fairest, and just way to obtain a wel-grounded peace, is by a personal Treaty
with the King: and that his Majesty, for that end, be invited to come to
London, with Honor, Freedom, and Safety: For which we offer the Reasons
following.

1. The sending of Propositions, without a Treaty, has been often essayed
without success: And the new Propositions are less to the advantage of the
Crown than the former. Therefore, we have no reason to expect better
satisfaction that way than formerly we had.

2. The Kings removal from his Parliament, is acknowledged by the Houses in
several Declarations, to be the chief cause of all the War, mischief, and
calamities of the Kingdoms. Then, his Majesty's presence with his Parliament
must be the best, if not the only remedy, to remove our troubles.

3. In a personal Treaty the Commissioners of both Kingdoms, may give reasons
for the equity and expediencie of our desires. But without a Treaty or giving
reasons for asserting the lawfulness and expediency of the Propositions to be
presented, they may be esteemed Impositions.

4. The King may have some just desires to move for the Crown, and for himself:
As that he may have his Revenues, and that he may be restored to his Royal
Government: which may be done, with greater honor and satisfaction to him, by a
personal Treaty, then otherwise.

5. A personal Treaty with the King is the best way to beget a mutual
confidence between Him and his Parliament: It is the best way to clear his
doubts and to remove all difficulties: and it is the absolute best way for
giving and receiving mutual satisfaction.

6. We cannot expect that his Majesty will grant in terminis whatsoever
Propositions shall be sent unto him: nor can every thing in the Propositions be
of that importance, as that the not granting of it ought to hinder a Peace.
Neither will the Houses of Parliament give full power to their Commissioners to
make alterations in the Propositions, as they shall see cause upon debate.
Wherefore, a personal Treaty with his Majesty at London, is the most probable
and expeditious way to remove or reconcile all differences.

There is one common objection, wherewith many are possessed and prejudiced
against a personal Treaty with the King, and his coming to London, [That his
presence may breed division, and continue our troubles: And that when his
Majesty desired to come hither from Oxford with freedom and safety, it was
thought unfit, and denied by the Houses, and the Commissioners from Scotland]
But that argument now has no force at all: For the case of affairs, the Kings
condition and ours (which were given for Reasons in that Answer to his Majesty)
are quite altered from what they were then. Then the King had Armies in the
fields; he had Garrisons and strong holds to return to; Now, he has none of
these. And his Majesty offers a full security against all hostility or danger
can be expected from him, by granting to the Houses the power of the Militia by
Sea and Land, during his Reign, as is expressed in his Majesty's late Message
from Caresbrook Castle. And for a further answer, we desire the Houses to
remember that Reply to his Majesty's Message of the 11 of September, 1642.
Where, after mention of their chief grievances, they say [All this
notwithstanding, as we never gave your Majesty any just cause of withdrawing
your self from your great Council: So it has ever bin, and shall be far from
as, to give any impediment to your return: Or to neglect any proper means of
curing the distempers of the Kingdom, and closing the dangerous breaches
betwixt your Majesty and your Parliament, according to the great trust which
lies upon us. And if your Majesty shall now be pleased to come back to your
Parliament without your Forces: We shall be ready to secure your Royal Person,
Crown and Dignity, with our lives and fortunes, Your presence in this great
Council, being the only means of any Treaty betwixt your Majesty and them, with
hope of success.] And if they were esteemed Enemies to the Parliament, and the
Peace of the Kingdoms, who advised the King to withdraw from his Parliament:
What estimation will the world have of them, who after such a Declaration, will
not suffer him to return to his Parliament, when he offers to cast himself into
their Arms? If so kind an offer shall be refused, and the King driven to
despair, it is to be feared, these Kingdoms shall be involved into greater
difficulties then ever. And therefore we do hold, that the admitting the King
to come to London with Honor, Freedom and Safety, and granting of a personal
Treaty with his Majesty, upon such Propositions as shall be agreed upon by
advice and consent of both Kingdoms, is the most probable, and only best means,
with hope of success, for settling a wel-grounded Peace.

Having spoken of the readi^^t means to obtain a just and lasting peace; We
shall next fall upon the Consideration of the Propositions, which are to be the
Foundation of our peace. And the most compendious and succ^^^t way to a good
agreement, and unanimous Resolution upon them, is, in the first place to
consider and remove our differences, which are chiefly (...) Religion, the
Interest of the Crown, and in the Union and Joint Conce^^ment of the Kingdoms.

We shall begin with that of Religion, which for the incomparable Excellence
thereof (although it be amongst the last of these new Propositions) deserves
the preference. It is the primum quarite, the unum necessarium; We ought to
build the House of God before our own. The Law of piety and true policy does
require that Religion, which renders to God his due, have the precedence. And
therefore (upon debate) before we went to the Treaty at Vxbridg, it was agreed
betwixt the houses and us, that the Propositions of Religion should be in the
first place, and first Treated and Agreed upon, before any Agreement upon any
other Proposition. And his Majesty in his late Message from Caresbrook Castle,
begins at Religion, as the best and chiefest Foundation for Peace. Wherefore,
if this changing of the former Order and Method of the Propositions, be only
their Error, to whom the reviewing of the Propositions was committed. And if
the Houses have not fallen away from their first Zeal. We desire that it may be
rectified, and the former Method kept. And so we come to the matter of the
Propositions.

The material differences and alterations concerning Religion, may be branched
into the Error of Omission and Deficiency, and into that of Commission and
Excess. That which is left out, is no less then the Solemn League and Covenant.
And shall the Covenant, which is as Solemn a vow, as Creatures on Earth could
make to God in Heaven, and the greatest tie betwixt men on Earth (to which the
most high and dreadful Name of the Lord God Almighty, was interposed) be
offered up in a Sacrifice, and buried in the ashes of Oblivion? Shall our
Covenant for the Preservation and Reformation of Religion, for the honor and
happyness of the King, and the peace and safety of the three Kingdoms; and for
the maintenance and defense of the Laws, and true public Liberties of these
Kingdoms; which was declared by both Kingdoms, to be a fit and most Excellent
means to acquire the favor of God toward both, and likewise to Unite them,
and by uniting, to strengthen them against the common Enemies of the true
Reformed Religion, and the Peace and Prosperity of these Kingdoms; and which in
all former Propositions was desired to be established: be now d^le^ed, as
unworthy to take room amongst these new Propositions? Shall the Covenant, which
both Houses did recommend to the Assembly of Divines, to make a Declaration to
all sorts of persons to take it, as that which they judged not only Lawful, but
exceeding expedient and necessary for all that wish well to Religion, the King
and Kingdom to ioyn in, and to be a singular pledge of Gods gracious goodness to
all the three Kingdoms (we say) shall that Covenant be laid aside? Shall our
mutual and solemn League and Covenant subscribed by the Parliaments of both
Kingdoms, by the Assembly of Divines, by the City of London, and which, not
only they, but all Scotland, and many thousands in England and Ireland, with
hands lifted up to the most high God, did swear [That they shall not suffer
themselves directly or indirectly by whatsoever combination, persuasion or
terror, to be divided and withdrawn from that blessed union and conjunction,
whether to make defection to the contrary part, or to give themselves to a
detestable indifferency or neutrality in this cause, which so much concerns
the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and honor of the King: but shall all
the days of their lives, zealously and constantly continue therein against all
opposition: and promote the same according to their power, against all lets and
impediments whatsoever: and that they shall do all this as in the sight of God]
Shall that Covenant (even with those that took it) be already out of date, and
not so much as remembered amongst the Proposit^ons of Peace? Yea, it is not so
much as mentioned in these new Propositions, except in the 7 Qualification of
the 14 Proposition, where it is only made a hook to catch some into the Notion
of Delinquency! But perhaps there it escaped the Revisers of the Propositions,
who in all other places have exploded it.

It is answered by some, that by one of the Propositions it is craved, that an
act of Parliament be passed, declaring the Kings approbation of the making of
the Treaties between the Kingdoms of Scotland and England; in which Treaties
there is mention made of the Covenant: And therefore it is not necessary to
desire a particular Confirmation and Establishment of the Covenant. To which it
is briefly Replied, first, that there is no Proposition for passing any Act of
Parliament, to confirm the Treaties between the Kingdoms, as was desired in all
former Propositions; but these words are purposely changed, and in place
thereof there is only desired, An Act Declaring the Kings approbation of the
making of the Treaties; which in effect is no more then an act of Indemnity
for making the Treaties, and not an Act for confirmation and establishing of
the Treaties themselves, and those things which are expressed and transacted in
them. 2. Suppose there were an Act of Parliament passed for approbation of the
Treaties between the Kingdoms in general (which is not in these Propositions)
Yet such a generality would not be understood to be extended to the
confirmation of the Covenant, unless the particular Articles of the Treaty and
the Covenant, were expressly inserted; because, there was an express Proposition
amongst the former, that an Act of Parliament be passed in both Kingdoms for
confirming and taking the Covenant; which being now left out of the new
Propositions, without mentioning the Covenant cannot but he interpreted as a
receding from the Covenant: and the approbation and confirmation of the
Treaties in general (after deleting the Covenant out of the Propositions)
would only be understood of the remaining Articles of the Treaties. Therefore,
if there be not an intention to relinquish the Covenant; Let us not be ashamed
to avow it and insert the confirming of it, as one of the chief and express
desires of our Propositions: [Let us give testimony, and bear witness to the
truth and not deny it, remembering that whosoever shall give testimony to Christ
and his truth by confessing him before Men, Math. 10.3^.33
he will also confess them before his Father which is in heaven: And whosoever
will deny him before Men, them will he deny before his Father which is in
heaven.] And seeing the Covenant was the soverain and only means of recovering
these embroiled bleeding Kingdoms, when the Houses were at their lowest ebb,
and desired the Kingdom of Scotland, Declarat. delivered in Scotland July 164^
[to consider with what difficulties, miseries, and distractions, they were
enforced daily to wrestle, even for the life and being both of Church and
State:] Surely, the despising, refusing, and casting aside that remedy, would
be the height of ingratitude, must render the disease much more desperate, and
turn our former mutual confidence into mutual diffidence. And therefore we
desire, that the Houses upon better consideration, will still adhere to the
Covenant, and insert it among the Propositions.

And whereas the Kings averseness from the Covenant may be objected, and that
the desiring to have it confirmed, may be a hinderance to peace: We answer, If
the omitting of the Covenant in these Propositions does really proceed from
that principle, that the Houses are desirous to please the King, and to remove
all obstructions that may hinder a peace: We do very much wonder, that they
are so liberal in the matters of God, and so tenacious in what concerns
themselves, in all differences betwixt his Majesty and them in things Civil,
which may far better be dispensed with. But to answer the strength of the
Objection, We say, That the Covenant being for the preservation and Reformation
of Religion, and for the true honor and happiness of the King and his
Posterity, and for the peace and safety of his Kingdoms; Whatever be the
difference of his Majesty's judgment, We have just cause to insist to crave
his Royal assent to it; And the Kings heart is in the hands of God, to turn it
as the rivers of waters whither he pleases: And although the King should deny
it, yet we ought to perform our duty: And when his Majesty shall be convinced,
that our intentions in entering into this Covenant, were and are pious and
loyal; and that our Actions do evidence that we intend no injury to his
Royal Person, to wrong his Government, nor to diminish his just power: We hope
God will incline his heart to give just satisfaction concerning the Covenant.
And though his Majesty shall not come the full length of our desires, yet we
must never depart from the Covenant, nor leave off by all just ways to promote
it, or desist from endeavoring by all lawful means to procure his Majesty's
assent unto it. But we desire that we may be rightly understood in this, and
not misconstrued; as if our zeal for the Covenant did abate or diminish at all
from our Loyalty and duty to the King, (for the Covenant does not lessen or
limit our allegiance, as some would falsely slander it, and those who sincerely
and loyally took it) or that upon difference of his Majesty's judgment, and
not coming the full length of our desires in every thing, he should be kept in
prison; or that Arms should be kept up (now when the War is ended) to
burden the Subjects, and force the King to grant what they please to demand.
We were confident (when our Army returned to Scotland, and left no Forces in
this Kingdom to oppose the Parliament) that the Army here should have been
instantly disbanded: And could never have expected that the Kings Majesty, to
whom the Parliaments of both Kingdoms were to make their addresses for a safe
and well-grounded peace, should have been taken away by the Army against his
will, and still kept in their power, to be carried whether they please, or
forced to fly for safety. If Scotland had apprehended, that the least injury
or violence would have been committed against his Majesty's Royal Person, or
Monarchical Government: Nay, if they had not received assurance from the
Houses to the contrary, certainly all the threatenings or allurements in the
world, could never have persuaded them to have parted with the King till all
Armies had been disbanded and the peace of the Kingdoms settled It was our
brotherly confidence in the Houses (who are our fellow Subjects) and the
assurance we had from them that made us leave the King with them: And their
care of him and duty to him ought to be such, as neither his Majesty, nor we,
have cause to repent it. And this we could not but declare to assert the truth,
and vindicate the honor and reputation of our Nation; for out Loyalty has
ever been, is and shall be dearer unto us, then our lives and fortunes; And the
candor and integrity of all our Actions, is a sufficient confutation of all the
calumnyes and aspersions, which malice or envy can forge against us.

We find also these Propositions omitted, viz. the Proposition for confirming
the Ordinances concerning the calling and sitting of the Assembly of Divines;
the Proposition for Reformation of Religion in England and Ireland, according
to the Covenant; And the Proposition for settling Unity and Uniformity in
matters of Religion between the Churches of God in both Kingdoms, according to
the Covenant. In place of all which we find nothing but a mere shadow of
Presbyteriall Government, an external Form of Discipline without life or
power; and a liberty granted for all sorts of Service and Worship of God, and
for the Exercise of all such Religious Duties and Ordinances as every person
shall please, and his own erroneous conscience shall dictate unto him (for
there is no other rule prescribed) which opens a door to Atheism to all
Religions, and to that which (by abuse of the name) is called liberty of
conscience; being indeed liberty of error, scandal, schism, heresy,
dishonouring God, opposing the truth, hindering Reformation, and seducing
others; So, in place of Uniformity in Religion, which by Covenant both
Kingdoms have sworn to endeavor, there is here desired to be settled a vast
difformity or multi-formity of Heresies and Sects; which, if the Lord in his
mercy shall not prevent, may produce the ruin of Religion in both Kingdoms,
which we have just reason to fear; as for other reasons, so when we consider
the Declaration of the Houses of Parliament, speaking of the design of the
Popish and Prelaticall Faction to alter Religion in this Island: of whom they
say, first, Page 492. collection of Declar.
[ they resolved to impose a Popish Service Book upon Scotland; for well they
know the same fate attended both Kingdoms, and Religion could not be altered in
the one without the other.] And in Answer to the Scots Declaration, page 601.
[Whensoever the design to root out Religion shall be perfected in either
Nation, it will easily be accomplished in the other, Religion being the band
and foundation of the safety and happiness of both.] And in August 1643. the
English Commissioners declare to the Kingdom of Scotland, [that they are
commanded by their instructions to put their brethren of Scotland in mind,
that the Popish and Prelaticall Faction, that began with them about the year
1638 and 1639, and then intended to make way to the ruin of the Kingdom of
England by theirs have not abated any part of their malice toward the Nation
and Church of Scotland; nor at all departed from their design of corrupting and
altering Religion through the whole Island, though they have inverted the
manner of their proceeding, conceiving now that they have an easier way to
destroy them, if they may first prevail over the Parliament and Kingdom of
England; In which respect it is the desire of both Houses, that the two Nations
may be strictly United, etc.] And in another paper it is declared, that [ what
corruptions take root in the Church and Kingdom of England, English
Commissioners August 16^3,
will quickly spread their venom and infection into the Neighbor Church of
Scotland:] Wherefore, we cannot dissent from this Proposition; And according to
the trust reposed in us, represent our just exceptions against it. And first of
all we think it very strange, That the Houses of Parliament should desire an
Act of Parliament to be made for establishing Presbyterian Government, and in
the very same Proposition, desire that it may be Enacted that none shall obey
that Act of Parliament, but such as shall please to do it. 2. We observe, that
however it is pretended that Presbyterian Government is desired to be
established, as the Government of the Church of England; yet it is only in
effect, a Liberty granted to all such, as of their own accord will join in
Presbyteriall Government, and so amounts to no more then a Toleration of it. 3.
That this toleration of Presbyterian Government is many ways limited; as in
the time for which it is to endure, being only to the end of the next Session
of Parliament, after the end of this present Session, which perhaps may be not
above six Months. And the Ministers and Elders are appointed by Ordinance of
Parliament to exclude from the Sacrament, only such Persons as the Houses have
thought fit, and no others, though it be against their consciences so to do.
They are bounded with several restrictions in their Meetings and Assemblyes,
and are not allowed the use and exercise of all the Ordinances appointed by the
Word of God; so as Liberty of Conscience is denied to them, and granted to
others: For, 4. An unlimited toleration for the time of endurance, matter of
worship, and exercise of all Ordinances, is expressly granted to all the
Sectaries of the time, whether they be Anabaptists, Antinomians, Arminians,
Familists, Erastians, Brownists, Separatists, Libertines, or Independents; yea,
it extends to those Nullifidians, the Seekers, to the new Sect of Shakers, and
diverse others; By all which the very foundation of Church and State is shaken,
and near to be overthrown, 5. The toleration here desired to be established is
of that capacity and latitude, as it may admit of many vile and gross errors
which have been condemned and cast out of the Church in former times, and may
be revived in England; as if errors and heresies were of so precious a nature,
that men should be encouraged by Law to enquire after them, and invited to
maintain them. 6. This toleration is not only to the persons of those
Sectaries and their families, but gives a full liberty to set up their
professions in any fit and convenient places, that so Scandals, Heresies,
Schisms, and new Religions may grow in their kinds, and also multiply in the
number of Professors and Disciples, as if there were not enough already. 7.
Though it seems that a provision is made that this indulgence shall not
extend to the toleration of Antitrinitarians, Arrians, and Antiscripturists,
yet there is no more expressed, but that this indulgence shall not extend to
tolerate the Printing, Publishing, or Preaching such blasphemies and errors as
they do maintain against God, the Holy Trinity, and the Scriptures. They are
not made liable to any penalty; and suppose penalties were imposed upon them
for Printing, Publishing, or Preaching those errors; yet they are by this
Proposition left to a full liberty to maintain them in private, to reason and
dispute that there is no God, that Christ is but an Impostor, that there is no
such thing as the Holy Ghost, that the Scriptures are but like other writings;
blaspheming at their pleasure, and seducing others to their opinions in secret;
All which, and much more, according to this Proposition, may not be questioned:
and so in reality, though not in pretext, they shall be tolerated as well as
others. 8. Al protane and wicked persons are left at liberty by this toleration
to do what they please. For they are not obliged to be subject to any
Discipline or Government, and so neither the duties of the first nor second
table of the Law of God, shall be observed; but all sort of impiety and works
of darkness, shall abound: and such as hate the sincere worship of God in the
Church, may have the most unlawful and wicked meetings elsewhere, under a
profession of religious exercises or Ordinances. We might add more exceptions
against this Proposition; But these we trust may suffice to make any that is
but a little endued with the light of the Gospel, and has any love to the
truth, for to detest and abhor such a toleration. And now we desire the
Houses of Parliament to remember their Remonstrance of the State of the
Kingdom of the 15 of December 1642. where they resent it as a great injury,
that any [should infuse into the people that they mean to leave every man to
his own judgment and fancy for the service and worship of God; and do declare,
that it is far from their purpose and desire, to let loose the golden reins
of Discipline and Government in the Church, to leave private persons or
particular Congregations, to take up what kind of divine service they please;
and hold it requisite, that there should be throughout the whole Realm a
conformity to that Order, which the Laws enjoyne, according to the word of
God.] How consonant this toleration is to that Declaration, we leave it to the
Houses of Parliament and all wise men to consider; and whether the danger of
the true reformed Religion in these Kingdoms, be not greater now then before
the taking of the Covenant; yea, or since Christian Religion came first into
this Island, when toleration of all Religions (the name of Popery only
excepted) is desired by the Houses of Parliament to be established by Law; and
the very Principles and Fundamentals of faith, which under Prelacy yea under
Popery it self, were generally received as uncontroverted, are now by many
Sectaries of this time, either oppugned or called in question.

There are diverse other passages in the Declarations and Ordinances of both
Houses to the same purpose; but here we shall only mention one or two. In
particular we would have the Houses call to mind their Declaration and answer
to the Lords of his Majesty's Secret Counsel of Scotland, and the general
Assembly of the Church of that Kingdom in the year 1642. where besides other
expressions they use these words [We acknowledge it an act of love to us, and
Wisdom for the good of both Churches, for which we are thankful both to God
and them, that our Brethren of Scotland have bestowed their serious thoughts
and earnest desires for Unity of Religion, that in all his Majesty's Dominions
there might be one confession of faith, one Directory for worship, one public
Catechism, and one form of Church Government. And although it will hardly be
obtained punctually and exactly, unless some way might be found, for a mutual
communication and conjunction of Counsel and debate in frameing that one
form; yet both intending the same and, proceeding by the same rule of Gods
word, and guided by the same Spirit: we hope by Gods assistance to be so
directed, that we may cast out whatsoever is offensive to God or justly
displeasing to any neighbor Church; And so far agree with our Brethren of
Scotland and other reformed Churches in all substantial parts of Doctrine,
Worship, and Discipline, that both we and they may enjoy those advantages and
conveniences, which are mentioned by them in this their answer; In the more
strict Union of both Kingdoms; more safe, easy, and comfortable Government of
his Majesty, and both to himself and co^le, more free communion in all holy
exercises and duties of worship; more constant security of Religion against the
bloody practices of Papists, and deceitful errors of other Sectaries.] And
having there made known their resolution to take away the Government by
Bishops, they desire some godly and learned Divines of that Church, to be sent
to the Assembly of Divines here, whereby an uniformity in form of Church
Government may be obtained; and one Confession of Faith, one Directory, and
one Catechism may be settled in all the three Kingdoms: Which desire was
afterward renewed to their Commissioners sent to Scotland; and in end the
mutual and joint desires of both Kingdoms, were crowned with a solemn League
and Covenant; as for other ends, so for endeavoring the nearest conjunction
and uniformity in all these; and for extirpation of Heresy and Schism. These
four years past, the labors of many learned and godly Divines of both
Kingdoms thereunto appointed, have been spent in framing a Directory for
worship (which was long since approved, and received in both Kingdoms,) a
Confession of Faith, a form of Church Government and Catechizing; all which
have been presented to both Houses, and some progress was made therein toward
the establishing of them, till of late they were laid aside.

The Houses not many months since, did appoint a solemn Fast, and day of
Humiliation, to be kept throughout the whole kingdom, because of the growth of
Heresies, Blasphemies, and Schism: The words of the Ordinance are these [ We
the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of England, having entered
into a solemn Covenant, to endeavor sincerely, really, and constantly the
reformation of Religion in Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship; And the
extirpation of Popery, superstation, heresy, schism, profaneness, and
whatsoever shall be found contrary to sound doctrine, and the power of
godliness. And having found the presence of God wonderfully assisting us in
this cause, especially since our said engagement, in pursuance of the said
Covenant, have thought fit (lest we partake in other men's sins, and thereby be
in danger to receive of their plagues) to set forth this our deep sense, of the
great dishonor of God, and perilous condition that this Kingdom is in,
through the abominable blasphemies, and damnable heresies vented and spread
abroad therein, tending to the subversion of the faith, contempt of the
Ministry, and ordinances of Jesus Christ. And as we are resolved to employ and
improve the utmost of our power, that nothing be done or said against the
truth, but for the truth; So we desire that both ourselves and the whole
Kingdom may be deeply humbled before the Lord, for that great reproach and
contempt, which has been cast upon his Name, and saving truths, and for that
swift destruction that we may justly fear will fall upon the immortal souls of
such, who are or may be drawn away by giving heed to seducing spirits. In the
hearty and tender compassion whereof, We the said Lords and Commons do order
and ordain, That Wednesday being the 10. day of March next, be set apart for a
day of public humiliation, for the growth and spreading of errors, heresies,
and blasphemies, to be observed in all places within the Kingdom of England,
Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick, and to seek God for his direction and
assistance, for the suppressing and preventing the same.

And are these the ways and means that the Houses of Parliament have thought
upon for suppressing Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies, to desire that a
Toleration of them may be established by a Law? Is the laying of a foundation
to propagate Heresy and Schism, the best way to extirpate the same? Are these
the fruits and effects of their solemn Fast and Humiliation? Certainly God
will not be mocked.

The Covenant does also oblige us, mutually to preserve the Authority of the
supreme Magistrate, the privileges of Parliaments, and firm peace and union
between the kingdoms to all posterity. And is it not visible, that many of
those Sectaries, with their adherents and abettors, do by their pernicious
doctrine and actions, offer violence to the Kings person and Authority, and
against the rights and privileges of Parliament? So as there is not any one
Article of the Solemn League and Covenant, which is not in a high degree
violated by them; And shall a toleration be established for all such? The
opposing the Covenant, and Reformation of Religion, the dividing betwixt the
King and his people, or making any faction among the people, contrary to this
League and Covenant, were formerly the characters of our enemies; and whosoever
mayntayn and do these things (though they should assume to themselves the name
of Saints) are still to be accounted Incendiaries, Malignants, and evil
Instruments. And we are obliged by Covenant with faithfulness to endeavor the
discovery of all such, that they may be brought to public trial, and
receive condign punishment.

And though it be far from our intentions that pious and peaceable men should
be troubled, because in every thing they cannot conform themselves to
Presbyteriall Govenment (for we did never oppose such an indulgence to their
persons as is agreeable to the Word of God, may stand with the public peace,
and is not destructive to the order and Government of the Church) yet we do
from our very souls abhor such a general and vast Toleration as is expressed
in the Proposition. And if the Houses (which God forbid) shall adhere
thereunto, and insist that it may be established, We do protest against it, as
that which is expressly contrary to the Word of God, utterly repugnant to the
solemn League and Covenant, destructive to Reformation and Uniformity in
Religion, altogether inconsistent with the Declarations and Professions of the
Houses, against the Treaty between the Kingdoms, directly opposite to the
example and practice of all the reformed Churches, and as that which will
unavoidably subvert all Order and Government, and introduce a world of
confusion. Our minds are astonished, and our bowels are moved within us, when we
think of the bitter fruits and sad consequences of such a Toleration. What
horrid blasphemies against God! What vile abominations! What pernicious
doctrine, to the subversion and perdition of souls! What disobedience to the
Magistrate! What violation of duties between persons of nearest relation! What
differences and divisions in Families and Congregations it will bring forth!
What bitter heart-burnings it will beget, and perpetuate to posterity! Nay, it
is impossible for us to express what infinite distraction, disorder, and
confusion it will make both in Church and State thorowout all the three
Kingdoms. And therefore we do obtest the Houses of Parliament by the solemn
League and Covenant (which they have made in the presence of Almighty God the
searcher of all hearts, with a true intention to perform the same, as they
shall answer at that great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be
disclosed) and by all the promises, professions, and Declarations wherewith
they induced the Kingdom of Scotland to an engagement and conjunction with them
in this Cau^^, That they do not establish such an impious Toleration, as cannot
but draw down the judgment of God, and make a rent between the two Kingdoms
united by so many ties and relations, which we desire to cherish and
strengthen, and to continue to all posterity.

That next to Religion wherein we differ in judgment from the Propositions, is
concerning the interest and power of the Crown. We are obliged by our Covenant,
allegiance, and the duty of Subjects, not to diminish but to support the Kings
just power and greatness. The question then is, wherein his royal Authority and
just power does consist. And we affirm and hope it cannot be denied, that
regal power and authority is chi^fly in making and enacting Laws, and in
protecting and defending their subjects, which are of the very essence and
being of all Kings. And the exercise of that power are the chief parts and
duties of their royal office and function; And the Scepter and Sword are the
badges of that power. Yet the new preface compared with other parts of these
new Propositions, takes away the Kings negative voice, and cuts off all Royal
power and righ^ in the making of Laws, contrary to the constant practice of
this and all other Kingdoms: For the Legislative power in some Monarchies is
Penes Principem solum, and their Laws are called Principum placita, which is
the highest and most absolute kind of Sovereignty. And in other Kingdoms and
Monarchies, the power of making Laws is by compact between the Prince and
people, or according to the constitution, practice, and usage of the several
Kingdoms. In the last the power of the King is least; but best regulated, where
neither the King alone without his Parliament, nor the Parliament without the
King can make Laws; and where nothing enacted by the one without the consent of
the other, can have the force of a Law. And although we will rather profess
ignorantiam and facti and juris alieni, then take upon us to judge of the Laws
of another Kingdom; yet it seems to be very clear and evident, by the practice
and usage of all times, by the Parliaments own Declarations, and to be
consonant to reason and law, that the King without the Houses of Parliament, or
the Houses of Parliament without the King, cannot enact any Laws; but both
jointly. And therefore the Laws are sometimes called the Kings Laws, sometimes
the Laws of the Land, and Acts of Parliament. And the form or Acts of
Parliament sometimes begin with the word Concissinus, or Statuit R^x; And of
later times Laws and Statutes begin, as ^ing enacted by the King with the
consent and advice of the Lord and Commons. All which do in port the Kings
power and consent as to the ma^i^^ of Laws* So that there can be no Law made,
and have the force of a Law without the King; which likewise is clear by the
expressions of to Kings answers. L^ Roy de Vene, and Le Roy S^avisera; so as it
is c^^t from: the words of assent, when Statutes are made, and from the words
of dissent, that the Kings power in the making of Laws is one of the chiefest
jewels of the Crown, and an essential part of Sovereignty. And if the King had
no power nor consent in making of Laws, he would be less then a ^ubject.
Sometimes the Kings denial had been better then his assent to the desires of
the Houses of Parliament; as when Kings have assented to the taking away the
reading of Scripture from the Laity, as Henry the Eight did; or to introduce
Popery, as Queen Mary. And since neither Kings nor Parliaments have the
judgment of infallibility, it must certainly be the best, where Laws are made
with consent both of King and Parliament, which is the strongest bulwark of the
peoples liberty, and supporter of the Kings authority. And the King being King
over diverse Nations, this form of constitution where neither the King without
his Parliament, nor the Parliament without the King can make Laws, is a good
and sure security to preserve his Kingdoms in peace from injuring one another,
and to protect the subjects from injury amongst themselves. The Houses of
Parliament page 710 of the Exact collection of Remonstrances and Declarations,
answering an argument against the Kings passing the Bill of the Militia, make
this Reply: If we had said (as we did not) that the King had been bound to
pass all Bills that should be offered to him by both Houses of Parliament,
without any limitation or qualification of reason or justice, yet such a
supposition as this could not fall upon a Parliament, much less that a King
were obliged for to grant it. And page 727, We did and do say, that the
sovereign power does reside in the King and both Houses of Parliament, and that
his Majesty's negative voice does not import a liberty for his Majesty to deny
any thing as he pleases, though never so requisite and necessary for the
Kingdom: and yet we did not, nor do say, that such Bills as his Majesty is
bound both in conscience and justice to pass, shall notwithstanding be law
without his consent; so far are we from taking away his negative voice.
Wherefore the power in making Laws, even according to the Parliaments own
Declarations, cannot be taken away from the King, and he required to assent to
all such Laws as the Houses shall think fit, according to the Preface of these
new Propositions, without a change of the Constitution and fundamental
Government os the Kingdom.

Concerning the power of the Militia, We do desire and shall be willing to
agree, that it may be so settled, as neither the King nor any other be able to
disturb or infringe the peace now to be agreed upon. And we think that in his
Message from Caresbrook-Castle he has offered that which should be very
satisfactory; But that the King, his posterity and the Crown should for ever be
divested of all power and ^ight of the Militia, is different from our
judgments. For if the Crown have no power of the Militia, how can they be able
to resist their enemies, and the enemies of the Kingdom, protect their
subjects, or keep freindship or correspondence with their Allies? All Kings by
their Royal office and Oath of Coronation are obliged to protect their Laws
and subjects: It were strange then to seclude the Crown for ever from the Power
of doing, that, which by the oath of Coronation they are obliged to perform,
and the obedience whereunto falls within the oath of Allegiance. And
certainly if the King and His posterity, shall have no power in making Laws,
nor in the Militia, it roots up the strongest foundation of honor and safety
which the Crown affords; and will be interpreted in the eyes of the world, to
be a wresting of the Scepter and Sword out of their hands. It is very far from
our desires that Monarchy should be at the absolute height of an Arbitrary and
tyrannical power; Neither desire we Just Monarchical power to be wronged and
rendered contemptible: But to have such a golden Mediocrity as they may be able
to protect their subjects, and oppose their enemies according to the
fundamental Laws, and ancient constitution of the Kingdom.

Before the last propositions were sent to his Majesty at Newcastle, both in
verbal debates and in our writings, we did show, That we were unsatisfied
concerning several particulars contained in those propositions; particularly,
when we did consent, that the power and exercise of the Militia should be
settled in the houses of Parliament for a time, we did it with this provision,
that it were understood to be without prejudice to the right and interest of
the Crown; And that the King and His posterity be not totally excluded and
rendered incapable to protect their subjects, and oppose the enemies of the
Kingdoms: And farther when we gave way to the sending of those Propositions,
we did declare it to be our judgment, that diverse things craved therein, were
such, as peace or war ought not to depend upon the grant or refusal of them;
We ever did and must still hold it as a good rule in the making of a peace,
that the more moderate and reasonable our de^^^e^^e, we may expect the firmer
peace. Wherefore as in the difference betwixt the King and the Parliament, we
think it very unjust to exclude the King from his Just power in the Militia; so
when we look upon the Liberty of the subject, we think neither King nor
Parliament ought to keep up an Army in the field, when the war is ended, to
the vaste expense and utter impoverishing of the people; the trained Bands of
the Kingdom, (which may be made use of with litttle charge) and the forces
which may be kept in some chief Garrisons, being sufficient to suppress any
commotion or disturbance that is likely to arise upon occasion of the late
troubles. And we conceive an Army should be kept up only in the case of a
powerful Insurrection within the Kingdom, or of a foreign invasion from
without, and otherwise to maintain a perpetual Army in the bowels of the
Kingdom upon the expense of the subject, when there is no enemy to fight with,
is but to enslave the King and Kingdom under a Military bondage.

When our Army returned to Scotland, it was confidently expected that the
Houses should have speedily disbanded their Army, (the war being at an end
and no visible enemy in the Kingdom) and proceeded to the settling of a peace
here, and to the effectual relief of Ireland: But now after a full years delay
almost, we do not find amongst all these propositions, any thing concerning
the disbanding of Armies, or sending releif to that distressed Kingdom; but on
the contrary there is only provision made for keeping up armies, and raising
money for their maintenance. We must therefore declare to the Houses, that it
is our judgment and earnest desire, that there may be a Proposition for
disbanding Armies in both Kingdom. Armies were raised for defense of Religion,
the Kings person and authority, the Privileges of Parliament, and the liberty
of the subject. And when they are no more useful for these ends, and the
Houses may consult freely and act securely without any hostile opposition, It
is high time to disband them, that the Laws of the Kingdom may take place. Some
of out neighbor nations are necessitated to keep up Armies because they have
enemies, that lie contiguous and adjoining to their borders; but the sea is our
Bulwark. And if we study amity and peace amongst our selves, and entertain the
union between the Kingdoms under his Majesty's government, we need not fear
foreign invasion. It is a Custom in other Nations to keep up Armies, to levy
moneys by force; But these are free Kingdoms; and when they have been fighting
for liberty and freedom, we trust, that it is not intended that war should
be made a trade, or that their wars shall end in slavery. The continuance of
Armies will certainly increase factions and divisions, to the great weakening of
the Kingdoms, and will in end expose us as a prey to our enemies; neither is it
possible so long as they are kept up, that there can be a settled peace. The
charge of entertaining Armies is needless, when there is no enemy, and
extremely grievous to the people, who before were willing to bear it, when they
saw a necessity for it. And now after so great sufferings and vast expense of
Treasure to soldiers for many years together, the burden is become
insupportable. For these and many other reasons which we could add, we hold
it most necessary, That as there is a Proposition for payment of the arreares
of the Army; so also there be an addition unto it for their disbanding.

Touching the conferring titles of honor, we desire the King who is the
fountain of honor, may not be deprived of that which in all ages and Kingdoms,
has been held and esteemed a flower of the Crown, and wherewith Kings do
usually recompense the virtue and merits of such as do memorable services to
the Crown or Kingdom. And as to the disposing of the great offices of State,
and nameing of privy Counselors, we conceive his Majesty's offer, in his late
Message of the sixteenth of November, to be so reasonable, as may give
satisfaction to the Houses.

That which we are to speak of next in order, is, the union and joint interest
of the Kingdoms, where we wish we had not just cause to expostulate, that the
Houses have omitted the Covenant in these Propositions; rejected all that
concerns Unity and Uniformity in Religion; and have altered the former
Proposition for confirmation of the Treaties, and desired now only an
Approbation of the making of them, which amounts to no more then an Act of
indemnity. They have also in that Proposition omitted these words With all
other ordinances and proceedings past betwixt the two Kingdoms, and whereunto
they are obliged by the foresaid Treaties; which words were inserted in the
former propositions, after serious debate; and therefore if the Houses intend
to make good, and perform all ordinances past betwixt the Kingdoms, according
to their manifold professions; We desire that this Proposition may remain as
before without any alteration or omission. The proposition desiring his
Majesty's consent to what the two Kindoms shall agree upon, in pursuance of the
Articles of the large treaty, which are not yet finished, is omitted. The joint
declaration of both Kingdoms is likewise omitted; And generally throughout
these Propositions all expressions of joint interest are left out. And whereas
formerly the Propositions of both Kingdoms were drawn up together in one body:
now for separating the interest of the Kingdoms, the Propositions for England,
are drawn up apart; which new way, when we did observe, and what essential
alterations, omissions, and additions were made in the matter of the
Propositions, we desired a conference for removing all differences, and that we
might the more speedily attain to an agreement; but it was not granted:
however we have herein discharged our duty, that we use all means to prevent
difference, and that we for our part, study to observe the Treaty betwixt the
Kingdoms, Where it is expressly provided in the eighth Article, That no
Cessation nor any pacification or agreement for peace whatsoever, shall be made
by either Kingdom, or the Armies of either Kingdom, without the mutual advice
and consent of both Kingdoms, or their Committees in that behalf appointed; and
here we think it not amiss to remember the Houses of Parliament of their
expressions in a declaration to the Lords States General of the united
Provinces of the Low Countries, showing why they did not admit of the mediation
of the Dutch Ambassadors between the King and Parliament in the way and manner
it was desired, without application to the Kingdom of Scotland. The words of
the declaration are, that both the Kingdoms are mutually engaged in the
Propositions and Treaty thereupon; And that neither could admit of their
Mediation without consent of the other, because the two Kingdoms were united by
solemn League and Covenant made to Almighty God, and by league each to other as
one entire body to prosecute this cause; And that in pursuance thereof,
Propositions for a safe and well grounded peace, were then preparing in a joint
way, by the Parliaments of both Kingdoms. And whereas the Lords Ambassadors
had propounded and offered from the King, the calling of a National Synod, to
correct and redress the government of the Church by Bishops; One of the
Answers which was given thereunto in the said declaration, was, That not only
the Kingdom of Scotland and the Members of both Houses of Parliament, but also
many thousands of others of his Majesty's subjects of England and Ireland,
stand bound by their late National Covenant, to endeavor the extirpation of
the Church Government by Bishops, intended in the paper of the Dutch
Ambassadors, both in England and Ireland, and to hinder the setting of it up
again in the Kingdom of Scotland. All which being duly considered, we are
extremely sorry, that the Houses of Parliament, should not only have given way,
but countenanced the Army in their meddling with the settling of the peace of the
Kingdom, and authorized Commissioners to treat with them, upon Propositions of
peace (which we take to be the reason, that these Propositions are in so many
things agreeable to the Proposals of the Army, especially in matters of
Religion,) and without all question, it had been more agreeable to the Treaty
betwixt the Kingdoms, and to former professions and proceedings, that the
Propositions of peace had been framed and agreed upon, with advice and consent
of both Kingdoms. We have known the Houses of Parliament formerly look upon it
as an offense of a high nature for any other then themselves to meddle in the
matters of peace, especially the Commanders and officers of the Army (though in
prime place and of great and eminent fidelity) making it only proper for them
to be exercised in matters of war, according as they should receive direction
from the Houses. And much more would the Houses have been offended, if any
officers of their Army should have taken upon them to offer proposals to the
King, for settling a peace, without authority from the houses, as we are
informed some officers of Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army have done. If the Houses
of Parliament had according to our earnest desire the third of March 1644. when
they modelled their Army, made choice of such officers, as were known to be
zealous of the Reformation of Religion, and of that uniformity which both
Kingdoms are obliged to promote and maintain, and if they had also renewed
their Declaration made the twentieth of September 1643. That they could not
confide in such persons to have or execute place and authority in the Armies
raised by them, who did not approve and consent to the Covenant; or if their
Ordnance on the 15 of February 1644 (which appoints all officers to be
employed in Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Army to take the National league and Covenant
of both Kingdoms, within 20 days after they were approved by the Houses) had
been really put in execution, we are very confident it would have prevented a
world of inconveniences and evils which have ensued upon the neglect thereof.
We shall not further insist on this subject, neither shall we enlarge our
selves upon the proceedings of the Army; But we must always put the Houses of
Parliament in mind, that our greatest strength is in a good agreement with the
King, and a firm Union between the Kingdoms.

There is left out in these Propositions, the Proposition ^^^^erning the City
of London, whereby they were to have the Government of their own Militia and
the Tower, and assurance that their Forces shall not be compelled to go out of
the City for Military Service, without their own consent. An Act of Parliament
confirming their Charters, Customs, Liberties, etc. And an Act that all the
Bylaws, and Ordinances of Common Council made, or to be made, should be as
effectual to all in^^^^^ and purposes, as if they were enacted by Authority of
Parliament, with liberty also for them to repeal these Ordinances as they
shall see cause. These things were formerly desired in the Propositions in
behalf of the City, because of their affection, forwardness, faithfulness,
and ^eal^ in the common cause of both Kingdoms. And we conceive our selves in
duty obliged, to desire that this Proposition may not be omitted, but presented
to His Majesty for His assent.

Concerning the Propositions for taking away the Court of Wards, and Porrest
Lands from His Majesty, It cannot be ^^pected, when the Houses of Parliament
shall take into their consideration, the glory and greatness wherein their
Kings have (...) that they will ever take away or diminish any part of that
^atrimony and Revenue, which is necessary for supporting the Dignity of their
Royal place, without giving a full recompense for the same.

Touching the Proposition for sal^ and disposal of the Lands of Deanes and
Chapters, etc. as the Houses shall think fit: We have only this to say, that
we have always he^rd those lands were reserved by the Houses for maintenance
of the Mi^^sterie; and if they should be otherwise disposed of, it will (...) a
great discouragement to faithful Pastors, make their subsist^^^^^ to depend
upon the benevolence and charity of their (...), and give occasion to the
people (where Ministers (...) wanting for lack of maintenance) to follow after
Sectaries and T^^^ Preachers.

We desire to see the Ordinances for Indemnity mentioned in the Propositions.

And now to conclude, we shall here set down most of our desires: Which are,

That there may be a Personal Treaty with His Majesty at London.

That the Preface may be the same as in the former Propositions.

That the Honorable Houses, according to the solemn Vows, Treaties,
Declarations, and Engagements between the two Kingdoms, would after so very
long delay, establish the Solemn League and Covenant; and that His Majesty be
desired to give His Royal Assent, for confirming the same by Act of Parliament
in both Kingdoms.

That the settling Reformation of, and Uniformity in Religion, according to the
Covenant, in England and Ireland, be likewise desired in these new
Propositions; And in particular, that the Confession of Faith, Directory of
Worship, Form of Church Government, and Catechizing, agreed upon by the
Assembly of Divines, and presented to the Houses, be established.

That by Act of Parliament, effectual Course be taken for suppressing
Blasphemy, Heresy, Schism, and all such scandalous Doctrines and Practices,
as are contrary to the light of Nature, or to the known principles of
Christianity (whether concerning Faith, Worship, or Conversation) or to the
power of Godliness; or which may be destructive to Order and Government, or to
the Peace of the Church or Kingdom.

That the Ordinances concerning the calling and sitting of the Assembly of
Divines, be desired to be confirmed by Act of Parliament, as in the former
Propositions.

That the Proposition for confirmation of the Treaties betwixt the Kingdoms;
And all Ordinances and proceedings betwixt them be expressed as in the former
Propositions. And that the Treaty for the return of the Scots Army, of the
Date of the 23 of December. 1646. be inserted amongst the rest.

That His Majesty's Assent be desired to what the two Kingdoms shall agree
upon, in prosecution of the Articles of the large Treaty, which are not yet
finished: And that all other things concerning joynt-Interest, or the Kingdom
of Scotland in particular, which are omitted, be inserted, and expressed as in
the former Propositions.

That Armies in both Kingdoms, which were raised for preservation and
Reformation of Religion, And for defense of the Kings Person, and safety of the
Kingdoms, be not kept up to hinder Reformation of Religion, And the King from
His Government, And to be a burden to the Subjects, since the War is ended;
but that they may have due satisfaction of their Arreares, and be disbanded;
without which, there can be no real nor lasting Peace; That all Armies being
disbanded here, speedy relief may be sent to Ireland.

That an Act of Oblivion, which is the bond of Peace, be agreed upon, to be
past in the Parliaments of both Kingdoms.

That the King be restored to his Rights and Revenues, and particularly that
the Crown be not excluded from the power of making Laws, which is as
essential to Kings, as to govern by Laws, and sway the Scepter; Nor from the
power of the Militia, without which they can neither protect their Subjects,
oppose their and the Kingdoms enemies, nor keep friendship with their Allies.

That there be a conclusion added to the Propositions, promising our real
endeavors (as was done in the Propositions Treated upon at Vxbridge) that his
Majesty may live in the splendour and glory of his Royal Progenitors, as
beseems His Royal place and Dignity; That so all differences and troubles
may end in mutual confidence and rejoicing; the King may enjoy the comfort of
His Royal Consort and Children, with other contentments; And we, after so
great distractions, and long continued sufferings, may reap the blessed fruits
of Truth and Peace under his Government.

And as it is very far from our thoughts and intentions in expressing our
Differences upon the Propositions, to provoke or give offense; so we trust,
that our freedom in discharge of the trust committed to us, proceeding from
our zeal to Religion, Loyalty to the King, and love to Peace; shall receive a
co^di^ Interpretation from the Honorable Houses. And that they (...) in their
wisdom, not slight the desires of a Kingdom, ^ho (...) the time of Englands
greatest danger, esteemed no (...) too hard for their Assistance; And are now
seeking nothing, but the performance of the mutual Obligements, Declarations,
and Treaties between the two Kingdoms, And to prevent the dangers which may
cause upon the (...) and (...) to solemn engagements.

The Houses of Parliament have frequ^ntly professed, that the chief end of
their Wars was the Re^orma^ion and establishment of Religion according to the
Covenant. And they have often Promised and Declared to the King and to all the
World, (not without ^l^ep ^^esta^^^ of the Name of God) that no trouble or
success should ever make them wrong or diminish the power of the Crown, which
were the chief mo^^^es and Arguments that endured Scotland to engage with them
in this War. Let therefore that be given to God which is Gods, and to Caesar
what is Caesar's; whereby it may be evident that you are not unmindfull of the
solemn Vows you made to God in the time of distress, for Reformation of
Religion; and it may also really appear, that (...) advantages and power which
(...) put into your hands, has not (...) your Loyalty to the King. And
according to our many professions, and near (...) ^^ally and co^^^^^ly,
che^ish and str^ng then the V^ion between the two Kingdoms under his Majesty,
by all the Pledges of reciprocal kindness, (...) so Religion and
Righteousness may flourish, and both Kingdoms, languishing under the (...)
and (...) of an natural War, may live in (...) pl^nty.

By Command of the Commissioners for the Parliament of Scotland. IO. CHEIS^^^.

WE (...) the In^^r^ctions communica^^^^ unto (...) in the (...), wherein the
(...) the King, care (...) present (...) the (...) (...) of (...) of (...) of
Parliament (...), Procla^, and (...) the Parliament to be (...) or (...) to
be made; and a new Proposition for the adjournments of both Houses. To which
Bills they are commanded to desire His Majesty's assent by His Letters Patents
under the great Seal of England, and not otherwise. And after His Majesty's
assent to those Bills, the Houses of Parliament will send a Committee of both
Houses to Treat with His Majesty in the Isle of Wight upon the remainder of
the new Propositions. To all which we answer; That, although there be nothing
which we more passionately desire then a happy Peace, and good agreement with
the King; yet we cannot agree to this way of desiring His Majestyes assent to
those four Bills, before any Treaty with His Majesty upon other Propositions,
it being in our judgment neither for the good of Religion, the King nor
Kingdoms. And first concerning Religion, we say, that in January, 1645. it was
agreed on betwixt the Houses of Parliament and us, before the Treaty at
Vxbridge; That the Propositions concerning Religion the Militia, and Ireland,
shall be treated upon alte^^s vicibus, beginning first with the Proposition of
Religion, and that as it is of most excellency, so it is to be sought after
and finally agreed upon in the fi st place before any final agreement the
(...) upon any of the other Propositions. We are very sure the Houses had far
greater reason at that time, to look to their security, and to desire the
Proposition for settling the Militia to be first agreed on, when the King had an
Army in the field, then now when they have a strong Army, and he has none at
all. And upon the other part the danger to Religion is now much greater them a^
any time before when men in Arms are demanding a toleration of all sorts of
Religions (Popery excepted.) And if first of all it should be agreed on, that
the continuance of such an Army shall be settled by Law, we desire it may be
equally considered, what good can be expected from a treaty upon (...), or what
hopes shall remain of settling it according to the Covenant; wherefore we
cannot consent to the sending any Propositions or (...) a se^^rity for ^^^ling
Peace without T^^th, which has been acknowledged both by His Majesty, and the
(...) all former Treaties or Messages, to be the best (...) most (...)
foundation of a lasting Peace. And we must still press that there may be a
preference of those desires which are for settling (...) and the Government of
the Church: the want (...), (...) the (...) of the Sects and Heresies which do
multiply and in^ daily, to the disturbance of all Order and Peace, both in
Church and State.

As this way is not for the good of Religion, so it cannot in reason be
conceived, that it shall be acceptable to the King; for how can it be
expected that he will grant those things for a personal Treaty (whereof the
issue is uncertain) which he has ever hitherto denied even to obtain a Peace
(especially when after all his Majesty's earnest desires, he cannot be
admitted to come to London, nor upon any terms to have a Treaty here, in
respect the Houses conceive that the Kings presence with them, at this time
stands not with the safety and security of the Parliament and kingdom; but
that the Kings assent to the four Bills must be by Commission, and thereafter a
Treaty upon the rest of the Propositions at the Isle of Wight (Or, can it be
looked for, that He will give the whole and sole power of the Militia from
himself and his Posterity, to the Houses for their security, and to be
disposed of as they shall think fit, and have no security at all to himself,
nor any assurrance that he shall be restored to his Rights and Government? It
is much more probable, that he will think he has already offered sufficient
security in his late Message from Carisbrooke Castle of the 16. November. wherein
he is content that all power of the Militia be settled in the Houses of
Parliament during his Reign.

Neither is this way in our apprehensions for the good and safety of the
Kingdoms, that an Army holding such principles as they do concerning Religion,
and in relation to the settling the government and Peace of the Kingdoms, and
which (without any known authority from the Parliament) has increased their
number to near the double of what they are allowed by order of Parliament,
(and in their late Representation, acknowledge their super numeraries to be
about twenty thousand.) That such an Army (we say) shall be perpetually
established when there are no forces to oppose the Parliament, and that the
subjects shall be obliged by a Law for ever to submit to a Military power, and
pay what money shall be demanded for their maintenance; whatsoever it may
seem to others to be, in our sense it does neither agree with the rules of
Policy nor Safety.

We did desire to see the four Bills to be presented to His Majesty (so much
the rather, that from the Title of the Bill for the Militia; we perceive that
it does extend to the settling and maintaining of forces in the Town of
Barwicke, contrary to the large Treaty betwixt the kingdoms.) And we did
represent that those Bills being assented unto by the King would be a real
security, and the making an Agreement for Peace, which according to the Treaty
betwixt the Kingdoms cannot be done without the mutual advice and consent of
both. To which the Houses did yesterday return as their Answer, That the
Privileges, Right and Custom of the Kingdom and Parliament of England, is,
that Bills past both Houses to be presented to the King for His Royal assent,
are not to be communicated to any other whosoever either in relation to Matter
or Form, before His Answer thereunto given. And that there is nothing
contained in any Article of Treaty betwixt the Kingdoms to the contrary.
Whereunto we make this Reply, that the Bills mentioned in the 11. Sect. of the
Propositions of Peace, presented to His Majesty at Oxford in Anno 1644. were
communicated unto us, before they were sent to the King, and upon perusal of
them, we did desire that nothing might be in those Bills contrary to the
Covenant, or the Reformation, and Uniformity to be settled. Upon consideration
whereof, the House of Commons gave us this answer: That the Reformation and
Uniformity desired, is already provided for, in one of the Propositions, to
which nothing containd in those Bills could be any prejudice, but should
hereafter be regulated as the said Reformation and Uniformity shall be thought
fit to be settled. Also the Bil for abolishing Episcopacy was communicated unto
us, and afterward debated upon by his Majesty's Commissioners, and the
Commissioners of both Kingdoms at Vxbridge. We thought fit to give these
instances; to show, that it has not always been the custom of both Houses
not to communicate their Bills before His Majesty's Answer were given
thereunto. Yet it is no ways our desire to meddle with the framing of your
Laws, or advising the form of your Bills, we shall ever be tender of any just
privilege of Parliament; but that it should be said that there is nothing
contained in any Article of Treaty between the two Kingdoms, which requires the
communication of the matter of any Bills, is to us very strange. It is agreed
upon betwixt the Kingdoms, that no Cessation, nor any Pacification, or
Agreement for Peace whatsoever, shall be made by either Kingdom, or the Armies
of either Kingdom, without the mutual advice and consent of both Kingdoms:
Suppose the Houses of Parliament should turn all their desires for peace into
Bills, and should say, that those Bills cannot be communicated to the Kingdom of
Scotland, either in relation to matter or form: We desire to know, and let
any rational man judge, whether this were not an eluding and clear violation
of the Treaty: Neither can it in this case be a satisfactory Answer, that the
Houses of Parliament do only send four of the Propositions in Bills to His
Majesty; for every one of the Propositions is a Proposition for peace, and an
Agreement made upon any one of them is an agreement for peace. And which is
much more, there are none of the Propositions which in their own nature do so
immediately concern the settling of a peace, as these four Propositions; and
what can be called an Agreement for peace if this be not? when the King by His
assent shall justify the proceedings of the Parliament in the ^^te war, and
make all Oaths, Declarations, Proclamations, and other proceedings against it
to be void, when by Act of Parliament he shall settle the power of all Forces
by Sea and Land into the Houses of Parliament, and also to raise moneys for
their maintenance: when he shall consent that all Peers made, or hereafter to
be made, shall not si^ or vote in Parliament without conserre of both Houses,
and when he shall give power to the House to adjourne at their pleasure: If
then, the Kings assent to those Bills be an Agreement for peace, (as we hope it
cannot in reason be denied) our advice and consent ought to be had therein,
before they be sent to the King, and otherwise the Treaty is violated.

As we cannot agree to this way of sending these four Bills to His Majesty for
His Assent before any Treaty upon the rest of the Propositions; so we are
extremely unsatisfied with the matter of these new Propositions lately
con^^^cated (...) us; for the reasons expressed in our Answer unto them, which
we do herewith deliver unto your Lordships, to be presented to both Houses of
Parliament; And we do desire that they would take the whole business unto
their further consideration, and that there may be a personal Treaty with His
Majesty here a^ (...) upon such Propositions as shall be agreed upon, with
advice and consent of both Kingdoms according to the Treaty.

By Command of the Commissioners for the Parliament of Scotland. IO. CHEIS^^^.
December. ^7. 164^.
FINIS.

