ACT OF PARLIAMENT: CONCERNING PATRONAGES. July 19. 1690.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD and LADY, the King and Queens Majesty's, Considering that
the power of presenting Ministers, to vacant Churches of late exercised by
Patrons, has been greatly abused, and is inconvenient to be continued in this
Realm, Do therefore, with the Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament,
hereby Discharge, Cass, Annul, and make void, the aforesaid Power, heretofore
exercised by any Patron, of presenting Ministers to any Kirk now Vacant, or
that shall hereafter happen to Vaik within this Kingdom, with all exercise of
the said Power: And also all Rights, Gifts and Infestments, Acts, Statutes, and
Customs, in so far as they may be extended, or understood, to establish the
said Right of Presentation; but prejudice always, of such Ministers as are
duly entered by the foresaid Presentations (while in use) their Right to the
Manse, Gleib, Benefice, Stipend, and other Profits, of their respective
Churches, as accords: And but prejudice to the Patrons, of their right to
employ the vacant Stipends, on pious uses, within the respective Paroches,
except where the Patron is Popish, in which case he is to employ the same on
pious uses, by the advice and appointment of the Presbytery; and in case the
Patron shall fail in applying the vacant Stipend for the uses foresaid, that he
shall lose his right of Administration of the vacant Stipend, for that and the
next vacancy, and the same shall be disposed on by the Presbytry, to the uses
foresaid; Excepting always the vacand Stipends, within the bounds of the Synod
of Argile: And to the effect, the calling and entering Ministers in all time
coming, may be orderly and regularly performed, Their Majesty's, with Consent
of the Estates of Parliament, Do Statute and Declare, That in case of the
vacancy of any particular Church, and for supplying the same with a Minister,
the Heretors of the said Paroch (being Protestants) and the Elders, are to name
and propose the person to the whole Congregation, to be either approven, or
disapproven by them; and if they disapprove, that the disapprovers give in
their Reasons, to the effect the affair may be cognosced upon by the Presbytry
of the bounds, at whose Judgment, and by whose determination the Calling, and
Entry of a particular Minister, is to be ordered and concluded: And it is
hereby Enacted, That if application be not made by the Eldership, and Heretors
of the Paroch, to the Presbytry, for the call and choice of a Minister, within
the space of six Months, after the vacancy, that then the Presbytry may
proceed to provide the said Paroch, and plant a Minister in the Church, tanquam
jure devoluto. It is always hereby Declared, That this Act shall be but
prejudice of the calling of Ministers, to Royal Burghs by the Magistrates,
Town-Council, and Kirk-Session of the Burgh, where there is no Landward Paroch,
as they have been in use before the year 1660. And where there is a
considerable part of the Paroch in Landward, that the Call shall be by the
Magistrates, Town-Council, Kirk-Session, and the Heretors of the Landward
Paroch. And in lieu and recompense of the said Right of Presentation, hereby
taken away; Their Majesty's with Advice and Consent foresaid, Statute and
Ordain, the Heretors, and Liferenters of each Paroch, and the Town-Councils for
the Burgh, to pay to the said Patrons, betwixt and Martinmass next, the sum of
six hundred merks, proportionally effeiring to their valued Rents in the said
Paroch, viz. two parts by the Heretors, and a third part by the Liferenters,
deducing always the Patrons own part, effeiring to his proportion as an
Heretor, and that upon the said Patron his granting a sufficient and formal
Renunciation of the said right of Presentation, in favors of the said
Heretors, Town-Council for the Burgh, and Kirk-Session. And it is hereby
Declared, That as to the Paroches, to which Their Majesty's have Right to
present, upon payment of the said six hundred merks to the Clerk of the
Thesaury, Their Majesty's shall be fully denuded of Their Right of
Presentation, as to that Paroch; and as to other Patrons, if they refuse to
accept the said six hundred merks, the same is to be consigned in the hands of
a responsable person in the paroch, upon the hazard of the Consigners, not to
be given up to the Patron, until he grant the said Renunciation; allowing in
the mean time, the Heretors, and Kirk-Session, to call the Minister, conform to
this Act; And Ordains Letters of Horning to be direct at the Instance of the
Patron, against the Heretors and others; who shall not make payment of the said
six hundred merks, after the said term of Martinmass next; and likewise at the
Instance of the Heretors, and others willing to pay, against these who are
unwilling: and in case the Patron be unwilling, to accept the said sum, or the
Heretors and others aforesaid, unwilling to pay, Ordains Letters of Horning to
be direct at the instance of Their Majesty's Solicitor, against either of
them. And further, Their Majesty's with Advice and Consent foresaid, Statute,
Enact, and Declare, That the Right of the Teinds, of the said Paroches, which
are not Heretably Disponed, shall by virtue of this present Act, belong to the
said Patrons, with the burden always of the Ministers Stipends, Tacks, and
Prorogations, already granted of the said Teinds, and of such augmentations of
Stipends, future Prorogations, and Erections of new Kirks, as shall be found
just and expedient, providing the said Patrons, getting right to the Teinds,
by virtue of this present Act, and who had no right thereto of before, shall
be; Likeas, They are hereby obliged to sell to each Heretor the Teinds of his
own Lands, at the rate of six years purchase, as the same shall be valued by a
Commission, for Valuation of Teinds: And whereas there are certain Lands and
Annualrents holden of the said Benefices, and Beneficed persons, from which the
Patrons might have some benefit arising to them; It is hereby Ordained, That
the Right of Superiority of the said Lands and Annualrents, shall belong to
Their Majesty's in all time coming, with all the whole Casualities and
Emoluments thereof, notwithstanding of any former Act of Parliament in the
contrair; Reserving notwithstanding to the Patrons, the Feu-farms, and
Feu-mails of the said Superiorities, ay and while they receive payment and
satisfaction from Their Majesty's, of the price thereof, at the rate of 1000
merks for each Chalder of Victual over-head, and for each hundred merks of
Feu-mail, except where the said Feu-farms are a part of the Ministers modified
Stipend, or where the Ministers is, and has been in possession thereof by the
space of ten years, or where he has the full Benefice, in which cases they are
to be irredeemable. Excepting likewise from this Act the Superiorities
belonging to the Deanery of Hamilton, and the Provostry of Bothwell, whereunto
the Duke of Hamilton has Right, which are no ways hereby prejudged.

Extracted forth of the Records of Parliament, by me TH: BVRNET, Cls, Reg.

GOD save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1690.


