A LETTER OF The Parliament of Scotland TO BOTH HOUSES OF The Parliament of
England.

Together with the DECLARATION Of the Parliament of Scotland, concerning His
Majesty: Their DESIRES; and the ANSWER of the Parliament of England.

The second Edition.

Printed at Edinburgh by EVAN TYLER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And reprinted at London for Robert Bostock, at the sign of the
Kings head in Paul's Churchyard. 1647.

January 16. 1647.
A Letter from the Parliament of Scotland to the Parliament of ENGLAND.
Right Honorable,
Our Commissioners at London and New Castle, having received from the Honorable
Houses the Vote of the first of January, and communicated the same to us; We
have considered of it as a business of very great concernment to both Nations,
And therefore have resolved upon the enclosed Declaration and Desires; Whereby,
it will appear how willing we are, to comply with the resolutions of both
Houses; And how desirous to remove all jealousies, for strengthening the Peace
and Union and maintaining a good understanding between the Kingdoms, so firmly
tied by Solemn League and Covenant; And how confident, that they will satisfy
our reasonable desires, And make the integrity of their proceedings and
resolutions in all this business concerning His Majesty, appear either by
Declaration, or otherwise as in their wisdom they shall think fit; whereby no
occasion of calumny may be left to the wicked Enemies of either Nation. And as
God has blessed the joint endeavors of both, during our Armies abode in that
Kingdom; So it will be a great encouragement for us to hope for the continuance
of the same blessing in time coming, that our resolution be known to be one at
our removing, in relation to all the ends contained in our mutual League and
Covenant; And if any difficulty occur there (for gaining of time) we desire,
that the Honorable Houses may be pleased to send particular Instructions to
their Commissioners at New Castle, with whom we shall authorize ours to concur
for the just satisfaction of both Kingdoms; and we rest

Edinbrugh the 16 of Jannary 1647. Your affectionate friends Crawfurd and
Lindsay. J. P. D. Parl.

For the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons Assembled in the Parliament of
England at Westminster.
THE DECLARATION OF THE KINGDOM OF SCOTLAND.
WHEREAS it pleased God to join the Kingdoms of Scotland, England and Ireland
in Solemn League and Covenant, for Reformation and Defense of Religion, The
Honor and Happiness of the King, and Their Own Peace and Safety: And in
pursuance thereof the Scottish Army being in the Kingdom of England, the Kings
Majesty came to their Quarters before Newark, and professed he came there with
a full and absolute intention to give all just satisfaction to the joint
Desires of both Kingdoms, and with no thought either to continue this Unnatural
War any longer, or to make Division betwixt the Kingdoms; but to comply with
His Parliaments and those entrusted by them, in every thing, for settling of
Truth and Peace; and that He would apply Himself totally to the Counsels and
Advices of His Parliaments: Which He did not only profess Verbally to the
Committee of Estates with the Scottish Army; but also in His several Letters and
Declarations under His Hand, to the Committee of Estates of Scotland, and unto
the two Houses of the Parliament of England respectively. In Confidence
whereof, and of the reality of His Intentions and Resolutions, which He
declared did proceed from no other Ground, ^^en the Deep Sense of the Bleeding
condition of His Kingdoms; The Committees of the Kingdom of Scotland, and
General Officers of the Scottish Army, declared to Himself, and to the Kingdom
of England, their receiving of His Royal Person to be on These terms, (which is
truth, notwithstanding what may be suggested or alleged to the contrary, by
any within or without the Kingdoms); and represented to Him, That the only way
of His Own Happiness, and Peace of His Kingdoms, under God, was, To make good
His Professions so solemnly renewed to both Kingdoms. Thereafter, not only
were Propositions of Peace (which after serious and mature Deliberation were
agreed upon) tendered to Him in the Name of both Kingdoms for His Royal Assent
thereunto; but also the chief Judicatories of this Kingdom, both Civil and
Ecclesiastic, made their humble and earnest Addresses to His Majesty by
Supplications, Letters, and Commissioners for that end, and did freely
represent all the Prejudices and Inconveniences of the Delay or Refusal of His
Assent, And in Particular, that this Kingdom would be necessitated to join with
the Kingdom of England conform to the League and Covenant, in providing for the
present and future Security of both Kingdoms, and settling the Government of
both, as might best conduce to the Good of both. And the Parliament of Scotland
being now to retire their Army out of England, have again, for their further
exoneration, sent Commissioners to represent their renewed Desires to His
Majesty, with the Danger may ensue by His Delay or Refusal to grant the same;
and that till then, there was danger to the Cause, to His Majesty, to this
Kingdom, and to the Union betwixt the Kingdoms, by His coming to Scotland; And
that therefore there would be a joint course taken by both Kingdoms concerning
the Disposal of His Person. And considering that His Majesty by His Answer to
the Propositions of Peace in August last, and also by His late Message sent to
the two Houses, and, by his Warrant, communicated to the Estates of this
Kingdom, Has expressed His Desires to be near to His two Houses of Parliament:
And seeing also the Parliament of England have communicated to the Scottish
Commissioners at Newcastle, and by them to this Kingdom their Resolution, That
Holmeby-House in the County of Northampton is the Place which the Houses think
fit for the King to come unto, there to remain with such Attendants about Him
as both Houses of Parliament shall appoint, with respect had to the Safety and
Preservation of His Royal Person, in the Preservation and Defense of the true
Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms according to the Covenant. Therefore,
And in regard of His Majesty's not giving a satisfactory Answer to the
Propositions as yet, And out of their earnest Desire to keep a Right
Understanding betwixt the Kingdoms, to prevent new Troubles within the same, to
satisfy the Desire of His Majesty, of the two Houses of the Parliament of
England, and of this Kingdom, for His Residence in some of His Houses near the
Parliment of England: The Estates of the Parliament of the Kingdom of Scotland,
Do declare their Concurrence, for the Kings Majesty's going to Holmeby-House,
or some other of His Houses in or about London, as shall be thought fit, there
to remain until he give satisfaction to both Kingdoms in the Propositions of
Peace; And that in the interim there be no harm, prejudice, injury, nor
violence done to His Royal Person: That there be no change of Government other
then has been these three years past: And that His Posterity in no ways be
prejudiced in their lawful Succession to the Crown and Government of these
Kingdoms.

And as this is the clear intention and full resolution of the Kingdom of
Scotland, according to their interest and duty in relation to the Kings
Majesty; So they are confident (from the same grounds and manifold Declarations
of the Parliament of England) that the same is the resolution of their
Brethren: And at such a time they expect a renewed Declaration thereof, and
that they will give brotherly and just satisfaction to the desires herewith
sent. Like as the Kingdom of Scotland do hereby assure their Brethren of
England, that it shall be their constant endeavor to keep, continue, and
strengthen the Union and Peace betwixt the Kingdoms according to the Covenant
and Treaties.

Extracted from the Records of Parliament, subscribed by the Earl of Crawfurd,
and Lindsay High Treasurer of Scotland, and President to the Parliament,
Witnessing thereunto the Subscription and Sign Manual of me Sir Alexander
Gibson of Dury Knight, Clarke of our Sovereigns Rolls, Register, and
Counsel. January 16. 1647. Alexander Gibson Clericus Registri.

Desires of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.
1. THat a Committee of both Kingdoms be appointed to attend his Majesty, and
press him further for granting the Propositions of peace; And in case of his
refusal, to advise and determine what is further necessary for continuing and
strengthening the union between the Kingdoms, according to the Covenant and
Treaties; And that no Peace nor agreement be made by either Kingdom with the
King, without the other, according to the late Treaty betwixt the Kingdoms.

2. Next it is desired, that such of the Scottish Nation, as have place or
charge about the King (excepting such as stand excepted in the Propositions of
Peace) may attend and exercise the same; and that none shall be debarred from
having access to attend his Majesty, who have warrant from the Parliaments of
either Kingdom respectively, or from the Committee of either Parliament
thereunto authorized.

3. It is desired, that the one Kingdom assist the other, in case they be
troubled from within, or from without for this agreement.

4. That the Kingdom of England would speedily condescend, and agree upon some
competency of entertainment for the Forces which we are necessitated to keep
up, to suppress the Irish Rebels, whom by the large Treaty they are bound to
suppress:

Edinburgh the 16. of January. 1647. Crawford and Lindsay I. P. D. Parl.

A Copy of the Parliament of Englands Letter to the Parliament of Scotland.
A Letter from your Lordships dated at Edinburgh the 16 instant, and the Papers
therewith sent having been communicated to both Houses of the Parliament of
England, we are commanded to return this Answer. They do answer their
Brethren of Scotland, that nothing needs to be said unto them, for removing any
jealousies out of their hearts, or for strengthening that confidence which they
have in the affections of that Nation: And they do presume that the
Proceedings of the Houses of the Parliament of England, from the very beginning
of these troubles, are a sufficient declaration of their integrity, and of
their constant affection to their Brethren of Scotland. And as to the desires
of the Kingdom of Scotland they do return these Answers.

To the first, That when the King shall be at Holmby, and the Scottish Forces
gone out of this Kingdom, both Houses of Parliament (saving according to their
former Declarations the peculiar Rights of the Kingdom of England) will then
appoint a Committee of theirs, to join with a Committee of the Kingdom of
Scotland, to employ their best endeavors to procure his Majesty's assent to
the Propositions agreed on by both Kingdoms, and presented to His Majesty at
Newcastle, and to the disposing of the Bishops Lands, according to the
Ordinances already passed both Houses in that behalf. And in case the King
shall not give his assent thereunto, however the Houses are still resolved,
firmly to continue and maintain, the happy Union between the two Kingdoms,
according to the Treaties and Covenant; And that according to the late Treaty
between the Kingdoms, no Cessation, nor any Pacification, or agreement for
Peace whatsoever, shall be made by either Kingdom, or the Armies of either
Kingdom, without the mutual advice and consent of both Kingdoms.

To the second desire, both Houses do declare, that it is not their intention,
by their appointing of Persons to wait upon the King in his journie to Holmby,
to make a settlement of any Persons in any particular places, nor to be any
prejudice to any of the Kings Servants that are of either Nation, who have
adhered to the Parliaments: And that none shall be debarred from having access
to his Majesty, who have warrant from the Parliament of Scotland, or from the
Committee of that Parliament thereunto authorized, except such as are disabled
by the Propositions agreed on by both Kingdoms.

To the third desire, the coming of the King according to the Votes of both
Houses of the Parliament of England, being agreeable to the Covenant and
Treaties; They do declare, that upon any troubles that shall arise to the
Kingdom of Scotland for the same, they will assist them according to the said
Covenant and Treaties.

To the fourth and last desire, both Houses return Answer, That their
Garrisons being delivered up, and the Scottish Army and Forces being marched
out of this Kingdom, they will take this their desire into speedy
consideration. This being all we have in command from the Houses, we rest,

Westminster, Ian. 27. 1646. Your affectionate friends and Servants: E.
Manchester Speaker of the House of Peers pro tempore. William Lenthall Speaker
of the House of Commons.


For the right Honorable the Lords, the Commons of shires, and Burrows
Assembled in the Parliament of Scotland.
FINIS.

