A LETTER From the Parliament of Scotland, To the Honorable William Lenthall
Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons.
SIR,
THe Estates of the Parliament of this Kingdom having received a Letter dated
the 23 of May, signed by you as Speaker of the Parliament, and written in the
name of the Commonwealth of England; which Titles, in regard of the Solemn
League and Covenant, and Treaties, and the many Declarations of the Parliaments
of both Kingdoms, are such as they may not acknowledge.

As for the matter therein contained; those many things of just resentment,
wherein satisfaction is demanded from this Kingdom, are only mentioned in the
general, and therefore cannot so well receive a particular answer: But if by
these general expressions, the late unlawful Engagement against England be
understood, They desire that their protestation against the same in Parliament,
and the opposition made thereunto by them afterward in Arms (which they never
laid down until the Garrisons of Berwick and Carlisle were restored unto the
Kingdom of England) may be remembered, together with the Letter of the House of
Commons to the General Assembly of this Kirk, of the third of August 1648: And
that Lieutenant General Cromwell, authorized from both Houses of Parliament, did
upon the 5 of October last, represent to the Committee of Estates of this
Kingdom, the wrongs and injuries committed against the Kingdom of England in
that Engagement; and thereupon did demand that they would give assurance in the
name of the Kingdom of Scotland, not to admit or suffer any who have been
active in, or consenting to that Engagement, to be employed in any public
place or Trust whatsoever; which was not only granted, and afterward confirmed
in Parliament, but all Acts for prosecution thereof have been repealed, and all
proceeding relating thereunto publicly disclaimed. And if any other wrongs
shall be make known unto us, we shall be ready to return such an Answer as may
give just satisfaction.

If the Bonds of Religion, Loyalty to the King, and mutual amity and
friendship betwixt the Kingdoms be impartially considered, according to the
Solemn League and Covenant, and the professions and Declarations of both
Kingdoms, The Estates of Parliament think that they have just cause to complain
of the late proceedings in England in reference to Religion, the taking away of
the Kings life, and the changing the fundamental Government of that Kingdom;
against which this Kirk and Kingdom and their Commissioners, have protested and
given Testimony, whereunto they do still adhere.

And since it is apparent there has been of late in England a backsliding and
departure from the grounds and principles wherein the two Kingdoms were
engaged, the Parliament of this Kingdom does propound, that the late
proceedings there against Covenant and Treaties may be disclaimed and
disavowed, as the prosecution of the late unlawful Engagement against England
has been disclaimed and disavowed here; and that such as have departed from
these principles, and their former professions, may return to the same: Upon
which grounds they are content to ^uthorize Commissioners on behalf of this
Kingdom, to treat with Commissioners from both Houses of the Parliament of
England, sitting in freedom, concerning all matters of just complaint which
either Nation may have against the other, and for redress and reparation
thereof, and to do every thing that may further conduce for continuing the
happy peace and union betwixt the Kingdoms, which can never be settled upon so
sure a foundation as the former Treaties, and the solemn League and Covenant:
From which, as no alteration or revolution of Affairs can absolve either
Kingdom; so, we trust in God, that no success, whether good or bad, shall be
able to divert us; but as it has been our care in time past, it shall be still
our real endeavor for the future to keep our selves free of all compliance
with, or inclining to the Popish, Prelatical and Malignant party upon the one
hand; or to those that are enemies to the fundamental Government by King and
Parliament, and countenance and maintain Error, Heresy, and Schism upon the
other. I have no other thing in command from the Parliament of this Kingdom,
but to take notice that there is no Answer returned to their Letter of the 5
March last. And so rests

For the Honorable Will. Lenthal Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons.
Edinburgh, 26 Junii 1649.
Your humble Servant, LOUDOUN Cancellarius, Praeses Parliamenti.
FINIS.

