A DECLARATION OF THE Committee of Estates of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.

Against The Forces of their new KING CHARLES the second, Or, any other Forces
in Rebellion against Them.

AND Al those that come not in within 20 days their Wives, Children and
Families to be put out of the protection of that Kingdom and sent away to
foreign parts

Edinburgh 4 May. 1949.
IT is Ordered by the Committee of States that these presents be Printed and
Published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, Glasgow, Sterling, Perth and
Aberden.

Tho. Henderson.



ALSO Heads collected out of several letters from Scotland of special and
remarkable news.

EDINBURGH And Reprinted at London for Thomas Walkley Stationer dwelling in
the Strand. Anno 1949.

Edinburgh the 4 May 1649.
WHereas the States of Parliament upon consideration of the insolent practices,
and rebellious attempts of Thomas Mackenzie of Pluscarden and other his
associates, did by Act of Parl. declare them and al such as should ioyn with
them, guilty of the crime of high Treason, and prohibit all manner of persons
whatsoever, to give any manner of assstance, or countenance the persons
aforesaid, under the pain of being esteemed Rebels, and Enemies to Religion
King and Kingdom And further the Commitee of Estates, out of their earnest
desire to preserve the peace of this Kingdom, and to reclaim these men from
their wicked ways, to their duty and obedience, and especially out of their
elemen-towards such as through information were ensnared into these courses,
did give power to L.G. ^e^sley to make a general offer to all such as were in
Arms, of freedom in their persons and estates, they giving an assurance for
their good behavior in time coming* All which notmithstanding James L. Ogilvy,
Lord Rae, Lues Gordon, Son to the late Marquess at Hun^ly, and John
Middleton. Sometimes called Mayor General Middleton, have risen in Arms, and
joined in open rebellion with the said Thomas Mackenz^^ of Pluscar^^^ which
sh^weth that no necessity for their own preservation has driven them to this
course, but their constant malice and wickedness against the cause of God and
Peace of this Kingdom, and an ambitious desire to attain their own base ends.
For if they had any love to Religion, and the Solemn League and Covenant,
which they have sworn and subscribed, They would not have engaged in ways so
evidently destructive thereunto against the mind and Judgment of the whole
Kirk, or if they had any regard to the peace of this Kingdom; they would not
begin an un-naturall War to shed the blood and tear the bowels of their own
native Country, and increase the burdens of this exhausted Kingdom, and
thereby (if the Lord in mercy prevent not) bring on famine and desolation,
neither would they if they had any respect to the King, persist in designs so
preiud^ciall to his honor and welfare endeavoring so far as in them lies to
divert him from giving satisfaction to the Commissioners sent from this
Kingdom, and now attending His Majesty's answer* Therefore the Committee of
Estates after mature deliberation do hereby declare the said persons with
their adherents and abettors, and all such as shall hereafter join and
concur with them, to be guilty of high treason, and to be proceeded against
accordingly. And discharges all other persons of whatsoever quality or degree
within this Kingdom to assist or supply the said Rebels and their adherents or
any of them, with men, money, arms, ammunition, victual, council or
intellignce, or to keep any correspondency public or private, or any who aid
or countenance them or any of them under the pain of being esteemed Rebels, and
to be proceeded against as enemies to Religion, the Kings Majesty and the peace
of this Kingdom. And further, give power and warrant to all the good Subjects
within this Kingto rise in arms for opposing and suppressing the said Rebels,
as they shall be required by the General Lieut Genesis Leisly or any others
having authority for that effect.

And to the end all the Kingdom may have full satisfaction concerning the
equity of our proceedings. And that these now in rebellion may be yet reclaimed
from their wicked practices and designs if it be possible, or otherwise left
altogether unexcusable. The Committee of Estates is content to pass by any
thing they have done in referrence to this late rebellion, And to allow unto
them freedom in their Persons and Estates they renouncing and disclaiming
their present course, and giving assurance for their dutiful carriage in time
coming, It being always provided, that such as shall accept of this offer
shall come into Lieut. Gen Leisly. and give the satisfation betwixt this and
the twenty of this instant, in which case they shall be free, but that the
said Declaration shall stand in full force against all such as after the twenty
day shall persist in rebellion or ioyn with them. And that in respect of their
frequent outbreakings upon al occasions, their wives, children and Families
shall be no longer under the protection of this Kingdom. And that such course
shall be taken for transporting of them out of the Kingdom into foreign
parts, as the Estates of Parliament or their Committees shall think fit. And
for encouragement of all such as shall suffer in opposing or suppressing the
said Rebels, The Committee of Estates declares that the losses and and
sufferings of such as have, or shall be active in the cause against the Rebels
shallbe taken into special consideration as their carriage shall deserve, and
repaired out of the Estates of such as shall obstinatly persist in the said
Rebellion* As likewise it is declared, that whosoever has, or shall do any
thing against the said Rebels, and their adherents and abettors, or any of
them in their persons or goods, during the time of their continuance in
Rebellion, shall be free of all actions criminal or civil at the innf^once of
any person whatsoever for the same,

And lastly, It is ordained that these presents be Printed and Published at
the Market Cross of Edinburgh, Glasgow, Stirling, Perth and Aberden, which
publications at the places aforesaid, the Committee of Estates do declare to
be a sufficient intimation to the persons above specified, and to all the
Lieges.

Tho. Henderson.

Heads collected out of several Letters from Edinburgh in Scotland, dated the
8. and 9. of May, 1649.
ALL here about Edinburgh are quite, our Grandees being all out of Town, the
Marquess of Argile went yesterday over the water to the Lieutenant General,
from home, and the enemies we hear nothing as yet certain.

Upon Saturday last, there was a Proclamation emitted, declaring Lues Gordon,
Pluscardin, and Middlcton, with all their adherent, Enemies and Traitors,
except they come in, and make their peace betwixt and the 20. of this Month,
which if they will not obey, themselves shall be as Traitors, and their and
children, left without shelter or protection.

We hear that there is a great scarcity of victuals in the North, and many
fertile fields lying waste and their houses deserted and waste.

This same day there was an express came, showing that those in Arms have
sent and craved a new parley, and that their wants are such as cannot be
supplied, so that they aree constrained to submit; the Lieutenant General
marched toward them on Saturday to Cromar where they are to meet, he has sent
Peter Innes with a Trumpeter to them. Col. Ker with five troops is in Rosse,
joined with the forces of the Earl of Sutherland.

The Lieutenant Genarall in his last march from the North, was in hazard of his
life, in the water (die) laboring to rescue a poor Soldier who was carried
away with the stream; the Lieutenant General horse fell amongst the stones,
and he twice under water, but was recovered, and yet without changing clothes,
rode twelve miles, and kept his intended quarters that night.

By another letter dated May 8. The Lieu. General was the 5. of this instant at
Blair in Athol, at an randezvouze of the party that are troubling the peace; I
have no certainty further for the present from these parts.

The Presbyterians in Ulster have given a remove to Monk the length of Dublin.

There was an out-fall at the siege of Darry, where Sir Charles Coot commands
within the walls, where they killed Major Balsoure, Major Graham, and Capt.
Galbraith, and took certain prisoners, whereat we and our friends are not
glad. There is news expected from Ormond before the last of this month.

By another letter dated May 9. The business in the North is rather worse then
better, Ogilby, Pluscardy, and Middleton, were the last week at Atholl, but the
Atholl men refused to rise, they have made Ruthen in Bazenoch sure, they are
back to the North again; David L^sly was the length of Dunkeld with his
forces, which is more then theirs are, and marched hard till they were
returned; Argile is over to speak with David Lesly, whose forces does daily
increase; no Highlander does rise at all, but are all quiet there, and
peaceable, and very few does follow Lues Gordon. There is a Proclamation
declararing them all Rebels and Traitors, who does not come in before the 20.
of May Instant,

May 9. 1649. T. J.

Imprimatur,

Theo. Jennings.


