PAPERS LATELY Delivered in to the Honorable Houses OF PARLIAMENT BY THE
COMMISSIONERS of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND, Concerning The Proceedings of the
Scottish Army, And their Intentions.

Published according to Order.

LONDON: Printed for Laurence Chapman. June 9. 1646.

Right Honorable,
WE are desired by the Committee of Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland
residing with the Scottish Army, to communicate to the Honorable Houses the
Letters and Papers herewith presented; wherein it will appear, how careful they
have been in exhorting His Majesty to give satisfaction to the joint desires of
both Kingdoms, without meddling in any Propositions of Peace; They have also
renewed their desires for advice from hence, and do earnestly entreat, That
Commissioners may be sent from both Houses to join with them, and to be
witnesses of all their actions, wherein they endeavor nothing more, then that
they may be such as may give equal satisfaction to both the Kingdoms.

We are further desired to acquaint their Lordships with the particulars of a
Letter written by Colonel Poyntz to Lieut. Gen: David Lesly, wherein he does
require, That if he had any forces about Rippon, he retire them to some other
place; And if he had appointed any more to come thither, that he recall his
Orders; all which he advised him speedily to perform, as he would evidence to
the world, that the intention of the coming of the Scottish Army into this
Kingdom, was to pursue the common Enemy, and not to be troublesome or encroach
upon their Friends. To which Lieut. General Lesly returned a civil Answer,
showing him, That his commands should be obeyed; and accordingly did forthwith
withdraw his Forces from those parts, being desirous, according to the
directions given unto him, to avoid all occasions of difference and contest:
Upon consideration whereof, It is their earnest desire, That as directions are
given by them to all the Officers of the Scottish Army, so the Honorable Houses
would be pleased to give Order to the Commanders of their Forces in those parts
to forbear all provoking expressions, speeches or actions, which may give just
cause of offense. And for preventing all disorders and inconveniences, they do
earnestly entreat, That Directions may be speedily sent to the Committee at
York to appoint them Quarters, that a considerable Supply of Money may be sent
unto them, now, after so much want, and so long suffering; which desires being
so reasonable, and so often renewed, we are persuaded the Honorable Houses will
take them into their serious consideration, and return a speedy and
satisfactory Answer. We remain

Your Lordships affectionate Friends and humble Servants, Lauderdail, A:
Johnston, Cha: Erskin, Hugh Kenedy, Robert Barcley.
25 May. 1646. For the Right Honorable, The Speaker of the House of Peers pro
tempore, to be communicated to both Houses Parliament.



THe Committee of Estates with the Scots Army, having received a Vote of the
Honorable House of Commons* enclosed in a Letter from the Commissioners of both
Houses, demanding the persons of Mr. John Ashburnham, and all others that came
with the King into the Scots Army before Newark, to be delivered up; did
seriously take into deliberation how they might return a satisfactory Answer to
the Desire of the House of Commons, wherein they found themselves pressed with
no small Difficulties arising from the consideration of the Vote, which did
require Mr. John Ashburnham and others to be delivered up as Delinquents, upon
this Narrative and Reason, That they came into the Scottish Army before Newark
with His Majesty. There being no other cause of Delinquency made known unto the
Committee of Estates, and no more being expressed concerning Mr. John
Ashburnham then other persons who were Guides to His Majesty in his way
thither: It did appear unto them, that they were no more obliged to deliver up
Mr. John Ashburnham His Majesty's ordinary Servant, and others, only for their
attending the King to the Scottish Army, then the Parliament of England should
have been obliged in the like case to deliver up any Subject of Scotland for
attending His Majesty if He had gone into Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army, or come
to London. And it did very much weigh with their Lordshops, That the delivering
up of these persons, merely for their coming with His Majesty into the Scottish
Army would import, That they did acknowledge it to be unlawful for themselves
to receive His Majesty, coming unexpectedly without any invitation into their
Army, since he could not come without one Servant or other to attend Him. But if
Mr. John Ashburnham or any other that came with His Majesty, had been Declared
by the Parliament to be Incendiaries, Malignants or evil Instruments, by
hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from His people, or one
of the Kingdoms from another, or making any Factions or parties among the
people, contrary to the Solemn League and Covenant, then it was their
resolution, and they were ready therein to give satisfaction to the Honorable
Houses. Upon these and other grounds they did desire to confer with the
Commissioners of both Houses, to the end they might either give or receive
satisfaction, and accordingly wrote unto them for this purpose, leaving unto
them to appoint the place of meeting: It was also considered what should be
done in the interim, till upon conference and mutual consultation with the
Commissioners of Parliament the matter should be determined: And though for the
coming of these persons with the King to the Scots Army (no other cause of
offense being known, or crime objected against them) the Committee of Estates
could not in Honor and Justice, nor without reflection upon themselves for
receiving his Majesty, put a Restraint upon them; yet lest the business should
be divulged, and upon apprehension of the issue thereof any of them should make
an escape, the Co^mittee thought fit, and did accordingly enjoin secrecy in
the whole matter. While they were expecting an answer from the Commissioners of
both Houses, they received Advertisement, That Five thousand Horse and Dragoons
were upon their march Northward toward them, no Enemy being in those parts, and
that two Messengers sent from us to them were intercepted and searched.
Whereupon they judged it necessary, and did write to the Commissioners of
Parliament to delay the intended meeting, till the army should come to a more
convenient place, being unwilling that the Forces of the two Kingdoms should
engage upon a mistake; and so soon as they came to Borrowbrigs they renewed
their desires to the Commissioners of Parliament for a Conference about this
business, to which the Commissioners by reason of their other occasions, did
not agree.

In all which, the Committee of Estates conceive that they have used their best
endeavors to give satisfaction to the desire of the Honorable House of
Commons, especially seeing upon the very first notice they had of Mr.
Ashburnham and Mr. Hudson their endeavor to escape, they sent forth on all
hands Orders to apprehend them, and such diligence was used, as Mr. Hudson was
apprehended, and is now in Newcastle in the Custody of the Deputy Major: and as
a worthy and Noble Lord, the Lord Balcarras lately come hither, has by order
of the Committee made known unto us, his Lordship and all the rest of that
Honorable Committee can declare upon their Honor, That directly nor indirectly
they were no ways accessory to Mr. Ashburnhams escape, nor had any knowledge
thereof, whatsoever may be suggested to the contrary. All which being
considered, together with the Letters and Papers to be presented this day to
the House from the Committee of both Kingdoms, We are confident that Honorable
House will rest satisfied with their carriage in this particular, and with their
other proceedings.

May 25. 1646.
SIr,
If the sending of Supplies to the Scottish Army, and the giving order for their
Quarters were a matter of small consequence, or could without very great
prejudice suffer a delay, we would be very loath so frequently to trouble the
Honorable Houses about that particular. But when we consider the exceeding
great wants of that Army, and the insupportable burden that lies upon the
Counties where they do now reside, by reason no moneys are paid to the army,
wherewith they may discharge their quarters, from whence many dangerous
inconveniences and sad evils must needs follow, as may appear by the Letters
from the Committee at York, if not very speedily prevented: We do find a
necessity laid upon us still to importune the Honorable Houses for sending a
considerable Supply of money to that Army, and in the mean time to give order
for their Quarters, that all differences which may arise between them and the
Country, or the Parliamenrs Forces, may be avoided, and all fair correspondence
may be mutually cherished and entertained. These things we have earnestly
pressed at the Committee of both Kingdoms, And do now again renew to both
Houses for our further exoneration; wherein, as we have used our best endeavors
to prevent the evils that are like to ensue, so we cannot but promise to our
selves, That the Honorable Houses will take the same into their wise
consideration, and speedily return a satisfactory Answer to

Your affectionate Friends and Servants, Lauderdail, A. Johnston, Charles
Erskins, Hugh Kenedy, Robert Barcley.
30 May. 16^6.
For the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the House of Commons.
WE have very frequently represented to the honorable Houses, the extreme
necessities of the Scottish Army, and the dangerous effects which were like to
follow, if some more effectual course be not taken for their necessary
provisions, whereby the Counties might be eased, and they not burthensom to
those places where they did or do Quarter. We have also earnestly desired, That
such Complaints that were or should for the future be sent up hither concerning
any Disorders in that Army, or abuses committed by any Person or Persons
therein, might be made known unto us, or to the Committee of Estates upon the
place, promising, that upon intimation given, and proof made of the Offense,
the Offenders should be condignly and exemplarly punished.

As by these and all other possible means and ways we have diligently and
faithfully endeavored to prevent mis-understandings and differences between the
Kingdoms; so from the conscience of the Solemn League and Covenant, and of the
particular trust put upon us; from the sense of the pressing and still
unremedied sufferings of our Army, our ears being also filled with the noise of
Complaints and Informations come against them, which some do not only easily
believe, and readily entertain, but with much Art spread and aggravate: And
finally, That we may for our own exoneration in point of duty, leave no mean
unessayed which may heal the present, and prevent all future Jealousies; We
cannot choose at this season, but express that which lies much upon our
Spirits, and which being timely animadverted by the Wisdom of both Houses, may
produce good effects to their and our comfort.

As we are conscious to the sincerity of our own Intentions and Endeavors to
preserve a firm Peace and Union between the Kingdoms, and to bring the War to a
happy and speedy conclusion; so upon our certain knowledge we can say, That the
Parliament of the Kingdom of Scotland, and in the intervals of Parliament the
Committee of Estates at home and with the Army in this Kingdom, have proceeded
and do proceed upon the same principles and toward the same ends, of which, so
far as concerns the Committee with the Army, the Commissioners of both Houses
have often upon the place given ample testimony, which we doubt not they have
done here also, as they freely declared they would do. Neither has that
Kingdom (to our best knowledge) failed in the performance of any Article of the
Treaty with this Kingdom, which was to be performed on their part, although
provocations have not been wanting, so that we are exceedingly amazed to hear
such noise of a breach expected between the Kingdoms, which if it should fall
forth (as the Lord forbid) we are confident it neither has nor shall have any
cause or rise from our Nation. And we are no less confident, That a curse from
Heaven shall be upon those persons, who for their own ends and interests,
colored with false though specious pretenses, are or shall be plotting and
acting all that they can to hinder a Peace, and to continue a War, and when
through Gods goodness the common Enemies of the Religion and just Liberties of
both Kingdoms are in so great a measure broken, least this should make an end
of the War, do, or shall apply themselves to sow discord amongst Brethren, to
make divisive motions, and to create and increase differences between the
Kingdoms; and for that end, are extremely vigilant to catch, and actively to
improve the smallest occasions taken sometimes from groundless and false
Reports, sometimes from the miscarriages of some few private persons pinched
with want and provoked with reproaches.

We shall heartily wish, That he in whose sight all things are naked and
manifest, may discover and resist all secret Enemies of Truth and Peace,
whoever they be; and we trust that God will so direct the Honorable Houses of
Parliament, that they will never comply with, nor connive at the Counsels and
ways of any party, which for their own advantages would not spare to let in
that flood of miseries upon this Island, which cannot but follow upon the
engagement of the Kingdoms in a War.

We do also expect from the Justice and Wisdom of the Parliament, That the
Brotherly way formerly used for a good correspondence between the Kingdoms, may
be remembered and resumed, and particularly that according to the Vote of both
Houses the 17. October, 1644. in reference to our Paper of the 14. Septem.
1644. What doubts or objections shall arise in either House, upon consideration
of any thing propounded concerning the Scottish Armies in England or Ireland,
the same be recommitted to a Committee of both Houses, that after Debate with
us, and full understanding of our meaning, the results thereof may be reported.

If now the Honorable Houses are or shall be unsatisfied concerning any in the
Scottish Army, we do faithfully promise and engage our selves in the Name of
that Army, that real and speedy satisfaction shall be given when it shall be
desired, and the Delinquents (when they shall be made known) severely punished;
and if they be such as have served in Arms against the Parliament, shall be
removed out of the Army: In which particular the Committee with the Army did
lately give an evidence of their willingness upon occasion of a motion offered
from some of themselves, to some of the Commissioners of the Parliament, that a
Paper might be delivered to the Committee of Estates from the said
Commissioners of Parliament, desiring such as had been in Arms against the
Parliament, to be removed out of that Army. After which a Paper was delivered
from the Commissioners of Parliament, proposing, that such Subjects of the
Crown of England as have served the Enemy, and have not conformed to the
Ordinance of Parliament, might be removed out of that Army. The Committee of
Estates did return a most satisfactory answer, condescending heartily to the
Proposition, and desiring from the said Commissioners a list of the Names of
such persons, that they might instantly be discharged, Promising also that they
themselves should diligently enquire after them, and make it appear how
cordially they love and honor the Parliament of this Kingdom (all which is more
fully expressed in the Papers themselves). Thereafter about the time of the
removal of our Army from Newark, the Commissioners of Parliament, according to
such Informations as they had, delivered in a List of the persons, wherein
there were named diverse of our Army upon a mistake, they being of the same name
with some that had served against the Parliament, but themselves (to the
perfect knowledge of the Committee) having never served against the Parliament,
yea having come in with that Army at their entry into this Kingdom. And as to
any others in that List, the Committee returned this answer, That according to
the former engagement in their answer of the 17. of April, such persons should
be removed out of the Army.

Their willingness to execute Justice has been manifested in the case of
other offenders, as well as those who have been in Arms against the Parliament.
Upon some Complaints against the Reformadoes that were in that Army, by Order
of the Committee of Estates they were forthwith discharged and removed out of
the Army. And upon some disorders committed by others, a Council of War was
called, and the persons guilty Condemned and Executed. It is true, the
Commissioners of the two Houses delivered a Protestation against that way of
proceeding by a Council of War of the Officers of the same Regiment to whom the
Delinquents did belong, but it was after the Council of War had met, and the
persons were sentenced. And concerning that way of procedure, we desire it may
be considered, That it is the constant way of the Military Discipline of
Scotland, as it is in Germany and many other places of the World, and which
every Regiment claims as their proper privilege. Some others have been
lately put to death, and what more can be required at their hands.

As to the Complaints of the Country of their great burdens; It is no wonder,
seeing one corner thereof sustaineth the burden of the maintenance of that
Army, when it should be equally laid upon the whole Kingdom: For remedy
whereof, the Army and we in their Name, have with much importunity desired from
the Parliament means to relieve them, as to supply themselves, and they are
most willing to allow in their accounts, what they receive in their Quarters;
and have often desired Commissioners to be sent down to concur with them to
adjust the particulars: And if they knew of any other way to keep themselves
from disbanding or starving, but by taking of Quarters in the Country when no
Mois provided for them, they would most heartily embrace it.

When we shall know any other particular Complaints concerning disorders in
that Army, we shall be ready to give speedy, just, and satisfactory answers:
This we can say for the present, That although Warrants have been issued out to
invite the Country to present their Complaints concerning disorders committed
in our Army (the like not being-done concerning disorders amongst the English
Forces) yet upon the knowledge and proof of any offense so complained of,
Justice was done, which is the most that can be required; although likewise all
the time our Amy was before Newark, our foot Soldiers had only penny half penny
per diem in money and provisions, whereas the English Soldiers employed in the
same Service with them, had Eight pence per diem, and Twelve pence every third
day when they did work. And although strict Disdipline and Justice against all
abuses uses not to be expected from an Army which receives so little of their
Pay, yet there has been more strictness in punishing offenders in that Army,
then amongst those who were much better paid. We desire not to asperse any, but
only to vindicate the Reputation of our own Army, and to move the Honorable
Houses to take some more real and effectual course for Supplying their wants,
And that they may be pleased for preventing of further differences, and for the
greater ease of the Country, to give Order to the Committee at York, for the
Quartering of the English Forces and ours in the most convenient places, As
likewise for sending to ours a considerable proportion of Money to discharge
their Quarters and relieve their extreme necessities. It is not light but
grievous to us to hear of any disorders at all committed by any person in that
Army (how great soever the necessities be unto which they are redacted) or that
our Army should be any longer burthensom to this Kingdom. And we do in the Name
of that Kingdom and Army declare and assure, That as they came into this
Kingdom upon an earnest invitation from both Houses of Parliament, and for the
ends expressed in the Covenant and Treaty, and Declaration of both Kingdoms
(the close whereof does express the resolution of both to have Truth and Peace
settled upon a firm Foundation before their laying down of Arms) so their
continuance neither is nor shall be made use of to the least encroachment upon
the Government of this Kingdom, Nor to any other ends besides those expressed
in the Covenant and Treaty: And how soon soever Religion and Peace shall be
settled accordingly, our Army and Garrisons shall forthwith remove out of this
Kingdom. And these things we shall wish may be speedily done, and that the
Propositions for a safe and well-grounded Peace (which did for a very short
time remain in our hands) may now after so long expectation, be sent to the
King, that upon his Royal consent to the desires of His People for settling and
securing of Religion and Peace, His Majesty may return to His Parliament here,
all Armies may be disbanded, the heavy pressures of the Subjects ended, and the
Kingdoms may remain in a firm Peace and Union to all Posterity, according to
the Solemn League and Covenant.

3. June, 1646.
FINIS.

