A PROCLAMATION Anent the Murderers of the late Archbishop of St. Andrews, and
appointing Magistrates and Councils of Burghs Royal to Sign the Declaration at
Michaelmas next.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To Our Lovits Heralds, Macers, Pursevants, or
Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally,
specially constitute, Greeting: We taking to Our Consideration how much the
Protestant Religion, and the Honor of this Our Ancient Kingdom are stained by
that Barbarous and Horrid Assassination and Murder of the late Archbishop of
St. Andrews; whereof We have by several Proclamations expressed Our Abhorrency,
and prohibited the reset of these Murderers whom We have excepted from Our
late Gracious Pardon and Indemnity: And albeit it was the Duty (not only of
those in Authority under Us) but of all Our Subjects, to use their endeavors
for discovering and bringing to Justice these execrable Persons, Enemies to all
Humane Society; yet We understand, that these Murderers, and likewise diverse
Heritors and Ministers who were engaged in the late Rebellion, and are excepted
from Our Indemnity, have been harbored and reset in some places of this
Kingdom, to the great Reproach of the Nation, and Contempt of Our Authority and
Laws: Therefore, We with advice of Our Privy Council, do Command and Charge all
Sheriffs, Stewarts, Bailiffs of Regalities, and Baylieries, and their Deputes,
Magistrates of Burghs, and others in Authority under Us, to Search for, Seek,
Take, and Apprehend the Persons afternamed, viz. John Balfour of Kinlock, David
Haxstoun of Rathillet, George Balfour in Gilstoun, James Russel in Kettle,
Robert Dingwal, a Tenants Son in Caddam, Andrew Guillan Webster in Balmerinoch,
Alexander and Andrew Hendersons, Sons to John Henderson in Kilbrachmont, and
George Fleming Son to George Fleming in Balbuthy, who did perpetrate and commit
the said horrid Murder; and also, any Heritors and Ministers who were in the
late Rebellion, and any Persons who have Reset and Harbored these Murderers
and Rebels, wherever they can be found within the Bounds of their respective
Jurisdictions, and put them in sure Ward and Firmance, until they be brought to
Justice: And in case these Persons flee out of the Shire, That they give notice
thereof to the Sheriff, or other Magistrate of the next Shire or Jurisdiction,
that they may in like manner Search for, Apprehend and Secure them until they
be brought to Justice; With Power to the Sheriffs, and other Magistrates
aforesaid, if they shall find cause, to call to their Assistance Our Subjects
within their Jurisdiction, or such a number of them as they shall think fit,
who are hereby Required to Concur with, and Assist them, under all highest Pain
and Charge. And We expect, That the Sheriffs and other Magistrates aforesaid,
will use exact diligence in the Premises, as they will be answerable on their
highest Peril. And seeing by the Fifth Act of the second Session, and the
second Act of the third Session of Our first Parliament. The Magistrates and
Councils of Burghs are Ordained at and before their Admissions to the exercise
of their Offices, to Sign the Declaration appointed to be Signed by all Persons
in Public Trust, under the Certifications therein expressed. Therefore, We with
Advice aforesaid, do Command and Require the Magistrates and Councils of the
respective Burghs of this Kingdom, who shall be chosen at the next ensuing
Elections, to Sign the foresaid Declaration, as is prescribed in the said Acts,
and to return the Declarations so Signed by them to the Clerks of Our
Privy Council, betwixt and the third Thursday of November next; certifying such
as shall not give Obedience, that they shall be proceeded against, and censured
conform to the said Acts of Parliament. Our Will is Herefore, and We Charge you
strictly, and Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Market-Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent Market-Crosses of the Head Burghs of
the several Shires of this Kingdom, and other places needful, and there by open
Proclamation, make publication of the Premises, that none may pretend ignorance
of the same. And We Ordain these presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the Twentieth Day of September, 1679. And
of Our Rign the Thirty one Year. Will. Paterson, Cl. Sti. Concilii.
GOD save the K1NG.

