CR

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION Anent the Rendezvouses of the Militia, for the year 1683.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially
constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch, as by reason of the not timous Intimation of
the dyets of the general Rendezvouses of the Militia of this Our Kingdom the
last Summer, there was no general Rendezvouses thereof kept; and We finding
it necessar for Our Service, that the said Rendezvouses be punctually kept
for this year, and hereafter; Have with Advice of Our Privy Council, thought
fit to appoint the said Rendezvouses for this year, to be at the dyets and
places after-specified, viz, The two Regiments of Foot, and two Troops of Horse
of the Shires of Fife and Kinross, to beat Edinsmoore, the twenty two day of
May next: The two Regiments of Foot, and two Troops of Horse of the Shire of
Perth, to be at Perth, the twenty third day of the said Month: The Regiment of
Foot and two Troops of Horse of the Shire of Forfar, at Forfar, the twenty
fourth day of the said Month: The Regiment of Foot and Troup of Horse, of the
Shire of Kincardine and Marischals part of Aberdene, at Aberdene, the thirtieth
day of the said Month: The Regiment of Foot of the Shire of Bamff, and Err^ls
part of Aberdene, and two Troops of Horse there, at Turreff the first day of
June next: The Regiment of Foot and Troup of Horse of the Shires of Elgin,
Nairn, and part of Inverness, at Elgin the fifth day of the said Month: The
Regiment of Foot and Troup of Horse of the Earl of Seaforth, and Lord Lovits
part of Inverness, at Inverness, the seventh day of the said Month: The
Regiment of Foot and Troup of Horse of the Shires of Ross, Sutherland and
Caithness, at Dornoeh the tenth day of the said Month: The Regiment of Foot of
the Stewartry of Orknay at Kirkwall, the fifteenth day of the said Month: The
Regiment of Foot and Troup of Horse of the Shires of Linlithgow and Peebles, at
Celem-moore, the first day of the said Month: The Regiment of Foot of the Town
of Edin^urgh, at the Links of Leith, the second day of the said Month: The
Regiment of Foot and Troup of Horse of the Shire of Edinburgh, at Musselburgh,
the fifth day of the said Month: The Regiment of Foot and Troup of Horse of the
Shire of Hadingtoun, at Beinstoun moore, the sixth day of the said Month: The
Regiment of Foot and Troup of Horse of the Shire of Berwick, at F^ggomoore, the
seventh day of the said Month: The two Regiments of Foot and two Troops of
Horse of the Shires of Roxburgh and Selkirk, at Ancrum Bridge, the eighth day
of the said Month: The Regiment of Foot and Troup of Horse of the Shire of
Dumfreis, the twelfth day of the said Month: The two Troops of the Shire of
Wigtoun, at Milntoun of Orr, the thirteenth of the said Month: The three Troops
of Horse of the Shire of Air and part of the Shire of Renfrew, at Air, the
fifteenth of the said Month: The rest of the Shire of Renfrew at Renfrew the
eighteenth day of the said Month: The three Troops of the Shire of Lanerk, at
Hamiltoun, the twenty two of the said Month: The Regiment of Foot and Troup of
Horse, of the Shire of Strivling and Clackmannan, at Sauchen-foord, the twenty
sixth of the said Month: The Regiment of the Shires of Argile, Bute and
Dumbarton at Dumbartoun, the ninteenth day of the said Month, for the Shire of
Dumbarton and Bute, and at Inverara the twenty fifth of the said Month for
Argile Shire. And We Ordain the whole Officers of Foot and Horse to attend
their Charges, at the said dyets of Rendezvouses, and the Heretors and other
Out-Reikers of the Sojors, to have their men present; ( habile) according to
Law; with certification to the said Officers and Heretors, if they neglect
their duty herein, they shall be proceeded against, and fined conform to the
Laws and Instructions made thereanent. And appoints the Muster-master General,
by himself or his Deputs, to be present at the several Rendezvouses, and to
return an Account to Our Council, of the Absents and Deficients, that they may
be proceeded against according to Law. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you
strictly and Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, and several Market Crosses of the head Burghs of
this Kingdom, and Burghs of Regality, and several Paroch Kirks within the same,
upon a Sunday after Divine Service, and other places needful; and there, in Our
Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make publication of the Premises,
that none pretend Ignorance. And We Ordain the Sheriffs of the respective
Shires, to cause duly publish these Presents.

Given under Our Signet, at Edinburgh, the twenty third day of March, One
thousand six hundred eighty and three: And of Our Reign, the thirtieth fifth
year. WILL. PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilij.
GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1683.


