A PROCLAMATION, Concerning Circuit Courts, etc.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To our Lovits
Heralds, Macers, Pursevants, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute Greeting: Forasmuch, as by
our Proclamation of the twenty-seventh day of July last, we have indempnified
and pardoned, with the Exceptions therein specified, all such as were engaged
in the Rebellion, 1666. or the late Rebellion in this present year 1679.
providing they appear before such as our Privy Council shall nominate, betwixt
and the da^s expressed in the said Proclamation, and enact themselves in manner
therein mentioned; And as it is our Royal Intention, that the said pardon and
indemnity shall be ^ffectual to all such persons as shall accept the benent
thereof; so it is our express will and pleasure, that such persons as shallnot
enact themselves betwixt and the days expressed in the said Proclamation, be
proceeded with the utmost severity the Law does allow: As also, it being most
just and necessary for vindicating the Honor and Reputation of this our
a^tient Kingdom, that the persons guilty of that horrid Assassination and
Murder, of the late Bishop of St. Andrews (which we will never forget) may be
brought to condign puni^ment; and all legal courses taken for that effect;
Therefore We, with Advice of our Privy Council, do ordain Justice airs, or
Circuit Courts to be holden by the Commissioners of our Justitiary, at the
places, and upon the days after mentioned viz. At the Town of Stirling, the
first day of October next, for the Shires of Stirling, Dumbartoun, Clackma^on,
Perth besouth the River of Earn, and the Stewartry of Monteith: At the Town of
Glasgow, the eighth day of October, for the Shires of Lanerk and Reafrew: At
the Town of Air, the fifteenth day of October, for the Shire of Air and
Jurisdiction within the same: At the Town of Dumfriese, the twenty two day of
October, for the Shires of Dumfriese, and ^igtoun, the Stewartries of
Kirkcudburgh and Annandale: At the Town of Cowper in Fife, upon the first day
of the said Month of October, for the Shires of Fife and Kinross: ^t the Town
of Edinburgh, the eighth day of October, for the Shires of Edinburgh,
Haddintoun and Linlithgow: At Jedburh the fifteenth day of October, for the
Shires of Roxburgh, Peebles, Berwick and Bailiry of Lauderdail. With power to
the said Commissioners to divide themselves in two Circuit Courts, to the
effect aforesaid. In which Cou^s, the said Commissioners are to proceed
against the persons who were engaged in the said Rebellion, and have not
accepted, or shall not except the benefit of our Indemnity. by^nacting
themselves in the Terms of our Gracious Proclamation, within the Dyets therein
mentioned, and particularly against the Murderers of the late Archbishop of
St. Andrews; and that the said Commissioners issue Citations against all the
said Rebels, and specially against the said Murderers, containing a
particular description of these Murderers: Which Citations are to be execute at
the Market Cross of the Head Burghs of the Shires where these persons dwells,
or formerly dwelt, or where they ordinarily haunt or resort, to the ef^ct that
none may supply, harbor, commune, or correspond with the said Murderers, nor
with any other of the Rebels, before these other Rebels, not accessory to that
horrid Murder^ enact themselves, conform to our Act of Indemnity; And in case
any person shall contraveen, they shall be proceeded against with all rigor, as
accessory to the said Rebellion and Ass^ination. And further, We, with advice
aforesaid, do ordain the Heretors and Masters of the ground where any of the
Re-bels have their dwelling and residence, to present to the ^d Justice airs,
the persons of these Rebels, who shall not before the dyets contained in our
Act of Indemnity, enact themselves not to bear Arms against us, or our
Authority; with p^er to them to apprehend their persons; And in case of their
refusal to enact themselves (as aforesaid) to send them to the next prison,
there to be detained and kept in sure firmanc^ until the enact themselves as
aforesaid, within the said Dyets and thereupon be dismissed; or otherwise to
detain and present them to the Justice airs, And in case the said Masters ^o
not apprehend them, by reason of their being fugitive, or latent, that after
the said Dyets they remove them, their Wives Bairns, and Servants off their
Ground, under the Certifica^ns contained in the Acts of Parliament. And the
Clerks of the Justice Court, are hereby ordained, to go before the said dyets,
in due time, and take up a portuous Roll of the N^es and Designations of the
said Rebels already known and contained in our Proclamation, or that shall be
declared upon Oath to have been in the Rebellion, or to have harbored ^he
Rebels before enacting themselves (as said is) or the Murderers of the late
Arch bishop of St. Andrews, or have been at Field-Conventicles since our last
Proclamation of the twe^y ninth of June last, or that since the said day have
threatened, abused, or robbed the Orthodox Clergy, and that they cause cite the
persons guilty of the said Crimes, to the said Justic^irs, and that they take
information upon Oath, of the Lands, Sums and Movables belonging to the
Rebels, and that they cause arrest Rents of their Lands, Sums and movables, ^d
put upon Inventor, and bond in the custody of their Masters; and in case their
Masters refuse, in the Custody of some other sufficient person to be made
forthcoming, in case t^ shall be condemned guilty of the said Rebellion, and
that they return an exact account thereof, and of their diligence to our Coucil
at their next diet, being the eighteenth day o^ September next. And We with
advice aforesaid, do hereby require the said Commissioners of our Justiciary,
to proceed against such of the said Murderers as were in the Rebelli^ (though
in absence) and that it be a part of their Sentence to be hanged in Effigy, in
all the Shiers of Scotland, that they may be more easily discovered and
apprehended, that none be^ceived in harboring of them, or communing with them
under false Names and Designations: And for the encouragement of any person or
persons to apprehend the said Murderers, V^ do hereby give assurance to any who
shall apprehend them, and present them to our Council, dead or alive, or shall
so discover them, as that thereby they be apprehended, they shall ^e indemnified
and rewarded in the sum of ten thousand Merks Scots Money, and in case of the
concourse of more persons, by discovering, or joining in the apprehending of
them, th^id sum shall be divided amongst them; and in case any of the said
Murderers be apprehended and taken, or discovered, so that thereby they may be
taken by any persons excepted (...) our Acts of Indemnity, they shall also be
indemnified (notwithstanding they fall within the exception) and a pardon shall
be past for them under our Great Seal; and in Cas^hey apprehend John Balsour of
Kinlech, and David Haxstoun of Rathillet, dead or alive, they shall not only
have their pardon, but also the reward aforesaid. Our Will is thefore, and ^e
charge you straightly, and Command, that incontinent these our Letters seen ye
pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, as also to the Market Crosses of the
Head Burghs of the Sh^fdoms, Haddington, Linlithgow, Perth, Roxburgh, Selkirk,
Berwick, Peebles, Dumfri^se, Stirling, Dumbarton, Clackmannan, Lanerk, Renfrew,
Air, Wigtoun, Fife, Stewartry of Kircud^gh, and other places needfuil and
thereby open Proclamation, make publication of the said Circuits, to all our
Leidges and Subjects, where through none pretend ignorance (...) the same, that
the said Circuit, Courts are to be holden upon the days, and at the Burghs and
places respective above written; and that ye command and charge all Dukes,
Marquesse^ Arch bishops, Earls, Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Barons, and
others of our Free holders, who hold Lands of us in chief, and owe suit and
presence within the several Bound^ Shires and Precincts belonging to the said
respective Circuit Courts, to compear before the said Commissioners, at the
said Courts, upon and at the days and places foresaid, with ^ntinuation of
days, to do whatever in Law is incumbent, and ought to be done by them in that
behalf: As also, that ye Command all and sundry the said Dukes, Marquesses,
E^s, Lords Spiritual and Temporal; as also, Lords of Regalites, Stewarts,
Barons, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Bailies, Cham-berlains, Magistrates and
Ministers of our Laws, and all su^ordinate Judges within our Sheriffdoms, above
written, and whole Leidges of the same, that they and every one of them, give
all due respect to our Commissioners and Justices fore^ds, and such special
assistance as to their Offices and Duty appertains, and as is incumbent to them
by the Laws and Acts of Parliament of this our Ancient Kingdom, as they and
every^ne of them will answer upon the contrary, and under all highest pain and
charge that after may follow: and particularly that ye Command our Sheriffs
that they cause sufficient and le^ men compear before our said Commissioners,
at the forsaid dyets, and such dyets and places as the said Commissioners shall
appoint for Assizes and Witnesses, as they shall be cit^ to that effect: As
also, that the said Sheriffs and Free holders within the said Shires and
Bounds, meet our said Justices, st their entry into the fame, and convoy them
into the same, and accompany them during their remaining there, ay and while
they be received by our next Sheriff, and his Deputs, into the next Shire. And
We ordain these Presents to be ^inted.

Given under our Signet, at Edinbu^gh, the fourteenth day of August, one
thousand six hundred seventy and nine years. And of our Reign, the thretty one
year. Al. Gibson^ Cl. Sti. Concilii,

Here follows the Names of those appointed to take Bond from the Rebels, in the
several Shires following, viz.

For the Shire of Edinburgh, Haddingtoun, Linlithgow, Perth? Roxburgh, Selkirk,
The Lord Collington. The Earl of Wintoun. The Earl of Linlithgow. The Marquess
of Montross. The Earl of Rexburgh. The Lord of Hayning. Lanerk, Dumfreise,
Air. Dumbartoun. Fife and Kinross, Wigtoun. The Earl of Cornwath. The Earl of
Queensberry. The Earl of Glencairn. The Earl of Wigtoun. The Lord Chancellor.
The Lord of Burghtoun. Stewartry of Kigkoudburgh Peebles, Stirling, Renfrew,
Berwick, The Earl of Nithisdale. Sir Will. Murray of Stenhop. The Earl of Mar.
The Lord Ross. The Earl of Home.
God save the King.
EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to his most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1679. And Reprinted at London, for Andrew Forrester, in
King Street, Westminster.


