THE Scotch Design discovered in their late subtle DECLARATJON: Laying open
The Falsehood and Deseit of their specious pretenses therein.

Together with the ground, rise, and progress made, in this their present
Treasonable Invasion of ENGLAND.

Written by a diligent Observer of all Transactions in Scotland, to his Friends
in England.

And published to undeceive the people, seduced by their late Deceitful
DECLARATION.

London, Printed by J. M.

Penrith the 14 day of July* 1648.
Much honored and dear friend,
BEing present here, by the providence of God, at the coming of a Gentleman,
one Mr Hellyburton, who is sent from that Malignant Committee of Estates, now
sitting in Scotland, to the heart-greif of all the people of God there; he
being thus far come on his way to the Parliament of England, and from the
Malignant Scots Army, by the way, with many dangerous private Letters, and a
devilish subtle false Declaration, which we have read, and some Letters to the
King; all which I thought good to acquaint you with: The deep designs that that
Malignant Crew is aiming at through that Declaration, which I find to be so
full of subtle expressions, to get your Parliament to think that they are the
men that they declare themselves to be in this Declaration, and their adherents
according thereto in England, and by this means to make your Parliament to
condescend to their unhonest desires, that is, the disbanding of your honest
Army, and so the power of England shall be in the Malignants hands: The King
being brought to his royal dignities again, presently they shall tread under
foot all the people of God, be under what name they will, excepting Royalists,
in all the three Kingdoms, and up with Epilcopacy: And this is for a certain
their intentions, declare what they will. To assure you of this, my dear
friend, I will show some of the proceedings lately betwixt the State and the
Kirk, before we came away, and their proceedings in the getting up of their
Army, when all the Congregations, Presbyteries, and Sessions, and Synods, and
Shires had supplicated and publicly declared against their proceedings, with
about threescore Members of Parliament declaring publicly against their
proceedings; and most part of the Officers of the former standing Army having
also deserred their places out of conscience, seeing the wicked course they
were running; So that I may truly say, the whole Kingdom, that was always for
the Covenant and Presbyterial Government before, is now against this wicked
course because the power is only put in those men's hands, both in Armies and
Committees, that ever were against the Covenant before, and against all
Religion. The first thing that they went about, after the Parliament was risen,
they divided their Forces, that they had standing, into all the well-affected
places of the Kingdom. His Excellency Hamilton did first begin with his own
Country, for that Country was most disaffected to him and his ways; he could
not get up a man; he sent (to gain his point) so many Troops of Horse to force
the men, but all could not prevail; the people were exceeding resolute, they
entertained the Troops as long as they had any thing, and at last left all; so
that he has destroyed all his own Country, Glascoe, which was the chief Town
of his Country, the Town being wholly established with godly Magistrates, after
the casting out of their Malignant Magistrates, in that time that James Graime
F. os Montresse had over run the Land; he has now cast out these godly men,
and set up those Malignants that were cast out before, and did imprison and
plunder all the godly Families in the Town, the Ministers themselves hardly
escaping the fury of the Soldiers, their houses plundered also: They came in
to a godly woman, hearing that she feared God, and did threaten to kill her, if
she would not swear that she did not fear God; this is of truth: These and such
like are only the chief men that are employed in this engagement willingly,
albeit the most part be forced, poor creatures: Another passage remarkable, to
show that these men mind not Presbyterial Government, nor no good to any that
are not professed Royalists, and upon any terms for the King, in all the three
Kingdoms; and to show you the irreconcilable difference betwixt this
MALIGNANT STATE that now is acting, the affairs of the civil power in Scotland
and the Kirk, and the most part besides both of the nobility, Gentry and
Comminalty: The passage was this, the Commissioners of the Kirk did make an
Act, That whatsoever Minister should be found not to preach against the
proceedings of that engagement, and should be found to go into England with
that Army, should be deposed from the Ministry: the Parliament hereing of it,
did make a contrary Act in their first Declaration; also they did declare, That
their coming to England was against Malignants, as well on the one side, as
Sectaries on the other side. The Commissioners of the Kirk set forth a
contrary, proving, that they were joined with Malignants in England, both in
the South parts and North parts, and that the English Malignants did nothing
without order from particular Malignant Statesmen in Scotland; all which truths
do now plainly appear, we hope, to the open view of the world, so that I may
persuade you, and I could wish that ye would use means to persuade all others
of the truth of these things, and that they may not be deluded with that
Declaration, which we know is come out in secret, without the knowledge of the
well-affected party in that Kingdom, otherwise it would have had a contrary
Declaration from them, proving theirs to be false in every circumstance.

Dear friend, the reason I am so large in these particulars is this, knowing
that the well-affected party in Scotland do not get their Letters conveyed to
you, for fear of intercepting, which some are suffering for at this time.

And my next reason and motive, that moves me, is this; I know that you are a
man that are acquainted with many Parl. Members with you, that ye may bestir
your self a little to make known these things, and to spread them abroad for
the undeceiving of many thousands, both in London and up and down this Kingdom,
who, I know, do appear with them, thinking that they are for the prosecuting of
the ends of the Covenant, and establishing of Presbyterial Government, and the
bringing of the King to his Throne upon good conditions; but they will be
infinitely deceived, think so who will: These indeed were the ends that the
wellaffected party would have had an Army up for; but Malignants bearing down,
being expressed, did cause the Malignants to thrust in themselves under this
covert, and they have played their parts very subtly; but God has made their
designs to shine through their covert, to their great shames and silence.

I pray you acquaint our friends with these things, for I know we have some in
the City Council, and may do much good; there is much lying upon your
Parliament, the Lord make them see about them; and we have reason to mourn for
the divisions of the people of God, and for the want of a right understanding
betwixt them in both Kingdoms, be under what name soever. I wish there were a
Union endeavored quickly, for all the wicked are combined together to root out
all that bear the Image of God in them, in their profession; these are the main
designs these old Malignants aim at; the old quarrel is the quarrel still, both
against Independents and Presbyterians, under what name soever, that shall not
be found to be altogether for the King upon any terms. Not troubling you any
further; I shall rest here, laying this over upon you, that you will not fail to
bestir your self in these things, to your power in the strength of God, who is
your strength, and the strength of him, who is

Your affectionate Friend in the LORD R. S.

I pray you enquire for an honest Gentleman, Lieutenant Colonel William O
sbourne, who is come along to the Parliament by the order of the General Major
Lambert, with the Papers and Declarations of that Malignant Committee in
Scotland, he will show you of all things to your satisfaction, for he came with
us from Scotland, make him acquainted with some of your Parliament Members,
that he may impart what he knows of affairs, both in this Kingdom and in
Scotland.

Imprimatur Gilb. Mabbot.

July 24. 1648.
FINIS.

