A PROCLAMATION For apprehending several Traitors and Fugitives.
JAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute,
Greeting: Forasmuch as Archibald Campbel late Earl of Argile (that Arch and
Hereditary Traitor) having with some others his Accomplices and Associats, both
of this and other Nations, Combined together, to disturb Our Government, and
the Peace and Tranquillity of this Our Ancient Kingdom, and having Associated
to themselves the Vile and Sacrilegious Murderers of James late Archbishop of
St. Andrews, and even that Bloody Miscreant Rumbold the Maltster, who was to
have embrued his hands in the Sacred Blood of Our dearest Brother, and to have
been the Principal Actor of that Hellish Tragedy designed at the Ry in England:
They pursuant to their Traitorous and wicked Plots and Designs, having Landed
in some of Our Western and High-land Islands, and there Pillaged and Harrassed
Our People for a considerable space bygone; And now after all their desperate
endeavors, It having pleased Almighty GOD to give Our Forces that good success
over these Our Enemies, as to Defeat and totally Rout them; many of whose chief
Ringleaders are now taken, and particularly the said Arch-traitor Archibald
Campbel, Rumbold the Maltster, John Aleife, called Colonel Alcife, (which
last, out of the terror of his Attrocious Guilt and Despair, endeavored to
kill himself after he was taken, by giving himself a Wound in the Belly with a
Knife in the Prison of Our Burgh of Glasgow,) and many others: And whereas
there are severals of that Hellish Crew not yet taken, who may sculk and lurk
in this our Realm with these of their Party, and be sheltered by disaffected
Persons: And We being resolved to prosecute and pursue those execrable Rebels
and Traitors, until they be apprehended and brought to condign punishment: Do
hereby with Advice of Our Privy Council. Require and Command all Our good and
loving Subjects, and particularly all Our Sheriffs and other Magistrates, and
the Officers of Our standing Forces and Militia, to use their outmost
endeavors for apprehending the said Rebels and Traitors, and bringing them to
Justice: And for that effect to convocat Our Liedges, and use all other Warlike
Force against them: And for their encouragement, We hereby not only Indemnifie
and fully Pardon them of any Blood, Slaughter, Mutilation, Fire-raising, or
such like inconveniences which may fall out in this Our Service; But We do
hereby promise and assure any person, or persons, who shall apprehend the
persons underwritten, dead or alive, or discover them, so as they may be
apprehended, the Rewards following, viz. For John Cochran, sometime called Sir
John Cochran of Ochiltree; Patrick Home, sometime called Sir Patrick Home of
Polwart, forfaulted Traitors; Archibald Campbel, Son to the Lord Neil Campbel;
Charles and John Campbels, Sons to the said Arch-Traitor Archibald Campbel;
(...) Pringle of Torwoo^lie; Sir Duncan Campbel of Auchinbreck, and each of
them the Sum of Eighteen Hundred Merks Scots Money; for (...) Denholm of
Westshiels; and (...) Balfour, and (...) Fleming, Murderers and Assassins of
the said late Archbishop of St. Andrews; William Cleaveland, called Captain
Cleaveland; and (...) Stewart, younger of Cultness, Grandchild to Sir James
Stewart, sometime Provost of Edinburgh, and each of them One Thousand Merks,
Money foresaid; for (...) Wishart, Master of one of the Ships, who came along
with the said Arch-Traitor Archibald Campbel, Five Hundred Merks; and for every
Fanatical Preacher, who was with the said Rebels, One Thousand Merks, Money
foresaid. And We further Declare, that if any of Our Subjects shall be so
desperately wicked, as to Harbor, Reset, Intertain, Intercommune, Converse,
Correspond with, or Comfort any of the said Persons, any manner of way, or
shall not give Intelligence of them, or shall not give their Assistance against
them, that they shall be holden, repute, treated, and demeaned as Art and Part
of, and Accessory to the said horrid Crime of Treason and Rebellion against Us,
and Our Royal Government, with the utmost severity of Law. And generally, We
hereby Prohibit and Discharge all Our Subjects from Harboring, Resetting,
Lodging, or Intertaining any Person whatsoever, unless they have a Pass from
these Authorized by Our former Proclamations to grant the same, as they will
answer at their highest Peril. And that this Our Pleasure may be known to all
Our Liedges, Our Will is, and we Charge you strictly, and Command, that
incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
Linlithgow, Stirling, Lanerk, Air, Renfrew, Rutherglen, Glasgow, Irving,
Dum^artoun, Wigtoun, Kirk^udbright, Dumfreis, Inverarey, and all the other
M^rcat-Crosses of the Head Burghs of the Shires of this Kingdom, and there, by
open Proclamation, in Our Royal Name and Authority, make Publication of Our
Pleasure in the Premises. And We further hereby Recommend to the Right Reverend
Our Archbishops, and Bishops, that they cause this Our Royal Proclamation be
read from the Pulpits, by the Ministers of the several Paroches in their
Diocesses respective, upon the first Lords Day after the same shall be
delivered to them. Requiring hereby all Our Sheriffs to cause Publish and
Deliver this Our Proclamation in manner abovesaid, immediately after the same
comes to their hands, as they will answer the contrary at their highest Peril.

Given under Our Signet, at Edinburgh, the twenty fourth day of June, 1685. And
of Our Reign the first Year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. COL.
MACKENZIE, Cls. Sti. Concilij.

GOD save the KING.

