Additional Instructions for the Militia:
Edinburgh, the eight day of July, 1680.
I. THE Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council considering, that by the first
Article of the late Instructions; the Heretors and Liferenters are ordered to
Stent the number of Horse and Foot in the usual way: Do declare, that albeit
according to the Act of Parliament, the Heretors and Liferenters be liable
thereto, yet they are to have their relief from the Tenants, whose proper
Burden it is to furnish the Bodies of the Footmen and their Arms, and Pay,
during the days of the Rendezvous; and the Heretors may accordingly force any
of their Tenants or Servants who are fittest: the rest of the Tenants
contributing for their several Proportions, in the way formerly accustomed,
either by Paroches, or otherwise, according as has been used in the respective
Shires.

II. As to the third and fourth Articles of the said Instructions, whereby it
is appointed, that no Soldier, Horse or Foot, be changed for another, and that
no Horse once received and listed, be changed without consent of the
Leiutenant; It is ordered that no such change be made without express consent
of the Leiutenant, and two Commissioners of the Militia.

III. As to the sixth Article of the Instructions, where it is appointed, that
Rendezvous be kept eight days every two Months, for the space of ten Months:
It is ordained, that the first Rendezvous shall meet for this year, as is
formerly appointed, viz* upon the 13, and 24. of August respective, and to
continue together for eight days, and the next Rendezvous to begin the first
Wednesday of October, and to continue together sixteen days; And for the
subsequent Years, it is appointed that the first Rendezvous shall begin the
first Wednesday of June, and to continue for sixteen days, and the next
Rendezvous to be upon the first Wednesday of October, and to continue then
likewise for sixteen days, and so forth to continue yearly thereafter; which
two Rendezvouzes compleats the 32. days, payable by the Country.

IV. As to the ninth Article, It is appointed, that the Militia Horse be worth
ten Pound Sterling, conform to the Act of Parliament, and be fifty eight
Inches high, At least, that the Horse be of sufficient size, fit for Service.

V. It is hereby declared, that these that are liable in the Fraction, shall
pay to the Leaders of Horse, and Outreikers of Foot, their proportional parts
of what is due for the Pay both of Horse and Foot, during the whole time they
stay at the Rendezvouses.

VI. Whereas, since the Act of Parliament in the Year 1663, Establishing the
Militia, by which there are 800. Foot, and 88. Horse, appointed for the Shire
of Dumfreis; There is an late Act of Parliament disjoyning the Militia of the
five Kirks of Eskdale from the said Shire, and uniting the same to the Militia
of Roxburgh, whose proportion of the great Militia is one hundredth Foo^ and ten
Horse: The Lords of Council ordains the Proportion of the new Modeled Militia
of these two Shires to be regular accordingly. Extracted by me

WILL. PATERSON, Cl. Sti. Concilij.


