A LETTER SENT FROM THE LEAGVER BEFORE HULL.
SIR,
I Put this Letter to the hazard of a quick passage, leaving it to take its
fortune at the Post House. The News most spoken of at this time, is, That Sir
John Hotham by his vigilancie has obtained four great piece of Ord^ance from
the Cavelliers, and taken the Lord Faulconbridge, a Peer of the Lords House,
and Mr. Bellassis, a Member of the House of Commons, prisoners at the same
time; both which persons have been most active in this their native County, by
their example to draw on all the rest of the Gentry to engage themselves
against the Parliament, and the proceedings thereof; finding both horse and men
in this service against Hull. They were going over Humber in a Catch with these
four pieces of Ordnance, in hope to have landed them in Linconshire side, and
to have planted them there opposite to the Battery at Paul: there were certain
great sadle horses in the same Catch, and diverse other gentlemen, young Mr.
Hotham, as I hear, made out of Hull in a small frigot, with four small Pieces,
and fifty Musketeers, and boarded them in their passage; If the Town hold out
well till Friday next, the Spring-tyde will make the Besiegers leave their
Trenches: Its pity if they have no fresh supplies of men and provision sent
unto them, whereof as yet we hear not, but are confident the Parliament will
not be slow in their relief, it concerns them. We are troubled at the great
resort of Papists hither, we the more distaste the proceedings, because of
their forwardness to interest themselves: theirs, and the entertainment of
Commanders out of Ireland, some Popish from beyond Sea, especially of the Lord
Dillon, and Colonel Taffote (Rebels come from Ireland, who are all active
against Hull) much reflects upon his Majesty's often expressions, cools our
affections, and fills us with doubtings. One Thornton (a Protestant of the last
edition) expelled Hull by Sir John Hotham, is now made Captain of a Troop: last
day he with his Soldiers rode to Anlaby (a little way off Hull) there plundered
and pillaged Lieutenant Colonel Legards house; whereof Legard hearing,
plunders Thorntons house at Hull: whereupon Thornton drives Legards grounds of
all his oxen, horses, kine, sheep, etc. Then Captain Jefford with sixty
Musketeers, makes after Thornton and his prize, Thornton perceiving this, fled,
and left his booty: and because his Troops would not loose his company, they
rode after him: Jefford prayed him, if he were a gentleman, that the Soldiers
on both sides might be dismissed, and they two end the quarrel. But Thornton
refused, declaring it was a vain proposition. You shall hear further as
opportunity serves. Farewill.

From the Leguer before HULL, July 13. 1641. Yours, T. S.

London: Printed by T. P. and M. S. in Goldsmiths-Alley.


