A PROCLAMATION For Discovering who Robbed the Packquit.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith; To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council,
Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally,
specially constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as, albeit by the Third Act of the
Third Session of Our current Parliament, the Robbing or Seizing the common
Post, Male, or Packquit, or any other Express to, or from this Kingdom to the
Kingdom of England, or the Kingdom of Ireland, is Declared to be a notorious
kind of Robbery, and shall be punished with Death, and Confiscation of
Movables; Yet nevertheless, some Persons of Pernicious and Disloyal
Principles, in manifest Contempt of the said Act of Parliament, have of late
made it their Business, to Robb, and take away the said ordinary Packquit, and
particularly upon Saturday last, the thirteenth Instant, a person mounted on
Horseback, with a Sword about him, and another Person on Foot, with a Pistol
in his hand, did Invade, and fall upon the Post-boy upon the Highway from
Haddingtoun to Edinburgh, near that place thereof called Jocks-Lodge, about Ten
hours of the Night, and violently Robbed and Carried away from the said
Post-boy, the Packquit or common Male from England to this Kingdom, with the
Horse whereon the Boy rode, being a Sorrel-Naig, and thereby did their outmost
Endeavors to Intercept Our Royal Commands to Our Privy Council of this
Kingdom, and to hinder that Communication which is absolutely requisite for the
right Administration of Our Government, and the support of Trade and Commerse
amongst Our good Subjects; And We being earnestly desirous, that the persons
guilty of such horrid Villainy and Crimes, as well as any accessory thereto,
should be discovered and apprehended. Therefore, for the more effectual
Discovery and Apprehending of the said Persons guilty of, or accessory to the
Seizing upon, or Robbing of the said Male or Packquit upon Saturday last; We
with Advice of Our Privy Council, Assure, and Declare, that (by and attour the
refounding what Charges and Expenses shall be laid out by any of Our Leidges,
or what Damage shall be sustained by them, in Discovering and Apprehending the
said Criminals) there shall be duly paid to them by the Lor^s of Our
Theasury, the Sum of Fifty Pounds Sterling, as a Reward for their Discovery,
and the Sum of an hundred Pounds Money foresaid, to any who shall Take and
Apprehend the Persons guilty of the Crime abovementioned, or any of them, and
deliver them Prisoners to the next Sheriff, or Magistrate of Burgh-royal; And
for the more effectual Discovery of the said Crime, We with Advice foresaid,
not only Pardon, Indemnifie, and Remit the said Crime of Seizing and Robbing
the Packquit to any one of the Persons concerned therein, or accessory and
privy thereto, who shall come in, and make the first Discovery thereof, to any
of Our Privy Council, betwixt and the Twenty second day of August current; but
also assure to them, or any of them the said Reward of Fifty Pounds Sterling;
And further, We with Advice foresaid, Declare these presents shall be a
sufficient Pardon and Indemnity to all and every one of Our good Subjects, for
all Slaughter, Wounds, or Mutilation that shall be done or committed by them
upon any of the said Criminals, and their Associats, in the taking and
apprehending of them, and bringing them to condign Punishment. OUR WILL IS
HEREFORE and We charge you Strictly, and Command, that incontinent these Our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-crosses of Edinburgh, Haddingtoun and
Linlithgow, and there in Our Name and Authority, make Publication hereof, by
open Proclamation, that none pretend Ignorance. And Ordains these presents to
be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Fifteenth day of August, and of Our
Reign the fourth Year, 1692. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. In
Supplementum Signeti. DA. MONCREIFF, Cls. Sti. Concilii.
GOD Save King William and Queen Mary.

