A PROCLAMATION For Restoring the CHURCH of SCOTLAND to Its ANCIENT Government
By BISHOPS: At Edinburgh the sixth day of September, One thousand six hundred
and sixty one years.
C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



THe Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, having considered His Majesty's
Letter of the date at Whitehall the fourteen^h day of August last, bearing,
that whereas His Majesty, by His Letter to the Presb^tery of Edinbu^gh, in the
month of August, One thousand six hundred and sixty years, Declared His Ro^al
purpose, to mainta^n the Government of the Church of Scotland settled by Law:
And the Estates of Parliam^nt of this Kingdom, having since that time, not
only rescinded all the Acts since the Troubles began, rela^ing to that
Government, bu^ also Declared all those Parliaments null and void, leaving to
His Majesty, the Settling of Church Government: Therefore, in compliance with
that Act Rescissory, and in pu^suance of His Majesty's Proclamation of the
tenth of June last, and in contemplation of the Inconveniences that
accompanied and issued from the Church Government, as it has been exercised
these twenty three years past, and of the unsuteableness thereof to His
Majesty's Monarchical Estate, and of the sadly experienced confusions, which
during these late Troubles have been caused by the violences done to His
Majesty's Royal Prerogative, and to the Government Civil and Ecclesiastical,
established by unquestionable Authority: His Majesty having respect to the
Glory of GOD, and the good and interest of the Protestant Religion; and being
zealous of the Order, Unity, Peace and Stability of the Church within this
Kingdom, and of its better harmony with the Government of the Churches of
England and Ireland; has been pleased, after mature deliberation, to Declare
unto His Council, His firm resolution to interpose His Royal Authority, for
restoring of this Church to its right Government by Bishops, as it was by Law
before the late Troubles, during the Reigns of His Majesty's Royal Father and
Grandfather of blessed memory, and as it now stands settled by Law; and that
the Rents belonging to the several Bishoprics and Deanries, be restored and
made useful to the Church, according to Justice and the standing Law; Have
therefore in obedience of, and conform to, His Majesty's Royal pleasure
aforesaid, Ordained, and by these presents Ordains the Lion King at Arms, and
his brethren Heralds, Pursevants and Messengers of Arms, to pass to the Market
Cross of Edinburgh and other Royal Buroughs of the Kingdom, and there by open
Proclamation, to make publication of this His Majesty's Royal pleasure, for
restoring the Church of this Kingdom to its right Government by Bishops; and in
His Majesty's Name, to require all His good Subjects to compose themselves to a
cheerful acquiescence and obedience to the same, and to His Majesty's Sovereign
Authority now exercised within this Kingdom. And that none of them presume upon
any pretense whatsomever, by Discoursing, Preaching, Reviling, or any irregular
and unlawful way, the endeavoring to alienate the affections of His Majesty's
good Subjects, or dispose them to an evil opinion of His Majesty or His
Government, or to the disturbance of the peace of the Kingdom, and to inhibit
and discharge the assembling of Ministers in their several Synodical Meetings,
until His Majesty's further pleasure therein be known; Commanding hereby, all
Sheriffs, Baylies of Bayleries, Stewarts of Stewartries and their Deputes; all
Justices of Peace, and Magistrates and Council of Buroughs, and all other
public Ministers, to be careful within their several bounds and jurisdictions,
to see this Act punctually obeyed: And if they shall find any person or
persons, upon any pretexts whatsomever, by Discoursing, Preaching Reviling, or
otherways as aforesaid, failzying in their due obedience hereunto, or doing any
thing in the contrary thereof, that they forthwith commit them to prison, till
His Majesty's Privy Council, after information of the offense, give further
order therein. And hereof the Sheriffs, and others aforementioned, are to have
a special care, as they will answer upon their Duty and Alleagiance to His
Majesty. And further, the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council do hereby
inhibit and discharge all persons liable in payment of any of the Rents
formerly belonging to the Bishoprics and Deanries, from paying of the Rents of
this present year, one thousand six hundred and sixty one years, or in time
coming, or any part thereof, to any person whatsomever, until they receive new
order thereanent from His Majesty or His Council. And Ordains these presents to
be printed and published as said is, that none may pretend ignorance of the
same. Extract. per me

Pet. Wedderburne, Cl. S^. Concilii.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

