LETTERS of PUBLICATION, IN FAVORS OF THOMAS WEIR Chyrurgeon in EDINBURGH.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith;
To Our Lovits, Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, cunjunctly and severally constitute, and to all and
sundry Our Lieges and Subjects whom it effeirs, Greeting:
Forasmuch as, Anent the Petition given in to the Lords of Our Privy Council by
Thomas Weir Surgeon in Edinburgh, Representing, that where the secret of
Preparing and Compounding the Medicinal Pil, Called Doctor Andersons Pil, being
Communicate by the said Doctor to Katharine Anderson his Daughter, and by her to
the said Thomas Weir, and to no other person, as appeared by her Assignation
and Declaration, dated the fifteenth Day of December One Thousand six hundred
and eighty six, the said Thomas Weir thereupon procured in anno One Thousand
six hundred and eighty seven, a Gift under Our Great Seal, giving to him the
sole Power, Right and Privilege to Prepare, Compose, Dispense and Vend the
said Pil, and to use the Printed Papers, Stamp and Seal formerly used by the
said Doctor Anderson and his Daughter: And Discharging all others from
Composing, Dispensing, and Vending the said Pil, or using the said printed
Papers, Stamp and Seal, under the penalty of a Thousand Merks toties quoties,
as the said Gift, with an Act of the Lords of Our Privy Council, and Letters of
Publication raised thereupon, in favors of the Petitioner therewith produced
testified. Nevertheless Thomas Steil Merchant in Edinburgh, having upon
mis-representation Impetrat an Act of Privy Council, dated the twenty sixth of
July, One Thousand six hundred and eighty eight, contraveening the foresaid
Gift, Act, and Letters above mentioned, in favors of the said Thomas Weir, and
presumed to Counterfit the said Pil, printed Paper, Stamp and Seal: As also, to
print and disperse several false and calumnious Papers and Placads in London
and else where, in prejudice not only of the said Thomas Weir who had the true
Secret and legal Right in manner abovementioned: But also Our Leiges abused by
the said Counterfits, whereupon the Petitioner having lately raised and execute
Letters of Complaint against the said Thomas Steil, for his so Contraveening,
Forging and slandering, he being conscious of his own Guilt, did not compear,
but suffered Certification to pass against him; upon which he stands Denunced
and Registrat at Our Horn; and yet notwithstanding he and others, for and with
him, do still upon pretense of the foresaid Act of Privy Council by him,
impetrat, as said is, persist in Counterveening the Petitioners Gift, in
Counterfitting and Vending the said Pil, to the prejudice of Their Majesty's
Leiges, so that necessary it is, that besides the foresaid Certification, the
Petitioner should have an Act of Our said Lords in his favor, Re calling,
Rescinding, and Discharging the Act of Privy Council, impetrat by the said
Thomas Steil, as said is since that he refused to (nor could in Law) abide by
and maintain the same: As also, to certiorat all Our Leiges of the Premises.
And therefore Supplicating to the effect aftermentioned, as the said Petition
in it self more fully proports. The said Lords of Our Privy Council having
Considered the foresaid Petition, with the Gift under the Great Seal and other
Writs produced therewith, and mentioned therein; They by their Act and Sentence
of the day and date hereof, Have Recalled and Rescinded, and hereby Recals and
Rescinds the above Act of Privy Council, formerly made in favors of the said
Thomas Steil, and have Declared, and hereby Declares, That neither he nor any
others are to use the printed Papers, Stamp and Seal above-specified, in
prejudice of the above Thomas Weir Petitioner, under the Penalty contained in
his foresaid Gift; And have Declared, and hereby Declares that the said Thomas
Weir has the Good and only Right to use the same, and to take notice of all
Counterfits, and to cause conveen them before the Privy Council, or any
inferior Judicatory competent, all the users and practisers thereof, that they
may be punished. And have ordained, and hereby Ordains, the said Act, with the
Petitioners Gift under the Great Seal, to be Printed and Published: Of the
which Gift the Tenor follows, Sic suprascribitur JAMES R. OUR SOVEREIGN LORD
Considering that the Medicinal Pil, invented by the Deceast Doctor Patrick
Anderson, Physician to his Majesty's dearest Father King Charles the First of
ever blessed Memory, has by experience been found to be a most useful and safe
Medicine, which has recommended that Pil, not only to His Majesty's Subjects
in the Kingdom of Scotland, but likeways it has been used in the Kingdoms of
England, Ireland, and other places in Europe; and that it is very much the
interest of his Subjects and others, that the Skill and Art of Prep^ring and
Compounding that Pil be preserved entire, and the Counterfit, sofisticat and
adulterat Pills, be not imposed upon any person, under the notion of this Pil,
which is so uni^sally known and used; And his Majesty Considering, That the
Secret and Skill of preparing this Pil, was only Communicated by Doctor
Anderson to his two Daughters, with power only to the surviver of them to
Communicate and Transmit that Secret to some fit and qualified Person, and that
the Deceast Katharine Anderson, the said Doctors surviving Daughter has
Communicate to Thomas Weir Chyrurgion in Edinburgh, the whole secret and skill
in Preparing and Compounding the foresaid Pil, and has sufficiently instructed
and seen him prepare and Compound and make up that Pil, as well as ever it was
done by Doctor Anderson or his Daughters aforesaid; And that the said deceast
Katharine ^nderson has by her Assignation, Dated the Fifteenth Day of December
One Thousand six hundred and eighty six years, Assigned and Disponed to the
said Thomas Weir her Stamp, for the Directions, and seal for the Boxes, with
all other Vessels, Materials, and other Instruments for Compounding, Preparing
and Making up the said Pills; and that the said Deceast Katharine Anderson does
thereby Declare that she has Communicated and Transmitted the Secret of
Preparing and Compounding the said Pil to the said Thomas Weir, and no other
person: And considering that there is none else to whom the Secret is
Communicated, or Art of Preparing and Compounding the said Pil is committed:
And that notwithstanding thereof there are several persons who have already,
and are of int^ion to senzie and counterfit the said Pil, and to disperse the
same with printed Papers and otherwise, under the name of the said Pil,
commonly called Doctor Andersons Pills; albeit the Secret of Preparing and
Compounding thereof was never Communicate to them, nor to any other person now
on life, except the said Thomas Weir, which (if not prevented) might prove very
dangerous and prejudicial to His Majesty's Leiges and others, through it(...)
of any Counterfit. Sofisticat and Adulterat Pills, and would much Discourage the
said Thomas Weir, who has only the Secret of Preparing and Compounding
thereof, to him Communicated by the said Katharine Anderson, who Assigned and
Disponed to him the said Stamp and Seal, with all other Vessels and Instruments
for Compounding and ^ing of the said Pil in manner foresaid: Therefore His
Majesty Ordains a Letter of Gift to be past and expede under His Majesty's
Great Seal of His (...) Kingdom of Scotland Giving, Granting and Disponing, as
His Majesty for Himself and His Royal Successors, Gives, Grants and Dispones
to, and in favors of the said Thomas Weir (...) Power. Right and Privilege to
Prepare, Compose, Dispense and Vend the foresaid Pil, called Doctor Andersons
Pil, with power to him to use the (...) the said Katharine Anderson, for
attesting and marking the printed Papers, and Boxes belonging to the said
Pills, for all the Days and Years of the said Thomas Weir his (...) And His
Majesty Does hereby Discharge all other person or persons whatsomever, during
the said space, directly or i^directly, to prepare, Compound, Make us, (...)
Vend any (...), under the name of the said Pil, invented by the said Deceast
Doctor Anderson, or Papers relating thereto, without the special License of the
said Thomas Weir, under the penalty of One Thousand Merks Scots Money for each
Contravention. And His Majesty does hereby Recommend to His Privy Council, and
other Judicators of the said Kingdom or Scotland, to see his Pleasure
concerning the Premises rendered effectual, and the Contraveeners Fined or
Punished to the (...), providing always that the said Thomas Weir shall be
bound and obliged, not only to continue the faithful and true Preparing,
Composing, Making up, and Dispensing of the said Pills, as was formerly done by
the said Deceast Doctor Anderson and his Daughters; But likewise to Communicate
the Secret thereof, and instruct any qualified person he shall think fit to
prepare, Compose and make up the said Pil (that the Invention be not lost) who
shall have no benefit, privilege, or liberty to Compose or (...) Pil, during
the full time and space above-written: And His Majesty Ordains the said Gift to
be further extended with all Clauses needful, and to pass the Great (...) per
saltum, without passing any other Seals or Registers in order thereunto, these
presents shall be to the Director of His Majesty's Chancellory for writing
(...) to the Lord High Chancellor for causing the Great Seal to be Appended
thereto, a sufficient Warran^. Given at Our Court at Whitehall the nineteenth
(...) Thousand six hundred and eighty seven, and of His Majesty's Reign the
third year. By His Majesty's Command, Sic Subscribitur, MELFORT. As the said
Act Ordaining the Our Letters of ^cation to be Direct thereupon, under the
Signet of Council in manner, and to the Effect above and underwritten more
(...) OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh
and whole (...) Market Crosses of the Head Burghs of the Shires of this
Kingdom, and other places needful, and there, in Our Name and Authority, by
open (...) make publication of the (...) Act of Privy Council, and of the said
^ut past under Our Great Seal, in favors of the said Thomas Weir, that all Our
Leiges may have notice thereof, and give obedience (...) under the pains and
Certifications therein-mentioned, and being further answerable as Our Privy
Council shall think fit, in case they contraveen: According to Justice, as ye
will answer to us thereupon. The which to do, We commit to you conjunctly and
severally, Our full Power, by these Our Letters, Delivering them by your duty
(...) and indorsed again to the bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the nineteenth Day of July, One thousand
six hundred and (...) Per actum Dominorum S(...) GILB. ELIOT, (...),

GOD Save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
their most Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1694.

Ad^rtisement, to all w(...) without which, they are none of (...)


