A PROCLAMATION, For Calling out Heretors and Fencible Men, to attend the
KING'S Host.
WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith;
To Our Lion King at Arms, his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy Council,
Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and
severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as, We, with Advice of Our Privy Council, have thought fit, for
putting the Country in a posture of Defense, against an Invasion of French and
Irish Papists, threatened to this Our Ancient Kingdom, whereby it may become the
Seat of a Bloody War, to appoint all the Fencible Persons betwixt sixty and
sixteen, in the Shires underwritten, being nearest to the places where the
said Invasion is apprehended to be designed, to be in readiness when
advertised, with their best Horses, Arms and Provisions, to attend Our Host,
for Resisting the said horrid Invasion, and have named several Officers to
Command the Heretors and Fencible Men, who are not Heretors; And by Letters
direct from Our Privy Council for that effect, have empowered the the said
Officers named, with consent of the Commissioners, to name the other Inferior
Officers not already Nominat by Our Privy Council, in the said several
Letters, and to Intimat a place of Rendezvous for the said Heretors to
Rendezvous at, when advertised, and particular places within each Paroch for
Fencible Men, who are not Heretors, to Assemble and Rendezvous at, when
required; And it being convenient, the said Heretors, and other Fencible Men,
should be Rendezvouzed and Mustered by their Officers at the said places, at
some fit day before it be necessary to Call them out to Action, to the end
their Number, Arms, and other Provisions requisite, may be the better known;
Therefore We, with Advice of Our Privy Council, peremptorly Require and
Command, all Heretors, Wodsetters and Liferenters, betwixt sixty and sixteen,
who are Fencible Men, within the Shires and Stewartrie following, with their
best Horses and Arms, to Rendezvous, under the Command of the Officers who are,
or shall be appointed, and that upon the Days and at the Places respective
aftermentioned, viz. The Heretors of the Shire of Edinburgh, at the Links of
Leith, the thirty first Day of May; The Heretors of the Shire of Haddingtoun,
at Beenstoun Muir, the said Day; The Heretors of the Shire of Berwick, at
Fogo-Muir, the said Day; The Heretors of the Shire of Roxburgh, on the Muir
upon the South Side of Ancrum-Bridge, the said Day; The Heretors of the Shire
of Selkirk, at Selkirk, the said Day; The Heretors of the Shire of Peebles, at
Peebles, the said Day; The Heretors of the Shires of Strivling and Clackmannan,
at Strivling, the said Day; The Shires of Fife and Kinross, at Edensmuir, the
said Day; The Heretors of the Shire of Linlithgow at Linlithgow-Bridge, the
said Day; The Heretors of the Shire of Lanerk, at Hamiltoun, the said thirty
first Day; The Heretors of the Shire of Air, at Air, the said Day; The Heretors
of the Shire of Argile, at Inveraray the said Day; The Heretors of the Shire of
Dumbartoun, at Dumbartoun the said Day; The Heretors of the Shire of Renfrew,
at Renfrew-Muir, the said Day; The Heretors of the Shire of Dumfreis, at
Dumfries, the said Day; The Heretors of the Shire of Wigtoun and Stewartry of
Kirkoudbright, at Glenluce, the said Day; all at ten Hours in the forenoon. And
sicklike We, with Advice foresaid, peremptorly Require and Command, all the
Fencible Persons within the said Shires and Stewartrie, not being Heretors, to
Rendezvous under their several Captains, at the Chief Town or Paroch Kirk
within each Captains bounds, upon the nineteenth Day of May instant, with their
best Arms; And We hereby ordain the Commanders of the said Heretors, and
Captains of the said Fencible Men, who are not Heretors, to make Lists of the
persons who shall appear at the said several Rendezvouzes, an^ the said
Commanders of the Heretors to make Report to Our Council, of the condition of
the Horse and Arms of such H^retors as do appear, with all possible D^ligence,
and at furthest within eight Days thereafter, together with a List of such
Heretors as appear not at the said Rendezvouzes, from the Clerks to the
Commissioners of Supply, out of the Books and Rolls of Assessment, for the
said respective Shires and Stewartrie, which the Clerks are hereby Ordained to
give them gratis, and that they take Trial what Arms the said absents have, or
Horses above the value of an hundred Merks Scots: And We Ordain the said
Captains of the Fencible Men, who are not Heretors, betwixt and the Day
foresaid, to make Report to Our Privy Council, of the number of Persons, and
their Names who shall appear at their several Rendezvouzes, and the nearest
estimat they can make what greater number might have been expected, if all the
Fencible men, not Heretors, had attended the said Rendezvo^zes, and of the
condition of their Arms, and whether they have any other or better Arms. And We
Considering, that by the 28 Act of the 2d Session of Our current Parliament,
Our Privy Council is Authorized to put the Oath of Allegiance, and the
Assurance subjoined to the said Act, to every Subject of this Realm, as they
shall see cause; Declaring such as shall refuse to Subscribe the same, shall be
repute D^saffected to Our Government, and be deprived of any Offices, Benefices
and Jurisdictions which they enjoy, and shall be obliged to give such Security
for their good behavior, and that they shall Act nothing against Our
Government, as Our Council shall think fit, providing it extend no further than
Bond, Caution, or personal Imprisonment, securing of Horses, and Arms, or
Garrisoning of Houses; And seeing there can be no greater occasion to call for
such Security and Assurance to Us. and Our Government, from Our several
Subjects, and particularly the persons entrusted by Us, with the Command of the
Heretors or Fencible Men; And the said Heretors and Fencible Men themselves,
within the several Shires and Stewartrie abovenamed, than the present
threatened Invasion, and the securing the Peace and Quiet of the Country, at
such a time, from all Treasonable Mischiefs, which may be Intented or Designed
by persons Disaffected to Us and Our Government: Therefore We, with Advice of
Our Privy Council, Appoint and Require, all the Officers already Named by Our
Privy Council, to Command the said Heretors and Fenc^ble Men, betwix and the
seventeenth Day of May current, to Swear and Subscribe the Oath of Allegiance
and Sign the Assurance, in presence of the Commissioners of Supply of the said
res^e^ive Shires, or any two of them, or to Instruct before them, that they
have already Sworn, and Signed the same, which is to be Reported by the
Commissioners to Our Privy Council, with a List of the Inferior Officers to be
Named, with Consent of Our said Commissioners, within eight Days after at
furthest: And albeit We, Have Resol^e^ to put no distinguishing Character upon
any of Our Subjects, without evident Grounds of Suspicion, that they will
comply with this abominable Design of Invasion, whereby Religion, Liberty and
Property may be betrayed into the hands of the most Bigot, Barbarous and Cruel
Papists: Therefore, and for the Discov^ry of the said Disaffected Persons, We
with Advice foresaid, hereby Require and Command the whole Heretors,
VVodsetters and Liserenters, who are Fencible Men, within the said several
Shires and Stewartry, to attend upon and meet with the Justices of Peace within
the same, or any two of them, upon one or other of the Days, and at the Dyets
underwritten, or to such particular Day and Diet as the said Justices of
Peace shall Require any of them who does not attend the Dyets of the first
Week after-mentioned: And sickhke, That the said Justices of Peace do meet
and attend at the Head-Burgh of the Respective Shires and Stewartry, from ten
to twelve in the Forenoon, and from two to four in the a^ternoon, with the
Clerk of Supply to serve them for the time, each Wednesday and Thursday of
every Week, until the Rendezvous of the said Heretors, at the Days above set
down, to propose to all the Heretors, Wodsetters and Liferenters, who are
Fencible Men within their several Jurisdictions, the Engagement unde-written
(whereof the Tenor is hereto subjoyned) and to make return of the
Subscriptions, of such as do wi^lingly Subscribe the same, to Our Privy
Council, with all possible Diligence, after the said Day, that it may be known
of whom the said Oath of Allegiance and Bond of Assurance should be required,
conform to, and under the Certifications in the foresaid Act of Parliament: And
We, with Advice foresaid, Require and Command the said Justices of Peace to
Tender and Administrat the Oath of Allegiance and Assurance, to all such of the
said Heretors, Wodsetters and Liferenters within their Respective Bounds, as
shall not voluntarly Subscribe the said Engagement: And in like manner, We
with Advice foresaid, peremptorly Command and Charge, under the pain of
Rebellion, and being put to Our Horn, and to be further pursued and punished,
as per^^^ disaffected to Our Government, all the Fencible Heretors, Liferenters
and Wodsetters, betwixt sixty and sixteen, who shall not appear before the
Justices of Peace at the Dyets foresaid, or appearing, shall not Subscribe the
said Engagement, and each one of them to deliver upon Oath their Horses above
the price of an Hundred Merks, with their Furniture and Arms into the hands of
the Justices of Peace of the said several Shires and Stewartry to be Secured
by them, for the public Service. And the said Justices of Peace are hereby
Authorized and Required, to give and put the said Horses with their Furniture,
in the custody and keeping of Stablers, Hostlers, or In keepers, or in the
custody of other persons who shall undertake to keep and be answerable for
themat the ordinary Rates to be paid by their Owners, and shall restore the
same again with the Furniture and Arms to the proper Owners thereof, when the
present Danger is Declared by Proclamation to be over; and that in the mean
time the said Horses shall be employed for no other use but for public
Service, in case of an Invasion, or Insurrection. And We, with Advice fores^id,
Declare, That what Damnage or Detriment shall befall the said Horses, Furniture
and Arms, through the fault of the said Keepers, or their Ryders, to whom they
shall be committed, shall be satisfied and paid to the respective Owners; With
Power nevertheless to the said Stablers, Hostlers, or others Keepers of the
said Horses, to pursue and call for the price of what Entertainment they shall
have advanced for the said Horses, from their respective Owners, at the
ordinar Rates, when, and in what manner soever they think fit and convenient;
And because it may contribute much to Our Service in the Premises, that there
be Justices of Peace appointed in the said Shires where they are wanting;
Therefore We, with Advice foresaid, conform to the Act of Parliament made
thereanent, Declare, Appoint and Authorize the Commissioners of Supply, of the
respective Shires foresaids, who have or shall qualify themselves according to
Law, to be Justices of Peace in the said Shires, with power to them to do and
perform every thing, which to the said Office and Trust is competent, and known
to belong and pertain, by the several Laws and Acts of Parliament made
thereanent, and Instructions ^herein set down. OUR WILL IS Herefore, and We
Charge you straightly and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye
pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and to the remanent Mercat-Crosses of
the whole Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartry abovenamed, and
there in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make publication of the
Premises, that none pretend Ignorance. And Ordains these Presents to be
Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the ninth day of May. And of Our Reign,
the fourth year, 1692. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. In Supplimentum
Signeti. GILB, ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save King William and Queen Mary.
Follows the Tenor of the Engagement.
WE (...) Bind and Oblige us upon our Honor, and the Faith of a Christian,
that we shall live peaceably under the Government of their Majesty's, King
William and Queen Mary, King and Queen of this Realm, and shall Act, Consult,
or Contrive nothing in prejudice thereof, nor concur with, nor Assist any
Invasion or Insurrection in Britain, by Counsel, Contribution of Money, Horses,
Arms, Ammunition, or any other Warlike Force, and shall not Converse with,
Entertain, Harbor, Reset, or Conceal any of the said Invaders, or their
Partakers, Associats, or Accomplices, whatever they shall profess or pretend to
be their Cause or Design, by the presence or Command of the late King James, or
any other ways.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1692.


