WR

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT

royal blazon or coat of arms
PROCLAMATION Anent Petitoning.
WILLIAM By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To Macers of Our Privy Council Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that Part Conjunctly and Severally Specially Constitute Greeting;
Forasmuch, as We, by Our Letter, under Our Royal hand, dated at Kensingteun,
the twelfth of December instant, have signified to the Lords of Our Privy
Council, That whereas We are Informed, that notwithstanding of Our Answer to
the late Petition of the Council General of the Company of that Our Kingdom,
Trading to Africa and the Indies, which We think ought to have given entire
Satisfaction to all Our Good Subjects; Yet there is on foot a Design of
Addressing Us of New, on the same heads, carried on after such a Manner, and
with so little respect to Our Government, as gives Us too just Grounds to
apprehend the Consequences, that We have never hitherto denied Our Subjects
their just Privileges, nor will We ever discourage the Liberty of Petitioning,
when the same is done in ane Orderly and Dutiful manner, But that having fully
declared Our Mind, as to the Subject of the last Address, We cannot but take
particular Notice of that unusual Method that is taken to procure Subscriptions
to ane new one, And that some Persons, who signalize themselves in carrying on
the same, have given no Evidence of their good affection to Our Government. And
make it their Endeavor to lodge the late misfortune of the Company, on
Proclamations emitted in the West Indies, tho they cannot but be sensible, that
the same did proceed from other Causes. And being convinced, that such
Practices may tend to Alienat from Us the Hearts of Our good Subjects, and that
it is necessar, for the Support of Our Government, and preserving the public
Peace of the Nation, that they be discouraged and prevented, We did therefore
Recomend to the said Lords of Our Privy Council, to signify and make known
Our Displeasure, and Dis-satisfaction with such proceedings, and to take the
most effectual Methods consistent with Law, for discouraging the same: And for
preventing these that are well inclined to Our Government, from Joining with
them, Wherefore, We, with advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, have
thought fit, that public Intimation be made in manner underwritten, of Our
Displeasure, and Dis-satisfation with the foresaid Proceedings, And that We
will take the most effectual Methods consistent with Law, for Discouraging the
same, and for preventing these that are well inclined to Our Government from
Joining with them, OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, And We Charge you strictly, and
Command, that Incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross
of Edinburgh, and Remanent Market Crosses of the whole Head Burghs, of the
several Shires, and Stewartries within this Kingdom, and thereat in Our Name
and Authority, by open Proclamation make Intimation of the Premises, that none
pretent Ignorance. And Ordains Our Solicitor to transmitt Coppies to the
Sheriffs, Stewarts and their Clerks for that effect. And Ordains these presents
to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the Eighteen day of December, and of Our
Reign the Eleventh Year 1699. Ex deliberation Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB.
ELIOT. Cls. Sti. Concilii.
God save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1699.


