A PROCLAMATION Anent Recruits, Levies, Deserters and Passes.
WILLIAM by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, To Macers of Our Priv^ Council, Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute;
Greeting. Forasmuch as, It is requisite and necessary, That during this present
War, which so much concerns the Defense and Security of the Protestant
Religion, and of Our Kingdoms, Rules and Orders be set down for Recruits,
Levies and Deserters, whereby frequent Disorders and Oppressions may be
prevented, and unfit men may not be Engaged, and none may be Troubled upon the
head of Desertion, but such as are truly Deserters: Therefore, We with Advice
of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Conform to the Thirty third Act Fifth
Session of this Our Current Parliament, Entitled Act for the Levies: Do Hereby
Appoint and Ordain, that no Officer, either at Home or from Abroad, offer to
Take on, or Press any Free Leidge to be a Soldier, unless the Man be Taken on
by Agreement, owned by him in presence of the Judge of the Bounds. And if any
Officer shall Contraveen this Order, and Press or Compel any Man contrair to
the Rule hereby Established, that it shall be reckoned Oppression, and the
Transgressor punished by the Fine of a Months Pay, and further by Imprisonment,
or Breaking and Casheering, as the said Lords of Our Privy Council shall think
sit. And further, We with Advice foresaid, Do strictly Prohibit and Discharge
all Our Officers which have come for Recruits from Flanders, to Seize upon any
persons as Deserters, but such as have Deserted from Our Scots Regiments in
Flanders since they were there, and none others: And allows the Officers of Our
Forces in this Our ancient Kingdom, to Seize upon none upon the head of
Desertion, but such as have Deserted from one or other of the said Regiments,
of which they are at present Officers: And Discharge any person to be Seized
upon, on pretense of Desertion before our Accession to the Crown. And for
preventing any Mistake anent Passes, given to such as have been Soldiers: We
with Advice foresaid, Do herby Appoint and Ordain, That no Pass be sustained
for any Soldier from Our Forces in Flanders, or out of this Kingdom, unless
the same be Subscribed at least by the Colonel of the Regiment, to which he
belonged. And that no Pass be sustained for any of the Soldiers of the
standing Regiments of this Kingdom, unless the same be Subscribed by the
Colonel of the Regiment, or by one of the Field-Officers, Commander of the
Regiment for the time, to which he belonged; and Declares, that the Passes
Signed in manner foresaid, shall free the persons in whose favors they are
granted. And further, We with Advice foresaid, Do hereby Ratify and Revive, all
former Acts and Proclamations, made anent Recruits, Levies, or Deserters,
except in so far, as the samen are hereby Innovat or Altered. Our Will is
Herefore, and we Charge you strictly, and Command, That in Continent their Our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent
Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within
this Our ^ingdom, and There in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation,
make Intima^^^^ ^hereof, that none may pretend ignorance. And Ordains Our
Solicitor to Transmit ^rinted Copies hereof, to the Sheriffs of the several
Shires of this Kingdom, to be sent ^y them, to the Ministers of the several
Paroches within their respective Shires: and Appoints the Ministers of the
Paroches, to cause Intimat these Proclamations in their Paroch Churches where
they are Ministers, immediately at the Dissolution of the Congregation, and
that either from the Pulpit, or at the Church-Doors. And Ordains these Presents
to be Printed and Published.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Thirteenth day of February, and of
Our Reign the Seventh year, 1696. Pe^ Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. DA.
MONCREIFF Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors o^ ^ndrew Anderson, Printer to
the Kings Most Excellent Maj^^^^ 1696.


