THE COPY OF A LETTER FROM An Officer under the Lord Lambert, Giving an Account
Of a Rising in DERBY.

Of Col. Charles White, his proclaiming Booth's Declaration.

And how they were dispersed.

Communicated in Letters from Col. Sanders, Col. Mitchell, and Major Barton to
the Lord Lambert.

With the last News from CHESTER, and LEVERPOOLE.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Brewster. 1659.

A LETTER From an Officer under the Lord Lambert, giving an account of a rising
at DERBY.
Honored Sir,
SInce I saw you I have had little rest, for the Lord Lambert required me to
wait upon him toward Cheshire; and this day being at Stafford, news was
brought him of a Rising in Derby; for the quelling of which he presently
ordered One hundred Dragoons, and about One hundred and fifty Horse to march
for Derby, giving the command to Major Grove, and commanded me to go with him.
Away we marched to Vtceter (where we are now) intending resolvedly to fall into
them at Derby this night; but while we were refreshing, a messenger came with
Letters from Col. Sanders, Col. Mitchel, and Major Barton, to give an account
that the business was at present ended. The beginning was thus: Yesterday
diverse Commissioners being busy in raising and settling the Militia, about
eleven a clock Col. Charles White, with some few, came into the Town, and
openly proclaimed Booths Declaration, whereupon all the town rose, shut up
their shops, seized upon many of Militia horses, with shouting, Cap. Doubty
turned on their side, and drew many of his new men to him, and in the midest of
this Confusion, Col. Sanders came in amongst them, asking them what they would
have, drew them all to the Green, where they all desired him to own their
quarrel, and be their leader; he refused, and had liberty to go Home and
afterward they drew into the Town, and moultered away, so that this morning
there was not one left to appear, the active Townsmen crying Pecavy; and thus
our journey is stopped and we are upon returning, save one Troop goes forward
thither:

Now for Chester, this was the last News, at seven a clock this day to the Lord
Lambert: That the Enemies numbers do something lessen. We have had Eighteen
Troops in their teethes these three days, but can do little for want of our
Foot; but we shall quickly now, for they lay the last night at Stafford: and
until they come up, for convenience of provision and quarters, our Brigade of
Horse lie about Drayton. They do make much of Leverpoole, Col. Ireland is
Governor, It Is thought some of their hot spirits begin now to cool, they will
ere long be lapt closer together. I am both weary and in haste. I remain

Yours to serve you S. S.
Utceter, August 13. three a clock.

