THREE ACTS OF THE Committee of Estates OF The Kingdom of Scotland; The first,
For providing Maintenance for the Soldiers to be kept up within that Kingdom;
and for preventing their taking of Free Quarter.

The second, For appointing a Sub-Committee for the managing the Affairs of the
Treasury, Comptrolary, Collectory and Exchequer of that Kingdom.

The third, For Summoning all those who are accessory to the late Engagement
against England, to Compier before the Estates of Parliament the fourth of
January next, 1649.

Edinburgh, Printed by Evan Tyler: and Reprinted at London by John Field,
November. 9. 1648.

Edinburgh, 20 October, 1648.
THe Committee of Estates considering how necessary it is, that some orderly
course be taken how the Forces to be kept up within this Kingdom may be
entertained by the public, with as little burden as may be to the Country;
Have therefore thought fit, that a proportionable part of the maintenance due
by the Shires, shall be particularly assigned to each Regiment or, Troop for
their entertainment: And for that end, the Committee appoints the maintenance
due out of the Shires of (...) to be allowed for entertainment of the Regiment
or Troop which should consist of (...) And to the effect that neither the
Public be prejudged by paying more Soldiers then actually they have on foot,
and that the Soldiers also want none of their due, The Committee Ordains, That
there be a Muster of the several Regiments and Troops, and upon attestation
from the Muster-Master of their particular numbers, that the General Commissary
and his Deputies, accordingly give out particular assignations upon so much of
the maintenance of the Shires aforesaid, as will fall due for their
entertainment for the space of one month, and after the expiring of that time,
the Muster-Master shall take new trial of the number of the Soldiers; and the
Collectors shall also try whether they have lifted more nor was assigned, and
give attestation thereof; upon report whereof, the General Commissary is to
renew Orders for their assignations, according to the number attested, and
where there is more lifted nor was assigned, he is to give assignations for no
more nor what shall be found then due, the whole intromission being compted:
And the Committee also is to take course for the ease and reparation of the
Shires so oppressed and burdened; And the General Commissary has hereby power
and direction to renew Orders for assignations every month, from time to time
in manner above expressed, until he be discharged by the Committee of Estates:
And to the end the Soldiers may be the more orderly paid, and the Country
people kept from oppression, the Committee appoints the maintenance assigned to
any Regiment or Troop, to be lifted up in manner after following, viz. That the
Officer of the Regiment or Troop, shall intimate this their Assignment received
from the General Commissary, unto the Committee of War in the Shire or Shires
respectively, and unto the Collectors thereof, and desire them to advance in
moneys, or give them surety for the paying to them the first fortnights pay,
from the time of their entry set down in their locality: And that the Committee
of War by some of their number, or others, or by their Collectors, will give
them Band for to advance unto them the first day of every fortnight thereafter
their fortnights means, which if the Committee of War by themselves, their
Collectors or others bind for and perform, the Committee of Estates does
absolutely discharge any Officer or Soldier belonging to that Regiment or
Troop, to take any Free quarter within that shire, but seeing they are orderly
paid by the Shire, they shall orderly pay for whatsoever they take, with
certification, that if upon complaint verified to the Officers, he do not make
reparation of the wrong, and condignly punish the Offender, the Officer shall
be cashiered with infamy, and be obliged to satisfy the party: Like as the
COMMITTEE Ordains the Officers of that Regiment or Troop having that locality,
to furnish what assistance shall be craved by the Committee of War, or by these
who are bound for them, that they may exact what is due by any deficient for
their relief, with allowance of Free quarter to these who are bound to this
service, so employed by them upon the deficient his Lands until he be paid:
But upon the other party, if the Committee of War in the Shires, after this
intimation made by the Officers, shall refuse to give surety, by themselves or
their Collectors, or by some others in this orderly way, to advance a
fortnights means, from fortnight to fortnight, or if giving the security, they
shall fail in the performance: In these cases the Committee of Estates gives
power and warrant to the Officers of that Regiment or Troop, for to appoint any
of themselves or any other they think fit, to lift up the maintenance due by
the bonds assigned to them, and for to have Free Quarter upon all such
deficients as will not advance unto them, or give them surety for to pay duly
their maintenance the first day of every fortnight, until they get satisfaction
therein; but withal, absolutely discharges them to trouble any, or Quarter
upon any who thus advances or secureth to them what is their due, to be paid
at the beginning of every fortnight: And Ordains this to be published at the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful, and also to be Printed.

THO: HENDERSON

Edinburgh, October 20. 1648.
THe Committee of Estates taking into their consideration, that by the late
agreement at Edinburgh and Stirlin, and by their Acts of the 22. of Sep. and
the fourth of October last, and by their engagement to the Kingdom of England,
that all those who have been accessory to the late engagement, or who have
joined in Arms or Counsel with the Earls of Crawford, Lanerick, George Monro,
and were Abetters or Assisters to them, should forbear all exercise of their
places or trust; and that the most part of the Members of the Exchequer, or
Officers belonging thereto, are notoriously known to have been accessory to the
said Engagement, or has joined in Arms or Counsel as is aforesaid; and
considering that the Government of the Affairs of this Kingdom is now lying
upon the Committee as it is now constitute, consisting of these who disassented
from the Engagement, and how great and many prejudices thereunto will fall out,
if in this interim they did not take care to see the Exchequer and the Kings
revenues and customs kept from confusion and dilapidation; And that the King be
not defrauded of his revenues, casualties, and customs, nor the same perverted
or employed to wrong uses, but for the good of the King and Kingdom. And
withal, considering how necessary it is that the Customs be rightly set, and
that what further is necessary to be done upon the trial of the true condition
of the Affairs of the Exchequer may be timously gone about, Therefore the
Committee appoints the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Marquess of Argyle, the Earl
of Cassils, the Lord Balmirinoth* the Lord Burghly, the Lord Advocate, Lord
Toses, Scotscraig, Libberton, the Provost of Edinburgh, Sir John Smith, Robert
Lochart, George Gairns, or any seven of them, there being one of every Estate,
as a Sub-Committee, in their name to meet and use all possible means to search
and try out the true condition of the Affairs of the Treasury, Comtrolary,
Collectory, and Exchequer, and thereby to learn what has been gotten in and
received, and what has been disbursed, and how, and to whom, and for what. And
likewise to know what was owing to the Exchequer on the first day of September
last, and by whom, And what is owing by the Exchequer, and to whom, and for
what, That they may make ane full report of the true condition thereof, with
their opinion anent the abuses, and the best remedies thereof unto the
Committee of Estates, that they may take course thereanent as they shall see
cause and necessity to require. And to this effect the Committee grants their
full power and Commission to the Sub-Committee aforesaid, or any seven of them,
to call for, and peruse the Records and Books, or Accounts belonging to the
Exchequer, or any Officer thereof; as also to call and convene before them any
Member or Officer of the Exchequer, or any of their Clerks, Receivers,
Customers or Collectors, and to call from them ane full Account and exact
Declaration of their knowledge in any of the particulars aforesaid, or any
other thing relating thereunto, and this under their Hand writ, with their
offer to verify the same by their Oath, if the Sub-Committee shall find it
necessary to require the same; With power likewise to them to cite and convene
before them, and to examine any other persons whom they shall find necessary
to be convened and examined for the trial of the particulars aforesaid: Like as
the Committee gives them hereby full power and warrant to advise on the best
way of setting the Customs at the best avail, and to report their opinion to
the Committee, that the same may be timously settled; and to the end there may
be no confusion of compts, nor anticipation of payment from them that are owing
to the Exchequer, for satisfying of Pensions or Precepts to evil affected
persons in this interim, Therefore the Committee discharges the Earl of
Craford-Lindsey, Sir James Carmichael, Sir William Lochart, Adam Blair, or any
other Officer or Receiver of the Exchequer from all intrometting with any of
the Kings Rents or Customs, and from all giving out any warrants, precepts or
payments thereanent, or holding of Exchequers, passing of Signators, taking up
of moneys from the Customers, the King or Prince, their tenants or vassals, or
any other way meddling in the exercise of their places since the date of the
Agreement at Edinburgh and Sterlin, unto the time that the Parliament give
warrant thereanent; during which time they are suspended from the exercise of
their places: Like as the Committee discharges all Sub-collectors and under
Receivers, or any of the Kings Lieges to pay any of the Dues, or Rents, or
Customs, or Casualties of the King into any of the aforesaid Officers, or unto
any other person by virtue of their Precept, Warrant or Allowance. And withal,
the Committee does hereby declare, That all Signators Precepts, Discharges,
Allowances, or other Warrants whatsoever, that has or shall be granted by the
persons aforesaid, and all payments made unto them, or to any other by their
warrant, by any of the Sub-collectors or other Leiges whatsoever since the date
of the agreement aforesaid at Sterlin and Edinburgh, are null and of none
effect either to the receiver or givers; so that both they who have received
them, shall be liable to refound the same, and these who have paid them, shall
be found liable to pay the same over again to such as shall have warrant from
the Commit or Parliament, as also they shall be liable to what Censure the
Committee shall think fit for their disobedience of this public Order; Like
as the Committee appoints the Customers, the Tenants of the Kings Propriety and
Principality to come or send to the Sub-committe at Edinburgh, an Account of
their condition with the Exchequer, and to make payment of what is due to such
as the Committee or Parliament shall appoint. And to the end none may pretend
ignorance hereof, The Committee appoints this to be proclaimed at the Market
Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful, and to be published in Print.

Tho: Henderson.

Edinburgh, 27 October, 1648.
Whereas it is the special duty and privilege of Parliament to settle and
preserve the Government and Peace of the Kingdom, to keep the Judicatories
thereof free from corruption, and preserve the Union betwixt the Kingdoms; and
that the expediency and necessity of frequent meetings of Parliament, for the
good of the Kingdom, especially in troublesome times, is known to all; and that
now after so many great distractions and alterations, the Kings Majesty and the
Honorable Houses of the Parliament of England are now upon a Treaty, wherein
Religion, the King, and the good and Peace of the Kingdom are so nearly
concerned; in all which the interest of this Kingdom can be best settled and
secured by the Wisdom and Authority of the Parliament.

Like as by the late Treaty at Edinburgh and Stirlin it is agreed on, That all
Civil questions and differences whatsoever, be referred to the determination of
a Parliament to sit down before the tenth of January next, and in regard of the
Clause contained in the Commission to the Committee of Estates, giving them
power to call a meeting of the Estates of Parliament, the whole persons of the
Committee within the Kingdom being warned; Therefore the Committee of Estates
having warned duly by Letters all these that are now of their number, and being
frequently convened, they think fit to call; Like as they do hereby appoint and
call a meeting of the Estates of Parliament to sit down at Edinburgh the fourth
of January next to come the year of God, 1649. and Ordains the several Shires
and Burghs to send thereto Commissioners, qualified according to the Acts of
the Two and twentieth of September and fourth of October, and does hereby warn
all Members of Parliament, Noblemen, Commissioners of Shires and Burghs, who
are free of the faults contained in the foresaid Acts, to meet and convene at
Edinburgh in Parliament on the day aforesaid, without any other or further
warning, or premonition to be made for that effect, but only the Proclamation
and Publication of this present Act, and that in place of all other Solemnities
and Formalities: And whereas the corruption of Judicatories of this Kingdom,
and Officers of Estate, and other persons in Public Trust, has been the cause
and fountain from whence our former evils has proceeded; And whereas by our
Solemn acknowledgement agreed on by Church and State, we are bound to God, by
our Engagement to England we are bound to them, and by the forecited Acts and
Public Declaration, we are obliged before the world to endeavor the Purgation
and Reformation of our Judicatories and places of Public Trust; And forasmuch
as the foresaid persons, and all who are in Public Trust, or liable to the
judgment and censure of Parliament, for their proceeding in their several
Places and Offices; Like as by the Agreement at Edinburgh and Sterlin, all such
as have been employed in Public Place and Trust, and have been accessory to
the late unlawful Engagement, should forbear the exercise of their Places in
the mean time, and all questions are referred to the determination of the
Parliament: And whereas by the said Treaty all those who have been accessory to
the said Engagement, or challengeable for their said accession, at the least in
so far as concerns their Places and Public Trust, and the debarring of them
from any of these: Therefore the Committee of Estates does hereby warn and cite
all and every one of these who exercised any Office, Public Place or Trust, or
who were Members or Clerks of any public Judicatory of whatsoever degree,
quality or condition soever, in Burgh or Land within this Kingdom, and has
been accessory to the late Engagement, or are guilty of the faults mentioned in
the Printed Acts of the Two and twentieth of September and fourth of October,
to compier before the Estates of Parliament at Edinburgh on the fourth day of
January next, to come in a peaceable way, accompanied only with their own
Domestic servants, to hear and see the Parliament take such course as they in
their Justice and Wisdom shall think fit, for purging of the Judicatories, and
for declaring of their places vacant, and filling them with such as are able
and qualified persons fittest for the service, and may give most contentment,
and as has continued constant to their Covenant and Cause in the time of
trial, and for debarring them who are put out from any other Public Places or
Trust during such time, and in such manner as the Estates of Parliament shall
think fit, with certification to every one of the persons concerned as is
abovesaid, and warned by this Public Proclamation (which the Committee of
Estates Declares, That they find it a sufficient intimation in this our case
of so great and public a backsliding to all persons concerned therein, for
the effect aforesaid, to be esteemed by them equivalent to a personal citation
at their dwelling Houses, upon particular summons against every one of them to
compier before the Estates of Parliament, as is aforesaid, and compiereth not,
that then the Estates will proceed both to determine the general question, and
the particular concerning their places and trust, and take what further course
they shall think fitting for the good of the Kingdom: Like as the Committee of
Estates considering the present distractions of the times, and that the
Parliament so nearly approaches, they think fit to continue the down sitting
of the Session until the Parliament give Order thereanent, and for the
acceleration of Justice to the Lieges, the Committee of Estates Ordains the
Clerks of Session, to give out Acts and Letters of continuation upon the first
Summons within the ordinary time of the sitting of the Session, albeit they sit
not; And that none may pretend ignorance of what is mentioned in this present
Act, the Committee of Estates appoints it to be proclaimed at the Market Cross
of Edinburgh, Pier and Shore of Leith, and to be Printed.

THO: HENDERSON.

FINIS.

