PROCLAMATION, Against Regrating of Victual, and Forestallers, and for
Regulating the Mercats.
WILLIAM By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, To Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severaly specially Constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuch as, By several Acts of Parliament, the keeping of Victual to a Dearth
is strictly prohibited, and particularly, It is Statute by the Acts James 2d.
Parliament Sixth Cap. Twenty two and twenty three, that for the eschewing of
Dearth, Sheriffs, Bailiefs and other Officers, both to Burgh and to Land,
enquire what Persons buys Victual, and holds it to a Dearth, and that the said
Sheriffs and Officers make such known. That in case they hold more Victual then
will sustain them and their Menzie to New Corn, they may be punished and
demeaned as Occorers and Usurers, and the Victual Escheated to Us, and that the
same be presented to Mercats, and Sold as the price goes. And by the Acts Ja.
2d. Par. 9th. Cap. Thirty eight and thirty ninth. It is Ordained, That no
manner of Victual shall be holden in Girnels by any man to a Dearth, but
allenarly what is needful for their own Persons and the Sustentation of their
Households, and that the said Persons present all that they have more to the
Market, under the pain of Escheat thereof. As likewaayes, the Crime of
Fore-stalling is forbidden by several Acts and Statutes, and particularly, by
the Act Ja. 6. Par. 12. Cap. one hundred and forty eight, it is Declared, That
who buys any Merchandise, or Victual coming to Fair or Market, or makes any
Contract, or Promise for buying of the same, before the said Merchandse or
Victual shall be in the Fair or Market place ready to be sold, or shall make
any Motion by Word, Write or Message for raising of the Prices, or dearer
Selling of the said Merchandise and Victual: Or, who shall diswade any from
coming, and bringing the foresaid Merchandise or Victual to Fair or Market,
shall be esteemed and judged a Forestaller; And it is Ordained, That all such
Forestallers may be pursued before the Justices or Magistrates of Burghs, and
that without a special Lybel, but only upon Forestalling in general, and the
Persons Convict, to be Fined for the first Fault in forty pounds, and for the
second in an hundredth Merks, and for the third to incurr the tinsel of
Movables. And seeing, through the not due observance, and Execution of the
foresaid Acts, the Calamity of the Country, by the present Scarcity and
Dearth, is greatly increased, therefore, We, with Advice of the Lords of Our
Privy Council have thought fit to revive the (...)d Ordains them to be put to
strict Execution; And for that effect, to empower and require all Sheriffs of
Shyres, Stewarts (...) Burghs: As likewise, all Commissioners of Supply, and
Justices of Peace, (...) made, (...) contrair to the foresaids Laws, and to
Command and Charge the keepers up of the said victual, in Girnels, or
otherwise co(...) to bring and expose the same for Sale, in Open and Ordinary
Mercats, or otherwise to open their Girnels, or other Houses where (...) and
there Sell the same, as the said Sheriffs, Stewarts of Stewartries, Lords and
Baillies of Regalities, and their Deputs and Magistrates (...) two of the said
Commissioners of Supply, or Justices of Peace shall find the Ordinary Price to
rule in the Country, for the time. With(...) if they fa^lz^e therein, they
shall be proceeded against, and the pains of the foresaids Acts of Parliament
execute upon them, with all rigo(...) the mean time, the Victual Girnelled and
unlawfully kept up, as said is, Arrested and Sequestrat by the foresaid
Sheriff and others, as Esch(...) further, We with Advice foresaid, prohibit
and discharge any Person whatsomever, to buy Meal in public Mercats, but only
for private use, a(...) ways to be sold again by whole Sale, or Retail. And
likewayes to buy any other Grain in public Market, to be sold again in whole
Sale, or Retail(...) the same kind as it is bought, but either for the private
and particular use of the buyer or to be first made in Malt, or ground in
Flower and Meal before the Sale of the samen. As also We, with Advice foresaid,
peremptorily discharge and forbid all persons whatsomever buying Oats or Peace
whether in public Mercats, or otherwise, to Sell the same, either in whole
Sale, or Retaile, unless they be first made in Meal, except what Oats are or
shall be bought and Retailed by the Commissaries of Our Army, for the Provision
of the Horses and Dragoons, presently employed in Our Service, and what are or
shall be bought and Retailed by Stablers and Inn keepers, within their own
Houses, with Certification, that such as shall Contraveen the premises in any
sort, may be Conveened and Pursued at the Instance of any person whatsomever,
before any of the Magistrates; or Justices of Peace, or other Judges above
named, where the Contravention is committed, and upon Conviction are to be
Fined, and made liable in the Sum of ten pounds Scots for each B^ll or Meal, or
other Victual Sold or Retailed, contrair to this present Procla^ation, and
decerned to pay the one half to the Informer, and the other half to the Judge
before whom the Contraveener shall be pursued and Convicted. Declaring,
nevertheless, that it shall be Leisum and Lawful to transport Oats bought
benorth the River of Tay from that side thereof, to the south side of the same,
and to Sell the said Oats either by whole Sale or Retaile, at any Place, or
Market upon the Southside of the said River, for private use, or to be made in
Meal allennarly without being subject and Liable to the Certification^, and
penalties above-exprest. And Lastly. We with Advice foresai^mm^nd and Charge
all Magistrates of Burghs, and other Officers of the Law to (...), that all
Mercats and Fairs be duly Regulate conform to the Laws, without Extortion and
to cause put the foresaid Acts of Parliament anent Forstallers and Regraters,
with this present Proclamation, to d^e and vigorous Execution, Certifying the
said Sheriffs, Magistrates and other Judges abovenamed, who shall fail in
their duty anent the Premisse, that upon Information given to the Lords of Our
P^ivy Council, they shall be therefore severely and examplarly punished, OUR
WILL IS HEREFORE, and We charge you strictly, and Command, that Incontinent
their Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and Remanent
Market Crosses of the whole head Burgh of the several Shyres, and Stewartries
within this Kingdom, and thereat in Our Name and Authority make Publication of
the Premises, that none may pretend Ignorance. And Ordains Our Solicitor to
transmit Coppies hereof to the Sheriffs ^d Stewarts of the several Shyres and
Stewartries, or their Clerks, to the effect the fame may published at the
Market Crosses and thereafter, be tran^mitted to the Ministers in the several
Paroch Churches within their respective bounds and Appoints the said Ministers
to cause Intimat the same at their se^eral Paroch Churches, at any time betwixt
and the first of December next, for all Paroches on this side of the River of
Tay, and betwixt: fifteenth day of the said Month for all Paroches on the other
side of the said River. And Ordains these presents to be printed(...)

Given under Our Si(...)


