A PROCLAMATION, Containing His Majesty's Grace and Favor to His Subjects
(...) ^his His Ancient Kingdom of SCOTLAND.
C R HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE



CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, to our Lovits, (...)Our Lion King at Arms, and his
Brethren Heralds, Macers, P^rsevants, Messengers at A^ms, Our Sheriffs ^^hat
part conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:

Fo ^^ much, as the affection which We have to this Our Ancient Kingdom of
Scotland, makes Us readily to embrace ^ll occasions, whereby We may witness Our
zeal to do all things which may be for the advantage and ease of ^ur good
Subjects; And We being informed by Our right trusty and entirely beloved Cousin
and Counsell^^ the Duke of Lauderdale, Our Commissioner, of some things which
have been, and still are troublesome a^ burdensome to Our good Subjects of this
Our Kingdom: We have thought fit as an Act of Our Royal Bounty, by Our Royal
Authority, with advice of Our Privy Council, to Declare Our Royal Pleasure, for
the ease and satisfaction of Our good Subjects in manner following.

First, We, with advice foresaid, Do hereby Statute and Enact, and accordingly
do free^y and absolutely discharge to Our Subjects all Rests of Assessments,
Monthly maintenance, Loan and Tax, Levies, Out-reiks of Hor^^ and Foot,
Excise, tenth and twenty ^enny: And generally all Impositions whatsoever due,
or imposed upon this Our Kingdom, (...) any time before Our happy Restoration;
excepting all sums of money already paid, or bonds given for money (which by
Assigna^^ons may be conveyed through several hands) and all these Particulars
abovementioned, We, with Advice foresaid, do now discharge, notwithstanding of
any Commission granted to Sir John Weymes of Bogie, or any others for
collecting them, or any of them.

We, in like manner, with Advice foresaid, Discharge all rests of the Taxation
ordinary and extraordinary, granted to Our Royal Father of blessed memory, by
the Parliament in the year of GOD, 1633. Comprehend^^g therein the Taxation of
two of ten (...) Annual-rents, excepting all sums of money already paid, or
bonds granted preceding the date hereof; And excepting all sums of money due
by any person, liable for the relief of those who have made payment or gven
Bond. But in regard the Duke and Duchess of H^miltoun, have a right to the
Rests of the said Taxat^^^ until they be (...) of cert^^^ sums of money
acclaimed, as yet re^^ng to (...) by Us, conform to a Contract past betwixt
(...) Duke of Hamiltoun, and a Commission granted by Us ^o William now Duke of
Hamiltoun: We do Declare, that We (...) satisfy the (...) the said Duke after
count and reckoning of his intromission with the said (...); The (...) Grace
and Favor intended hereby to Our good Subjects may be made effectual, and
entire to them; But prejudice in the m^^^time, to the Duke of Hamiltoun, of hi^
right and execution thereupon, ay and until he be satisfied of what shall be
found due to him, (...) court and reckoning of his intromission with the said
Taxation.

We do likewise, with advice foresaid, freely and absolutely discharge all such
parts of the annu^^e of ^einds as were due to Us before our happy Restoration:
And do suspend the charging for, the receiving or paying of any Annuity due
(...) Our Restoration, ay and until the Earl of Lowdon make account (to any
We shall appoint for that effect) of what he o^ his Father (...) received of
the said Annuities: To the end We may then declare Our further pleasure,
excepting always from this all sums of mone^ (...) pay^ed, or for which Bond
is given upon that Account, preceding the date hereof: And this,
notwithstanding of any (...) granted by Us (...) to the Earl of Lowdon, for
collecting of the said Annuities.

We do also, with advice foresaid, freely and absolutely discharge all Fynes
imposed by Ou^ First Parliament of this Our Kingdom, excepting such as are
already paid, or such for which there is bond already given. It is always
hereby declared, That all moneys received by Collectors or Sub collectors from
their several Entries in all or any of these particulars, (...) discharge, or
others entrusted for uplifting thereof, are ^^^eby excepted: And the said
Collectors, Sub-collectors, and others foresaid declared accomptable for the
same, to any who have or shall have Our Commission for that effect.

And last, We for a further proof of Our affection to Our good Subjects of this
Our Kingdom; Do, ^^th advice foresaid, freely and absolutely grant ageneral
pardon and discharge of all arbitrary and pecunial pains incurred by any of Our
Subjects, before the date hereof through the contraveening of any Laws, penal
Statutes, or public Acts whatsoever; except such pecunial pains as are already
inflicted (...) Our Privy Council, or any other competent Judicatory, for (...)
of money paid: And excepting all Sentences of (...) imprisonment or (...),
Declaring always, this ^ardon is not to be extended to any who were guilty of
the Rebe^li^^ in the Year 1666. and are not admitted to the benefit of our
^^mpnity, not to such as are guilty of (...) Crimes. And We having given, as
said is, so full proof of Our bounty and goodness (...) ^^bjects, a^^ of Our
full pardon of all arbitrary and pecunial pains, extending even to these
against Conventicles, withdrawing (...)ances, disorderly Baptisms and
Marriages, We do expect, that this Our unparalelled grace and goodness will
oblige all Our good Subjects ^^ to express their due sense of and thankfulness
for the same, by a more careful observance and due obedience to Our Laws, from
which nothing is to be derogate hereby as to their due observance in time
coming. And to the end, That Our Royal clemency and bount^ to O^^ good
Subjects, may be for their full security made known to them; Our Will is, and
We charge you straightly and command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen;
ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and the Market Crosses of all the
other Royal Buroughs of this Our Kingdom, and other places needful And
thereat, in Our Name and authority, with all due Solemnities, by open
Proclamation, make publication of the Premises. The which to do We commit to
you conjunctly and severally Our full power by these Our Lette^, delivering
them by you duly execute and indorsed again to the Bearer. Given under Our
Signet at Holy-rood-house the twenty fourth day of March, 1674. And of Our
Reign the twenty sixth year.

Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii.

Gibson, C. S^ Concilii.

God save the King.
EDINBVRGH, Printed by Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Exc^llent
MAjESTY. Anno Dom. 1674.


