Copy of a Letter from the Lords of Session to King Cha. and of King Ja. his
Majesty's Answer to them, anent two prizes called the Palm Tree and Patience.
May it please Your most Sacred Majesty,
WE Received Your Majesty's Letter dated the fourth day of August last,
concerning the two Danish Ships called the Palm Tree and Patience; which being
Intimat to the Parties concerned in that Process, and the Cause fully Debate.
Upon Advising thereof, the following Doubts did arise; Whether or not the want
of Passes conform to the Formula appointed by the 20 Article of Your Majesty's
Treaty with the King of Denmark, is sufficient alone to Confiscate the Ships
and Goods; albeit it be thereafter proved, that they belonged to the Subjects
if Your Majesty's Allies. In the next place, if the Fraught-breif (whereof a
duplicat is herewith sent signed by the Clerk of that Process) containing the
different Ports of London and Holland, as a double Document, and sufficient
alone to Confiscate the Ship and Goods, albeit it be thereafter proved that the
Property belonged to Your Majesty's Allies. And in the third place, if the said
Fraught-brief being concealed at Sea the time of the Capture, and thereafter
Exhibit to the Judge at the Trial by the Reclaimers; If that be a concealed
Document and sufficient alone to Confiscate the Ship and Goods, albeit it be
thereafter proved, they belonged to Your Majesty's Allies. And considering that
the Laws of Nations are and may be Regulat by Your Treaties with Foreign
Princes. Whereof and of Your own Instructioos. Your Majesty being the best
Interpreter: We thought it our Duty humbly to offer to Your Majesty's
consideration, the Cases abovementioned; That You may declare Your Royal
Pleasure and Opinion concerning the same; which in the Decision of this and
other Processes of the like Nature, shall be exastly observed. By

Your most Faithful, most Obedient, And most Humble Subjects and Servants.
Edinb. 27 Jan. 1684.
Copy of His Majesty's Letter To the Lords of Session, anent the Palm Tree and
Patience.
JAMES R.
RIGHT Trustee, and Right well Beloved Cusins and Counselors, Right Trustee
and well Beloved Counellors, and Trustee and well Beloved, We Greet you Well:
Whereas by your Letter of the 28 th day of January last past to Our most d^ar
and most entirely Beloved Brother lately deceased, you have Remitted the
Queries therein contained, touching the Process relating to the Patience and
Palm Tree, to be determined; Separatly for your greater Clearness, and although We
find the same Queries jointly Remitted to his said late Majesty, in the Year
1680 and 1684, Clearly and Positively already Determined; Yet We being most
desirous to have these tedious and troublesome Processes put to an end, have
separatly Resolved the same as they are now stated by you, viz. First whether
or not the want of Passes conform to he Formula appointed by the Twentieth
Article of the Treaty with the King of Denmark is sufficient alone to
Confiscate the Ships and Goods, albeit it be thereafter proved that they
belonged to the Subjects of Our Allies. Secondly, If the Fraught-brief
according to the Duplicat sent hither is a double Document, and sufficient
alone to Confiscate the Ships and Goods, albeit it be thereafter proved that
the Property belonged to Our Allies. And Thirdly, If the said Fraught Breiff
being Concealed at Sea the time of the Capture, and thereafter Exhibited to the
Judge at the Trial by the Reclamers if that be a concealed Document, and
sufficient alone to Confiscat the Ships and Goods, albeit it be thereafter
proved that they belonged to Our Allies. As to the first, The want of a Pass
Conform to the Formula, is not of it self a sufficient Ground of Confiscation,
but a good Ground of Seazure, and bringing the Ship up in order to an
Examination, whereupon if it be proved it belonged to an Allies, the Captor is
to be allowed his Coasts and Damages.

As to the second, The Fraught Breiff is equal to a Double Document, because it
bears double Ports of London and Holland, then in open Hostility, and cannot be
otherways understood, than if there were a separat Fraught. Bre^ff for each of
the two Ports, and is a sufficient Ground alone to Confiscate both Ships and
Goods, according to the third Article of the Instructions to our Admirality,
and the said Letter in the year 1680, and Admits of no Probation to the
Contrary. And as to the third and last Querie, We find the Concealing at Sea,
the time of the Capture, of any Document, is sufficient alone to Confiscat both
Ships and Goods, and Admits of no Probation thereafter to the contrary. And now
upon the whole matter, We do find that the sa^d Two Ships and Goods, were in
Our High Court of Admiralty there, upon the foresaid Grounds and Reasons,
Justly Condemned to be Good and Lawful Prizes, as wanting Passes conform to the
Formula, and having no Pass at all for that Voyage; as al^o having double and
Concealed Documents, which jointly are Vnquestionablie of such Force by the
constant practick of our High Court of Admirality here, the Law of Nations, and
the said two Letters Explanatory as ought to have Excluded all Probation to the
Contrary. Therefore it is our Express Will and Pleasure, and we do hereby
Ordain and Require you notwithstanding of any former Probation to the contrary)
to give your final Sentence and Determination in that Process, upon the Grounds
and Reasons abovementioned, without any further delay; And to Record these
presents in your Books, to be a rule for the future in the like Cases, for both
which this shall be your Warrant: And so we bid you Heartily farewell.

Given at our Court at Whitehal, the 28th day of February 1684, and of our
Reign the first year. By His Majesty's Command, Sic subscribitur. Drummond.

The Principle given up to Mr. Roderick Mckeinie Clerk, to lie as the Warrant
for Extracting the Decree.

