A PROCLAMATION, Anent Baggage-Horses.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith;
To Our Lovits, (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute,
Greeting:
Forasmuch, as by the 3d. Act, Parl. 3. Charl. 2d. It is Provided and Ordained,
that in case it shall happen any Horses to be employed, and made use of by
Officers and Soldiers, in Towns, or in the Country, for carrying Artilliary,
Ammunition, or Provision, or any other use of the Army, there be paid for each
day that they Travel, Three shillings Scots for each two Miles to the Man and
Horse, and each day that they do not Travel, Six shillings Scots to the Man,
and as much for the Horse; the Man being obliged to provide Himself and the
Horse, which by the said Act is appointed to be paid by the Magistrates of the
Burghs, if the Horses be taken within a Town, or if in the Country, by the
Collector of the Supply in the Shire, who are to be re-payed thereof, or to
have the same allowed to them by the Receivers-General. And sicklike, We, with
Advice of Our Estates of Our Parliament, by Our Act of the Date, the Thirtieth
day of May, One thousand six hundred and ninety, did Empower the Lords of Our
Privy Council, to proportion and Impose Baggage-horses, for the transporting of
Provisions and Furniture necessary to Our Army, the Expenses of the Horses
always being paid conform to the Act of Parliament abovementioned. And to the
effect the said Baggage-Horses may be orderly furnished, and with greater
equality Outreiked and Provided, for the ease and convenience of Our Subjects,
and be in readiness for Carrying and transporting any thing requisite and
necessary for the Accommodation of Our Forces, and Expedition of Our Service,
in the several Shires and Burghs of this Kingdom, where Our Army shall have
occasion to March through, or be Quartered in the same. Therefore We, with
Advice of Our Privy Council, Ordain every Heretor of this Our Ancient Kingdom,
and the Tutors, Factors, or Chamberlains of such of them as are Minors, or live
not within the Shire where they have Lands lying, and the whole Magistrates of
Our Burghs-Royal within this Kingdom, to design, have in readiness, and set
apart for that use, betwixt and the Twenty two day of June instant, a
sufficient Baggage-horse, well Furnished and Graithed, with Sodds, a Sack, and
a pair of Baccats, or Creills, with a Man for each two Horses, and that
effeiring to every Twenty Pounds Scots of Assessment they pay Monthly of Supply
to Us, by virtue of the 6th Act, 2d Sess of Our Current Parliament; And where
there are lesser Sums paid by the said Heretors or Magistrates, either under
Twenty Pounds, or more than the round Sums of one or more Twenty Pounds, the
Heretor or Burgh which pays the greatest Fraction, under Twenty Pounds, or over
and above the one or more Twenty Pounds payable by them Monthly, shall be liable
to Outreik and Furnish a Baggage-Horse, with a Man in the next place, and so
from the greater to the lesser Sums of Monthly Supply, through the whole
Heretors of the Shires, and Magistrates of the Burghs of this Kingdom, until
all and every one of them have equally and proportionally contributed to Our
said Service, in the Outreik and Furnishing of Baggage-Horses, effeiring and
conform to their several Interests and Monthly payments, ay and while such a
number of Baggage-Horses be Furnished and Outreiked by the several Shires and
Burghs within the same, as corresponds to the Monthly payments of Supply they
are liable to, by virtue of the Act of Parliament foresaid; and that such who
have once furnished, in obedience to these presents, shall not be liable to
furnish again, until all such who pays the lesser Sums of Monthly Supply have
likewise furnished and set forth Baggage-Horses, as do effeir and correspond to
the Monthly Supply, payable by the respective Shires and Burghs within the
same: And which whole Baggage-Horses above-exprest, with the Servants attending
the same, shall be punctually paid, conform to the Acts of Parliament
abovementioned, for the time they shall be employed and made use of. And We,
with Advice foresaid, peremptorly Require and Command the Heretors, for their
Baggage-Horse, and their Servants to be sent forth with them from Burgh and
Landwart respective, to answer and obey what Directions and Commands shall be
given to them by Sir Thomas Livingston, Commander in Chief of Our Forces within
this Kingdom, and punctually to meet from such Shires and Burghs respective
within the same; in such numbers, and at such times and places, as the said Sir
Thomas shall find necessary to enjoin and appoint from time to time. And for
the better preserving of the said Horses, and safe returning thereof to the
respective Heretors and Magistrates of Burghs, who send out the same, and that
the Menservants who attend them may be duly provided for, and entertained, We,
with Advice foresaid, Require and Command, that the Baggage-Horses furnished by
each Shire, and Burghs within the same, when met and gathered together, at the
places to be appointed by the said Sir Thomas Livingston for their Rendezvous,
be presented to the Commissary for the Army, whom We by these presents Require
and Command to grant Receipts therefore, and take care for the equal
distribution of the same, amongst the several Regiments, upon the Officers
Receipts thereof, for the more commodious service of Our Army; And how soon the
said Baggage-Horses furnished by any Shire, shall have Marched to a
Neighboring Shire, then such a number of the said Baggage-Horses, which have
come from the remotest places, shall be dismissed and sent back, effeiring to
the number of Horses furnished by the Shire they arrive at, which shall
Conveen, to take their Baggage off their hands: And in case no Receipts be
given for the said Baggage-Horses by the said Commissary, to whom they are
presented, it shall be a sufficient Instruction against him, that he has
received the said Horses, if Instruments be taken and produced against him at
the delivery thereof, or a Declaration Subscribed by two Credible Persons, in
absence of a Nottar^: And We hereby Ordain the said Commissary, to make the
said Horses and Graith forthcoming, and restore the same to the true Owners
and Outreikers thereof: And sicklike we hereby Require and Command, the
Commissaries of Our Army, to furnish and afford Victuals and Sustainance to the
Baggage-men, who attend the said Horses, out of the Provisions and Stores of
Our Army, from time to time, keeping account thereof, that the same may be
deduced out of the Wages allowed to them by Act of Parliament; And for the more
commodious and speedy Outreik of the said Baggage-Horses from Burgh and
Landwart respective foresaid: We with Advice of Our Privy Council, Give and
Grant full Power and Warrant to each Heretor, to press the Horse or Horses he
is liable to furnish, with the Servants necessary to attend the same, within
any part of his own Ground, the Horse not exceeding four pounds Sterling value;
And Appoints the said Heretors, to draw up an Account of the said Horse or
Horses, as they shall be Prized by three honest Neighbors upon Oath,
Subscribed with their Hands, with their Graith, not exceeding forty shilling
Scots for the said Graith; and according to the extent of that Account, if the
Horse shall not return, the Heretor Out-reiker of the same, shall be allowed
the Apprized value thereof, not exceeding the price foresaid, out of the Cess
payable by the said Heretor, to be applied by him to the use of the Out-reiker
of the Horse, or from whom he was pressed. And the several Collectors are
hereby required to give allowance thereof upon production to them of the
Apprized value of the said Horse, with the said Commissary his Receipt, that
the Horse was Outreiked, or Instruments taken, or Declarations foresaid
produced, upon the delivery of the said Horse, against him: And which Apprized
value of the said Horses, is to be deduced out of the Pay of that Regiment, to
which the said Commissary shall instruct he delivered him; or otherways he is
to be liable therefore himself. And further, We with Advice foresaid, Grant
Warrant to, and Empower the Magistrates of Our Burghs within their own
Jurisdiction, to press the Horses and Men to be sent along with them, the Horse
and Graith to be estimat and prized, instructed to be delivered, and paid in
manner above set down. And to the end the said Sir Thomas Livingston may have
particular knowledge of the number of Baggage-Horse, to be furnished out of
every Shire and Burgh, by the Rule abovementioned, and of the persons liable
to Out-reik the same; We with Advice foresaid, Require and Command all the
Collectors of Supply within the several Shires and Burghs of this Kingdom,
whenever they shall be required by the said Commander in Chief, to send in to
him with all expedition, and particularly at present, the Collectors of Supply,
for the Shires and Burghs respective following; viz. The Shires of Edinburgh,
Strivling, Perth, Fife, Kinrose, Linlithgow, Dumbartoun, and Clackmannan, and
Burghs respective within the same, subscribed with their hands, exact Lists and
Doubles of the whole Heretors within their Shires, and the proportions of
Supply Monthly payable by them, conform to the said 6th Act of Our current
Parliament; Certifying such of the Collectors who shall be deficient in sending
in the said Lists, that they shall be pursued as obstructers of Our Service,
and disaffected to Our Government. And further, We hereby Require and Command
the said Commissary, to Report and Transmit to Our Privy Council, true and
exact Lists of such as shall be Deficient in Out-reiking and sending forth
their Baggage-Horses, and Men to attend the same, conform to the rule and
proportion of Monthly Supply abovementioned, when they are required so to do,
by the said Sir Thomas, that the same may be proceeded against therefore with
all rigor. And to the Effect Our Pleasure in the Premises may be known, OUR
WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent,
these Presents seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent
Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of this Kingdom, and other places needful,
and there, by open Proclamation, make Publication of the Premises, that all
persons concerned may have notice thereof, and none pretend ignorance, as ye
will answer to Us thereupon; the which to do, We commit to you, conjunctly and
severally, Our full Power, by these Our Letters, delivering them by you, duly
execute, and indorsed again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the eleventh day of June, and of Our
Reign, the third year, 1691. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT,
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save King William and Queen Mary.
EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, anno DOM. 1691.


