royal blazon or coat of arms A PROCLAMATION, For the Calling out the Levy of
One Thousand Men, for the Year 1697.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith: To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constiute,
Greeting. Forasmuch, as by the Twenty third Act of the last Session of this
current Parliament, It is Statute and Ordained, That for the Service of this
present War, and Recruiting of Our Regiments, either at Home or Abroad, there
shall be Furnished to Us the Number of One Thousand Men yearly, when We shall
Require them, to be Proportioned and Levied, conform to the Proportions
contained in the Act of Parliament, one thousand six hundred and sixty three,
Entitled, An Humble Tender to His Sacred Majesty of the Duty and Loyalty of
His Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, as to the Twenty thousand Foot
therein-mentioned; which Thousand Men, by the foresaid Act, are appointed to be
Furnished and Levied in this manner, viz. That the Commissioners of Supply for
the respective Bounds where the said Proportions shall fall, or any Five of
them as the Quorum, appointed to that effect by the foresaid Act, or the
Sheriffs and their Deputs, or the Lords and Baillies of Regalities, or Stewarts
and their Deputs, the Magistrates of Burghs, first design and cause be given,
the idle, loose and vagabond persons liable by former Acts of Parliament, to be
seized by Sheriffs to make up the foresaid Number, and the remainder of the
said Proportions are to be put forth according to the former Rules in use for
subdividing the same within each Shire* And by the foresaid Act of Parliament,
Heretors are Empowered to design and make choice of such young Fencible Men
living within their respective Bounds, and not having Wife or Children, and who
earn their Living by daily Wages or Termly Hire, as shall satisfy for their
part of the said Levy, or other wise the Tennents and Fencible-Men shall have
their option to offer and pay down for each of the said Men that may fall to be
put out by them, the Sum of Twenty four pound Scots, so that the District shall
either deliver a good Man effectually, or pay the said Twenty four pounds: And
further, the said Heretors (conform to the foresaid Act of Parliament) are
hereby Empowered to secure the person or persons designed, or chosen as said
is; and for the encouragement of the foresaids persons so to be designed and
made choice of, it is further Statute and Ordained by the foresaid Act, that
each of them shall before Delivery, have Twenty pounds Scots paid to him in
ready Money by the Officer who receives him, at the sight of one of the said
Commissioners; as also, that their being put forth and engaged as said is,
shall not oblige them longer to be and continue Soldiers than for the space of
three years, and the first of November next after the Ish of the said three
years from the time of their Engagement. And We Considering, that the present
Exigence of Our Service, does require the foresaid Number of One Thousand Men,
to be Furnished and Levied for this present Year with all dispatch and
expedition: Therefore We with Advice of the Lords of Our privy Council, Require
and Commend the Commissioners of Supply of the several Shires, Stewartries and
Burghs within this Kingdom, upon this side of Tay, to meet at the Head-Burghs
of their respective Shires and Stewartries upon the seventh day of Januarie
next to come one thousand six hundred ninety seven, and the Commissioners of
Supply for all the rest of this Kingdom, at the Head-burghs of their respective
Shires and Stewartries, upon the fourteenth day of the said Month with
Certification to such of them not other ways employed in our public Service
who shall not meet, they shall be liable each of them to the Penalties contained
in the Acts of Parliament made anent the Militia and there to Proceed, Design,
and have in readiness, in manner, and conform to the Twenty third Act last
Session of this current Parliament, and Method therein set down the particular
Number of Men respective after-mentioned, or Twenty four pounds Scots for each
Man to be delivered to the Officers to be sent by Order of our Priyy Council,
or of Colonel George Hamilton Colonel to one of our Regiments in Flanders, at
the respective Head-Burghs, upon payment of Twenty pounds Scots to every Man
who shall be delivered of the said One Thousand Men, in manner abovementioned,
upon the days after set down. viz. These for the Shires of Edinburgh Berwick,
Had^ingtoun, Roxburgh, Selkirk, Peebles, Linlithgow, Drumfries, Wigtown and
Stewartrie of Kirkeudbright, Air, Renfrew, Lanerk, Stirling, Cla^kmannan, Fife,
Kinross, and these of the Shires of Argile, Bute and Dumbartoun, with these for
the Town of Edinburgh, Leith and Cannongate, at the respective Head-burghs
thereof, upon the Fifteenth day of the said Month of Jannuary next, and these
for the Shires of Perth, Forfar, Kincardin, and Marishal's part of Aberdeen,
Bamf, and the rest of Aberdeen-Shire, with these for the Shires of Elgin,
Nairn, and this side of Ness, the Earl of Seaforth and Lord Lovats Division of
Inverness, the Shires of Southerland, Caithness, and the rest of Inverness,
with the Stewartrie of Orkney and Zetland, upon the twenty second day of the
said Month: And We with Advice foresaid, Require the said Colonel George
Hamilton timeously to dispatch and send such Officers, or others as he shall
think fit, sufficiently empowered with an Order and Warrant under his Hand, to
the Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries beforementioned, to
receive thereat the Proportions of Men wherein the said respective Shires,
Stewartries and Burghs are liable, and to make payment of the Twenty pounds
Scots to each Person who shall be delivered to them as a Soldier in manner
foresaid, or otherways to receive and get payment of the said Twenty four pound
Scots for every undelivered Person, and grant Receipt of the samen; And which
thousand Men, or twenty four pounds Scots for each undelivered Man, are to be
delivered to, and received by the said Officers at the Head-Burghs of the
several Shires and Stewartries of this Kingdom in manner, and by the
Proportions after mentioned viz. That there be delivered for the Shires of
Roxburgh and Selkirk at the Head-Burghs thereof, the Number of Sixty six Men;
For the, Shire of Benvick at the Head-Burgh thereof, the Number of Forty Men.
For the Shire of Haddingtoun Forty Men. For the Shire of Peebles Thirteen Men.
For the Shire of Edinburgh Forty Men. For the Shire of Dumfried Forty Men.
For the Shire of Wigtoun Fifteen Men. For the Stewartrie of Kirkcudbright
Twenty five Men. For the Shires of Air and Renfrew Sixty six Men. For the Shire
of Lanerk Fifty Men. For the Shire of Linlithgow seventeen Men. By the Town of
Edinburgh, Leith and Cannongate, Forty Men. By the Shires of Stirling and
Clackmannan Thirty four Men. By Fife and Kinross Eighty Men. By the Shires of
Argyle, Dumbartoun and Bute, Forty Men: As also there is to be delivered in
manner foresaid by the Shire of Perth Eighty Men. By the Shire of Forfar Fifty
Men. By the Shire of Kincardin and Marishals Part of Aberdene Forty Men. By
the Shire of Bamf, and rest of Aberdeen Shire, Fifty three Men. By the Shires
of Nairn. Elgin, and this side of Ness, Fifty Men. By the Earl of Seaforths,
and Lord Lovats Division of Inverness, Thirty four Men. By the Shires of
Sutherland, Caithness, and the rest of Inverness, Fifty three Men. And by the
Stewartries of Orkney and Zetland, Thirty four Men, or twenty four Pounds Scots
respective, for each undelivered Man in manner abovementioned. And We with
Advice foresaid, authorize and appoint the several persons after-named, to
judge and determine upon all Differences and Debates that may arise betwixt the
Commissioners of the several Shires and Burghs, and the Officers that shall be
sent to them anent the Sufficiency and Insufficiency of the men to be Outreiked
in this present Levy, viz. Sir John Pringle of S^itchel the Lord of Grubet
younger, and the Sheriff-deput of Roxburgh for the said Shire, Sir James Murray
of Philiphaugh, one of the Senators of the College of Justice, or his Depute
for the shire of Selkirk, Sir John Hume of Blacader, Sir John Swintoun of that
Ilk; or the Sheriff-deput of the Shire of Bervick, with either of them for the
said Shire, the Earl of Lauderdale with either of the Sheriff-deputs of
Edinburgh for the Shire thereof, the Lord Provost of Edinburgh, with Sir
William Austruther of that Ilk one of the Senators of the College of Justice
for the Town of Edinburgh, the Lairds of Prestongrange and Bean^^oun, or either
of them, with the Sheriff deput of Haddingtoun for the said Shire Lawson of
Ca(...)muir with the Sheriff-depute of Peebles for the said Shire, Sir Thomas
Kirkpatrick of Closburn, and Johnstoun of Elchesh^^ls for the Shire of
Drumfries, Sir Andrew Agnew of Lochnaw and the Lord of Garthland for the Shire
of Wigton the Lairds of Rusco and Machrimore for the Stewartrie of
Kirkcudbright, the Lairds of Rowalland, Kilbirnie, Cai^letoun, and John Mure
Provost of Air, and the Sheriff-deput of Air for the Shire of Air, the Lairds
of Craigens Glanderstoun, and Gald well, and the Sheriff-deput of Renfrew for
the said Shire, Sir Alexander Monro of Bear-crofts, and William Cunninghame of
Boquhane for the Shire of Stirling Rollo of Woodside for the Shire of
Clackmannan Hamilton of Udstoun Sheriff-deput, and Andrew Hay of Craignethen
for the Overward of Lanerk Shire Hamilton of Barncleugh, and Hamilton of
Aikenhead for the Netherward thereof, the Lairds of Livingstoun, Dudingstoun,
and Pardivan for the Sheriffdom of Linlithgow, Sir Charles Halket of Pitfirren,
Sir James Mcgill of Rankellior, the Lairds of Randifoord, Auchtermarnie,
Ready, Hay younger of Naughtoun, and the Sheriff-Deput of Fyf, for the Shire,
of Fyf; The Master of Burghly for the Shire of Kinross, the Lord Ruthven, Sir
Colin Campbel of Aberuchle one of the Senators of the College of Justice, the
Lairds of Megnish, Culforgie, Dumbarnie younger; And the Sheriff-Deput of
Perth, for the Shire of Perth; Fullertoun of Kinnaber, and Miln of Balwillo,
for the Shire of Forfar; Irving of Kincousie, and the Sheriff-Deput of
Kincardin for the said Shire; And Marschals part of Aberdeen, the Lord of
Craigivar, Alexander Duff of Braco, the Lord of Munimusk younger, the Lord of
Birkenboog, and Sheriff-Deput of Bamff for the rest of Aberdeen-Shire and
Bamff; The Lairds of Brodie, Lethim and Culloden, Dumbar of Grange, and the
Sheriff-Deput of Inver^ess for Elgin, Nairn, and this side of Ness; Sir
Alexander Mckenzie of Coull, Mckenzie of Redcastle, the Lord of Collodon, and
Frazar of Rerick, for the Earl, of Seaforth, and the Lord Lovats, Division of
Inverness, the Lord of Balnagoon, Sir Adam Gordon of Dalfollie, and the
Sheriff-Deput of Southerland, the Lord of Hempriggs, Sinclair of Brimes
younger; for the rest of Inverness, and Shires of Southerland and Caithness;
The Land of Ardkinglass, Sir John Campbel of Carrick, for the Shire of Argyle
and the Sheriff-Deput of the said Shire, Claud Hamilton of Barns; Colquhoun of
Craigtoun for Shire of Dumbarton; The Lord of Kelburn or his Deput for the
Shire of Bute; James Beakie of Tankerness, and the Lord of Grahameshall for
Orkney and Zetland: And to the Effect Our Pleasure in the Premises may be
known. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and to the Mercat-Crosses of the remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shires and
Stewartries within this Kingdom and there in Our Name and Authority, by open
Proclamation, make Intimation of the Premises, that none pretend Ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the Sixteenth day of December, and of Our
Reign the eighth year 1696. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT,
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, 1696.


