THE Glorious Kingdom Of our Blessed Lord JESUS CHRIST on Earth, RIGHTLY TIMED:
Proving it not to be till His SECOND COMING.

IN Answer to two Treatises; The one, Entitled, Theopolis; or, The City of
God. By a nameless Author.

The other, A Treatise of the New-Heavens and New-Earth. By T. M.

By W. S. a Servant of Christ.

Job 38.2. Who is this that darkneth Counsel by words without Knowledge?

Rev. 5.10. And has made us unto our God Kings and Priests; and we shall reign
on the Earth.

Rev. 3.21. To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my Throne,
even as I overcame, and am set down with my Father on his Throne.

Isa. 57.14. Take up the stumbling Block out of the way of my People.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1693.

The EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
To the Churches of Christ in this Nation, Salutation.
Brethren;
I Cannot but lament the Disadvantages you lie under, which not a little
obstruct your Generation-work: for certainly you are set to be the Light of the
World; Matthew. 5.1^.
but how little you have been so, is too palpable. It Is also as certain, that
our Lord has given a Ministry to his Church, Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
for the perfecting of the Saints, -- for the edifying of the Body of Christ:
Yea, every Scribe instructed into the Kingdom of Heaven, is, Matthew. 13.52.
or should be, like a good Householder, which brings out of his Treasury
things new and old. True it is, we have had new things brought forth often, in
this day, both in Sermons and Books; but how unsound, unwholesom, and
unhealthful some of those have been, we sadly experience. This Nation is
wonderfully deluded with those strange Pamphlets of the Quakers, that seldom
have any thing of Truth in them, but a bundle of Delusions, whereby many Souls
are misled. Lamenting therefore the State of this Nation upon that account,
what care ought to be had by others how they preach and write? But now where
lies the fault, or on whom shall I lay the blame? The Ministers I cannot
excuse; for I fear they have too much neglected that Charge given to Timothy,
and in him to all others in the like Capacity; i. e. To give Attendance to
Reading, to Exhortation, 1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15, 16.
to Doctrine, and not to neglect the Gift given to them; and to exercise their
Meditations upon the Oracles of God and Mysteries of Christ, even the hidden
Mystery: and to give themselves WHOLLY to them, that their Profiting may appear
to all; and to take heed unto themselves, and unto their Doctrine; continuing
in them, that in so doing they may both save themselves, and them that hear
them. Without question, this Neglect has caused so many raw and undigested
Sermons, and impertinent Books. But now, alas, how should it be much better?
Must they make Brick without Straw? Can they give themselves [wholly] to this
Service, when the Care of their Families lies upon them, and little care is
taken by the Churches to set them free from those Encumbrances? Do we not see
they are forced to leave the Work of God, Nehem. 13.^0, 11.
and flee to their own Fields, like the Levites in Nehemiah's time, and none
are yet found like Nehemiah to reform herein? ^ Tim. 2.^, 14, 15.
How then should they study to show themselves approved unto God, Workmen that
need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth, as they are charged to
do? Certainly the Churches must bear the Blame, who are found guilty herein.
And now amongst other things of this kind, which we have cause to bewail, there
is a Book extant, printed 1672, entitled, Theopolis, or, The City of God, New
Jerusalem, etc. wherein it is asserted, That the thousand Years Reign will be
before the Personal Coming of Jesus Christ, in a Comment upon the 20th and 21st
Chapters of the Revelation, by a Nameless Author: The Consequence whereof is
very sad, tending to prompt Christians to that unchristian and unbecoming
Service the Gospel no ways injoins them, and to exasperate the Government
against them; a thing which all wise Men are, as much as in them lies,
concerned to avoid, and enter a Protest against. The which erroneous Opinion, I
hoped had been worn out and relinquished by time, that so no Man needed openly
to appear against it, since God Almighty has given sufficient Demonstration of
the contrary, by things that do run in another way, contrary to these Men's
Expectations, as also by what has been writ on the contrary. But now again, I
find this Error revived by Another, in a Book printed 1680, entitled, A
Treatise of the New Heavens and New Earth, by T. M. whereunto is added (as the
Author says) a true State of the thousand Years Time, affirming it to be
before the Second Coming of Christ.

Considering now the dreadful Consequence of these Men's Opinions, thus
published to the World in Print, whereby some are already led into Error, etc.
gives me now the occasion thus to appear, that if it may be a Means to recover
some that are unbiassed, and not wedded to their Fancies, and to prevent others
from falling in with them, to the great scandal of the Christian Religion, and
the prejudice of its Professors. Which Holy Gospel is styled the Gospel of
Peace, and no ways countenances the contrary: Be it therefore ever remembered
what our Blessed Lord said when in the hands of his Betrayers, Put up thy Sword
again into its place; for all they that take the Sword, shall perish with the
Sword, (which Experience has hitherto proved true): I say again, If this be
the fruit of these my Endeavors, I shall rejoice; for it is not any Prejudice
against these Authors, (for I know them not) but their erroneous Tenets that I
give my Testimony against. Neither would I seem in the least to reflect upon
any good Service they have otherwise done, particularly that Part called the
first Subject of the second or last Book I mentioned, i. e. the Treatise of the
New Heavens and New Earth; which I would have all that read me, take notice I
oppose not, but do heartily wish there were a more diligent Search after, and a
clearer Knowledge of it. I will only mind the Author of one or two things as to
that, and so pass it: In p. 3, 4. he tells us, That in the Renewed State, or
Glorious Kingdom of Christ, there shall be no Sun, Moon, or Stars in their
Courses; and no Temple, etc. Now this at best, is but an unwary Harangue. He
gives this further as a Reason, "Because (says he) there will be no Night
there. But, alas, how short this is of proving that for which it is brought,
will appear if we consider; 1st, The Text does not say, There will be no Sun,
etc. But there will be no need of it. 2dly, Not in every place in that time
neither, but in that City. Again, in p. 5. for Answer to an Objection, he makes
it a Question, Whether there be any Hell now, viz. any Place so called? A
needless Question, (in my Opinion) and of bad consequence; for by that Rule, we
may as well question, whether there be any Heaven now? And then whither shall
we run at last? even to question whether there be any God or Devil. Therefore
he had far better never undertook to answer such an Objection, than left it so.
3dly. If this be true, as to the New-Heavens, and New-Earth, as I grant in the
main, of what he there says it is, then how contradictory is this to the
former Book, and unhinges all that was said in it by the first Author. That it
is as contrary as Light is to Darkness, consider these Instances: In the first
Book the Author tells us, p. 164, That if these glorious things spoke of Rev.
21. of the New-Heavens, and New-Earth, and New-Jerusalem, be taken in the
Letter, are but of earthly, corruptible, perishing and fading things: The
latter Author, in his little Treatise, frequently affirms the literal and
perpetual Duration of these things, Rev. 21. And his 11th Arg. p. 6. is this,
That the New-Heavens and New-Earth, Rev. 21.1. are utterly inconsistent of any
other Sense, viz. than literal and eternal. The first Author affirms this
New-Heaven, and New-Earth, and New-Jerusalem, Rev. 21. to be only Mystical and
Spiritual, and to be fulfilled before the Personal Coming of Christ; as you may
see p. 125, 127. And the last Author affirms it to be literal, material, and to
be after Christ's Personal Coming, after the Day of Judgment, as p. 2. Thus I
have showed the Contradiction. 2dly, That it unhinges all that the first wrote
about his thousand Years Reign, as to the time of it, is also evident, if you
consider how he makes his Notion, viz. Rev. 20, and 21 chap. an Allegory; and
the foundation of his thousand Years Reign; I say, all his Discourse is built
hereon, as you may see Title Page, and p. 229. with the whole Discourse about
it.

But see how much these Men have mistaken themselves, arguing from false
Premises, mistaking Scriptures, making an Allegory of that which is spoke
literally. The first Author tells us, p. 8. It Is alike injurious to Truth, to
take a mysterious Allegory in the Letter, as to make an Allegory of the plain
Scripture. Now by his grant, it is alone, or alike dangerous: How he quits
himself of the latter, let all Men judge, when we have made a Trial.

This Author proposes, p. 10, 11, 12. First, As necessary to the Exposition of
the difficult things in these 20th and 21st Chapters of the Revelation, as
previous to all, and of absolute necessity: 1st, Prayer: 2dly, Reading: 3dly,
Meditation: 4thly, Conference: 5thly, Practice, (all very good.)

As to the four first, I hope I may say I have herein exercised my self long
before this Undertaking, as many can bear me witness; and to the last, let my
Work speak for me, and not my own Mouth. After these, the Author lays down some
Rules to go by in order to our understanding things aright herein.

1. To compare any obscure Places with those that are plain.

2. To consider what Vision, or obscure Passage, the Holy Ghost has
interpreted in the Revelation it self; for of all such, the Exposition is
undoubted and infallible; and so will the Revelation be the best Expounder of
the Revelation; and from those Expositions, proportionably borrow Light for the
discovering of other obscure Passages depending thereupon, or relating thereto,
or contemporaneous therewith.

His 3d Rule is, To observe diligently the Scope, Order and Harmony of the
Prophecies; and further adds, p. 43. That where there is no necessity to take a
Scripture in a figurative Sense, we are to take it in the Letter. All which I
approve, and shall endeavor to observe.

But now, how does this Author vary from these Rules by him proposed, as I
hinted before? In his 10 and 11 page he tells us what things are plain; and
amongst the rest, for our better understanding, this; That Saints shall come
forth in Vengeance. He bids us compare Rev. 19.13. Isa. 63.2. Rev. 19.15. with
Psalm. 29. Isa. 63.3.

Now since by the word Saints, he means Christ's Disciples, or Believers as
such; and by coming forth in Vengeance, he intends in this Life, viz. before
the Personal Coming of Christ; as it is evident p. 3. and from the whole of his
Discourse.

Then I ask where this is plain in any of these Texts, when there is not one
word of it, nor any thing like it in all the Texts; unless confident Assertion
shall pass for a plain Evidence? Nay, where is this found plain in all the
Bible? Is not this contrary to the Scope, Order, and Harmony of other
Scriptures? I am sure the contrary is plain; yea, so plain, that he that runs
may read it: See Romans 12.19. Dearly Beloved (sure these spoken to are Saints)
avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto Wrath: for it is written,
Vengeance is mine; and I will repay, says the Lord.

But no wonder when Men have got the knack to make hard things easy, and easy
things hard; as I read an Author lately affirmed, That the beginning-Principles
of the Christian Religion were hard to be understood, notwithstanding the
Apostle calls them Milk for Babes, etc. Thus we see oft-times Confidence
supplies the place of Evidence. Again, he tells us, p. 11. That, Rev. 1.20. i.
e. the Mystery of the seven Stars, and seven Golden Candlesticks, are
interpreted by Christ; and the Mystery of the Woman and the Waters, are
explained and expounded by the Spirit; and it is the Divine Key of the
Revelation. Now be it so, that these are plain, and to be taken literally, why
must not other things, that are explained also, be so accounted? For instance,
Chap. 11.8. we read of a City where the dead Bodies of the two Witnesses shall
lie three Days and a half: It Is told us as plain as words can be spoken, what
City this is, or at least as plain as either of the Authors explained things.

See them paralleled, at least in one of them;

The Woman which thou saw, is that great City which reigns over the Kings
of the Earth, chap. 17. ult.

This the Author acknowledges to be plainly meant of Rome, because Rome reigned
then over the Kings of the Earth, p. 11.17. As Rome is her literal Name,
Babylon is her mystical Name.

Their dead Bodies shall lie in the Street of the GREAT CITY; which spiritually
is called Sodom and Egypt; where also our Lord was Crucified, chap. 11.8.

Now let the Reader judge whether there is not as much, nay far more ground, to
take this according to the latter than the first, viz. The Woman for Rome: All
that we have to know the Woman to be meant of Rome, is but this one thing, (I
deny not but it is enough) viz. She is that Great City that reigned over the
Kings of the Earth.

But touching the other, we have not only the same Description, viz. That it is
the great City where our Lord was Crucified; which is as well known at this
time to the Churches to be Jerusalem by that Description, as Mystery Babylon is
known to be Rome by the Description given in that behalf. But again, we have
more in this Case; it is told us, That it is the City which was spiritually
called Sodom and Egypt: Now we find Jerusalem so called, Isa. 1.10. Jer. 23.14.
Perhaps you will say, Rome's mystical Name was written in her Fore head; Ergo,
She might be known by it also. But pray hold! John; it is true, saw it so in the
Vision; but 'twas not so plain but he still wondered, and that with great
admiration, who this Harlot should be; as you may see ver. 6, 7.

And yet, notwithstanding this, at least equal (nay more) Plainness, the Author
makes this an Allegory, as you may see p. 48, 49, 50. A mystical City, mystical
Prophets, mystical Heaven. And why not as well a mystical Christ, and a
mystical Crucifying in a mystical City, viz. the Hearts of Men? as William Pen
the Quaker, against Muggleton, p. 58. and in his Vindication of George Fox, p.
12. Sect. 6.

But again; Why must this City, New-Jerusalem, chap. 21. be an Allegory with
this Author? Is it because St. John had not so clear a sight of this City? p.
17. 3. 21. 10.
Certainly this cannot be supposed, unless the Author imagines that the
Wilderness will give a better Prospect of Mystery Babylon, than a great and
high Mountain will do of the New-Jerusalem, which cannot lightly be supposed;
and it is evident, here is as plain a Description of this as the other. But he
tells you, p. 164. That it is called an Allegory, Gal. 4.24. Now whether
New-Jerusalem be there so called, I need give no other Answer, but desire the
Reader to see if he can find any such thing in that Text.

It Is evident to all that will not shut their Eyes, (...). 11.10,
That our God has builded a City for his Saints, and will one day bestow it
upon Abraham and his Sons for a Reward of their Losses; (...). 3.12. ^^ap. 21.2.
and this City shall come down from God out of Heaven: it is for the Saints, and
therefore not the Saints, as this Author affirms, p. 156. The Saved Ones shall
walk in it, ver. 24. Ergo, Not the City it self; There shall in NO WISE enter
into it any thing that defiles, etc. ver. 27. Which cannot be meant of the
Church here in this mortal State, before the Personal Coming of Christ, in the
primest and purest Age that ever was or shall be. Further; This Author will
have the Dragon, Rev. 12.9. and 20.2. to be allegorical or figurative, viz. the
Pagan Empire, not any particular Person or Creature, p. 14, 15. although
there is none of those, he calls plain things, so plainly described. He tells
you of some places where some other are called the Devil: Admit this to be
true, 'twill not prove the other; for not only in this Book of the Revelation,
but in the whole Bible, there is not a plainer Speech. And we may as well, with
the Quakers, conclude that all the Scriptures that speak of the Devil, are
meant only of a mystical and figurative Devil: And I dare say, you may as soon
find a Dolphin in the Wood, as a Devil in Hell, if this be not he: for pray
mark how our Lord describes him, That old Serpent, called the Devil, and Satan,
which deceives the whole World. If this can be applied to any other, I must
confess my self very ignorant therein.

But I rather conclude this Notion to be like W. Deusbery's Interpretation of
Matthew. 21. touching the Ass that Christ rode upon; which he has taken the
Boldness to affirm, That it was the wild Nature in all the Children of the
Lord. Another says, That it was the Lord's People. And G. W. a Quaker,
likewise, upon Rev. 11.8. says, That City is the Rock of Ages. And indeed, if
Men may take this Liberty in their interpreting Scripture, then I may boldly
say, The plainest Scripture will not escape their Allegorizing Frames.

But now if this Book of the Revelation be the Key to unlock the whole Bible,
(as this Author confesses) then it is strange the Key should be made more
difficult than the Lock; for so indeed it is, if the most part be an Allegory,
as this Man affirms it is.

It Is called not only A Revelation, but The Revelation; a wrong Name, if this
Man's Doctrine be true. True it is, that what is therein delivered, (as many
other places of Scripture are) is set forth by Metaphors; but it follows not,
That therefore the Doctrine there delivered is in it self Allegorical, or but
Metaphorical: For instance, Chap. 1.
The seven Churches are set forth by seven Golden Candlesticks; and the seven
Ministers, or Messengers, by seven Stars. Now will any wise Man conclude these
seven Churches, and seven Messengers, are but figurative Churches and
Messengers, and not really such? And so Rome is set forth by a great and brave
decked Harlot; what then, Chap. 17.
must this be only a Figure, (viz. Rome) and not a real City, as some gether
figurative, and several others also; but this Author acknowledges, the
contrary. So of the Waters. Again, Chap. 12, and chap. 20.
the Devil is set forth by a great red Dragon, (a fit Similitude indeed;) But
what then? Must this Devil be nothing but a Figure still? Sure in all such
Figures, there is something figured out that is really so. ^^p. 11.
So by the two Candlesticks and two Olive Trees, are set forth the two
Prophets: But what then? Must these Figures be but a Figure of a Figure still?
although our Lord tells us plainly, They are two Prophets set forth by these
two famous Similitudes; and describes their Work, and the time of it, with
their Death, how it shall be, and by whom; how long they shall lie dead, and
where, and what shall be done to them in that time by their Enemies; and also
their perspicuous and dreadful Resurrection and Ascension: All which cannot be
applied to any thing else save two Persons. (...) his 48, 49 Pages.
Yet this Author will have these two Prophets to be but figurative Prophets
still, viz. The Church of God; and others of the same stamp with this Author,
Magistracy and Ministry; by some the two Testaments, etc. O what strange stuff
have we here! Brave Interpreters of Scripture! But let God be true, though
every Man a Liar. True it is, many things in this Book are delivered by
Metaphors, but not all; and those that are so, signify something that is real:
Therefore according to this Author, p. 3. the Consideration whereof calls for
the greater Circumspection, Wariness and Sobriety, as indeed other Writings do,
wherein are some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned
and unstable, wrest to their own Destruction. Pet. 3.16.
I commit all that I have said to the Blessing of God, and the Consideration of
his Churches.

W. S.

The ANSWER to the First Book, Entitled, THEOPOLIS, etc.
SIR,
I Have impartially read, and seriously considered what you have writ in your
Theopolis, etc. weighing it in the Balance of the Sanctuary, (according to the
Rules proposed by you) and find it greatly wanting; insomuch, that I cannot but
wonder you should take so much pains to so little purpose; for all that you
have said (in my Judgment) proves nothing for which you urge it, viz. That the
Saints shall reign a thousand Years upon Earth before Christ's Second Coming.
And that you may see your great Mistake herein, I shall give a brief and plain
Answer to what may seem most material therein for that purpose (not in the
least denying, but plainly acknowledging the glorious Kingdom of Christ on
Earth.)

And first you tell us, ( page 97, 98.) That there is a five-fold Kingdom
belongs to Christ, spoken of in the Scripture, viz. 1st, A Providential: 2dly,
A Spiritual: 3dly, A Mystical: 4thly, A Monarchial, or Davidical Kingdom:
5thly, A glorious Mysphatical Kingdom, viz. The Sovereignty that Christ in
Person (with all the Saints in their glorified Bodies with him) shall, upon
their general Resurection and Judgment, exercise here upon the Earth, before
all is given up into the Father's hands.

And for want of a right distinguishing herein, proceed (as you humbly
apprehend) all the mistaken Notions and Differences about the Kingdom of
Christ, treated of in your Book.

And truly, I do acquiesce with you herein; for I conclude your wrong
Distinction, or Misapprehension of a five-fold Kingdom of Christ, as thus
distinguished by you, is the great cause of all those your mistaken Notions
about the Kingdom of Christ in your Book: for to say nothing of four of your
five, I cannot yet see by all that you have said, that the Holy Scripture
speaks of your fourth Kingdom, as distinguished by you, from the fifth Kingdom,
(which fourth you call a Monarchial or Davidical Kingdom) that is to take place
here over the Nations before the Second Coming of Christ; but rather, that the
Holy Scripture is wholly a stranger to it.

And now I shall answer your Arguments urged on that account. The first sort
you direct your Reader to, ^0, 31, 32.
as most fit to be taken notice of in the first place, are in number five,
urged by you to prove (at least consequentially, or in the second place) That
Christ will not come in Person at the beginning of the thousand Years.

Because his Personal Coming is not to be till the Judgment-Day: And that (say
you) is not to be till after the thousand Years, and after the Battle of God
and Magog; (meaning Gog etc. Rev. 20.8.)

viz. That his Personal Coming is not to be till the Judgment-Day.

But the two last Branches I deny, viz. That the Judgment-Day is not to be till
after the thousand Years; after the Battle of God and Magog. For it is evident
to all that will not shut their Eyes, that the Judgment-Day begins at the
beginning of the thousand Years, Rev. 20.4. AND I SAW THRONES, AND THEY SAT
UPON THEM, AND JVDGMENT WAS GWEN UNTO THEM, etc. with the Chapter before,
compared with Dan. 7. where the same thing is spoken of; He beheld the little
Horn, ( viz. the Man of Sin, or great Antichrist) make War with the Saints,
till the Ancient of days comes; and one like the Son of Man came to the Ancient
of days; yea, near before him, and until the Throne were set, or PITCHED DOWN,
(so it is in the Original) not thrown down: And the Ancient of days did SIT,
ver. 9. with his Son brought near before him, or set by him, with the Saints,
ver. 10.22. THE JVDGMENT WAS SET, ver. 10.26.

Because when he comes in Person, it is not to such a Work as this, viz. to
fight and subdue Enemies with material Swords, nor to put his People as the
Lamb's Army, and Followers upon any such Service at that time; being then all
to be in the Resurrection and glorified State, made like himself in Glory; and
as the Angels of God. Neither will any of his Enemies be in a Capacity to make
Resistance or Opposition; who in their own Persons shall be destroyed by Fire,
and the very Earth they inhabit, and all its Works burnt up and consumed; at
whose Presence, the Earth and Heaven flee away.

(not to such a Work as this) you mean, not at all, then I deny it; and tell
you, It Is to do such a Work as that.

First, Because Christ's People will be all in the Resurrection and glorified
State, made like himself in Glory, and as the Angels of God.

etc. shall then be raised, changed and glorified, and so said to be in the
Resurrection, etc. yet all Christ's People that shall stand with him, Rev.
14.1. Zech. 14.4.
and follow him in that Army when he shall come down, and stand upon Mount
Zion, and upon the Mount of Olives, will not then be in the Resurrection, viz.
raised and glorified, etc. For part of those People and Followers, or Army,
will be of the Jews, who will not be converted till after the Resurrection of
the forementioned Saints, and therefore not raised and so changed with them.
It Is conspicuous enough, that their Conversion will not be fully wrought till
the Deliverer ( viz. Christ) comes to Zion, Isa. 59.20. Romans 11.25, 26.
Then shall he turn Ungodliness from Jacob: Or more fully thus, Our Lord Christ
appearing in the Clouds of Heaven, and the Saints Resurrection, and Ascension
up to him, together with the wonderful things that shall be wrought then; and
Christ's coming down with his glorified Saints and Angels, to deliver the whole
House of Israel (then remaining) from the hand of their strong and mighty
Enemies, Isa. 59.19. Ezekiel. 38.9.16. Zec. 14.2, 3.
that will come in like a Flood, a Storm, and Cloud to cover the Land; yea, all
Nations gathered against Jerusalem to battle. These things, I say, will produce
the Jews Conversion, or be the means to bring forth that Nation; and therefore,
not till these things be accomplished, shall that Nation be converted: Ergo,
Not raised and changed, but still in their mortal State: Therefore, according
to your own Argument, may, under Christ, do such a Service as above specified.
We are likewise told, the Jews, the number of whom, Rev. 7.4. to the 8 Verse.
Verse 9.
even of all the twelve Tribes of Israel, will be one hundred forty four
thousand; who are distinguished from the innumerable Company of glorified
Saints; as you may clearly see: Chap. 14. 1.
These are said to stand with the Lamb upon Mount Zion, (...). 19, 20.
when the Sickle shall be thrust into the Harvest; yea, when the Wine Press
shall be trodden without the City (Jerusalem) in the Valley of Jehoshaphat,
(...) 3.2, 12, (...), 14.
when the Lord shall plead and decide the Controversy of his People, and thresh
the Nations by his Thresher, (...) 4.13.
i. e. the Daughter of Zion, ( viz. the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, or Jews) yea,
at that Day, when the Lord shall set his Feet upon the Mount of Olives, (which
you acknowledge to be at the Personal Coming of Christ, ^^ech. 14.4, 4.
and Day of Judgment, p. 101. Then Judah also shall fight at Jerusalem.

Because there will not be any of Christ's Enemies in a Capacity to make
Resistance, or Opposition, at his Personal Coming: Ergo.

They will be destroyed by Fire then. I confess they will be then incapable
indeed, when they are burned to Ashes: But pray what is this to the purpose?
Will they not be in a Capacity before? Or, 2dly, Will all Christ's Enemies be
burned up before his Coming, that none shall be left to make Resistance or
Opposition at his Coming? You have brought no Text to prove it, and I know not
of any Text that will do it; therefore I conclude none are bound to believe you.

The very Earth they inhabit, and all the Works thereof, shall be burnt up and
consumed; at whose Presence the Earth and Heaven flee away. Ergo, No room for
such a Work.

i. e. That the Heavens and Earth shall be consumed? Does not your Second (in
his Treatise, p. 5.) tell us, That the Scripture does not express an
Annihilation thereof? etc. Again, what though the Scripture speaks of such
great things to be done in that great Day of the Lord? yet does it not follow
from hence, that all these shall be done in the first Hour of that Day, and
that before the Enemies make opposition. Thus much in answer to the Reasons
brought to prove your second Argument.

Because such an Apprehension would make three Personal Comings of Christ;
whereas we read but of two, ( Heb. 9.28.) Who will appear the second time, etc.
because it is expressly said, He sits at the Right Hand of God, till his Enemies
be made his Foot stool.

53d page: For without making three of two, or two of one, I am sure it cannot
be done. Again, if but two Personal Comings; then you infer, this at the
beginning of the thousand Years cannot be the second Personal Coming: because
(say you) it is expressly said, He sits at the Right Hand of God, till his
Enemies be made his Footstool. Here you think you have your Antagonist fast,
and are invincible. I confess you are safe enough yet, whilst you have not here
told us where it is thus expressed; and since I must also acknowledge, if my
Memory fail not, it is expressly said so in all the Books that ever I read about
this Subject, (and they are more than a good many) I mean those Books written
for a thousand Years Reign before the Coming of Christ, to the everlasting
Shame and Consusion of your Faces, who have time after time affirmed, That this
is expressly written in the Holy Scripture, as we well know you intend in this
place, and as you elsewhere in your Book affirm, (for this is three times at
least affirmed by this Author in his Book); by which you have miserably
deceived your selves and others, (as some in my hearing have confessed). Be not
offended, for herein I must be plain with you, take it as you please: Is it not
to be wondered at, that ever any Men of Learning and Conscience should bear the
Face to affirm such a thing? when I dare be bold to say, there is not one place
in all the Bible that says so. To mistake at some times, in the business of
Interpreting of Scripture, is an Infirmity we cannot help, though Caution had
need be had therein, especially in Cases of this nature; but to transgress in
this kind, looks too much like Presumption. This may serve for an Answer at
present, till I meet with it again.

This conquering fighting Work, is not by Christ in Person, at this time of his
glorious and terrible Appearing.



Because the Execution then, upon the Enemies, will be (say you) sudden and
speedy, like Travail upon a Woman with a Child; as a Thief in the Night; like
Lightning; as it was in the days of Lot and Noah, with sudden Destruction: and
as a Snare, will he come upon all the Inhabitants of the Earth: This Work, at
Christ's Personal Coming, will be done at an instant, suddenly, at the Sounding
of a Trumpet, in the Twinkling of an Eye: whereas this Work asks time gradually
to be performed. (And you comprehend in the first the Preparation for, and
Judgment of the great Whore, etc.)

(...). 17.16, (...). (...). 14.
but by them that afterward will give their Kingdom to the Beast, and afterward
make War with the Lamb. Secondly; You say the Work of the beginning of the
thousand Years, asks some Time, etc.

Ay; And so will that also which will be done when Christ comes in Person: for
although it is told us, Christ shall come as a Thief, etc. viz. very suddenly
and unexpectedly; yet it is not any where told us, That Work that he shall then
do, shall be done as suddenly as a Thief comes; nay that very Similitude, if
you will follow it so far, lets us know the contrary: for though a Thief in the
Night comes suddenly, yet he oft-times is long enough a doing his Work, viz.
Rifling and Robbing, as some have sadly experienced. So also tho Travail upon a
Woman with Child comes suddenly, yet her Delivery asks some time, and is not
done in the Twinkling of an Eye; ^en. 7.12, 7, 24. ^hap. 8.3. ^ompare ^hap.
7.11. ^h Chap. ^ 13, 14.
and so I may say of the days of Noah, etc. for though it was sudden, yet you
cannot but know the Waters were forty Days increasing, and prevailed upon the
Earth one hundred and fifty Days before they began to abate, but were not dried
up till twelve Months were completed, etc. Again, whereas you say, That Work
of Christ's Personal Coming shall be done at the Sounding of a Trumpet, etc.
What then? the Question may be how long the Trumpet shall sound? Surely you
will not (upon second Thoughts) say no longer than the Twinkling of an Eye, for
that is no Sounding at all.

But again; Where find you that any thing, save the Coming of Christ, and the
Resurrection, Change, and Ascension of Saints, shall be at the Sound of a
Trumpet? and yet surely you will conclude, there is something more to be done
when Christ comes.

Again; You say the Work that Christ shall do at his Personal Coming, will be
done in the Twinkling of an Eye: But pray what Work else besides the Change of
Saints? I find no other, nor any body else for me: The Text that speaks of
this, (for there is no other that I can find) viz. of something done then, in
the Twinkling of any Eye, is 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. which speaks so plain of the
Change of Saints only to be in the Twinkling of an Eye, that unless the
Reader's Eyes twinkle, and that greatly too, when he beholds the Text, he
cannot lightly be mistaken.

You also tell us, The Execution upon the Enemies will be sudden and speedy,
like Lightning, at the Personal Coming of Christ.

But how you came to know this, I much question, Mat. 24.27. Luke 17.24.
since I find no Text in holy Writ reveals it: True it is, the Coming of our
Lord is compared to Lightning; but then it ought to be observed, it is not in
respect of the Swiftness of it, but in respect of the Visibleness of it. But
again, admit it had; what is this to the Question? which is concerning the
Destruction of the Enemies. Again, You further add, As a Snare, etc.

I grant it; But what is this to the Question? for Ensnaring and Destroying are
two things: Do you not know many Creatures are taken or ensnared suddenly, but
not destroyed so quickly. Thus you may see how you deceive your self and others
in such an ambiguous Manner.

Neither can Christ's Personal Appearing be at this time; because then it must
be supposed that Christ, being in the Camp of the Saints, and beloved City,
shall suffer Himself, and all the glorious Angels and glorified Saints, to be
besieged and straightened by the Gog. Magog Army.

Therefore must this be done by his virtual Presence, Power and Spirit, (though
spoken as if he did it in Person) and these great Conquests effected, etc.

Maton, which you commend, viz. Whatsoever Text of Scripture is expounded any
other ways than God meant by it, it is, according to its Interpretation, the
Word of Man and not of God; and consequently, in adhering to such
Interpretations, we believe not what God says, but what Man does make him say.

How much you have fulfilled this Man's Sentence in Expounding this Scripture,
contrary to what God meant by it, let all judge, and let your Tongue or Pen
condemn you: for pray read the Text, and see whether there be any such thing in
it, or at all like unto it: The Text is Rev. 20.7, 8, 9, 10. And when the
thousand Years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his Prison; and shall
go out to deceive the Nations which are in the four Quarters of the Earth, Gog
and Magog, to gather them together to battle: the Number of whom is as the Sand
of the Sea. And they went up on the Breadth of the Earth, and compassed the
Camp of the Saints about, and the beloved City; and Fire came down from God out
of Heaven, and devoured them. And the Devil that deceived them was cast into
the Lake of Fire and Brimstone; where the Beast and the false Prophet are, and
shall be tormented Day and Night for ever and ever.

Now I will appeal to any judicious and unbiassed Man, whether here be any
Suffering and Straitning (in this Man's Sense) to Christ, or his Angels and
Saints: You may as well say, Christ now suffers in Heaven; and yet this must
pass for an Argument.

Thus I have done with the five first Arguments which you have laid down to
prove, That Christ comes not in Person at the beginning of the thousand Years
Reign; and therefore there must be (as you conclude) a thousand Years reigning
before his Personal Coming.

Let the Arguments and Answers be compared, and then judge.

In the next place I shall consider your eleven Arguments, of the second sort,
upon the latter part of the 4th Verse of the 20th Chapter of the Revelation, i.
e. these words, And I saw the Souls of them that were beheaded for the Witness
of Jesus, and for the Word of God, and which had not worshipped the Beast,
neither his Image, neither had received his Mark upon their Foreheads, or in
their Hands; and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand Years.

(Upon which words (say you) all this Opinion or Discourse of yours, is
grounded. See your large Sheet.)

When you have told us the great Difference of Writers and Commentators hereon,
some judging it to be a Corporal Resurrection, others a Spiritual, viz. A
renewing and reviving of the Soul, the Effects of Christ's Spirit upon the
Hearts of Bevers, etc. p. 47.

Then you tell us, That it is humbly conceived, the Mind of the Spirit is here
a Mystical Resurrection, or Civil Life, that they are said to live, as most
consonant to Truth, (as you say) sound Reason, and the Scope of the Place they
lived. And as you more largely speak, p. 61, 62. This Life is a reigning State
both of the one and the other; and the contrary, viz. Death, a dethroned,
scattered, imprisoned, and captivated State.

The Dead that lived not. Where you show us, by the direct Antithesis, That
this Life and Death, of the one and the other, is the same, viz. That the
Saints now are dead, the other now alive; the Saints shall then live, and the
Wicked then be dead, ( viz. in the thousand Years:) After the thousand Years
the Wicked shall live again, and the Saints then die again; according to the
former Distinction: For (say you) They must take their turns; as the one goes
up, ( viz. to the Throne) the other goes down: They ( viz. the Wicked) are not
to live again till the thousand Years be finished; implying, (say you) That
when the Dragon is loosed, there will then be a Military Power and Jurisdiction
at least, that they (viz. the Wicked) may live too. Again, in opposition unto
Christ, and the Saints, in their encompassing the Camp of the Saints, and
beloved City which their ( viz. of the Wicked) said raised State makes good.

You tell us further, That Living and Dying is variously taken; sometimes
literally, for the natural Spirit or eternal Life and Death; sometimes
figuratively, for a civil or mystical Life and Death. For the latter you give
us several Scriptures; which I have seriously considered, and find that many of
them speak not of any Life or Death at all; several more speak of the natural
Death, and the Resurrection therefrom: But now admitting this, that there is
such a thing as a civil Life spoke of in these or some of them, the Question
then is, Whether this be intended in your Text, Rev. 20.4. which is now the
Matter we are upon?

And for a leading Card, you present us ( p. 51.) with the Assemblies
Annotations upon this place; which we shall not much regard, seeing their
Interpretations, especially upon this Book of the Revelation, are so like some
others, viz. It Is this or that, or the other, and sometimes fix upon nothing;
and also as inconsistent and contradictory to themselves, as they are to the
Truth; as any one may see that reads them: After which rate any Man may
interpret Scripture all day long. ^^e the As^^mblies An^t. on Rev. ^0.4, 5, 6.
And in this very place, you may see, they tell us also, That this first
Resurrection, is a Rising from the Death of Sin to the Life of Grace. And no
marvel that poor deluded Sect of Quakers have got this by the end, viz. to call
the rising out of the Death of Sin to the Life of Grace, the first
Resurrection; and Pythagoras's Transmigration of the Soul, the second
Resurrection; since our grave Annotators have thus led the Van, as the Papists
did (in this thing) before them. ^ee Rhemish ^est. Annot. ^ Rev. 20. (...).


Therefore as we are not to mind them in the one, we shall as little regard
them in the other; and so pass on to your Position, p. 51. which is as
follows.

And that the Corporal Resurrection of the Saints cannot be understood in this
place, further appears.

Because the Text, in the Letter of it, speaks not of their Bodies, but Souls;
and of the Souls only of them that were beheaded, as Rev. 6.9. Now it is
nowhere said that Souls, in a proper Sense, revive and are raised; because
they never die, being immortal, and so not capable of a Resurrection,
necessitating therefore another Sense.

viz. by your Arguments, than it did by the Assemblies Annotations; yet I must
tell you, it is yet alike, and no better demonstrated: and I cannot but wonder
that so skilful a Man in Figures, should no better discern the Text, nor what
makes for, or against himself. For if this Argument hit your Antagonist, will
it not as quickly return against your self? It will seem to do your Assembly of
Annotators some Service for their Spiritual Resurrection, ( viz. the Renewing
of the Souls, or their Notion of the Soul's Living and Reigning with him in
Heaven) but it makes against your self; unless you intend by your Civil Life,
that the Saints shall reign a thousand Years without their Bodies; and then it
would follow, the Wicked reign now without their Bodies also. This might
suffice for an Answer, but that I may not leave any in the dark; and therefore
pray remember, that by a Figure called Metonymy, viz. one thing is put for
another that has some relation to it, so we find the Soul is put for the Body
in several places of Scripture, as Psalm. 16.10. Acts 2.27. and so also by a
Figure called Synechdoche, Genesis 46.2. Acts 2.4. Chap. 7. 1.
viz. a part put for the whole, is frequently found in this very case in
Scripture; and the one of these must needs be here intended, and very probable
the latter. The Apostle chooses to express their Souls now, because he had seen
their Souls in the separated State, Chap. 6. 9, 10, 11.
crying out, and wishing for such a time as this; and therefore, here, to show
the Alteration, says thus, I saw the Souls, etc. which is as much as if he had
said, I saw those Souls that before were without their Bodies, under the Altar,
with their fellow (Slain) Servants, (and in that State said to be dead) united
to their Bodies, and live again, and reign with Christ. And that this must
needs be the Sense, and no other, consider:

First; They were really dead, expressed by this word Beheaded; and now said to
live again, (for so it is by the Antithesis, The rest lived not again).

Secondly; This is expressed after the same manner, as our Lord expresses his
living again, Chap. 1.18. I am he that lives, and was dead, and behold I am
alive for evermore; (which is a Living again.)

Thirdly; What is more usual in Scripture than this, both in respect of natural
and eternal Death, to speak after this manner, So many Souls were slain or
died; the Soul that sins shall die; and so of Life?

Fourthly; It Is obvious to all from these words, See Chap. 6. 11. Chap. 11.
(...) Chap. 12. 11. Chap. 13. 15.
The rest of the dead, that the lump or general is, That many are dead, both
Saints and Wicked; among which, you have an Account before in this Book, that
many Saints are killed, immediately before; and of the great Slaughter of the
Wicked at several times, and diverse ways, as in this Book at large may be seen:
and at last that wonderful Slaughter, Chap. 19. to which this is joined, as
appears by this word (And) in the first Verse of this 20th Chapter. And now of
this dead Lump, whereof many of the Saints are said to be beheaded immediately
before, some are said to live again: But the rest of the Dead, viz. the Wicked,
whereof many were (as aforesaid) but immediately slain, lived not again till the
thousand Years were expired.

Thus it is evident, that both Saints and Wicked were all dead before, viz. a
natural or corporal Death; the one are raised, the other not, but lie in their
Graves till after the thousand Years.

Fifthly; Consider the Antithesis, which you have already granted, viz. that
Life and Death are the same in both Parties: Mark that. And if the Wicked shall
never live the Civil Life (as you have defined it) after the thousand Years,
then it must be meant a Corporal Life.

But the Wicked shall not live such a Mystical or Civil Life; ( viz. Reigning.)
Ergo, It must needs be a Corporal Life here intended. The Consequence of the
Major is clear; the Minor is proved thus:

If the Wicked shall live again such a Life, ( viz. Civil, as before defined)
after the thousand Years;

Then the Holy Scripture does some where or other testify of it.

But the Holy Scripture does no where testify of any such thing: Ergo, They
shall not.

All that you bring to prove it, is but Rev. 20.8, 9. which proves no such
thing; for there is no Reigning mentioned: nay, so far from Reigning, that it is
only attempted to overcome, whereby they might reign; but far off from being
accomplished: They do not so much as hurt or straiten any, (as you boldly,
though without ground, affirmed) but are quickly destroyed. And it is well known
such Attempts may be made in a Nation, (as late Experience has shown) and yet
the Attempters never come to reign; which is the Life you speak of, (viz.
Reigning.)

As for the other Branch in this Argument of yours, viz. And of Souls only that
were beheaded; it is your next or second Argument, and therefore I shall not at
present take notice of it.

Because if we are to understand a bodily Resurrection of the Saints, (Martyrs
only being here mentioned, and beheaded Martyrs too; taking in no other Saints,
and only such too that suffered under Antichrist) then will Christ have but a
small Kingdom: And then only such Martyrs, partaking of the first Resurrection,
are to share of Happiness and Freedom from the second Death; excluding all but
such, both from Happiness, and Exemption from such a Curse, contrary to the
Analogy of Faith, and the whole Current of Scripture: For what, by such
Doctrine, will become of all the Saints from Abel to this time, that were not
Martyrs under Antichrist?



For first; Pray consider, Will not this, like your former Argument, make as
much against your self? May we not ask the Question, What will become of all
the rest of the Saints that shall not be beheaded, and yet shall be found alive
when the Kingdom is set up? Must they have no share with the rest? Certainly
this is contrary to the Analogy of Faith, and the whole Current of Scripture,
etc.

Sir, Could you be ignorant of the Fallacy of this Argument when you made it?
Did you not know that by a Synechdoche, a Part might be put for the Whole in
this Case also, viz. Beheading, for all Afflictions? Is it not common in
Scripture so to do? Is it not said, Matthew. 10.38. Luke 14.27. Whosoever does
not take up, and bear his Cross, cannot be my Disciple, and is not worthy of
me? Now, tell me, do all Christ's Disciples take up a Cross? It Is evident the
Cross is here put for all Afflictions.

Again; Is not the Reproach of Christ put for all Afflictions, Heb. 11.26? And
is it not said of all the Faithful, Romans 8.3.
that they are killed all the day long, accounted as Sheep for the Slaughter?
But what need I spend time thus, but for the sake of others? for pray read your
58th, 59th, and 60th Pages, and see whether you have not said the same in
effect in your answering an Objection, which is as follows:

But why must the Church be included under these Terms or Characters, Of Souls
beheaded, that would not worship the Beast?

Because it may more emphatically and significantly hold forth the State they
are raised from, and raised to, etc.

Thus you grant the whole Church then is included under these Terms, and also
the Reason of it. Then you further tell us, The diverse Afflictions they
suffered were represented by the various Characters the Church is set forth in
this Book; as may be seen at large in those Pages.

Therefore look into your own Glass, and behold the Folly of this Argument.

If the Apostle judged that Man to be happy that condemns not himself in that
thing which he allows, ^^m. 14.22.
what think you of that Man that condemns others in that thing which he
allows himself?

But before I pass this Argument, I will open another Glass, whereby you and
all others may more clearly see the Vanity of this Argument.

Whereas you question (since Martyrs only being here mentioned, and beheaded
Martyrs too, and only such too that suffered under Antichrist, taking in no
other Saints) what will become of all the Saints from Abel to this time, that
were not Martyrs under Antichrist; concluding hereupon, that Christ will have
but a small Kingdom, viz. none but Martyrs, and such Martyrs too, (and worse
still) and that all the rest are hereby excluded from Happiness and Exemption
from such a Curse, ( viz. the second Death): Affirming, more expressly in your
8th Argument, (upon this Doctrine of the Corporal Resurrection, in this Text)
that Martyrs only shall be happy, and all the rest ( viz. Saints) shall be
raised to the second Death.

Now to remove this Absurdity, which you have thus drawn upon this Doctrine you
so much oppose, ( viz. of the Corporal Resurrection in this Text) I will show
you that there shall be more than these Martyrs share in this Happiness, i.e.
of reigning with Christ this thousand Years.

First Negatively. Let it be well observed, the Text does not say, That all
Persons which have not a Part in this first Resurrection, shall be hurt of the
second Death; neither does any Text in the whole Book of God affirm such a
thing. All that this Text says, is this, That the rest of the Dead lived not
again until the thousand Years were fulfilled, and that those are blessed which
have a part in the first Resurrection. Nor can there be any good Reason showed
for such an Inference, (though you boldly affirm there may) as I shall more
fully show anon, when I come to answer what you say in your ninth Argument. But,

Secondly, Affirmatively. Take a full view of the Text once more, and I doubt
not but you may see (unless your Eyes be closed) that there is more than only
Martyrs, viz. such Martyrs, etc. shall have a part in the first Resurrection,
and reign with Christ this thousand Years; and that you may the better see it,
I will read the Text for you:

Rev. 20.4, 6. And I (John) saw Thrones, and they sat upon them, and Judgment
was given unto them: And I saw the Souls of them that were beheaded for the
witness of Jesus, etc. And they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand Years.
-- Blessed and Holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection, etc.

Now taking it for granted, that you have fully viewed, and well observed this
Text, I ask these few Questions:

First; Did John at this time see any more, save Martyrs, rise from the dead,
sitting upon Thrones, judging and reigning with Christ?

You answer (upon this Doctrine);

John saw no more but Martyrs risen from the dead, sitting upon Thrones,
judging and reigning with Christ.

Who then are those which St. John tells us first, He saw sitting upon Thrones,
and to whom Judgment was given?

I presume, upon serious Thoughts, you will not say these were the Martyrs; for
the Martyrs are distinguished from them by these words, [And I saw]: The common
Phrase used for Distinction in this Book.

Who then? Was it the Father and the Son? If you say it was, (as I think you
will not) then I ask who gave them two this great Gift, ( viz. Judgment?)
Again, If you shall say it is meant of Christ's Sitting upon the Throne, to whom
the Father shall give the Government of this World, So used Psa^. 9.7.
expressed in this word [Judgment;] then I ask further, Is Christ a Plurality
of Persons? for mark, it is said Thrones, [or Seats on this Throne,] And they
sat upon them. And further; They, with the Martyrs, are distinguished from
Christ in this very place; ver. 4. And they [also] lived and reigned with
Christ. Again, ver. 6. Blessed is he ( viz. every he, or, all such) that has
part in the first Resurrection; they shall be Priests of God and of Christ, and
shall reign with Christ. And I presume also you will not say it is meant of
Angels; (...) 2.5. (...). 6.3.
for the Lord will not put the World to come into the Government of Angels. We
read the Saints shall then judge Angels; never read that the Angels shall then
be made Judges. (...) 1.6. ^ 5.10. ^. 3.21. ^ 7.22, ^
Furthermore; Is it not expressly written, That all the Saints (here I intend by
this word [Saints] all that died before, and are found alive in the Faith at
Christ's second Coming, i.e. those that were not beheaded, as well as those
that were) shall be made Judges and Kings, and shall sit upon Thrones with the
King of Kings, (...). 6.2, 3. (...). 2.26, (...)
to whom Judgment shall be given, and shall judge Angels and Men, and reign with
Christ on Earth?

Therefore, although the Martyrs are here particularly mentioned for the
Eminency of their Services and Sufferings; and because so immediately done, for
the great Honor of all such, and the present Encouragement of all the Lord's
Servants in their Tribulations; yet you may clearly see, by what has been
said, that all the rest shall be blessed with them: and so no need for you, or
any body else, to ask, what shall become of all the Saints from Abel to this
time, that were not Martyrs under Antichrist. And so I pass to your 3d Argument.

Because this will hold out an Absurdity of a twofold Resurrection (a thousand
Years distant each from other) of Bodies, ^^g. 3. and (...) of the ^^^e Sheet.
contrary to John 5.28. the State of the Resurrection being there held forth by
Christ to be general and universal, relating to Good and Bad, and to be at one
time; the Hour, the Day, viz. The Latter-day. So John 6. four times, ver. 39,
40, 44, 54. chap. 11.24. Job 19.25. In the Twinkling of an Eye, and Sound of
the Trumpet, 1 Cor. 15.51, 52.

First; To the first Branch of your Argument, viz. An Absurdity: Pray what
Absurdity, or why is it absurd? Methinks you that are so full of Reasons, might
have given some here? I deny that a twofold Resurrection is an absurd thing:
Must your bare Word, without Proof, pass for an Oracle, when the Holy Scripture
so often affirms the contrary; yea, and your self, in the large Sheet, confesses
a twofold Resurrection; and so does your Second, in his 10th Page? And pray
tell me what Absurdity is it for the Saints to be raised a thousand Years
before the Wicked, any more than for Christ, (who was not only of the same Lump
with all Mankind, (in respect of one of his Natures) but also Head of his
Church) to rise a thousand Years before the rest?

Your Second Branch, is, That it is contrary to what is held forth by Christ in
the Scripture by you mentioned, viz. a twofold Resurrection, a thousand Years
distant each from other: For, (say you) the Scriptures say, That all the Dead
shall be raised in a Day, yea, in an Hour, nay less, in the Twinkling of an Eye.



First; How is this like to be, since, as you confess, That they shall not be
raised both together; but the Saints first, See in (...) 5th Arg. (...) the
large Sheet.
and the Wicked after them? And your Second, in his Treatise, p. 10. the like;
acknowledging also, That many things shall be done between the Resurrection of
the Saints, and that of the Wicked: As, 1st. Christ's sending his Angels to
gather together the Saints after they are raised. 2dly. The Taking them up into
the Air. 3dly. The Burning up of the World and its Works. 4thly. Christ's
Sitting upon the Throne to judge his People; at which time, they must give an
Account, and receive accordingly; all the Unjust continuing in their Graves
until this Judgment be over.


Now I appeal to every judicious and impartial Judgment, and to your self in
particular, whether, since all this must be done in this order, one after
another, in this Interim, between these two Resurrections, I say, whether these
two can be both in the Twinkling of an Eye? Nay, take it short, as your self
have delivered it, and then resolve me.

Secondly; Before I pass, take a view of the Scriptures by you quoted, and see
whether you have not heedlesly affirmed this thing, viz. That the Resurrection,
both of Just and Unjust, shall be both in the Twinkling of an Eye? when, in
truth, there is nothing in the Text testified to be done in the Twinkling of an
Eye, but only the Change of Saints; as any one may see that reads it.

Whether then this be not absurd in you to affirm, That this twofold
Resurrection ( viz. of Just and Unjust) shall be both in the Twinkling of an
Eye; when the Scripture speaks of no such thing?

Thirdly; You tell us, This twofold Resurrection shall be all in one Hour, and
therefore cannot be a thousand Years distance each from other.

Now if by Hour you mean a natural Hour, consisting of sixty Minutes, then I
deny this also, and tell you this twofold Resurrection shall not be
accomplished in so little a time: for beside what is already offered against
your E^e-twinkling, which might seem for an Answer in this also, I will add,
(because I design not only your Confutation, but Illumination) That your
Argument is fallacious, because it is argued from that which is Metaphorical, to
that which is Proper: For you cannot be ignorant that the word Hour, in
Scripture, is sometimes put for a certain Time wherein such a Work is done,
shorter or longer, as it is. For instance; The time of great and universal
Tribulation that shall come upon all the World, foretold by our Lord, is called
an Hour of Temptation; ^ev. 3.10. ^sal. 30.5. Cor. 4.17.
yea, all the time of our Troubles here, not only called a Day, or a Night, and
an Hour, but also that which is far less, even a Moment; and all the time of
the New Testament's Ministration, an Hour: and since you had such an Hour spoke
of at that very time, ^oh. 4.21, 23
even in the same breath, but two Verses off, ^oh. 5.25.
viz. 25th, it is wonderful you could no better discern what kind of Hour this
was. Read that 25th Verse, and consider.

Fourthly; You tell us further, This twofold Resurrection will be all in a Day:
Ergo, Not a thousand Years distant.

This is like your Hour, full as fallacious; and therefore the Question is, How
long your Day is? whether a Day-Proper, or a Day-Metaphorical; an ordinary
Natural-Day, or a Day extraordinary: for you cannot be ignorant, that the Holy
Scripture frequently speaks of both. Touching a Day-Metaphorical: Heb. 4.7. 2
Cor. 6.
You have it sometimes for the Time of Grace and Salvation, sometimes for a
Man's Life, sometimes for the time of Christ's being here in the Flesh, Luke
19.4. Joh. 9.4. Joh. 8.5.
sometimes for the time of Judgment upon the Wicked here; and frequently for
the time of Christ's, and the Saints Reign on Earth; called, The Day of Christ;
and the Son of Man's Day; the last Day; the great Day; Job 14.6^ and 18.2^ Jer.
12.3^ Ezekiel. 30.2^ Phil. 1.1^. Luke 17.2^ Joh. 11.2^ Jude 6. Acts 2.20 Zech.
14.7, Psalm. 49.1^ 2 Pet. 1.1^ Mal. 4.2. Zec. 14 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 20^ 21.
that great and notable Day of the Lord: That Day; it shall be one Day, which
shall be known (or acknowledged and kept to him) to the Lord.

Described, first, by its parts; Dawning of the Day, Sunrising, Morning, etc.
not Day nor Night: -- But in Summer; and in Winter shall it be: And it shall be
when the Lord my God shall come (to Mount Zion:) And all the Saints with Thee.
Then shall the Lord go forth; and fight against those Nations, as when he
fought in the Day of Battle, ( i. e. with Amaleck and Og, when Israel came near
to Canaan.) And his Feet shall stand in that Day upon the Mount of Olives: And
it shall be when living Waters shall go out from Jerusalem. And the Lord shall
be King over all the Earth: In that Day shall there be one Lord, and his Name
one; and in that Day there shall be upon the Bells of the Horses, Holiness to
the Lord; and the Pots in the Lord's House shall be like the Bowls before the
Altar; and every Pot in Jerusalem and Judah shall be, Holiness unto the Lord of
Hosts: And in that Day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the House of the
Lord of Hosts.

Secondly; Described by its Works at large, viz. The Lord's Coming; The Saints
Resurrection and Change; then caught up to meet the Lord in the Air; the Jews
Conversion; the Consternation of the Wicked; and the Man of Sin, and his
Company's Destruction; Calling his Saints to Judgment; Subjecting the Nations
to the Jews, Reigning over the Nations, etc. and at the end, destroy, and then
raise and judge the rest, and so deliver up the Kingdom to the Father, that he
may be all in all.

Moreover; You may clearly see that it is agreeable to Scripture,
(notwithstanding you have affirmed it to be contrary) viz. a twofold
Resurrection. I will instance only in two, 1 Cor. 15.23, 24. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.

Thus much for answer to the Day. As for what you infer from the last Trump
Sounding, I have answered before to your 4th Argument of the first Five,
therefore need say nothing more to it now: Wherefore, from what has been said
in answer to your 3d Argument, I hope you may see the Invalidity of it; and
that notwithstanding what you have yet offered, this Doctrine stands firm and
unshaken, viz. That this first Resurrection, Rev. 20.4, 5, 6. is, by the Spirit
of God, meant the Corporal Resurrection of the Saints: and not your vain
Conception of a Mystical or Civil Resurrection, as you have defined it.

I proceed now to your next Argument.

Because this Opinion ( viz. of a Corporal Resurrection) holds out this to be
the first Bodily Resurrection, contrary to what the Scripture speaks of; nine
going before it: As 1st, The Widow of Sarepta's Son, 1 Kings 17.22. 2dly, The
Son of the Shunamite, 2 Kings 4.35. 3dly, The Man that was raised by the Touch
of the Prophet's Coffin. 4thly, The Widow of Naim's Son, Luke 7.15. 6thly,
Lazarus, John 11.44. 7thly, Those many that came out of their Graves,
accompanying Christ at his Resurrection. 8thly, Tabitha, Acts 9.41. 9thly,
Eutichus, Acts 20. By which several Instances, it must appear, that either this
is not a Corporal Resurrection spoken of, or these nine mentioned were not so;
for this cannot be said, in truth, to be the first Corporal Resurrection, when
nine went before it, but the tenth Resurrection rather.

Christ at his Resurrection. Notwithstanding what this Author affirms, see the
Text, And many Bodies of Saints which slept, Matthew. 27.52, 53.
arose, and came out of their Graves after his Resurrection. 2d. Both
superfluous and contradictory to himself: For in his 5th Reason of his large
Sheet, he does not only call the Resurrection of the Just and Unjust at the
last Day, Resurrections in the Plural; but the Rising of the Saints he calls
first; and so does his Second, p. 10. That it is contrary to other Men,
consider, besides what I have minded of his Second, in his Treatise, see the
Assemblies Annotations on 1 Cor. 15.20. (which he so much respects in other
Cases.)

Touching eight of his nine; these are their words, He was the first that ever
rose to a blessed and immortal Life; other Dead was raised for a time to Life,
but afterward died again: None before Christ so rose from the dead that he
died no more, nor had Death any more Power over him.

Had this Author first considered, that although the Scripture oft-times makes
mention of the Resurrection of the Dead in short, yet not as separate from that
Glory Saints shall then have: See 1 Cor. 15. with other places.
For what will a Resurrection be without that?

Further; If these nine must bear the Appellation of Resurrections, in equal
Rank, or as the other, i. e. Christ and the Saints at the last Day; then how
could that be true that is said of Christ and them? Every Man in his own Order,
Christ the First Fruits, 1 Cor. 15.23. Col. 1.18.
afterward they that are Christ's, at his coming: He is the Firstborn from
the dead, (in which thing, as well as others, he is said to have the
Pre-eminence): First-begotten of the dead: 1 Thessalonians. 4.16
And the Dead in Christ shall rise first. Therefore how should Christ be the
First Fruits, and have the Pre-eminence, if these must be said to be before
him? etc. Ergo, This may still be said, and that in truth, to be the first
Resurrection, notwithstanding what is said by this Author from his several
Instances to the contrary.

The Bodily Resurrection cannot be here meant, ( i. e. in this 4th Verse)
because that is not to be till a thousand Years after this, as in this Chapter,
when all the Elements must give up their Dead, Rev. 20.12, 13.

viz. of the rest of the Dead that were not raised at the beginning of the
thousand Years, expressed in these words, The rest of the Dead lived not again
until the thousand Years were finished. This latter therefore is the second
Resurrection. The former, ver. 45. is the first Resurrection: both which are
here evidently distinguished also in 1 Cor. 15.23, 24, 25, 26. that he that
runs may read.

This cannot be the Corporal Resurrection of the Saints; for that cannot be
till Christ's Personal Coming and Appearing, and Day of Judgment, 1 Thessalonians.
4.14. 1 Cor. 15.23. 2 Timothy 4.1. And (as before) Christ's Personal Coming is
proved by many Arguments not to be till after the thousand Years; and it is as
clear, that the Judgment-Day is not till after the thousand Years, and
Destruction of the Gog-Magog Army.



Your Reason, to prove it cannot be the Corporal Resurrection of the Saints,
is, Because the Corporal Resurrection of the Saints cannot be till Christ's
Personal Coming and Appearing, and Day of Judgment. Pray where find you these
three Distinctions, (according to your Notion) viz. Coming, Appearing, and Day
of Judgment, in all these three Texts by you cited? True it is, here are three
words, (but not your three) viz. Coming, Appearing, and Kingdom. But what
ground have you to distinguish between his Coming and Appearing? This by the
way. Further; Pray who ever affirmed that the Saints should be raised before
Christ's Personal Coming? And what you further add, That it is as clear that the
Judgment-Day is not till after the thousand Years;

I answer; If by the word [not] you mean, not at all, then I deny it; and tell
you, That the Judgment-Day shall begin at the beginning of the thousand Years.
See for this in the Answer to the 3d Argument. Further; Pray mind the Text you
have now cited, viz. 2 Timothy 4.1. Who shall judge the Quick and Dead at his
Appearing and Kingdom. And it is in this place said, Judgment was given to the
Saints that sat upon these Thrones; Rev. 20.4.
which was at the beginning of the thousand Years. And in 1 Cor. 15. as the
Resurrection of the Just and Unjust, so consequently the Judgment: For it is
evident he must reign till he has put all his Enemies under his Feet; which
cannot be till they are raised, which will not be till the end of his Kingdom,
as ver. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.

This cannot be the Corporal Resurrection of the Saints, because it inverts
Christ's Order, which is to be at the Sounding of the last Trumpet; the time of
the living Saints change; the time that is expressed to be the last Day, which
is the Judgment-Day, but this a thousand Years before all.

viz. the Sounding of the last Trumpet, living Saints changed, last Day,
Christ's Coming, and Judgment-Day; as is clear, Rev. 11.15, to the end.

Because, if Corporal, and to be understood of Martyrs only, then all the Dead
at the last Day shall be raised to the second Death, contrary to Job. 5.24. and
6.39, 40, 44, 45. Dan. 12.2. and they only Martyrs, Priests to God; contrary to
1 Pet. 2.5, 9. Rev. 1.6.

Idem per Idem with your second Argument, and so only serves still to make up
the number; and therefore I refer you and the Reader to the Answer made to that
Argument.

Because if this be understood to be the Resurrection of all the Saints, who,
in that mortal and glorified State, are to live and reign the thousand Years in
and over the World; It necessarily infers these strange Absurdities:

First; That glorified and unglorified, mortal and immortal Bodies, must
converse together, contrary to express Scripture, 1 Timothy 6.16, etc.

i. e. of Moses, and the Disciples of Christ at his Transfiguration, and Paul
in the Vision; and I may ^^d, Israel, Deuteronomy. 5.24. and Moses, Aaron, and the 70
Elders, Exodus 24.10, 11. and the Disciples of Christ with him after his
Resurrection 40 Days. All which do abundantly show, that mortal and immortal
ones have conversed without any Consumption upon Mortals: and if so, why shall
it be thought absurd for Men, when immortalized, or changed, to converse with
Men not changed?

What you say further, from 1 Timothy 6.16. and Exodus 33.20. touching the
Impossibility of any Mortal approaching into the Light which Christ dwells in,
and to see God, etc. Take notice you now dispute beyond the due bounds of the
Question: for the Question is not, whether Mortals may converse with God, and
that now; but whether mortal and immortal Men can converse together? More might
be said to this, but I pass it.

What you seem to hint at, i. e. of the glorified Saints conversing with the
Wicked, I neither well know what you mean, nor of any that affirm such a thing;
therefore shall pass it by, and proceed to your second Absurdity.

It holds out, That some glorified and unglorified Saints shall at this time
converse together, viz. those that are raised from the dead, with those that
are then upon the Earth; when the Scripture tells us, 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. that at
the same instant that the dead Saints are raised, the living Saints are
changed, etc.

Because when Christ comes, he must have all the Saints come with him who are
raised, changed, and glorified; taken up into the Air to meet him, and in that
State are ever with him, not one Saint being to be left behind.



But you further tell us, That when Christ comes, he must have all the Saints
come with him, who are raised, etc.

You did very well to put in these words, ( who are raised, etc.) for who think
you will oppose you here? I say, again, certainly none will be so weak as to
affirm, that any of these shall be left behind: But shall there be no other Men
left behind? is now the Question: for satisfaction, read Matthew. 24.40, 41. Luke
17.34, 35, 36. Zech. 14.16.

Again; Though all those that died, and shall be found in the Faith when Christ
comes, shall be raised and changed, yet this follows not that there shall be
none converted at and after his Coming, who will not then, viz. at that instant
be changed, with whom those glorified Ones many converse.

But you come after with this Reason, which you think cuts off all, viz.
Because Christ shall come in flaming Fire against them that know him not, nor
obey his Gospel; the Day of Grace being then over, and none to be converted
after that.

etc. yet the Holy Scripture no where tells you, That all Men that are upon the
Earth (the glorified Saints here excepted) shall be burnt up: Neither does it
any where tell you, that the Day of Grace shall be so over, as that there shall
be no Day of Grace to any after that time; nor that none shall be converted at,
or after the coming of Christ; neither is any thing like it in all the Book of
God, but the contrary. And whereas you hint at the Parable of the Virgins,
Matthew. 25. as a Ground for this your Conception; pray consider, these were not
only Persons that had the Day of Grace before allowed them, to whom the Gospel
was preached, but were Members of the Church of Christ; and therefore no marvel
that it will be too late for such to get Oil in the Vessel when Christ comes:
But what is this to the purpose, respecting others not in that Capacity, but
under other Circumstances? But now to your 3d Absurdity.

That whereas Christ says, The last Enemy is Death: Here the raised Saints,
after Death, are to meet with another Enemy, viz. the Gog-Magog Army.

Paul (which I suppose you mean) tells us, The last Enemy is Death, 1 Cor. 15.
yet he does not there tell you, this Enemy of Christ shall be destroyed at the
very instant when the Saints (that died before Christ's Coming) shall be
raised: Neither is it any where else so written, but the contrary: Read the
24th and 25th Verses; from whence it is evident, that this Enemy, Death, shall
not be destroyed till the end of Christ's Reign: And it is as plain, Rev. 20.
that the Gog-Magog Army shall make that Attempt, and be destroyed immediately
before the last Resurrection, or Destruction of Death. True it is, the Saints,
beforementioned, shall (through Christ) get the Victory over Death before: so
did our Lord at his Resurrection. But I presume you will not say, he did then
destroy Death; for Victory and Destruction are two things. Thus I have showed
that this Opinion you contend against, infers no such Absurdities. I come now
to your 10th Argument.

This cannot be the Corporal Resurrection, because it is said expressly, That
during this thousand Years, etc. the Saints shall build, plant, marry, and give
in Marriage, enjoy the Works of their Hands, be liable to Death, etc. Which is
utterly inconsistent with the Resurrection-State, Luke 20.34, 35.

[Saints] is an ambiguous word, and ought not to be disputed from, unless
explained: for though our Lord tells us, the Children of the Resurrection shall
not marry, ( viz. when raised) yet he no where tells us, that Saints shall not
marry in the thousand Years, viz. fuch as are in a mortal State. Thus this
Argument falls to the ground like its Fellows.

Therefore, lastly, It will follow, that if it be neither the Corporal,
Spiritual, nor Eternal Life, that is here meant, to the which the Saints are
raised, then must it be the Mystical or Civil Life, etc.

viz. If there be no weight in them, then this must needs be too light also:
and that they are so, let the Arguments and Answers be compared, and I leave it
to every unbiassed and impartial Reader to judge.

As for those five Arguments in your large Sheet, or any elsewhere in the Book,
they are either the very same with some of these sixteen that I have answered,
or else comprehended in them; and therefore I suppose need no particular Answer.

I shall therefore proceed to the second Author, to answer his Arguments, or
Demonstrations (as he calls them) which are in number six.

A Brief ANSWER to Six Demonstrations (as the Author calls them) laid down by
T. M. in his Treatise of The New Heavens and New Earth, page 8. to evince this
for a Truth, That the thousand Years Reign of the Saints with Christ, will be
before, and (so) without his Personal Presence on Earth. Or before the Second
Coming of Christ, as Title Page.
THE thousand Years is set forth in Scripture (and so generally understood) to
be a time of Peace, Plenty, Liberty, and Rejoicing of the whole Earth: But when
Christ comes in Person, it produces an universal Destruction and Astonishment
to the World; Rev. 6.15. Every Bondsman and every Freeman, crying to the Rocks,
etc. so Rev. 1.7. Matthew. 24.30.

time of Peace, etc. you mean only, and altogether without any War or
Destruction, (as that is your Meaning, or else you give away the Cause:) And by
the whole Earth, you intend every Man upon the face of the Earth, all the time
of the thousand Years: then I deny this Proposition, and tell you, That the
Scripture no where sets out the thousand Years to be such a Time: neither is it
generally so understood, (as you affirm;) nay, so far from being generally so
understood, that I know of none at all that understand it so. Does not your
self hold that there shall be War in the thousand Years? and therefore you
frequently call the first part of that time, The smiting part; as may be seen
in the first Author's large Sheet, and frequently in his Book. But now to your
second Proposition of this Demonstration: If by [universal Destruction and
Astonishment to the whole World] you mean every Person in the World, both great
and small, without Exception, (as that is it you must intend, or else you say
nothing) then I deny this Proposition also; and tell you, Christ's Personal
Coming will have no such Product.

Your Scriptures produced for this, are three, viz. Rev. 6.15. and 1.7. Matthew.
24.30. In two of these there is not a word of Destruction: In the other it is
only wished or called for. But admit this, that every one of these shall be
destroyed, mentioned in this last Text; yet does it not follow, that every
Person both great and small, upon the face of the Earth at that time, shall be
destroyed. For it is well known this phrase, every Man, in Scripture, is
ofttimes to be understood respectively, without reference to that sort of Men
the Discourse concerns, and not every Man in the World, as 1 Cor. 12.7. and
many more; and so here it is as evident; for at the opening of the sixth Seal,
when he sees these run to the Rocks, (...) 7.3.
etc. there is a 144000 of the Tribes of Israel upon the Earth, which are not of
this Number that run to the Rocks, and wish for Destruction; besides, many more
that might be named, which shall not perish immediately at the Appearing of
Christ: Ergo, Your Demonstration is become no Demonstration.

When Christ comes, all the dead Saints are raised, and the Living changed, and
all (together) caught up to meet the Lord in the Air, and so to be for ever
with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17, 18. So that from that time, they could no more
converse with the unconverted of this World, as the thousand Years requires:
See Luke 20.35, 36.

[Caught up into the Air, and ever with the Lord] you intend these shall never
come down out of the Air again, then you say something, (as to these): But pray
who told you that? not this Text, nor any in the whole Bible.

2dly; What you mean by [Conversing with the Vnconverted] I do not well
understand; and therefore when you have told me, I shall give you a further
Answer.

3dly; What if these should not so converse with the Unconverted, (as you
mean); Shall there be no other Saints then to do it? Pray mark, the Text speaks
only of such as were converted before Christ's Second Coming; and not of those
that shall be converted when he comes. See more in my Answer to the 9th
Argument of the first Author, in my 24th and 25th Pages.

When Christ comes, he comes in flaming Fire, taking Vengeance on them that
know not God, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 4.7, 8. Jude 14, 15. and then also the World, and
the Works that are therein, shall be burnt up, 2 Pet. 3.10. Now all these
Persons, and things being destroyed at that Day; if this were at the beginning
of the Thousand Years, where was the Reign (for a thousand Years after) of the
Saints over the World in converse with the Unregenerate? Therefore Christ's
Coming is after the thousand Years.



1st, Though one of these Texts tell us, that he will take Vengeance in flaming
Fire on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel, etc. yet it follows
not from hence, that he will then destroy them that do know the Lord, and turn
to him. Nor,

2dly, Those that are at that time incapable to know him; (for Incapacity is no
Sin, nor Cause of Vengeance.) Nor,

3dly, Those that have not heard of his Fame, or had the Gospel preached to
them: for pray mark the Texts, and you may clearly see they speak of such
Persons which had the Gospel preached to them, and were disobedient to it, and
persecuted them also that did obey the Gospel.

Secondly; As to the Destruction of things, which you say will then be; pray
remember your self what you said of it in your 5th Page, viz. That none of
these [ i. e. Shaking, Melting, Dissolving, Burning up, Folding up and
Changing] express an Annihilation, but destroying the former Surface, and the
Works of Men on Earth.

Therefore you have no cause to say, Where shall they reign? etc.

But Thirdly; What Cause had you to make this Supposition, [if this were at the
beginning of the thousand Years?] Certainly no ground from these Texts, nor any
other; and therefore you do by this subtly deceive your Readers. ^^et. 3.10.
Pray mind once more the Text, But the Day of the Lord will come as a Thief in
the Night, in the which the Heavens shall pass away: Not in the beginning of
which.

So that your Conclusion [ viz. That Christ's Coming is after the thousand
Years] falls to the ground. See more in my Answer to the first Author's second
Argument in my 4th Page.

Upon Christ's Coming and Raising the Saints, etc. Then follows the Day of
Judgment, 2 Timothy 4.1. which is clearly set down (in the Order of things) to
follow the thousand Years, Rev. 20.11, to the end. See p. 9, 10. So that
Christ's Coming (to Judgment) cannot be before, but after the thousand Years.

viz. That the Day of Judgment shall follow Christ's Coming, and the Saints
Resurrection, etc. But what you assert in the second place, I deny; and entreat
you, and every unbiassed Man, to consider; First, Whether there be any thing
like it in this Text; ^ev. 20.
nay, it is so far from it, that the very contrary is found evident therein.
First see 2 Timothy 4.1. Who shall judge the Quick and the Dead at his Appearing,
and his Kingdom: and Rev. 20.4, 5, 6, 7. gives us an Account of the Saints
Resurrection, and their reigning with Christ a thousand Years, before this, in
the 11th Verse, shall be accomplished: And you confess herein, and in your 10th
Page, That upon the first Resurrection, viz. of the Just, Christ will sit and
judge his People. So that it is plain the Judgment-Day shall begin, as you
confess, when Christ comes, and has raised his Saints, which (as I have
already showed) will be at the beginning of the thousand Years; and therefore
Christ's Coming in Person will be before, and not after the thousand Years. See
more in my Answer to the first Author's first Argument, in my 2d Page; and to
his 4th and 5th Arguments of the 2d sort, in my 20th and 21st Pages.

Psalm. 110.1. Acts 3.21. Christ is to remain at God's Righthand, till his
Enemies be made his Footstool: But after the thousand Years, Gog and Magog
assault the Saints, Rev. 20.8, 9. Therefore he came not a thousand Years
before, while that Enemy was unsubdued.

5th Page, might suffice; to which I refer you: But I Will add a few words,
because we have a little more in this. The first Author, both in his third
Argument, and again in his large Sheet, tells us that it is expressly said in
the Scripture, That Christ shall continue, and sit at the Right Hand of God,
till all his Enemies be made his Footstool, or destroyed: But he had that
Policy in both these places, not to tell us where 'twas thus expressed, fave as
aforesaid: But this has told us where, i.e. Psalm. 110.1. Acts 3.21. I suppose
he means Acts 2.34, 35. Which places I have well considered, and find no such
thing, neither in Words nor Sense; nor in any other place of Sacred Scripture.
True, it is thus written, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my Right Hand
until I make thine Enemies thy Footstool: But not until I have made them so.

Now who is so weak that cannot see a Difference between these two words? It Is
well known the one (viz. until I make) speaks of a Work to be done, and so
respects the beginning of that Time when this must be set about: The other
(viz. until I have made) speaks of a Work done, and so respects the end of Time.

Therefore consider how you have abused these Texts, and led many an unwary
Reader aside; making this the Foundation to build this your Principle upon. For
you cannot but know, that to Change, Add, or Take away from a Word but so much
as one Letter, quite alters and destroys the Sense; as has been told the
Quakers in Print, (who are much guilty herein) or at least their Advocate W. L.
For that Instance in 1 Cor. 15.51. it is said, We shall not all sleep, but we
shall all be changed: Leave out but the Letter (C) and then it must be read, We
shall all be hanged: And the like in changing a Letter; as might be showed, as
you have now done in taking away [K] and putting in [D] instead of it; and more
than this, in adding the word [Be], which you are forced to do, or some such
word of the same Sense, or else you can make no Sense of it (in the Reading.)
And more yet, in adding the word [All], as the first Author has done, and the
Latter in effect. If that Printer in King James's time was fined a thousand
Pounds, because the Particle [Not] was lest out of the Seventh Commandment:
What shall they be thought worthy of that both change, in respect of Letter,
and add Words to what is written, to the total Destruction of the true Sense
thereof? Read and fear what is said, Rev. 22.18, 19.

Although the word [Made] be not in the Text cited, yet it is in Heb. 10.12, 13.

This Man after he had offered one Sacrifice for Sins for ever, sat down on the
Right Hand of God: From henceforth, expecting till his Enemies be made his
Footstool. Which alters the case.

For who is there but will grant this, viz. his Expectation, (from that Day
forward) that such a Work shall be done, and yet deny that he shall sit there
till it be done; for as he in Heaven, so we on Earth, expect this, viz. that
his and our Enemies shall be made his Footstool. But what is this to the Case in
hand?

Ergo, Your Conclusion (That Christ's Coming is after the thousand Years, or
that he will not come a thousand Years before the subduing of Gog and Magog,
Rev. 20.8, 9.) is altogether false.

Neither is Gog his last Enemy, but Death is so called, 1 Cor. 15.26. Therefore
Christ's Coming is not till he comes to swallow up Death in Victory, ( ver.
54.) in the Resurrection of the Saints. See above.

Gog is not the last Enemy, but that Death is so called, 1 Cor. 15. 2dly, Your
Consequence, or Conclusion, (though not from these Premises) Christ's Coming is
not till he comes to swallow up Death in Victory, in the ( ver. 54.)
Resurrection of the Saints.

But now, what is this to the Question, viz. That Christ's Coming is after the
thousand Years? You bid us see above; and I refer you to the abovesaid Answers.
But I suppose here lies your Mistake, (as this Demonstration implies) i. e.
that you account Destruction and Victory both one thing; and therefore you
argue from the one, ( viz. Destruction) to the other, ( viz. Victory). A
strange Mistake, and as strange Arguing, of a wise Man. Do not all Men know,
that although sometimes they may go together, yet they are two distinct things,
and very frequently go asunder? viz. the Victory before the time of
Destruction; Instances hereof enough among Men might be produced if need were:
And it is as true in this case. It Is well known our Lord himself got the Victory
over Death when he rose from the dead, yet did not then destroy Death: so the
Saints (through Christ) get the Victory over Death at their Resurrection; yet
Death shall not then, to wit, at that very instant, be destroyed. And our
Apostle very wisely makes the Distinction in that 1 Cor. 15.23, 24, 25, 26. and
this very Verse, ( viz. 54.) He does not say, That at the Saints, or first
Resurrection, shall be brought to pass the Saying, O Death, or O Grave, I will
be thy Destruction: But that Saying, Death is swallowed up in Victory. And
herein you greatly contradict your self, in making these two, one, ( viz.
Destruction and Victory) or contemporary, namely, at the Resurrection of the
Just, or first Resurrection: For in your 9th and 10th Pages, you tell us, The
Wicked shall not be raised till after the Saints; nay, that many things shall
pass, or be done, between the Resurrection of the Just and Unjust. Now if this
be true, (as I grant it is) then by your own Grant, Death will not be destroyed
at the first Resurrection, since it shall hold the rest down after that is
past: And this is evident from both Isaiah, (from whence the Apostle has these
words) and from 1 Cor. 15. also.

Ergo, I conclude from this your Demonstration, or the Consequence thereof,
that since Christ shall come Personally at the first Resurrection, and that
will be (as I have showed) at the beginning of the thousand Years; that then
the thousand Years are not before, nor without, but with his Personal Presence
on Earth.

Thus much in answer to your Six Demonstrations.

A POSTSCRIPT.
READER, this Treatise was wholly composed, and designed for the Press some
Years past, as may be conceived by some Passages in the Epistle: But for some
Reasons (of no necessity herein to be inserted) came not forth till now; and I
hope may be as seasonable at this time, to inform Men, and to prevent the
Mistakes that many are ready to make concerning the Kingdom of our Lord.

Further; This may indifferently serve for an Answer to several Books that have
come forth since the Writing hereof; particularly Mr. Richard Baxter's,
entitled, The Glorious Kingdom of Christ.

It may seem strange that such great Mistakes are about the Glorious Kingdom of
our Lord Jesus Christ on Earth, and that by those that are accounted Wise, etc.
since the Holy Scripture is so full and plain in this Case: But call to
remembrance the words of our Lord Jesus, Mat. 11.25, 26. Luke 10.21, 22, 23.
and that may satisfy you; for the Promise of making known these great things,
is to them that humble themselves to do the Will of Christ, Joh. 7.17.

I have been solicited by several to write more fully what I understand
concerning this Glorious Kingdom, and the wonderful Preparatives to it, i. e.
those exceeding great Things that shall be wrought in a little Time, or few
Years, before the Kingdoms of this World become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and
of his Christ, (all which have been my Meditation this many Years with great
Diligence and Delight); but shall forbear till I see how this will be accepted,
or rejected; and therefore stand ready to make defense against any that shall
soberly and pertinently oppose. And hereafter (if God permit) shall answer the
Desires of those abovementioned, for the Edification of the Churches of Christ.

All that I shall further say at present, is, The Time is short, the great and
terrible Day draws near, and hastes greatly; as appears by the Signs given by
our Lord, and in part come to pass, viz. The great Wars and Rumors of Wars in
the World, and the great Earthquakes in diverse Places, etc. which are by our
Lord called, The beginning of Sorrows, and must first come to pass, Mat. 24.6,
7, 8. Mark 13.7, 8. Luke 21.9, 10, 11. May we not now conclude, that this
Generation shall not pass before all these things shall be fulfilled? Mat.
24.3^ Mark 13.2^ Luke 21.3^
What manner of Persons ought we then to be in all holy Conversation and
Godliness? looking for, and hasting unto the Coming of the Day of God. Be
diligent that ye may be found of him in Peace, without Spot, and Blameless, 2
Pet. 3.11, 12, 14. And remember the Words of our Lord, When these things be
seen to come to pass, then look up and lift up your Heads, for the Day of your
Redemption draws nigh, Luke 21.28. And take heed to your selves lest at any
time your Hearts be overcharged with Surfeiting, and Drunkenness, and Cares of
this Life, and so that Day come upon you unawares; for as a Snare shall it come
on all them that dwell upon the face of the whole Earth, Luke 21.34, 35. He
which testifies these things, says, Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so come,
Lord Jesus. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen. Rev.
22.20, 21.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the Epistle.] Page 7. line 4. for alone, read all one. P. 9. l. 9. f.
latter, r. Letter.

In the Book.] Page 2. line 26. for Throne, read Thrones. P. 13. l. 13. f. the,
r. your. P. 14. l. 37. f. fulfilled, r. finished. P. 15, and part of the 16,
till the third Argument, raze out the double Comma's in the Margent. P. 18. l.
18. f. seem, r. serve. P. 19. l. 31. f. subjecting, r. converting. P. 29. l.
36. f. former, r. form and. P. 31. l. 29. f. For, r. From. l. 36. f. the same
sense, r. the same Tense. Idem, f. the, r. your. P. 35. f. be seen, r. begin.


