THE HISTORY OF PHILOXYPES AND POLYCRITE, As it was told by LEONTIDES to the
great CYRUS.

Englished out of French, by an Honorable ANTI-SOCORDIST.

Ex pede Hercules. London, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at
his Shop in St Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Prince's Arms. 1652.

THE HISTORY OF PHILOXYPES AND POLICRITE: As it was told by Leontidas, to
Artamene, or the great Cyrus.
THAT you may the better understand this Story, it is requisite that you know
part of the Customs of this Island, the which I will in a few words acquaint
you with, that my ensuing Discourse may appear less tedious to you. You must
then know, Sir, that this goodly Island, which for its precinct, situation,
fertility, for the beauty and greatness of its Towns, and its Magnificent
Temples, passes for the most famous and most considerable of as many as lie on
the Aegean Sea, has always been consecrated to Venus; and that love, which
every where else is a passion, which has no particular privileges, is in this
place accounted a religious act. All that are born here, seem as if they were
bound to love from their very birth; all the Temples are dedicated to Venus,
under several name^; all the pictures and statues here, represent only this
Goddess, and depend only upon her. You shall find here Cupid set out every
where, and those who instruct us elsewhere virtuously in our youth, by teaching
us how to overcome ambition, anger, hatred, envy, and all other passions; deal
otherwise with us here, persuading us only how to love innocently. But as there
is nothing so pure or refined, which meets not with alteration and corruption
at the last; a strange disorder crope in long since amongst us: for you must
know the first Temple which was consecrated to Venus, was that of Venus Urania,
who we say, is the daughter of Heaven. This Venus as we believe, inspires only
rational resentments, and virtuous passions: whereas on the contrary, there are
some Temples on the utmost borders of the Isle toward the South, built long
since the former, which are dedicated to Venus Anodema, as much as to say, to
Venus coming forth from the foam of the sea. Now Sir, these Temples do differ
very much, as do their resentments, who offer sacrifices at them; yet as those
Religions wherein Libertinism passes for a virtue, are grounded with most
ease, the Religion of Venus Anadiomena, has for a long time prevailed over
that of Venus Urania; and our Island has seen things which makes those even
blush with confusion, who remember they have heard them spoken of by their
forefathers: but thanks to Heaven, a virtuous Queen, who lived some sixty years
since, did re-establish all the Temples of Venus Urania; made almost all those
of Venus Anadiomena, be beaten down; abolisht all the shameful customs which
were introduced in Cyprus, and left only pure resentments amongst us of that
passion, which is the soul of the Universe, and which is the sole entertainer
of civil society. We are now taught to love our Goddess, our Princes, our
Laws, our Country, our fellow-Citizens, our Parents, Brethren, Wives and
Children; and lastly, to love our selves, to the end that we may do no shameful
act. We are taught also to love Glory, Sciences and Arts; to love innocent
pastimes, and to love beauty and virtue above all that has been spoken of: in
fine, we are taught that he who loves not, is not rational, and that not to
have a sense of all these aforementioned things, is to be very much to blame.
You may easily imagine then, that this being a belief generally held amongst
us, the Court of Cyprus must needs be a pleasing abode, since every one there
loves handsome actions, and handsome personages. True it is, that according to
the rules of Venus Urania, the love by her permitted, is so pure, so innocent,
so free from having any thing to do with the senses, and so free from fault,
as she seems to suffer us to love others only, that we may make our selves
become the more lovely, through our care of meriting true glory, of becoming
accomplished, and of getting that Courtly Air, and pleasing conversation, which
is only inspired by love. This Sir, is the present condition of our Island; all
delights are here, but all innocent. Love is the predominant, and universal
passion in it, but such a passion, as is not incompatible with virtue and
modesty, and which hinders not many lovers from complaining of their Mistresses
rigor. Public festivals are here frequent, conversation free enough, but
wholly spiritual, games for prizes very usual, pleasing Bals, excellent
Music, and Women in general, infinitely handsome, full of gallantry, and
perfectly virtuous. But of all the rest, the Princess of Salmis, sister to
Philoxypes, was the Court-Star, till such time as she withdrew her self from
thence. The Princess Aggharista, now Princess of Cicily, is also very taking,
and the famous Artaphil doubtlesly bears a great renown. To boot with these
there is one called Timoclea, and an hundred others, of somewhat a meaner
condition, which are wonderfully handsome. But Sir, lest I may prove too
tedious, I will briefly tell you that the King who now reigns in Cyprus, is but
two years elder then Prince Philoxypes, who is descended from the Race of
Demophon, son to Theseus, who is held in great esteem amongst us. Philoxypes in
his younger years, you may easily judge was one of the loveliest personages
which could be seen; for though he be now twenty eight years old, he continues
to be so extraordinarily handsome, and so well behaved, as it may easily be
guest what he was when a child; and though he were wise even from his cradle,
and knowing, even from the time he began to speak, yet ceased he not to be of a
pleasing humor, and comportment, such as is only infused by youth, and the air
of the Court, and which is the charm of conversation amongst Ladies. In fine,
set one article aside, Philoxypes may be truly said, to have fully satisfied
and made good all the precepts of Venus Urania.

He reverenced the Goddess, he loved his Prince, kept the Laws, he loved his
Country, his fellow Citizens, was ambitious of glory, which he went inquest of
at fifteen years of age in the Milesean War, wherein he gave singular testimony
of his carriage. He loved the Sciences, and all the liberal Arts; delighted in
innocent pastimes, and loved virtue above all things; but as for beauty, he had
only a general admiration for it, and never felt in himself, any particular
addiction or adheration to any whatsoever handsome Lady. You may imagine Sir,
how strange this insensibility appeared, in a Court where it met not with any
example, and in a man so fit to occasion love. Yet was he so lovely, as he was
not for this the less beloved; he was so liberal, so magnifical, so full of
complacency, and so civilly behaved, as he was the wonder of the world.

When Solon after having established those famous Laws at Athens, went from
thence, resolving to forgo his Country for ten years, to the end that he might
make no alteration there, he came to our Court; Philoxypes, who was then but
eighteen years old, had a great affection for him, as he had likewise for
Philoxetes; insomuch, that as long as Solon abode in our Isle, Philoxetes gave
over all his other delights, and the frequenting of the Ladies companies to
fasten himself totally to him: whom that he might enjoy with the more freedom,
he carried him to a Town of his which is called Apia; built by Demaphon in a
very strong, but rocky situation, and of hard access, all the Country about
it being craggy, dry, and exceeding barren. Solon being come thither, showed
him how that they that laid the foundations of that Town, might have made it
much more pleasanter, if they had built it upon the banks of the River Claria,
in a spacious and fertile plain, which lies at the foot of the Mountain, where
the other Town was situated; hardly had Solon spoke his thought, when
Philoxypes resolved to put it in execution, and began already to give all
necessary orders for it. And indeed Solon was the Architect who guided this
great enterprise, Philoxypes giving him the glory thereof, for he called this
new Town Soly, to perpetuate the memory of the name of Solon. This place being
not far from Paphos, one of our Kings most usual abodes, they went often to the
Court; where our Ladies complained sometimes of Solon, who by bereaving them of
Philoxypes, bereft them of their fairest ornament; and to show you how great
this Prince his inflexibility was, Solon whose virtue is not austere, to
justify himself to those that blamed Philoxypes for this, telling him that
love was a passion, which sweetened all other passions, and which did sometimes
exceed them all. That for his part, he confessed he would never set his whole
heart against it, and that he thought it no shame to be once in his life
overcome thereby. Philoxypes said in his defense, that he loved all that was
lovely, that he had a passion for all beautiful objects, and that no man ever
loved so much as he. But notwithstanding all his universal affections, there
was no one so fair in all the Court, who could boast in her particular to have
inthralled his heart; and who peradventure had not more then once consulted
with her glass, to know by what innocent art this so famous heart might be
taken: but at last, after having staid a good while, Solon went his way much
taken with Philoxypes his virtue, and made some verses in his praise before he
embarked for Egypt. He who was commended by all Greece, did highly commend this
young Prince; saying, that Nature had taught Philoxypes in eighteen years, what
Art could not teach in an Age, and that a man might see in him by way of
prodigy, all the ages of man put together; that is to say, the innocence of
infancy, the charms of youth, the fortitude of a more advanced age, and the
wisdom of old age. After his departure, Philoxypes was somewhat melancholy,
but this humor being over, he spent some time in travel, and did not only see
whole Greece, but likewise the famous City of Carthage, which did then wage war
with the Massiliens, who inhabit a place which they have of late made famous,
by a cried up Academy, wherein eloquence, and all the Grecian Sciences are
rarely well taught.

I will not relate unto you all the gallant actions he did in Africa, nor what
befell him during that Journey, which continued till some months before you
came to Cyprus; where Solon stayed awhile again, not suffering himself to be
seen almost by any one. But I will tell you that Philoxypes at his return to
Court, charmed all the world; and that the King himself grew so far in love
with him, as never was known so great a favor as his, nor yet so little
envyed; neither did he make use thereof, but for his Masters glory, and to do
good to as many as he could; he rceceived no rewards, but to enrich such as
stood in need thereof; all the advises he gave, were good; he did none but good
offices: and thus he stood fair in the opinion of the great ones, and of the
people, as well as in that of the King; and there were none but our Ladies who
continued to accuse him of inflexibility. Thus did he live amidst delights, in
the stateliest and most gallant Court of all the world, without envy, without
love, and without melancholy. But the King was not this mean while so happy as
he; for after having had some flitting passions, which had notwithstanding much
disquieted him, he fell mightily in love with the Princess Aretephile, who
certainly is very beautiful, and has an hundred good qualities; but who withal
this was extremely ambitious. The King was no sooner aware of the violence of
this his passion, but that he discovered it to Philoxypes, and entreated him to
intercede for him with Aretephile, who at that time did often visit the
Princess Agarista, sister to Philoxypes. You may imagine this Prince did not
refuse to assist him, since his affection was innocent; yet did he sometimes
crave pardon of the King, if he did not much bewail him in his disquiets: For
Sir, said he, love being a malady which I am not acquainted with, and which I
have much to imagine is so great as man would have it thought, I confess I do
not so much compassionate your Majesty, as perdaventure I ought; and
consequently, I may perchance not so fully exaggerate your sufferings as I
should do, when I speak with the Princess Aretephile. Fear not Philoxypes,
said the King, that I complain of your inflexibility; on the contrary, if you
had a more tender heart, I would not have chosen you for the confident of my
passion: and did I think that you could become my rival, I would not give you
Commission to speak so of ten with my beloved Princess. But my intention not
being to speak of the Kings love, otherwise then as it relates necessarily to
Philoxypes adventures; I will only tell you that though Aretephile were ravished
to see her self beloved by the King, yet aiming at the Crown of Cyprus, she
thought she was a little to disguise her sense thereof, and to make it a harder
matter for the King to win her, then she had found it to win the King: So as
this Princess behaved her self with much discretion and reservednesse, and
mingling continually severity with mildness, the King stood long in need of
Philoxypes assistance, whom Aretephile, who knew what power he had with the
King, used with all possible civility. Philoxypes was notwithstanding sometimes
much troubled at the continuance of this passion, which made him for his
recreation, go to a very stately house, which the famous Solon had caused to be
built for him near Soly, and wherein he had made a collection of whatsoever
Greece had of most rare and curious, were it either for pictures, or statues.
In this place it was, which is called Claria, where wondering sometimes at the
Kings passion, he did me the honor to bemoan himself to me of his employmen,
and he himself gave me a thousand pleasant marks of his inflexiblenesse, by
those things which he uttered against love. This mean while though the King
were much in love with Aretephile, yet he had somewhat to do to persuade
himself to marry her, because indeed in reason he should much rather have
married the Princess Thimoclea, by reason of some claim she pretended to have
to the Principality of Amathusa; insomuch as the King being yet unresolved what
to do, had not as yet acquainted Aretephile, nor let her be acquainted that
his love tended merely to set her upon the Throne; but only following the
custom of Cyprus, he had sufficiently witnessed his service, and to purchase
her esteem, had done whatsoever a handsome and ingenious Prince seconded by
Philoxypes, could do, who though he were himself insensible of love, was
notwithstanding a very great gallant; so as Aretephile who was absolutely
resolved never to part with her heart for less then a Crown, treated the King
sometimes severely enough, insomuch as the whole Court was troubled thereat,
and Philoxypes delight lay only in Hunting, and in his stately Country house.
Some other times Aretephile fearing lest she her self might extinguish the fire
which she had kindled in the Kings heart, was somewhat more kind unto him, and
by the Prince his Joy, rejoiced the whole Court. 'Twas then in one of these
pleasant conjuncture of times, that Phyloxypes to oblige the King, made the
Princess of Salamis his sister, and the Princess Agharista do him the honor
to entertain the King upon a day that he invited the King and all the Court to
go from Paphos to Claria, and to pass one whole day in his retiredness, which
indeed deserved to receive so Princely a company. Never was there so gallant an
Assembly as this; it was wholly composed of young and handsome personages, of
great birth, and understanding: and one would have said, that fortune had
favored Philoxypes, in ordering it so as that all persons of quality who were
peevish or of ill humor in the Court, were either sick that day, or busied
about some important affairs, so as this well compacted company was not
troubled with the importunity of any of their companies: On what side soever
they did cast their eye, they met with nothing but goodly objects, there was no
fear of being wearied or anoyed. Philoxypes had taken such excellent order for
all things, were it either for the stately furniture of the house, for the
magnificency of the Feast, or the excellency of the Music, as the King to give
him the highest praise he could, said aloud, that if Philoxypes had been in
love, and that his Mistress had been in that company, he could have done no
more then he did. On the contrary, Sir, said Philoxypes, I think that if I had
been in love, all things would have been much more in disorder, then they are;
it seeming impossible to me that a man should lose his reason, and yet have
leisure enough to think of such trivial affairs. The King began then to oppose
Philoxypes, and to tell him that he did little know the effects of this
passion; and this he did more then once, as well for that he could hardly find
a more pleasing entertainment by discourse, as also that by reproaching
Philoxypes with his ignorance of love; he thereby found an opportune means to
make the Princess Aretephile, who listened unto him, know that the passion he
had for her, had made him very expert therein, Philoxypes did defend himself
the best he could. Sometimes he said the fear of not being beloved kept him
from loving; sometimes that he had so nice a soul as did avoid such pleasures
as could not be purchased without pain; and consequently that love not being a
voluntary thing, he was not to blame for that he did not love: and for his last
reason, he said that the difficulty of the choice made him that he neither did,
nor could resolve on any; for Sir, said he to the King, how is it possible to
have the affrontedness to prefer any one of so many handsome personages as I
see before all the rest? Ah, Philoxypes, said the King, the more you speak of
love, the more pity do you move in me; and (speaking low in his ear) the more
said he do you make me see that my Confident will never be my rival. After
this, all the Ladies, and all the men of quality, began to argue the matter
with him; he did sometime almost hate them all for their reproaching him with
his inflexibility. When they had dined, Philoxypes led all this fair assembly
into a stately gallery, painted all over by the hand of an excellent Master,
named Mandrocles, who is of the Isle of Samos, and who having finished this rare
work, some few days before this great Feast, was returned to his own Country.

The story of Venus Urania, was the subject of all those pictures, in whom
nothing but modesty was to be discerned. The Painter had not drawn the Graces
all naked, as they usually are drawn, but had clothed them in transparent
tiffeny, which rendered all those figures very delightful; in one of the
draughts, you might see Venus descend from Heaven in a Chariot, all of burnisht
gold drawn by Swans; a thousand little Cupids seemed to hover about her, and to
be the first that lighted in the Isle of Cyprus, which is represented in the same
piece, to prepare all things to receive her; in another piece, all those little
Cupidons, erected unto her an Altar of Turffs, and made dressings of flowers to
adorn her; in another piece, this Goddess teaches Cupid how to choose his
golden shafts, which he meant to use; and in another, she put a Torch into his
hand, and showing him the Sun which is painted at the top of that piece, seems
as if she would tell him that she would have the flames wherewith he sets
hearts on fire, to be more pure then the beams of this glorious constellation.
In fine, Sir, this Goddess is represented in above twenty parts of this
gallery; but though in different postures, you may still discern the same
countenance. Though all in this Gallery be beautiful, this figure is
incomparably beyond all the rest: all the rest are pictures, but this seems to
be effectually a divine personage; for certainly there was never any thing seen
of so much handsomnesse; all the fair Ladies who Philoxypes had brought
thither, were amazed to see it, and maugre themselves confessed that their glass
showed them nothing like it. All their eyes were fixed upon a face so full of
beauty, and they all agreed in one, that the Painters imagination had far
outdone what ever nature had done of most accomplished. After they had well eyed
this Venus, for my part, said the Princess Aretephile, I would fain know
whether Philoxypes heart could resist a personage who should perfectly resemble
this picture? Since I have been able (replied he) to behold all these Ladies
that are here, without daring to profess my service, it is to be believed, I
should be as insensible for her, or rather as full of respect for her, as I
have been for all the rest that I see, who are no less fair then he this Venus.
It Is not notwithstanding (said he smilingly, and without any other design, then
to say somewhat of gallantry to entertain conversation) that I am not glad that
this picture is only the effect of the famous Mandrocles imagination. For I
confess unto you there is a certain charming, modest, and passionate air in
the eyes of this Goddess, which would peradventure please me too much, were it
a living beauty. Philoxypes had no sooner said this, but all the company began
to smile at this first mark of his tenderness, which they had never before
observed in him. There was not any one of them who would not willingly, if it
had been possible, have inspired life into this picture, that they might see
whether Philoxypes might be bent by her or no; and whether his rebel heart to
love, would prove proof against her extraordinary charms. If this could be,
said Princess Thimoclea, I wish at least that this fair personage should have
as much sweetness in her soul as in her eyes, to the end that nothing might be
wanting to Philoxypes happiness. On the contrary, said the Princess of Salamis,
me thinks it were to be wished, that (to punish my brother for his
inflexibility) she were as cruel, as fair; and I doubt me, added Aretephile,
whether for his greater punishment, she were not to be wished to be proud and
stupid: or rather, said Princess Agherista, inconstant, fickle, altering her
humor every day; and for his yet farther punishment, added the King smilingly,
that she were all that you all have said. At these words Philoxypes desired so
much favor of them, as that they would suffer him to enjoy that quiet which
liberty bestows on them who possess her: but the Sun being already low, he
mentioned a walk to this fair company, who without resistance gladly accepted
thereof. He led them into a large plot of ground, which makes an Island; for he
had drawn a branch of the River of Claria round about it. Passing from thence
over a little bridge, with ballasters of brass, he led them into an allie of
Orange Trees, twelve hundred paces long, which the Sun could never get into, so
large are those Trees, and so thick covered with leaves and flowers. Amidst
this Allie there crosses a Channel of running water; at last you come to a
place where eleven Allies cross one another; at the end of which, the river is
every where seen, as if it were so delighted with that place, as it were loath
to leave it. All these Allies are either of Orange Trees, or Citron Trees, or
Myrrh, or Laurel, or Pomegranats, or Palm Trees: but after being come to the
end of one of these Allies, into which Philoxypes sent them, they found
themselves in a large Meadow, which is cut through in the middle by the River,
which gathered together in that place, seems to be a great channel, which has
on its banks neither canes, nor rushes, nor reeds, nor little shrubs, but is
only bordered by thick turff, and all besprinckled over with Flags of differing
colors, with Narcissusses, with Lillies, and all other flowers, which love
moisture and freshness. There are likewise on this River, great store of Swans,
which swim so demurely, as you would think they were afraid to trouble the
water which bears them up: and that there might nothing be wanting to this
entertainment, Philoxypes had so ordered it, as this River was all covered over
with Boats, made like Galleys, painted with lively colors, and guided by young
Boys in Maratin apparel, but very handsome; who rowing gently with Oars
painted red and green, came to the bank to receive this gallant company, who
were played unto on rustic Music by young Shepherds very quaintly clothed,
who drove herds along that Meadow on the other side of the River. Their
Shepherds crooks were all trimmed with brass guilt over, and strewed over with
ciphers; their Flutes and little Bagpipes were as well decked as were their
sheep, all whose horns were loaded with flowers. In diverse parts of this
Meadow, were an hundred lovely Shepherds, clothed in white, with hats of
roses, who to make the place the more pleasing, mixed the melody of their voices
to the rustic Music aforesaid. So sweet a place being doubtlesly proper to
infuse joy, and pleasure, being no disposition to cruelty; the King found
Aretephile a little more gentle; and all the worst treated lovers of this
company, found at least some truce to their sufferings, and were maugre
themselves delighted with so lovely a place, which was bounded about by a very
high Pallesade, wherein Niches placed at equal distances, were statues of
white Marble, the rarest that were ever seen in Greece.

But I may seem to be my self enchanted in a place so full of charms, since I
stay so long thereon: I must then haste to make this fair company depart, whom
Philoxypes waited on back to Paphos, after having offered them a famous
banquet. Some few days after, being teturned home, with intention to entertain
himself alone there for two days, he spent all that time very contentedly: But
Philoxypes his humor lying rather to like general beauties, wherein art has
nothing to do, then those where art undertakes to perfect nature; went out of
his Park, and unaccompanied by any save one servant, he went to the River side,
intending to walk along it till he should come to the head thereof, which is not
far from thence, and which certainly is one of the goodliest things in the
world: For this miraculous Springhead, which of it self makes a River, is
enclosed by Rocks of an unaccessible height; at the foot of the greatest, and
highest whereof, is a large cave which extends it self even to the loss of
sight, both on the right hand and on the left, under unaccessible Rocks. At the
bottom of this Cave, is a silent spring, which sometimes rises up to the top
of the den, and sometimes falls so low, as it is not above five or six foot
high. This inequality is the cause why the River of Claria, as well as all the
others of Cyprus, pass rather for a fair Torrent, then for a River; though this
be not positively so, for it is never altogether dried up, as are all the rest.
As he went toward this Cave, he got off horseback, leaving his horse with his
servant, commanding him to wait his return, and not to follow him.

Thus did he walk all alone, along these Torrents, with the sight and noise
whereof, he was much delighted, when raising up his eyes, he might see some
twenty paces off, a very handsome woman, though in a mean habit, who was sat
upon a Rock, all covered over with moss; and who seemed to take pleasure in
eying attentively the fall of waters which came rushing at her feet, as if to
do her homage. At first Philoxypes thought not to trouble the contentment of
one whose humor was so conformable to his, to sit musing upon the River side,
and to turn a little aside, that he might not interrupt her. But being come a
little nearer, and seeing that her apparel though clean, and handsome, gave her
not out to be a personage of quality, he went directly toward her, because
that was the easiest way. But being come very near her, and the noise his
walking made, having made this woman look about, he was strangely taken; not
only to see the handsomest creature in the world, but to discern perfectly
that, that miraculous Venus which he had in his Gallery, and which he had
always taken only for the effect of a handsome imagination, was really the
picture of this personage; Philoxypes, ravished at this so strange apparition,
changed his color; and saluting this maid with more civility then her
condition seemed to require, he advanced yet nearer her; but she rising up in
haste, and having not without a blush paid him his salute, as if she had been
troubled to be seen alone in that place, she hasted to go unto an old man and a
woman well-advanced in years, who were not above twenty paces off her; yet
fearing by like to be followed, she turned her head twice toward Philoxypes,
who was still the more dazeled with her beauty, and more confirmed in his
opinion. This Prince surprised at this encounter, had a great desire to know
who this young and so wonderfully handsome maid might be; and to know also how
Mandrocles could come to draw her picture; and why Mandrocles had always told
him, that the picture which he had drawn, was only an effect of his fancy: He
followed her with his eyes as far as he could; but having stood still a pretty
while, not knowing why he did so, he lost sight of her amongst those Rocks
after she was come up to those she went unto, so as he could no more discover
her.

Philoxypes did not overmuch endeavor it, though his mind led him very much
thereunto, but coming near the River side, in stead of continuing to walk
toward the Spring head, he went down the stream; and were it by hazard, or out
of design, he happened to rest himself upon the same Rock covered with moss, on
which he had seen the fair maid sit. Philoxypes being there, could think on
nothing, but on this fair unknown one, and upon the pleasing adventure which
had befaln him. He then remembered the discourse which had past in the Gallery,
and what he had said of that picture which every one so much commended; and
delighting to entertain himself upon this subject, how glad said he unto
himself, would Princess Aretephile be, if she knew what had befaln me, and how
would the King mock me if he heard it? They would certainly say, that the
Goddess had wrought a miracle to punish me, by making me meet with a Country
wench, of whom to make the object of my choice. But said he, presently after,
this Country maid is fairer then whatsoever there is of beauty in the Court;
and I shall sufficiently revenge my self of all our Ladies, if I can once more
meet with her, and let them see her. He then resolved to return the next day to
the same place, and in the mean time not to speak of her till he had found her
again. He then returned home, but full of amazement; at his first arival, he
went strait to his Gallery, and grew so confident in his belief, that his Venus
Urania was the very picture of this fair unknown one, as he doubted no more
thereof. He compared all the features of this picture, with the image which he
bare about in his mind, not finding any difference between them save that the
original was far above what ever Mandrocles with all his art, could
represent. He seemed to have observed in her face, a much more pleasing youthly
air, a much more majestical modesty, and a sweetness infinitely more alluring.
In fine, the Prince Philoxypes, who had wont to be more in his Closet, then in
his Gallery, perceiving that the sight of this picture detained him there,
whether he would or no, went forth much perplexed to see that once in his life
time, he could not master his affections. He past the rest of that day, and all
the next night, not being able to eface this pleasing phantosm out of his
mind. The next day he returned to the same place where he had seen that fair
one, still thinking how he should be pleased to cause her be seen by the King,
and the whole Court. But though he went up the River, even up to the head
thereof, he could not find her; he sought her long in vain; and being angered
thereat, he sought whether he could not find some little track about that
place where he had seen the fair unknown one; but it being all Rocky, no
impression of footsteps could be seen there, nor could there be any track found
amongst the Rocks. Desperate then, as he was not to find any knowledge of what
he so much desired, he returned back, absolutely resolving not to return any
more to that place: yet was he no sooner at home, but that he wished to be at
the River side; he enquired of all his servants, if they had never met any body
thereabouts, which resembled that Venus; and asked them very particularly, into
what places, and into what houses Mandrocles went when he painted his Gallery?
They answered, that they had never seen her whom he spoke off, and that
Mandrocles was a solitary man, who saw no body, who spent all his time in
designing amongst those Rocks; and that he took almost always the way toward
the head of Claria. Philoxypes not able to learn any more, did what he could to
think no more thereon; but though he had resolved to return next day to Paphos,
he stayed at Claria, (for his house bears the name of the River which passes
by it) and whatever design he had, never to return to seek out the fair
unknown one, his feet maugre himself, bare him always toward the place where
he had met her. He returned often from thence, not knowing why he would not
willingly go thither, nor why he went thither, not having any thought of so
doing. But at last yielding to his curiosity, he returned toward those Rocks,
resolving to suffer himself to be guided by fortune; leaving always his servant
and his horse where he left them the first time.

He wandered then long amongst those Mountains, when being weary, he sat
himself down, which he had hardly done, upon a neighboring Rock, when he
might discover afar off a little Cottage, in a place which appeared very savage
unto him: so as rising up, it may be, said he unto himself, it is here where the
Gods have hidden the Treasure, which I seek for. And indeed he had not walked
far, when he saw the fair unknown one, accompanied by the same old man, and the
same woman which he had formerly seen, and by three or four others all meanly
clothed, which seemed to take a by-way which led to a little Temple, which lies
toward the Sea side, and which was built for the accommodation of strangers,
who traffic in that Island, and land on that side. The Temple not being above
six furlongs from this little rural habitation, 'twas but a walk to go thither
on foot.

Philoxypes ravished at this encounter, went toward them; and addressing his
speech to the old man, after having saluted, and looked on the fair unknown,
with more admiration then at first; Father, said he, know you who they be that
live in that little house which I see yonder amongst the Rocks? Sir, said he,
they are people who merit not the honor you do them in speaking to them; nor
do I know how my Cabin should cause curiosity in a man of your condition.

Whilst the old man spoke, Philoxypes had his eyes fixed upon the fair unknown
one so attentively, as he made her blush, and forced her to turn her head
aside; he willingly would have spoken to her, but that (as he told me
afterward) he was afraid to ruin himself in so pleasing an enchantment; and
that he should find as much rudeness in her conversation, as she had
sweetness in her eyes; to boot, that he saw her to be so modest, as he easily
imagined she would not speak long unto him in her parents presence, (for he
perceived she behaved her self as if she were the old man's daughter) he
enquired also of the good old man, if he went often to that Temple? whether his
abode there had been long? whether he were of Cyprus, or no? whether that were
his whole family? and a hundred other things to continue the conversation. To
all which, though the other answered exactly, Philoxypes did hardly hear any
thing he said; and thus they parted, after he had taken his leave of them all,
hardly knowing what he said.

Not having learnt any thing, but that he had once more seen the fair unknown
one, that she was much more lovely then he had thought her to be, that he knew
her abode, and the Temple whether she sometimes went. He pursued her with his
eyes as far as he could; but at last being ashamed of what he did, and seeking
a reason for it, he returned back the same way, and went into his Gallery, it
being the only place in all his house, wherein he pleased himself. When he was
come thereinto, he began to walk with more disquiet then he had wont to be
acquainted withal. And far from his former design of bringing the fair unknown
one to the Court, he did as far as in him lay, put on a resolution of never
seeing her more himself: so much was he affected with this second sight.

To this purpose, he went forthwith out of his Gallery, got on horseback, and
returned to Paphos; the King who loved him dearly, and who had as much of
friendship for him, as of love for the Princess Aretephile, complained of his
so long abode in the Country, and made as much of him as could be. He
immediately entreated him to visit the Princess Aretephile, because there had
been some little quarrel between them, which he acquainted him withal, making
the most he could of it.

Phyloxypes obeys him, visits the Princess, and makes them friends: but let
him do what he pleases, or go whither he will, his thoughts are still busied
about the fair unknown one; he compares her with all the beauties that he sees,
and whether he behold Aretephile, Thimoclea, Agharista, or whosoever else, he
can see none but his sister, the fair Princess of Salamis, who comes any way
near her for beauty; but he preferred the other a thousand times before her, as
being a thousand times more beautiful, then whatsoever the world has of
beauty. Two days after he returned to Claria, and the next day he went to the
aforesaid little Temple, whether those that were of the Island went seldom or
never, it being only built for strangers.

And this was the reason wherefore the beauty of the fair unknown one, had not
been noised abroad, neither in Apid, which is not far from thence, nor in Soly
which is very near it, nor in Claria, which joins upon it. Phyloxypes, then
maugre himself, went thither, whether he was no sooner come, but he saw the
fair maid still accompanied with the same company, who devoutly prayed to the
Goddess that is there adored. In fine, Sir, to keep that no longer from you,
which Philoxypes had much ado to acknowledge to himself, this last sight fully
conquered him; for the sacrifice being somewhat long, love had time enough to
fasten him with his chains not to be untyed. You may believe it had been easy
for Philoxypes to have spoken to this maid, as she came out of the Temple, and
to have followed her home, if he had pleased; but though love had already
gotten the upper hand in his heart, yet had it not driven out shame from
thence. And Philoxypes did me the honor to tell me afterward, that he was so
ashamed of his own weakness, and of the meanness of this maids condition as he
sometimes wished to be dead.

This little assembly being gone, and he being returned home strangely
perplexed, what said he to himself, is it possible that Philoxypes, that
unflexible Philoxypes, who could never be wrought upon by all the fair Ladies
of Cyprus, should be in love with one born in a Cottage, bred up amongst Rocks,
and savage people? Ah, no, no: it cannot be. I would rather rip out my heart,
then suffer it any longer to retain so mean, and so unworthy an affection. But
(said he presently afterward) there is somewhat of Divinity in Supreme beauty,
which is not to be resisted. And if this unknown one be more fair then all the
Princes of the world, she better deserves the love of the inflexible
Philoxypes, then all they do. Yet I am sure, said he, when the wise Solon told
me, That a man might without shame be once in his life time overcome by love;
he understood it not to be by the love of a shepherdess, as doubtlesly she is
-- at these words not having power to end his speech and say, Whom I love;
shame stopped his mouth, and for a while he said nothing.

Then suddenly re-assuming his speech, No, no, said he, Solon would not approve
the folly which possesses me: For in fine, to love a person so beneath ones
self, a person, whose name one is afraid to ask; one to whom one has never
spoken, and to whom I dare not speak, for fear of finding her mind unworthy of
her beauty, one who peradventure will not understand my language, who
peradventure has neither virtue nor goodness, and whom the Gods have endowed
with extraordinary beauty, only for my confusion, and to make me despair;
once more it cannot, it must not be; so dreadful an evil must be early
withstood; and as there are some venomes whose mischief is only cured by
themselves, the fair unknown one must cure me of the malady she has caused in
me.

I must once more see her, and speak to her, to the end that the blemishes of
her mind, and her rude conversation, may drive that beauty from out my heart,
which her charming beauty and pleasing eyes has placed there. But good Gods,
replied he unto himself, is it possible so fair a personage should have any
defaults? Think Philoxypes what thou will do; and fear lest whilst you think to
find a cure for your evil, you render in incurable.

Thus Philoxypes reasoned with himself, who in effect resolved to go the next
day to the Cottage, where the fair unknown one dwelt, with intention to speak
unto her, and so to cure himself, imagining that his shame to see himself in
that Cottage, and the maids gross conversation, would infallibly salve his
passion. But he knew not that it is an usual effect of love to make those who
are in love, make use of all pretenses, whereby they may come near those whom
they love, not knowing themselves why they go thither.

Philoxypes failed not then to go the next day toward the rocks, at foot
whereof according to his custom he left his servants: But as he went he was
much disquieted; sometimes he wished this young maid might neither have wit nor
attraction; and by and by, desired again he might meet with nothing in her
which might detract from her beauty. In fine, not knowing whether he desired to
be sick or cured, whether he would be free or a captive, and not knowing also
under what pretense to make this odd visit, he marched on till he came to a
little Valley, seated between Rocks, stolen as it were from the world, and very
fit, to say the truth, to hide so infinite a precious treasure. At the foot of
this little Valley, there lies a pleasant Meadow; and upon the side of these
Rocks, a little Wood of Myrtle 'and wild Pomegranats, intermingled with some
Orange Trees. At the bottom of this Wood, there stands a little House very low
built, but in indifferent good repair: As Philoxypes drew near it, his troubles
re-doubled, and he was almost tempted to turn back, so ashamed was he of his
weakness. But at last being forced on by love, he entered into the fore-Court of
this house, closed in with Laurels no higher then ones elbow, which are very
common in this Island. At last, seeing a door open, he came into a little
Chamber, decently, though but meanly furnished; in which, he found the fair
unknown one, and two other women who made Garlands of flowers, intending to
carry them the next day to the Temple, and give them to the Priest who lived
there, to adorn the Victime, which was to be offered, there in sacrifice. You
may imagine, how much astonished this young maid might be, to see such a one as
Philoxypes enter her Cabin, who is always richly clothed, and who as you know,
is of a very stately behavior; she no sooner saw him, but rising up in haste
she let all her flowers fall, thereby affording Philoxypes occasion of
commencing conversation, who stooped down to gather up the fallen flowers: Sir,
said she, endeavoring to hinder him, pray trouble not your self, for our Woods
and Meadows abound in the like, so as I may easily repair this loss, if these
were spoiled. Those which your Woods and Fields produce, said he, are not of
such worth as these, which I restore you, because they have not been gathered
by so fair a maid as you. Sir, said she, blushing, the Goddess to whom I intend
to offer them, will look more upon the intention of my heart, then upon my
face, which certainly has nothing in it, which may occasion you to speak as
you do. But Sir, said she, (not giving him leave to interrupt her, to the end
she might change the discourse) you have perhaps somewhat to command my Father,
who will be very much troubled that he is not here, that he might have the
glory to obey you: but he is gone forth with my Mother, and will not return
till night.

Philoxypes hearing her speak with so much judgment, and such civility, he
having at most expected nothing but innocence, and simplicity in her
conversation, had hardly the power to answer her. He beheld her with
admiration, and listened to her with astonishment; he observed a decent
negligence in her apparel, and her tone of speech so excessively charming, as
he was ravished; she spoke not only Greek, but with all the Atique purity, and
Courtly smoothness; her action was moreover infinitely becoming, having nothing
in it, neither of affected, nor yet of Clownish. He found such modesty in her
looks, and so lovely a freshness in her complexion, as he had hardly liberty to
reply; yet after some strivings within himself, it is true, fair maid, said he,
I had somewhat to say unto your Father, but till such time as I shall see him,
give me leave to ask you why he makes choice of so solitary an abode. Sir, said
she, such is my respect unto him, as I never informed my self of what you
desire to know; but I have sometimes thought that this place is not of his
choice, and that he lives here, only to fit his mind unto his fortune, which
not having destined him a Palace, hinders him not from thinking himself happy
in his Cottage.

But is it possible, said he, that this austere solitariness should not seem
tedious to you? Sir! (replied she with a modest smile) you will doubtlesly
think me very rustic and savage, when I shall dare to say, that the only
trouble I have met withal amidst these Rocks, since I have lived here, is that
wherewith I am now possessed, to see you in a place, where I use not to see any
one; and where certainly I would not see you, were I in a condition to do
otherwise; it not appearing seemly to me, that one of your condition, should
busy himself in talking so long with such an one as I am. I should be very
unhappy, said Philoxypes, if I should have offended you, or have appeared too
importunate: but lovely personage, tell me I beseech you, your name, and your
Parents name, and tell me what God or Goddess it is that comes to instruct you in
these Woods? Sir! said she, my name is Policrite, my Father is called
Cleanthes, and my Mother Megisto; but as for those Gods which you say do teach
me, they have as yet taught me so little, as I am ignorant even of civility: to
witness which, I shall take the boldness to say, that since those on whom I
depend are not here, I shall desire you not to take it ill, if I entreat you
not to tarry any longer in a place, wherein you will find more of incommodity,
then content. I shall not alter my mind, replied Philoxypes for what you say,
but must once more affirm, that doubtlesly the Gods have in a moment inspired
you, with what others have much ado to learn in their whole lives. For that
you should be the fairest maid in all the world, and fairer in a Cottage, then
Queens are in their Palaces; though this be very much, yet is it not
impossible, but that living amongst Woods and Rocks, you should behave your
self, and speak as you do, it is this, fair Philocrita, that I cannot
comprehend; nor can I imagine that you were born here amongst these savage
Rocks; It Is true, Sir! said she, I am not of this Island by birth; but was so
young when I parted from Creta, as I hardly remember any thing thereof. It Is
true, the conversation which I have here, cannot have given me the accent of
the Country, for I speak with none but those of this family, who are no more
of Cyprus then I.

What, Policrite, said Philoxypes, do you spend your whole time without
speaking, and yet speak as you do? Once more, this Cottage is unworthy of you;
and some means must be found out to draw you hence. I am so well contented
here, Sir, said she, as I should thereby receive an injury; and I imagine you
have no such design; therefore I conjure you to leave me in that solitariness
that you found me; for neither will I say much more unto you, not being able to
speak any thing of mine own experience.

Philoxypes, who observed that this young maid was indeed troubled to see him
tarry so long with her, though it were in no dis-obliging manner, was loath to
anger her; so as with much violence used upon himself, after having saluted her
with such reverence, as if she had been upon a Throne, he offered to be gone.
But, Sir, said she, with much candor, you know my name is Policrite, and I
cannot tell my Father what his name is, that has done him the honor to
enquire after him. You may tell him, replied this Prince, transported with
love, my name is Philoxypes. Alas, Sir! answered Philocrita, I beg your pardon,
if I have not used you with such respect as I ought. Is not then, said he, my
name unknown unto you? No, Sir, said she, and I have heard my Father, though he
knows you not himself, say such things of you by the report of others, as I am
sure will make him rejoice exceedingly, when he shall know that you will do him
the favor to command him any service. Philoxypes, enchanted to hear Policrite
speak in such sort, said unto her a thousand passionate and obliging things, if
she would have understood them; to which she still replied with such readiness
and modesty, as he still became in love with her more and more.

He then took his leave of her, and departed from this Cottage, with an
unconceivable sorrow, being come to the same place where he first saw her, he
stayed; and beholding on the one side his goodly and magnificent Palace of
Claria, and on the other side this little Country Cottage: Ah, Philoxypes,
cried he, who would believe, that in the condition thy soul is in, thou can
prefer this unlucky Cottage before that stately Palace? and that thy heart so
insensible of love, and so ambitious of true glory, can abase it self before
Policrite's feet? But then, said he again, is it possible that Philoxypes
should love any thing which is not the handsomest thing in the world? And if it
be so, Policrite ought to be the object of his desires and love. I say,
Policrite, in whose looks is no art, whose words are sincere, all whose
thoughts are innocent, who knows not what a sin is, whose heart is not
prepossest with any passion, who as yet loves nothing but the Woods, Fields,
Flowers, and Fountains; who is hardly conscious of her own beauty, and whose
inclinations are doubtlesly all virtuous. But when all is done, said he, after
a little pause, love is a weakness, from whence I have till now defended my
self, only because I did verily believe, that it was handsome not to be
capable thereof; but to love a personage of so unequal birth, is a folly, which
I ought by all means to withstand. For in fine, with what face shall I dare to
appear at Court? How fair soever Policrite be, I dare not show the irons she
makes me wear; they must either be broken by force, or so cunningly conceald,
as no man may ever discern them.

With this resolution did Philoxypes return home, and from thence to Paphos;
but he was so possessed with melancholy, as he was forced to fain himself sick.
The King, who saw him that very night, both with himself, and with the Princess
Aretephile, perceived his perplexity, and pressed him to know the cause: But
Philoxypes answered him as he had done the rest. The Court was very great that
day, and all that was gallant, was there; which occasioned Philoxypes in his
ravings, to inquire of himself an hundred and an hundred times, why, since he
was to love, it was not some of those illustrious personages? Yet though he
would use violence upon himself, and endevor to love by reason, he could never
co^pass it. And Policrite's image was so deeply imprinted in his heart, as
nothing could eface it. He passed over 3 days thus with very much disquiet, and
on the 4th maugre himself, he returned to Claria, and from thence to Cleanthes,
whom at his first approach, he found leaning upon that little Pallisado of
Laurels, which encompassed his Court. As soon as this wise Old man saw him, he
stepped unto him, and received him with such Civility as had nothing of Rustic
in it. Sir, said he, I thought my Daughter had been deceived when she told me
your Name, which kept me from coming to Claria to receive your Commands; to
boot, that it is hard to imagine, that a Man of my Fortune and Age may be any
ways serviceable to such a Prince as you. Virtue and worth, said Philoxypes,
makes friends unto it self of all Ages, and of all Conditions. But Cleanthes
the only thing I desire to know of you, is whether it be out of necessity, or
out of choice, that you inhabit this little House? for, if it be the former,
you shall not tarry long here; and if the latter, I will come and live with you
sometimes; at which Cleanthes smiled, and said, Poor Cottages, Sir, are no
proper abodes for great Princes. It Is very true, said Philoxypes, neither ought
great Worth to be confined to little Cottages, but does much better become
great Palaces: I therefore proffer you my House Claria, where you and your
Family may live more commodiously then here. Sir, replied Cleanthes, it is
handsome for a personage of your condition and worth to be willing to relieve
the distrested, but it were not just to abuse that Goodness, which may be
better employed on some better occasion. For, in fine, Sir, I suffer no want in
this Cottage, my mind being no greater then it; I here live in quiet; and
finding in this little corner of the earth sufficient to keep me from being
troublesome to any body, I live here much more happily then those who live in
Palaces, and whose desires are not therein bounded. But wise Cleanthes, said
Philoxypes, will you not tell me what Fortune it is that has brought you
hither, and acquaint me precisely with your condition? Sir, said the good Old
man, I am descended of honest Parents, of an indifferent Fortune; for mine, you
see it is mean enough, and I assure you my worth is not extraordinary. I was
forced to foregoe my Country, for many reasons, too long now to tell, and to
seek out a place of Retirement in this Island, where I have lived a good while;
but said Philoxypes, are you not afraid lest Policrite, who may justly be
termed a Treasure, may not be safe in such a place as this? if I should grant,
answered Cleanthes, that Policrite should be what you say, since this Treasure
is only known by Prince Philoxypes, I should think it safe enough; you have
reason, Father, said he, for what you say, for I engage my self to protect you,
against what, or whosoever shall go about to injure you. After this Cleanthes
led him into his House, where he found Megisto, Cleanthes wife, who received
him so Civily, as he easily discerned that there was nothing of Rustic nor
savage in this family. She had by her young Policrite, and another Maid
handsome enough, whom Policrite called Sister, and whose name is Dorida: But,
good Gods, how fair did Policrite appear to Philoxypes that day? Her Hair which
hung carelessly over her Neck, and which were the one half covered by a thin
Tiffany, were tied back behind her head, with a Garland of Orange and
Pomegranate flowers, over which hung a thin Veil, with which she covered her
Face when she went in the Sun, and which very well became her Dressing: The
rest of her Apparel was white, of a handsome shape; her Sleeves, which were
very large, were trust back with Ribbonds of several colors; and rhough there
was nothing of stately in this habit; and that instead of Pearls and Diamonds,
she was only decked with flowrs, yet was there somewhat of so handsome and so
comely in her Dressing, as she never appeared so fair to Philoxypes, the more
he saw her, the more he was in love with her; and were it that he entertained
Cleanthes, that he spoke to Megisto, that he addressed himself to Policrite, or
that he said somewhat of civility to Dorida, he was still more and more taken.
What did he not do to make them tell him somewhat more then Cleanthes had told
him, and to persuade them that he might fit them with a better Lodging? He
offered Cleanthes Jewels to dispose of at his pleasure; but let him do what he
could, he could learn nothing, nor obtain nothing, save only leav to come and
visit them sometimes, which they granted him, merely because they knew not how
to deny it him. I will not stay to tell you how frequently Philoxypes returned
thither during twelve Days space which he staid at Claria, without returning
to Paphos; but I will tell you, that Cleanthes, who had understanding enough,
and Megisto who wanted not any, easily perceived that it was Policrite's beauty
which occasioned this Prince his so frequent Visits, he read her a long Lesson,
and wished her to have a care of her self, and that she should consider that
Philoxypes his affection could not but redound to her prejudice: and that
therefore she should live with him, as with one whom she should never look upon
but merely with respect, not suffering him to engage her in any particular
affection. This mean while Philoxypes, who perceived he should never have the
Freedom to speak to Policrite in particular, unless it were by chance, came
so often thither, as he met her once unaccompanied by any save the young
Dorida. This being too fair an occasion to let slip, he drew near unto her, and
expressing much Love in his looks, Think not, Policrite, said he, that I have
any thing of mis-becoming to say unto you, though I have diligently watched to
entertain you alone; It Is only that not knowing how you will receive my
affection, I was not desirous to have any witnesses of my misfortune or
happiness. Sir, said she, with a Maidenly-blush, before you speak, consider I
beseech you where you are; mark well the Cottage wherein I live, and see what
Clothes I wear. No, Policrite, replied he, I see nothing but your Eyes, and had
you a Crown of Diamonds on your head, I should no more mind it then what you
speak of; so firmly are my looks fixed upon your Beauty. Permit me then, Sir,
said the discreet and fair Maid, to teach you another thing, which it may be
you are ignorant of, and which ought to keep you from saying any thing of
unfitting to me. It Is, Sir, that this very Policrite, whom you see in this
Country Cottage, who is thus simply attired, who is only known to these Woods
and Rocks, has notwithstanding her meannesse and simplicity, so tender a sense
of Honor, that should you offend her never so little therein, she were able to
dye for sorrow and dislike. Be careful then, Sir, to say nothing which may
make Policrite beleev, that you know her not; for, in fine, she has such a
passion for Virtue, as she should have much ado not to hate those who should
say any thing unto her in opposition thereunto. Fear not, said he, fairest
Policrite, that I shall say any thing to you, which shall offend you, at least
which should offend you; for I protest unto you in the presence of the gods,
who hear me, that the passion which you have for flowers, fountains, and for
these inameld fields, is not more pure, nor more innocent, then that which I
have for Philocrita; and if there be any difference between them, it is that the
affection which I bear to her, is so violent and strong, as there is nothing
which I shall not willingly undertake to witness it unto her: You cannot better
do it, Sir, said she, then in doing me the favor to say no more such things
unto me, which will only serve to trouble the quiet of my life, since if I
should not believe you, I should certainly be somewhat troubled to think you
would laugh at my simplicity; and if I should believe you, I should almost
despair, for being the cause why a great Prince should contract a passion so
unworthy of him, and from whence he can never reap any advantage.

For in fine Policrite knowing her self, and knowing you also, would not her
self commit a fault, nor yet cause you commit one for love of her; do not
therefore engage your self Sir, in so angersom an adventure: Let me alone (said
she, looking upon him with an eye, which did rather detain him then drive him
away, though it were done without art) let me alone I say, amongst our woods
and rocks, and get you to your palaces where you will be much better then here.
Philoxypes was astonished to hear Policrite speak thus, when throwing himself
at her feet, no, no divine Policrite said he, you are not what you appear to
be; and though you were so, yet would your virtue place you in a degree above
all the Queens in the world. Sir said she, raising him up, think not that I am
to be wonn by flatteries; for though I know not the world by mine own
experience, I know it by my Parents relation. I therefore know that love is a
dangerous passion, and not knowing precisely what it is, I know it ought to be
avoided; and that I ought rather to apprehend that love which you say you bear
me, then any other. And wherefore, Policrite said he, do you thus treat that
innocent passion, which you raised in my heart? because said she, it cannot be
but injurious to Philoxypes, or to Policrite. but say for God's sake said he,
suppose that Policrite were a Princess, or that Philoxypes were of the same
condition that Policrite is; what would you then think of him? I cannot tell
said she, but this I know sir, that though I should esteem him never so much,
nay, though I should love him very much, Cleanthes and Megisto should always
absolutely dispose of me. Say then said he, if they should be favorable, would
you without any repugnancy obey them? Sir said she, smiling a little, I have
been so told that I must not lightly trust any one, as I think it not
convenient to reveal so great a secret to you. Hereupon Cleanthes and Megisto
returned, and broke off their discourse; Philoxypes presently observed that
these two persons were troubled at his visits; he therefore resolved not to be
so frequent in them, least he might for ever lose a happiness, which now he
might sometimes enjoy. Thus, Sir, Philoxypes after some short discourse
departed, and returned not only to Claria, but to Paphos, whether the King had
also sent for him; not being able to let him be so long alone and solitary, all
the Ladies, and the whole Court complained of him, and could not comprehend the
reason of his so long retirement; The King continued to give him new
testimonies of his affection, by bestowing on him the government of Cithera,
which was fallen void by the death of the former governor. He acquainted him
with what had befalne him during his absence, with Princess Aretephile, and
conjured him to speak always to her in his behalf. For said he, Aretephile
has taken a fancy to be sure of the Crown of Cyprus, before she give me her
heart, and I will have her give me her heart, before I give her the Crown.
Philoxypes promised the King to speak to Aretephile, but it was with such
sadness as all the Court took notice of it. He did almost always little better
then rave, he would mistake, and say one thing for another, he shunned company,
and as soon as he could, he returned to Claria. He found more resistancy in
Policrite, then he thought to have met withal; for she, fearing all things,
durst hardly look upon this Prince; the difference of his condition, though it
made her more obliged unto him in her soul, yet was it the reason why she
treated him so coolly. Philoxypes would have presented the whole Family, but
they all refused to receive any. This mean while he was still more unhappie; for
though he loved Policrita passionately, and that he valued her more then all
the world besides, yet could he never put on a resolution of making any one
acquainted with this his so meanly placed passion: He would certainly have been
able to live with Policrita in any desert Island; but he knew not how he could
avow the marrying a Maid of her condition, to the world; yet did he still love
her with a respectfull affection, not giving way to any sinful desire: That
pure and unartificial virtue which he saw in Policrita, infused into him a
greater respect for her, then if she had been seated on a Throne; he then
perceived he loved, without hope of ever finding a remedy for his evil, upon
lesser terms, then resolving to abandon the Court, and Kingdom, and to ask
Policrita of Cleanthes upon so vexatious terms; but that which most of all
afflicted him was, that he knew not how he stood in Policrita's affection; he
found her mild and civil, he observes no marks of hatred in her countenance;
but there was therein also so great a reservedness, and so exact a modesty, as
he could not penetrate her thoughts: He thought also, that Policrita was grown
somewhat more melancholy then she had formerly been, and indeed he was not
mistaken, for Philoxypes his handsomness, his good behavior, his wit, and
civility, being things not to be seen without likeing; young Policrita could
not see her self beloved of such a Prince as he, without having her heart a
little touched with acknowledgement; yet seeing her self in a condition so far
beneath his, and out of a sense of virtue she must resist this budding
affection, she could not but be afflicted at this conquest which she had made;
and to bemoan her self thereof to her dear Dorida who had wit enough. Sister!
said she unto her, how happy are you in comparison of me, who can take
pleasure in walking abroad, in gathering of Flowers, in hearing birds sing, and
the fall of waters, and in not being reduced to a condition of complaining of
too much good fortune: For in fine Dorida, Philoxypes heart is a conquest which
I am sure the greatest Queens would be proud to have made; yet whilst they
might innocently rejoice thereat, I must be therewithal afflicted: I could
wish I had never seen him; or at least I think I could: For when all is done,
though methinks I could heartily desire that he would love me no more, yet am I
glad to see him. But if love, replied Dorida, be so powerful a thing as it is
said to be, how know you but that Philoxypes may love you well enough to marry
you? Ah Sister, answered she, as I would do nothing misbeseeming me, so neither
would I that Philoxypes should do any thing that might misbeseem him to do:
But, said Dorida, by like then you love Philoxypes, since you interest your
self in his honor, against your self. Policrita blushed at this discourse, and
looking confusedly upon Dorida, if you were better acquainted with this passion
then I, said she, I would tell you whatsoever my soul is sensible of, to the
end I might know what to think of it; But I cannot yet believe that this
dangerous disease be yet got into my heart; for if you remember well, we have
heard Cleanthes say, and we have read it more then once, that love makes one
lose their reason; that it causes a thousand pains, and vexations, that it
sometimes makes people do amiss; and I thank heaven, I do not yet feel any of
all this; me thinks my reason is free enough, and I am well enough pleased with
the melancholy which possesses me: For it is true, I often times talk I know not
what, but I delight in doing so; and though I would not love Philoxypes, yet
there are certain moments wherein I am well enough pleased that he should love
me: But as for any thing of fault, so far am I from being willing to commit
any, as I protest unto you, that were it for no other reason, then not to lose
Philoxypes his esteem and good opinion, I would die a thousand deaths rather
then do any thing that should be unjust. You may then believe, that whilst I
love virtue, and would become worthy the affection of so great a Prince, I will
never do any thing contrary to reputation. I believe you, answered Dorida; but
for all this Sister mine, you deceive your self, if you believe you love not
Philoxypes: For in a word, you do not love what you loved before you knew him,
you are somewhat more comely, you consult oftener with the Crystal fountains,
and you are quite another thing then you were. Ah Sister, replied Policrite, if
that were true which you say, I would quickly take order for it, I would never
see Philoxypes, but to use him harshly; to the end, that he hating me, I might
no longer love him. These two young people having entertained themselves thus
upon the bank of a little rivelet, Cleanthes and Megisto, who had altered their
minds, came thither; and bidding Dorida withdraw a little; Megisto began to
say; Policrite! it is not many days since I told you, that in respect of your
condition, you should never look upon Philoxypes, but with a great deal of
respect; but fearing lest through that inequality which you may believe to be
between you and him, you may not appear to be so much obliged to him for his
affection, as indeed to put somewhat too great an estimation thereupon:
Cleanthes and my self have resolved to tell you, that your true condition
considered, you are not bound to behold Philoxypes at any time, but with a
great deal of indifferency: For in a word, said Cheanthes, not to disguise the
truth from you any longer, you are what you think not your self to be, and we
are likewise that which you know not, and what you shall not as yet know;
because the Gods have not permitted us as yet to let you know it: But to show
you how much you are more obliged then you think for, to be virtuous, know
Policrite that you are of as Noble blood as any is in all Greece: And how
answered Policrite, interupting him, am I not what I always thought to be? No
daughter said he; to number Kings amongst your Ancestors, is not the greatest
mark of honor that you make boast of. There is somewhat of more August in your
race, then what I speak of: Therefore that I might raise up your heart, I
thought it good to trust you with this important secret, (which I charge you
not to reveal to any one) as also to let you know the better how much bound you
are not to do any thing unworthy of your Fathers house, nor of the condition
you are born in. Policrite was exceedingly joy'd to hear Cleanthes speak after
this manner, though her joy was not over quiet; for she was in trouble to know
more precisely what was told her. Father said she, leave me not in such
perplexity; tell me a little more plainly, I beseech you, so pleasing a truth,
and let me know who I am.

The Gods have forbidden us it, my daughter, answered he, by the mouth of an
Oracle: you must be content with what you have heard: but make use thereof to
defend your self against Philoxypes love; and far from looking on him, as on a
Prince who has don you too much honor: look rather on him, as on one whom you
shall favor by your permittance.

This is not, said Cleanthes, to deny, but that Philoxypes is endowed with all
the virtues and qualities requisite for a great Prince; but it is, my child, to
let you know, that there is a certain pride which does not mis-become a young
maid to defend her self thereby against love, when we have an esteem; for
those that are above us, it is hard to gainsay, if they entreat. And on the
contrary, when we believe them to be beneath us, or at least but our equals, we
stand not much upon denying them unjust things. Policrite assured then
Cleanthes and Megisto, That though she had known nothing of what they now had
told her, she should never have done any thing contrary to that decency which
she had learnt of them. But how much were they mistaken, if their design were
to hinder Policrite from loving Philoxypes.

Sometimes she was filled with joy, to know that she was of Noble descent; and
afterward, being willing to make use thereof; to drive thereby the beginning of
affection which Philoxypes worth had already raised in her, out of her heart,
she found it the more fortified by this knowledge. For said she, the
knowledge of what I am, does not take from the obligation which I ow him; since
he knows not that I am any thing more then what I seem to be.

But for me, who now know what I am, why should I not hope that the Gods
permitting Philoxypes to know my true conditition, may not so order it, as that
I may love him and be blameless, and be beloved by him innocently? No, no,
Policrite added she, let us no longer defend our heart any longer with such
opiniatrecie; let us content our selves with concealing our recentments, and do
nothing that shall be faulty: and let us not reject, as a mischief the love of
a Prince, to whom the wisest king of the world would not refuse to giv his
daughter. But it may be, said she, that Philoxypes does but counterfeit, that
he has sinful thoughts toward thee, and that thy simplicity abuses thee.

Stay then, said she, to be resolved herein, and make trial of his constancy
and fidelity, by an appearing indifferency, which may leave him without hope.

Thus was Policrite minded, when Philoxypes came to her; as soon as she saw,
him she b^gan to go toward her Cottage; but he, advancing hastily, stayed her;
yet not being above twenty paces from it, and there being two of her
women-servants at work in a Close hard by them, she stayed. What, Policrite,
said he, you shun a Prince, who shuns all the world for love of you? Sir, said
she, (after somewhat more an imperious manner then before, though she intended
not so to do) I do what peradventure you ought to do: For in fine, what
advantage can you hope for by your visits and solicitations? The contentment
said he, to hear from your fair mouth, that you do not hate me: If that be all
you desire to be satisfied in, replied she, you may easily compass your
desires; but ask no more, upon pain of refusal. What, lovely Policrite, said
he, will you never love me, and shall all I can do to win your affection, prove
useless? no, it is impossible, were you as incensible, as those pictures which I
have of you. My pictures, replied Policrite? Yes, added Philoxypes, I am not so
unfortunate as you think for; in despite of you, and without your consent, I
have the contentment of seeing you daily.

Ah! said Policrite, I perceive Mandrocles has betrayed me, and has falsified
his word. Philoxypes asked her then, how she came to know Mandrocles? She told
him how that famous Painter walking daily when his leisure would permit him,
amongst those rocks to draw some lanskips, had one day by chance light upon
their house: where, having seen her, he had begged leave of Cleanthes to draw
her pict^re, which Cleanthes would have refused him, but that seeing his
importunity, he was afraid lest he might speak of her to him at Claria, and
that therefore he gave way unto his desire, upon condition that he should not
make use of this picture, in any of his pieces, but as of a head made by fancy
and imagination, and making him take a solemn oath, never to speak with any
body whosoever, of any acquaintance he had with them. That since that time, as
long as Mandrocles tarryed at Claria, he came to teach her to design, and had
drawn her picture in twenty several postures. She then enquired of Philoxypes,
whether Mandrocles had spoken to him of her, or no? And he told her the whole
truth: but you may perceive, said Philoxypes, that the Goddess whom you
represent, intends not that you should always be inhumane, since she would her
self appear in your vizage.

Sir, said she, not being of your Isle, my devotion leads me rather to be a
Votress to Diana, then to worship Venus Urania; therefore it is not this your
reason that will prevail with me: to boot, that his Goddess approving only of
such passions as are innocent, will certainly never council me to admit of
yours. Virtues self, replied Philoxypes, would advise you to it; and did you
know my heart, you would need no other Councellor then your self. It would take
up so much time, replied she, to make me know it, as I shall advise you not to
undertake the work. But said he, if I do undertake it, and if I make it evident
to you, that never man loved any thing as I love you, what will you then think?
I would think, said she, that you were very unfortunate, in having so
passionately loved one, who is unworthy of so much honor. But said he, would
you think your self any ways obliged unto me? I should be sorry for you, said
she, and would wish your cure either by absence, or by forgetfulness.

Ah! cruel maid, said he, wish it rather by your compassion and charity; and
promise me only that you will afford me leisure to persuade you, that I am the
most in love of all men. To do as you say, said she, would be to be somewhat
persuaded thereunto already; therefore (and with this, she walked toward her
Cottage) I will listen no longer to you. After this manner did Philoxypes pass
away his time; having but very few moments of delight, amongst many hours of
anguish.

This mean while, he could not endure to tarry at Paphos, and when he went
thither, all he could do, was only to visit the Princess Aretephile, which the
King compelled him to do; but he appeared so melancholy, and so changed, as he
was hardly to be known. The King, who loved him dearly, was much afflicted to
see it; he together with the whole court, sought what might be the occasion of
this alteration; but they could not find it. The King asked it of Philoxypes
self, but could learn nothing. Philoxypes answering always, that it was some
melancholy, which proceeded certainly from his temper, and from some little
indisposition of health.

But said the King, solitariness is no usual cure for such incommodities;
wherefore you ought not to go any more to Claria: Yet affairs went still on
thus, yea even when Winter was come, which did the more astonish the whole
Court; they knew he built no more at Claria, that the Painters and Engravers,
who had been so long there, were all gone; that the season was foul; that when
he went thither, 'twas but with a small train; and that he walked always
alone: they saw a strange sadness in his face, and a wonderful alteration; and
all this without any appearing cause. The King heaped favors and honors upon
him; he asked him an hundred times, what he would desire of him: he had not any
one enemy; the whole Court loved him; he was exceeding rich; he appeared not
to have any sickness, as the Physicians could perceive: In fine, his
melancholy and retiredness, were things which could not be guest at. The
whole Court talked of nothing else; and the King was strangely troubled at it;
who, not knowing how to inform himself of what Philoxypes ailed, he bethought
himself of me, whom he knew this Prince did love particularly, and in whom he
did more confide, then in any other.

Thus upon a day, when Philoxypes was gone to Claria, the King sent for me; and
after having assured his Majesty, (as it was true) that I knew nothing of
particular concerning this Prince his melancholy, he did me the honor to
command me to go to him, and to use all my cunning to discover what it was that
was in his mind: For, said he, Leontidas, I do so love Philoxypes, as I
cannot live content unless I see he do so likewise; and were it to give him
half my Kingdom, I would doubtlesly do it, rather then not to give him
satisfaction.

I then departed, reallie intending to endeavor to satisfy the Kings
curiosity, who certainly stood in need of Philoxypes presence, to counsel and
comfort him concerning Aretephiles behavior; for I think there was never known
a stiffer combat between ambition and love.

I went then to Claria where I found Philoxypes in his usual melancholy; the
which I made the greater, because I hindered him from going that day to
Cleanthes. At first sight of me, he endeavored notwithstanding, to enforce
himself to honor me so much, as to seem glad to see me; but it was after a
fashion, which made me easily see that his heart gainsaid his words; and that
notwithstanding any friendship he had for me, he wished I had tarried still at
Paphos.

Leontidas! said he, I am much beholding to you for coming to visit me in a
season, when the Country has lost all its ornaments; and when the Court is
fullest of diversions.

Sir, said I, you commend me with less reason, then the Court complains of you;
for to forgo Paphos for Claria, when you are there, it is to forgo the Court,
for the Court; nay, for the most pleasing part of the Court: but to forgo
Paphos, only to seek out solitarines at Claria, as you do, Oh, Sir, said I,
(not suspecting him notwithstanding of any passion) it is all that a Prince in
love, who is upon bad terms with his Mistress, can do. Philoxypes blushed at
these words, and looking upon me with a kind of smile, which did not,
notwithstanding drive the melancholy from his countenance; I perceive,
Leontidas, said he, I am not so much beholding to you, as I had thought, since
doubtleslie you are come hither rather to chide me, then to visit me.

I am come, Sir, said I, to try whether I may not be able to serve you in a
time when all the world believes that somewhat of great importance, which they
cannot guess at, does afflict you. Leontidas, said he, I am much bound to you,
but I should be so more, if you could hinder the Court from looking so far into
my heart. For I confess said he, I find it somewhat hard that a man may not
look inwards sometimes, though whilst he does so, he is hardly master of his
own mind.

Sir, said I, were you less beloved, you would not suffer under this
persecution which you complain of: This kind of Love replied he, causes in me
no small suffering: For what can I more rationally do, then to conceal my
Melancholy in a retiredness, to the end that I may not trouble the joy of
others. But Sir, said I, it is the cause of this Melancholy which every body
seeks after, and none can find: as for my particular, I must crave your pardon
if I do. For Sir, it is not ambition that torments you. No, Leontydas, said he,
if I were sick of that disease, the King would quickly cure me. Neither is it
revenge, said I, for not being hated by any, it is not to be believed that you
are possessed with hatred. You have reason for what you say, said he; and sighing
added, I think I am mine own greatest enemy. It is not said I again the
passion which you have for books, for that passion may cause solitariness, but
not such melancholy as you are possessed withal. And moreover, you have had that
passion a long time, without the product of so bad an effect. It is not books
certainly said he, which cause my trouble, which were I capable of reason,
would rather be my comfort. It is not Love said I, that torments you, for you
see none that can cause it in you. Conclude then, said he, taking me in his
arms, that there is no more to be said, but that I hate my self, that I have
lost my reason, and if my friends be wise, they will let me alone, and will
leave the knowledge, or cure of my malladie, to the process of time.

Sir said I, shall Leontidas, who has so particular an affection for you, be
dealt withal as others are? shall he have known nothing more of your
concernments, then do your enemies, if any such you have? Ah, Sir, said I, you
must if you please do otherwise: and to prove to you that Leontidas does in some
sort deserve you should do so, know Sir, that hitherto I have spoken unto you
as a spy, sent by the King, who will know at whatsoever prise, what it is that
afflicts your mind. But after having bootlesly acquitted my self of my
Commission, I speak no longer Sir, as one sent by the King, but as one who is
resolved to serve you with his life, if it shall be needful; and never
absolutely to give you over till he know the cause of your Melancholy: for Sir,
if there be no cause of this Melancholy, and that it be but a distemper of
humors, I must stay here, that I may endeavor, mauger your self, to divert
you; and if there be any cause for it, Leontidas must likewise serve you
therein, if there should redound no other benefit to you thereby, then to help
you to keep it concealed from the King, and from the whole Court, if you desire
it should be concealed from them.

I do not know any way, said he, to keep it undiscovered better, then to tell
it to no body.

But Sir, said I, if you treat me with this indifferency, when I shall return
to Paphos, and the King shall ask me what I think of your Melancholy, I must
needs say something to him.

And what will you say to him, replied Philoxypes? I think Sir, said I, that to
revenge my self for the little confidence you have in me, I will say what I do
no ways believe, to wit, that you are in love; and that the shame of your
former inflexableness, or of your new weakness, hinders you from avowing it:
nay, I will peradventure tell him, said I, in mockery, that that Venus Urania,
which people have so much quarreled with you about since the great feast which
you made here, and which did precede but a few days your melancholy humor has
struck you effectually in love. In fine sir, there is nothing of so odd, which
I shall not say to revenge my self for the wrong you do the passion which I
have to your service.

During this discourse; Philoxypes changed color twenty times; and were it
out of friendship, or out of my importunity, or that indeed those that are in
love love naturally to speak thereof, he took me by the hand, led me into his
Cabinet, and after having made me take sundry solemn Oaths, never to discover
what he should say unto me; and all this with as much ceremony, and pressure,
as if he had some conspiracy to discover unto me against the state, or some
attempt upon the Kings Person; he told me that he was in love.

What Sir, said I, these retirements, these Melanchollies, and this
impenetrable secret, which all the world in vain seeks to find out: is it
only that you are in Love? Ah, Leontydas, said he, mock not at my misery; for
it is greater then you can imagine. But Sir, said I, I have much ado to imagine
that you can be so unfortunate as you say, since I cannot conceive that there
is e're a Princess in the Kingdom (except ambitious Aretephile, who will be
Queen) who will not favorably entertain your affection, when you shall make it
known unto her. Alas! said he, with a sigh, Love has dealt much more cruelly
with me then you are aware of; and since I must discover unto you the secret of
my heart, know that I have met with an invincible resistance, in one who lives
amongst these rocks, and dwells but in a cottage.

Yes Leondidas, I have found a maid, or to say better, I have found virtue it
self, wholely pure, and under the viseage of Venus Urania, which has and does
yet resist me. A maid who is not touched with ambition; in whom beauty causes
no affectation nor pride; who has simplicity and wit, gallantrie and
sincerity; and who in a sandy and desert place, which the Gods alone have
pointed out unto me: speaks better then all the wittiest Ladies in the Court

But when all this is done, she lives in a Cottage, her condition appears to be
very mean, if I consider all that is about her; and when I consider only her
self, or do but hear her speak, she appears to be upon a throne: Her
Governors are virtuous, and discreet, but still Leontidas they live in a
Cottage, and will not abandon it. At last said he with tears almost standing in
his eyes, I am the most unfortunate of all men: I have a passion which I cannot
overcome, and which I will not have known: I too much respect Policrite's worth
(for so is she called of whom I speak) to have any sinful desire toward her,
which though I should have, it would be to no purpose: I likewise am too great a
lover of Glory, to resolve to marry a maid of this condition without much
repugnancie,; Yet can I not live without her: my sufferings are such that I
cannot express them, and seeing no remedy for my Malladie; I bear it
patiently without complaining of it, and void of all hope but death.

Phyloxypes told me this in so feeling a manner, as I much pitied him: He then
told me all that had befallen him: How it was he met Policrite, how he was
surprised that it was she by whom Mandrocles had drawn the Picture of Venus
Urania, and all the rest which I have told you. I was somewhat surprised at
this fantastic passion, chiefly when I called to mind Philoxypes former
inflexibleness; Yet did I endeavor to comfort him. Sir, said I, such a beauty
as that is which you represent unto me, and such a one as I have seen in the
Venus in your Gallerie, bears some excuse with it, of what condition soever the
possessors are, especially when it occasions only some passing passions, and
which are of no long durance, as I will hope yours will prove. No, no, said he
Leontydas, do not deceive your selves; I will love Polycrite till death. But
Sir, not to abuse your patience, perceiving Philoxypes grievance too great to
be cured I smoothed it, and sweetened it as much as possible I could. He then
led me into his gallerie, to show me his excuse, though I had seen his pictures
many times before: we afterward walked abroad, but he being able only to walk
one way, we were soon amongst the Rocks, in a place from whence we might
discover Policryte's habitation, which we no sooner saw, but blushing with
confusion, he said it is there my dear Leontydas where she that I adore does
live; it is underneath that roof, which I prefer before the proudest Palaces,
that Philoxypes finds some moments of content: and it is there in fine that all
my joy and happiness is circumscribed. Sir said I, there needs no greater
proofs of Polycrytes beauty, then the smalness of her Cottage; and whosoever
shall imagine that Phyloxypes affection is placed therein, cannot doubt but
that he has argued the matter with himself as much as he was able.

In fine, Sir, after that he had enlarged himself in expressing Policrytes
charming beauty, not suffering me to see her for fear of offending her: I must
think of returning to Paphos, for I had promised the King to return that very
night. I asked Phyloxypes what I should say unto him; any thing said he my dear
Leontydas rather then the truth of my adventure: For in the mind that I am of,
I think that I should run mad if the King should know it.

I then left him after he had made me swear a hundred times, not to discover
the least part of his misfortune. I went to find out the King, who expected me
with much impatiency, and who had purposely withdrawn himself early, to the end
that I might speak with more freedom to him when I should return.

And How, Leontydas, said he? what does our solitary companion do?

Sir said I, terming him as you do, your Majesty may easily guess at what he
does. He muses, he walks, he reads; looks upon his pictures, and statues; goes
from one place to another, and seeking ease every where, he finds it no where.

But Leontydas, said he, you speak to me as Philoxypes does, and it is not that
which I expect from you.

Sir, said I, I have done all I am able to satisfy your Majesty; but I
confess my journey has not been so successful as I hoped for: For all that
Philoxypes says, is only that he finds himself somewhat ill disposed, and
that he is possessed with a Melancholy which he cannot master.

Did you ask him said the King, whether it were not that he did wish for
somewhat which I have not be thought my self to give him, because I knew not
that he did desire it?

Oh, Sir, said I, (thinking I had done well) it is not ambition that torments
Philoxypes who is so satisfied with your Majesty's goodness, as he desires
nothing more then what he has.

Have you then discovered, said he, that he has any thing of private
discontent against any one of this Court? For if it be so, I will make his
interest mine, and will as severely revenge any injury done unto him, as if it
had been done unto my self.

Sir, said I, Philoxypes appears to be so well beloved of all the world, as it is
hard to think any one should injure him. I know not then what to imagine, said
the King; but if Philoxypes's Ambition be satisfied, and that it is not hatred
nor revenge that does trouble him, he must needs be in Love.

Your Majesty, Sir, said I, does too well know Philoxypes's inflexibleness, to
suspect any such thing in him. No Leontydas, said he, Philoxypes past
obduretie, is not a Reason strong enough to persuade me that he is obdurat
still. I am almost confident that it is this passion which robs me of Philoxypes's
company; For in fine he has all the marks of one in love. His countenance is
altered, he not having been sick; he is melancholy without any appearing
cause: he does little else but rave; he cannot stay long in a place; he
conceals his melancholy from us; he cannot endure that one should take notice
of it; he gives over thinking of his affairs; he visits none but by constraint,
and unless it be the Princess Aretephile, whom he has seen by my command, he
has not visited any one Lady since we were at Claria.

Sir, said I, part of what you allege to prove that Philoxypes is in Love, me
thinks makes for the contrary: For if he were in Love, he would certainly seek
out the party beloved; we should never see him from her: instead of being
melancholy, he would study to play the Gallant more, and would be the more
sociable: and instead of seeking out solitariness, as he does, me thinks he
should rather add to the Court diversions: and that his chiefest employments
should be music, Baals, conversation, and going abroad.

You say well, answered the King, for what concerns ordinary passions, or such
Lovers as have been fortunate in their affections; but there are certain giddie
headed passions out of the common road, which arising from a melancholy
anguish, feed themselves therewithal, and shun whatsoever affords delight. But
that which does a little trouble me, is that I cannot imagine who it is that
Philoxypes can love, and be hardly dealt withal by; for certainly there is
never a Lady in all my Court, who would not glory in having wonn his heart:
and moreover I have not observed that he has applied himself to converse with
any one in particular, yet doubtleslie Philoxypes is in Love.

Sir, said I, be not so resolute in your assertion, till you have stronger
proofs thereof, and till you may at least conjectture who it is he is in love
withal. The King began then to number over all the Ladies of the Court, one by
one, and found not any one of them that he was likely to be in Love withal.

He then began to walk not saying one word: soon after I saw some color com in
his face, and presently, me thought, he was much disquieted.

Leontydas, said he, you know more then you will tell me.

Sir, said I, I have said nothing but truth unto your Majesty. For in fine
Phyloxypes his Ambition is satisfied; he has no enemies that I know of; and if
I be not deceived, the fairest Ladies of the Court have no great power over him.

Ah! Leontydas, said he, you conceal the truth from me; but I know it without
your telling. Yes, Leontydas, said he, Philoxypes does Love, and so love, as
doubtleslie he is much afflicted thereat, and which he will withstand and
overcome: were not my thought true, he would not make his passion so great a
secret. But good Gods, said he, how unfortunate am I? and to what strange
extremity am I reduced; for in fine, Leontydas, said he, confess the truth,
Phyloxypes, mauger himself, is become my rival, and his grief for it is the
cause of his melancholy.

Ah! Sir, said I, (not having leisure to think of what I said) I know not the
cause of Philoxypes his melancholy; but I very well know he is not in Love
with Princess Aretephile, and that he too much respects your Majesty to suffer
such a thought enter his breast.

Think well Leontydas, said he, on what you say: you assure me you know not the
cause of Phyloxypes his melancholy, and yet you know he is not my rival:
once more Leontydas, if you know the business, let me know it: or if you know
it not; confess my suspicions are well grounded, and fear not for all this,
that I wish any harm to Phyloxypes: on the contrary I shall be beholden to him
for it.

I was extremely troubled to hear the King talk thus; for without violating
what we hold most sacred, I could not reveal Philoxypes his secret, which he
had made me swear above a hundred times not to do.

To consent likewise that the King should suspect him to be his Rival, me
thought it was a business of too great importance to leave him in that opinion;
but the more I persuaded him to the contrary, the more firmly did he believe
it. No, said he, I am cause of mine own misfortune, and of Phylxoipes his
misfortune too: it is I who made him visit Aretephile more then any other; it is
mine own hand that has enthralled him, and it is I who am the cause of all his
sufferings: For said he, I easily comprehend he seeks out all this
solitariness only to rid him of this passion: nay, I have observed that of
late he has been troubled as often as I have spoken to him to speak to
Aretephile, that he has shunned such Commissions as much as he could; and I am
too much persuaded that he has argued the business stiffly with himself, and I
am the only cause of what he suffers.

Good gods, said he, how great is my misfortune? there is not any one man in
all my Kingdom, whom I should not hate if he were my rival, unless it be he;
and there is not any Lady in the Court, in whose Love he would not have been
happy, except Aretaphile.

But Sir, said I again, I protest unto you he is not in love with her; and I
protest to you, replied he, expressing an extreme grief, that Philoxypes is my
Rival; for were it not so, he would not conceal his passion from me.

The respect he bears to you, said I, ought to hinder him from so doing, if he
were in Love.

No, no, replied he, you shall no longer abuse me; and I am equally persuaded
of Philoxypes his love, of his innocence, and of my misfortune. For in fine,
that the man in the world that I love best, should fall in Love with the
oneliest Lady that I can Love: and that I should see my self cruelly
necessitated, either to forsake Aretaphile, or to see Philoxypes die, it is an
unsufferable adventure.

Sir, I beseech you, said I, expect till she has once more seen Phyloxypes,
and have absolutely commanded him to discover his heart unto her, before you
resolve on any thing; and if you please I will bring him hither to morrow
morning.

No, no, replied the King, you shall not stir out of the Palace this day; nor
shall you see Phyloxypes before me. In effect this Prince gave one of his
servants charge over me; and commanded me to withdraw into a Chamber, which was
appointed for me in the Palace.

'Twould be too difficult a thing to represent unto you my vexation, and the
Kings disquiet: since to tell you true, he had as much friendship for
Philoxypes, as Love for Aretaphile.

Who ever saw, said he, (for he himself told it afterward) an adventure like
to mine? I have a Rival whom I must love in despite of me, and who gives me
more occasion to love him, for the affection he bears to my Mistress, then for
all the service he ever did me; and then for all the good Offices he has done
me to her, it being certain that I need only look upon him, to see what he
suffers in my consideration; and that I need only consider what life he leads,
to see how much I am beholden to him. I observe in his eyes a melancholy,
which makes me apprehend his death: and I seein all his actions, visible signs
of his love to Aretaphile, and of his respect to me. What shall I do, said he?
shall I seem not to know this passion, and let Philoxypes die? But it is no
longer time to conceal what I think, since Leontidas knows it. Leontidas who is
so much his confident, and shares so deeply in his friendship: shall I also tell
Philoxypes that I know his love, and not complain of him? and if I should
complain, how weak a succor would this be? I should peradventure hasten his
hour of death, by making him despair. But shall I quit Aretaphile, and let my
friendship exceed my Love? Philoxypes his passion is unjust; but passions are
not voluntary, and he has done what ever he could, or ought to have done,
since not being able to keep from loving, he has yet kept from making his love
known; and has rather chosen to hazard his life by his respectfull silence,
then to preserve it by making his passion known, which he knows will displease
me.

The King past the night in this manner very unquietly: sometimes he was
agitated with anger, and hatred, not knowing whom he hated, or on whom he
desired to be revenged: sometimes he did a little blame Philoxypes, for not
having at the very first acquainted him with his passion: sometime he betook
himself to Aretaphiles beauty; but at last he blamed himself.

Then suddenly considering the pitiful condition into which Phyloxypes was
brought, and what an unhappy life he led, his heart was so touched with
compassion as he did almost love his pretended Rival, better then his Mistress.
He then called to mind, how that all the favors he had received from her, had
been husbanded, and obtained by Phyloxipes his means. He past the next morning
in like perplexity, and strange irresolutions; at last having dined somewhat
early, he went well accompanied to lie that night at Claria, not affording me
any opportunity to give any notice thereof to Philoxypes; for he into whose
custody I was given, thinking it had been for some business of another nature,
treated me as a prisoner of the State and would not give me the least liberty.

The king commanded me to follow him, so as I came with him to Claria, he not
having spoken one word all the way long, but musing still on his adventure: But
when we were come thither, Phyloxipes's people told the King, that their Master
was not at home; and that according to his custom, he was walked out all alone.
The King informed himself carefully of one of his servants, who had a long time
waited on him, whether he knew not the cause of his Masters melancholy: this
servant who loved his Master dearly, that he might make use of the honor the
King did him in speaking to him, said;

Sir, I know not what my master ails, but this I know, that if your Majesty
out of your goodness find not some means to cure him of the Melancholy which
possesses him, he will certainly not live long; For he eats little, hardly
sleeps at all, does nothing but sigh, cannot endure that one should speak to
him about business, wanders whole days in the fields; and I once heard him cry
out, when he little thought I did so. Good gods, what would the King say, if he
saw how great my sadness is! and how hardly would he guess at the cause of my
death?

In fine Sir, said this man, with tears almost in his eyes, I know not what to
say, but I am very certain your Majesty will lose the faithfullest of all your
servants, if you lose the Prince my Master.

Whilst this man spoke thus, I was strangely in pain; for I saw all that he
said tended to confirm the King in his Opinion: I was much the better for
beckning unto him, he never looked on me, so intent was he to what he said.

The King on his part sighed, and having left the other, well, Leontidas, you
will not have it that Philoxypes is in Love, nor that it is Aretaphile whom he
loves? Sir, said I, I confess I am still of that belief, and I would your
Majesty could resolve to be so too.

O, Unfortunate Philoxypes cried the King! (not answering me) how sad is this
distemper? and how unfortunat am I my self, that I cannot absolutely cure thee
of the Malladie that possesses thee. I would then have gone to find out
Phyloxypes, that I might acquaint him with the Kings sense before he saw him,
but the King would not suffer me: but making the way be shown unto him, which
Philoxypes most usually went, we went directly toward the head of Claria.

Philoxypes was this mean while gone to Cleanthes his house, where the face of
affairs was a little altered; for Policrita-knowing that her condition was not
what she believed it to be, Philoxypes his desert had made a further
advancement in her heart then formerly: neither could she so well hide her
affection, but that Cleanthes and Megisto were much to their grief aware
thereof.

Yet was Philopyxes never a whit the more happy: for Policrite having taken a
Fancy to make trial of his affection by an appearing indifferency, did very
carefully conceal from him, the affection she had for him.

And in truth that very day that the King came to Claria, where we mist of
Phyloxypes, she had caused as much trouble in him, as admiration. For being
gone to her, and having found her at the root of a a tree, where she was
designing out a corner of the country which pleased her, he began to entertain
her with his passion, and to tell her how it grew still more violent upon him.

Sir, said she, if I may be permitted to do so, I should tell you, That if you
desire to win my good esteem, you should do better to tell me, that your
passion grows every day more moderate: for to tell you the truth, I do somewhat
apprehend these extravagant passions, which I have heard spoken of, and which
they say, does disorder reason, makes men lose the respect they ow to virtue,
though it inhabit in a Cottage, and which occasion a hundred strange things,
the very hearing whereof causes horror; Therefore, Sir, if you would oblige
me, you will satisfy your self with telling me, you have affection enough for
me, to wish if it were possible that Fortune had been more propitious to me,
that I had been born of a higher condition then I am, or at least this not
being so, I might rest content with my own condition, without envying others.

To love you with indifferency, said Philoxypes, (who acquainted me afterward
with this their conversation) your beauty should be indifferent, your virtue
and discretion should be so also: in fine that inexpressable Charm, which I
find in every of your words, looks, and actions, ought not to inchant me as it
does: But divine Policrite, apprehend nothing from the violence of my passion;
for the stronger it is, the fuller of respect shall I be, and the more obedient
to your will.

Sir, said She, if what you say be true, speak no more thereof I beseech you;
for not comprehending that I may lawfully give you any part of my affection,
me thinks I ought entreat you to entertain me no longer with yours.

But Divine Policrita, said he, for whom do you reserve that Glorious
affection, which you cruelly affirm I shall never enjoy?

At these words she blushed, and modestly bowing down her eyes, I reserve it
said she, for our woods, fields, rocks, and fountains, whereof Sir, said she,
smilingly, I think you will not be jealous.

I shall not be jealous of them said he, but I shall envy them, and I shall
not easily endure that you should love things to my prejudice, which cannot
love you again. But cruel maid, will you say nothing to me of more obliging?
and forgoing the Court as J do for love of you, and renouncing what ever is in
the world, except it be Policrite; is it possible you should not deal with me a
little less severely? J do not desire you to love me, say only that you are
not sorry that J love you; and add if you please, that if J be not beloved, it is
because you neither do nor will love any thing.

For what is to come, said Policrite, it is a thing to which J ought not to answer
with such assurance; and as you knew not the day before J had the honor to be
known unto you, that you should so often for go your Palaces to come to this
Cottage wherein I live: how do I know whether the resolution which I now take
of suffering no affection to enter my heart, will still continue? No, Sir, we
must not trust so absolutely in our selves; nor can I answer otherwise then for
my present opinions.

Show me then, replied he, what they really are; to the end I may know what to
do.

Sir* said Policrite, having much esteem, and much of respect for you, I must
confess I should be sorry that you should love one long, whose condition were
not answerable to yours, and that I could not receive a much greater
displeasure.

Philoxypes, who knew not the hidden sense of these words, answered, That
supreme beauty had in it, somewhat of Celestial, which did ennoble all those
that were therewithal endued.

In my opinion said she, a certain proportion is requisite in all things to
occasion love, therefore do not deceive your self; and if I were at any time to
love any body, it should certainly be one of my own condition: nor should I
ever resolve to marry any one that were not so.

What Policrite! said Philoxypes, much afflicted, do you speak the truth?

Yes; Sir, said she, and time will make you find it so.

But Policrite, replied he, you remember not that you are a miracle, and that
there are no men of your condition amid'st these rocks, who deserve so much as
to look upon you.

I will then love nothing, Sir, said she, and so she rose up, for she saw
Cleanthes and Megisto coming, who much troubled at this Prince his so frequent
visits, especially, having observed what they thought they had done in
Policrites behavior, desired him not to give himself the trouble to come so
often thither.

Philoxypes, who was somewhat moved at those cruel words (as he understood
them) which Policrite had uttered which made notwithstanding so much for him,
could not with his accustomed moderation receive the discourse of Cleanthes and
Megisto, but anger might easily be seen in his face, and grief in his eyes.

Cleanthes, said he, since I come not hither to rob you of the treasure which
the Gods have given you, withstand not the satisfaction which I find in
admiring that virtue in Policrite which you have infused into her.

Sir, said Cleanthes, though I very well know your worth, I cannot but fear
least Policrite who has not yet lived long enough to know precisely what
bounds to put to the respect she ows you, may be failing in something either to
you, or to her self.

No, no, said Philoxypes, somewhat roundly, you need not fear what you say, you
may rather fear least her severity and yours make me lose my reason. In fine
this conversation, though full of respect to Policrite, was so passionate, as
Cleanthes and Megisto were much troubled at it, and Policrites self was
sufficiently disquieted thereat, and was sorry that she had spoken so
despitefully to Philoxypes. But at last this Prince departed much discontented,
and much in love: and as he returned back with intention to get on horse back
where he had wont to leave his followers, he met the King who was lighted on
foot, and on whom I had the honor to wait.

You may imagine how much he was surprised at this sight. As soon as he saw the
King, striving as much as he could to hide his Melancholy, he mended his pace,
and having done his obeisance, Sir said he, your Majesty quits Paphos in a
season wherein you are not much accustomed to seek out solitary walks.

You have reason for what you say, said the King, but it seems less strange to
me that I should come to seek for Philoxypes at Claria, then that I should
find him amongst the Rocks. The day being fair enough, though in Winter, the
King who could no longer stay from acquainting Philoxpesy with what he had in
his heart, made a sign to the few atht waited not him to stand off, and
commanded me to stay.

There remained none then with him but Phyloxipes and my self; we all stood
silent for a good while, and certainly had all of us much differing thoughts.
The King seeing Philoxypes so altered, so melancholy, and so perplex't
endeavored to make his friendship out go his Love: Philoxypes would have found
by the King's eyes and mind, what the King had to say to him, and why he had
taken this journey, fearing by the signs which I made, least he had discovered
his passion.

For my particular, I was ready to go wild, to think I could not advertise
Philoxypes, nor durst not tell the King what I knew of his love, whom he took
to be his Rival; but at last this long silence wherein every one of us said
several things unto our selves, was first broke by the King, who looking in a
much obliging manner upon this Prince, embraced him, and said, be not offended
that I know the secret of your soul, and that I am not ignorant of the passion
which torments you. Philoxypes surprised to hear the King speak thus, looked
with a blush upon me; and the King imagining (as it was true) that he thought I
had betrayed him, looked upon me too: and to punish me (as he told me
afterward) for not having told him the truth, not giving me leave to speak,
and not disabusing Philoxypes in what he had conceived of me: once more said
he, my dear Phyloxypes, be not afflicted that I have discovered your love, and
believe I esteem you never a whit the less.

Sir, replied Philoxypes, me thinks if your Majesty did know the true cause of
my affliction, you should be so good as to bewail me, and not to speak of it.

No, Philoxypes, replied the King, my goodness shall extend it self much
further then so, for you: I am come hither expressly to accompany you in your
solitariness: for since I cannot make you happy, I must at least make my self
unhappy with you.

Sir, said Philoxypes, you altogether confound me; take no such resolution I
beseech you, leave me to bear the punishment of my weakness alone, and believe
me I shall infinitely praise your goodness, if you will suffer me to die in
peace amidst these woods, and rocks.

The King touched with extreme compassion, once more straightly embraced
Philoxypes, and looking upon him with a very sad look, I crave your pardon said
he Philoxypes, if I cannot as yet absolutely yield Aretaphile to you: but I am
come hither to endeavor to gain say for your sake the passion I have for her,
as you have stroven a long time for my sake to suppress the passion which she
has occasioned in you.

Philoxypes surprised at the Kings discourse, felt two contrary agitations at
the same time: he was grieved to find his odd opinion, and joyed that he knew
not the true cause of his love, as he thought he had done. And believing that
he might easily disabuse him in a thing so false as the former was, he resolved
to continue the concealment of his true passion.

The King then had no sooner said what I have told you, but Philoxypes stepping
back a little, said, what Sir! does your Majesty suspect me of so much boldness
as to be your Rival? Confess, said the King, for I know your misfortune has
been such, as not to be able to resist Aretaphiles charms. But Phyloxipes, I
blame you not for it; it was I that first made trial thereof; I know how
inevitable they are; you have done more then I my self should have done: it may
be had I your part to play, I should have betrayed my master, instead of
resolving to die of grief and sorrow, as you have done for my sake. Thus
Phyloxypes, I am not displeased with you for loving Aretaphile.

Sir, said Phyloxypes, to witness unto you that I am not in love with her, I
promise you never to see her more, nor yet ever to come within Paphos, or at
least never to speak to that Princess.

I very well know said the King, your Generosity rather leads you to resolve on
death, rather then to be failing in your duty. But Philoxypes, to the end you
may not object unto me, That I have done nothing to vanquish my self, I am come
to stay at Claria, as well as you, that I may endeavor to cure my self of this
passion, and to yield up Aretaphile to you. You on your side shall do the like,
and he that is first cured, shall surrender his part in her to the other.

But my dear Phyloxypes, said he, you are yet more unhappy then you think for,
for when I should cease to love Aretaphile, you would not have wonn her heart:
you know how ambitious she is, that her soul is only sensible of greatness:
and when I should have yielded up my mistress to you, unless I should also
yield my Crown unto you, you would not win much upon her inclination.

But in fine said he (not affording Philoxypes leisure to answer him) if I
yield up Aretaphile to you, it will not be hard for me to yield you up my
Crown. And in a word, I will not be upbraided with your death.

I will do what I can to cure my self, to the end that you may cure your self;
and if we can neither of us cure our selves, we will at least die together.

Sir, said Philoxypes, I vow by whatsoever I hold most sacred, and most holy,
that I have not the least pretense to the Princess Aretaphile.

What then said the King, who did not believe him, is the cause of your retreat
and Melancholy? I confess Sir, I was a hundred, and a hundred times ready to
break my word which I had past to Philoxypes; but seeing the trouble he was in,
end that in fine he could not resolve to all the King the truth, I with held
whilst Phyloxypes answered, That what his Majesty did command, did not deserve
his curiosity, and that he could not tell it him.

Being by this time late, we returned to Claria, where the King spoke still
after the same manner to Philoxypes, as Philoxypes did also to him. Having
found a moment of time to entertain Philoxypes alone, I would have persuaded
him to have acquainted the King with the truth; but he could never resolve to
do so, saying it would be sufficient to let him see he was not in love with
Aretaphile, if he should never see her more.

This mean while, the more obstinacy, and grief the King found in Philoxypes,
the more did he compassionate him, and the more he labored to overcome his own
passion.

And to this purpose he stayed eight days at Claria, all which time Philoxypes
ready to go mad, as well in consideration of the Kings opinion, and more for
that he could not get to see Polycryte.

I do not think the King would so soon have left this retiredness, had he not
been advertised that an Ambassador from Amasis King of Egypt, was come to
Paphos, which forced him to return. But Philoxypes, do he what he could, must
needs go along with him: No said the King, I will not see Aretaphile, without
seeing you at the same time. The Melancholy which I shall see in your eyes,
must be to me an antidote against the Charms which I shall see in hers.

We went then to Paphos, but good gods how little delightful was the Court
then, and how much troubled did the Ambassador find the King, who was three
days without seeing Aretaphile, and Philoxypes being in unimaginable pain for
the abovesaid reasons, seemed to grow still more melancholy, whereat the King
was still more and more afflicted.

Ambitious Aretaphile was this mean while not without her perplexity, as well
by reason of the Kings journey to Claria, as that he came not to visit her;
and for that she heard he was returned wonderfully sad.

But at last the King desirous still to confirm himself in his belief, brought
Philoxypes with him to Princess Aretaphile, hoping to discover his passion
better there, then in any other place.

Philoxypes, who thought there was no better means to undeceive the King, then
in leting him see that he took no pleasure in looking upon this Princess, was
still careful to look another way; but that which he did to dis-deceive the
King, did the more deceive him: for said he to himself, unfortunate Philoxypes
cannot endure the sight of her whom he loves, and whom he will not love.

He accused himself then of too much inhumanity, in exposing him to so great a
punishment, and seeing how strangely perplexed he was, his visit was not long.

This mean while, he having during this visit eyed his pretended Rival, as
much as his mistress, and having been much disquiet, the Princess was not much
satisfied with his conversation, and knew not whereunto to attribute the cause
of the change which she saw in him.

At his coming forth he said a thousand obliging things to Philoxypes, and
Philoxypes made as many protestations to him of his being unconcerned in
Aretaphile. But at last, that I may shorten my discourse as much as I may;
Philoxypes being persecuted by the Kings conceit, angered at Cleanthes
discourse, much afflicted at what Policryte had said, and much more that he
could see her no more, and that he durst not return to Claria, fell dangerously
sick, all the Physicians gave up their opinions, that unless some cure were
found for his Melancholy, he would infaliblie die. The fever continued seven
days upon him very violently, during which time the King was greatly
disconsolate; and during which time I had taken a little journey to Amathuse,
about some business that I had there, for I think if I had been at Paphos, I
should have had much ado to have kept Philoxypes his secret from the King.

As often as the King came into his chamber, and saw him in that pitiful
condition, he resolved to think no longer on Aretaphile, but as soon as he came
from him, or that Philoxypes grew any thing better, this resolution slackned a
little.

Nor was he yet resolved what to do, but the feavor having at last left
Philoxypes, and the Physicians continuing still to affirm that he would
infallibly die, if the cause of his Melancholy whence his malady proceeded were
not taken away: the King seemed to have put on a very strong resolution to
pluck from out his soul the passion which possessed him.

He then resolved to visit Aretaphile no more, who not knowing what to think
of this change in the King, thought it might be he was offended that she had
not all this while been to see Philoxypes, whom he so dearly loved, especially
since almost all the Ladies of the Court had been to visit him. For during his
sickness, the Princess of Salamis, and Princess Agarista had never left him, so
as the Ladies might with decency enough go thither.

Yet so it happened, that the day that Aretaphile came thither, Philoxypes
being much better then he was, they were gone forth, so as Aretaphile going
accompanied with four or five of her women, found him all alone. It Is true she
was not there long without company, for the King came thither presently after.
Philoxypes blushed when he saw him come in, and seemed so amazed at this
encounter, as if he had been really in love with Aretaphile; the King who
observed this his change of countenance, being much concernd to see that he
should be the cause of Philoxypes danger: after a great strife within himself,
drew near to Princess Aretaphile, who out of her respect would have given him
her place, which he would not accept of: and after having looked upon her a
while without speaking, he sigh't, and said, Madam, will you not cure
Philoxypes?

Sir, said she, if his health depend on me, your Majesty should soon be eased
of the grief his sickness causes in you.

Philoxypes, who found a great alteration in the Kings countenance, was afeard
least he might say somewhat which might have made Aretaphile know his opinion
of him; wherefore not affording the King leisure to reply,

Sir, said he, though I believe Princess Aretaphile be able to do great things,
and to charm great pains, yet I think I may say without offending her, that
those evils which I lie under, depend not on hers will; and that none but the
Gods them selve can withdraw me from the grave. Philoxypes pronounced these
words in so sad a manner, as endeavoring to overcome whatsoever opposed his
design of saving Phyloxypes: drawing yet a little nearer to the Princess
Aretaphile, for fear least they that were in the chamber might over hear him.

Madam, said he, (making a sign to Phyloxypes that he would not be interrupted)
I shall tell you a thing which will much surprise you. I conjure you
notwithstanding to give it a favorable interpretation; and to oblige me so far
as to believe that upon better terms then the saving of Philoxypes life, I
would not tell it you, no not though mine own life were concerned therein.

Oh! Sir, cried out this sick Prince, if your Majesty end what you have begun
to say, you will hasten my death instead of retarding it.

Princess Aretaphile, amazed to hear what she heard, and not able to guess what
the matter should be, looked sometimes upon the King, sometimes upon
Philoxypes; but at last the king completing his determination, it is you, Madam,
said he, to the Princess Aretaphile, who send Philoxypes to his grave; your
charms have been more powerful then his reason, though his nobleness has been
yet greater then his love. He loves you divine Aretaphile, not daring to tell
you so; He will not so much as acknowledge it, yet I know for certain, that
unless you take compassion on him, he will infallibly die.

I therefore speak no more to you in my own behalf, said he, in a strange
Melancholy manner, but deal less rigorously with him, then you have done with
me, since he deserves it better: and if your Ambition be not to be satisfied
without a Sovereign power, I promise you divine Princess, that if I cannot
place Philoxypes upon the Throne, he shall always be so near it, as his place
shall hardly be discernable from mine.

In fine said he, if Philoxypes die, I shall die, and so I shall for ever lose
you: but if you save Philoxypes, I may at least hope to languish on a while,
and to share part of your esteem, not being able to pretend any longer to any
part of your affection. Nor think not said he, That this which I do, is any
mark of weakness in my affection, since on the contrary it denotes the violence
thereof.

For in fine, if I could resolve to abandon you, and to follow Philoxypes to
the grave, I would not yield up to him the part I pretend to have in your
affection, though he be more worthy thereof then I; but not being able to see
him die for my sake, without expiring with grief, I must live, that he may
live, and consequently must endeavor for a while to prolong the satisfaction I
take in seeing you.

Aretaphile was so astonished to hear the King speak after this manner, and
Philoxypes so afflicted, as astonishment and sorrow producing the same effect
in these two personages, they staid a good while without speaking.

Aretaphile had opinion good enough of her beauty, to suffer her self easily
to be persuaded that Philoxypes was in love with her, and she had likewise
opinion good enough of his Generositie, to believ he durst not discover his
passion.

But as nothing that was not King could touch her heart, she was strangely
perplexed to hear what she heard, and sometimes she thought it was peradventure
but a pretext sought by the King to break with her.

Philoxipes on his side thinking that at the last he must be fain to tell the
King the truth, that he might disabuse him, was so strangely confused, as he
could not open his mouth: so as the King seeing them both so surprised, and
finding that peradventure his love might quickly make him unsay all that his
friendship had made him affirm, rose up, and without expecting what Aretaphile
would answer. Madam, said he, the pitiful condition which you see Philoxypes
is in, persuades you better then I can do, and he doubtlesly will pardon me, if
I speak not so long to you for him as I have formerly done to you for my self:
which said, he went his way, though Philoxypes desired him to tarry; assuring
him that he would wholly disabuse him.

This mean while, though Aretaphile had a great mind to be gone too, yet being
imbitterd in mind, and desirous to know a little more precisely, what the
business of this so strange adventure would prove, she staid a little after
the King, and looking upon Philoxypes, who appeared to her to be so struck
mute, as if he had been in love with her: is it you Philoxypes, said she, that
have lost your reason, or is it the King? for I confess unto you I know not
whether of the two it is, and that I cannot comprehend either of you.

I confess Madam, said Phyloxipes, that I am not master of my reason, but
Madam, it is a malady which you are no ways cause of, and whereof I accuse you
not: had you any design then said she, to make me lose the Kings good opinion?
or is it that the King seeks some bad pretext to bereave me of it? But if it be
so Philoxypes, there needs not so far a fetch about the bush. You need but give
me reason of the least suspicion, and I assure you I shall not long lament the
loss of so divided a heart as his is. For til now the King did always love his
Crown better then Princess Aretaphile, and by his this days discourse, he will
make me believe that he loves you better then me.

Madam, said Philoxypes, I beg it as a favor from you, not to blame the King
upon so small reason; and not to blame in him the compassion he is pleased to
have of an evil, which he believes you to be the cause of.

engage my self Madam, to free him from the error of his opinion; for though
your charms be without compare, the respect which I have always born to you,
and that which I shall always bear to the King, have assuredly warranted me
from almost an inevitable danger, for those who have not had so powerful
reasons to withstand your beauty: therefore Madam, do not disquiet your self,
and do me the honor as to promise me to pardon the Kings injustice, in
desiring that I should share with you in a heart where you ought only to reign.

But Madam, the King had given me the place which I now enjoy, before he loved
you; you ought not therefore be troubled thereat.

No, no, replied ambitious Aretephile, you will not easily be able to justify
the King: he is Generous, I confess, but he is but a bad lover, and whosoever
can yield up his interest in the party beloved, his love is certainly very
indifferent.

This being said she bid him farewell, and left Philoxypes, so much grieved,
as his malady increased. Fearing then least he might die, and leave the King
in the opinion he was in, he sent to desire him that he might speak with him;
and this was just as I returned from Amethusa. I happened to be by the King
when he received this message, who instantly went to Philoxypes, but with so
much discontent, as I pitied him: he had repented himself more then once of
what he had said to Aretaphile, and not knowing whether she might not have said
somewhat of obliging to Philoxypes after he had left them together, he returned
unto him much disquieted.

When we came thither, he enquired whether the Princess Aretaphile had tarried
there long after him or not, and being told not, he entered into Philoxypes
chamber, who was glad to see me with the King.

Sir, said he, I see it is time that I confess my weakness to you, and that I
disabuse you.

The King, who could not reconcile these two things, answered him only with a
sigh, and being set down by his bed side, Philoxypes asked him pardon for the
trouble he had put his Majesty to, and desired me to acquaint the King with
what I knew of his adventure; desiring him not to be offended that I had not
told his Majesty the truth, since unless I should have drawn down the anger of
Heaven upon me for perjury, I could not have revealed his secret, after the
Oaths that he had made me take to the contrary I then began to acquaint the
King with all that I knew touching Philoxypes love: but all I could say to him,
appeared to be so incredible, as it was a long time before he could believe
it. At last he told Philoxypes, that unless he should let him see Policrite,
he would not believe what he had heard.

Philoxypes perceiving the Kings obstinacy, told him, that though he was very
ill, he would be carried to Claria, in case he were any thing better the next
morning, imagining he should sooner recover his health being near Policrite,
then if he should stay at Paphos.

All this while the King did not believe what I had told him; sometime a man
might see some sign of rejoicing in him: ha! my dear Philoxypes, would he say,
is it possible that you were not my Rival, and that I was deceived: if it be
so, I think I shall adore that Policrite you speak of, instead of blaming the
love you bear her; since thereby I shall not be enforced to yield up what I
hold dearer then my life, and that my confident will not prove my rival.

But observe sir, the extraordinary effects of love. Philoxypes was very sick
when he sent to desire the King to come unto him: but when once he had any
thought of returning to Claria, he grew better: he slept all the next night
quietly enough, and the next day was carried in a Litter to Claria, whither the
King went to lie that night.

The next day Philoxipes left his bed, and the following day, notwithstanding
all his weakness, he got on horseback together with the King, waited on but by
very few: and came to the foot of the mountains where they were to light. Being
there, the King followed by none but Philoxypes and my self, went toward
Cleanthe's Cottage, which as soon as we discovered, Philoxypes, who had need
enough howsoever to rest, staid a while, and showing it to the King, Sir, said
he, strangely confused, see the place which made me forgo Paphos: see the inch
of all the earth, that likes me best, and where you go to see one, who
peradventure will rather make you Philoxypes his Rival, then Philoxipes shall
prove yours.

He spoke this with a smile, by which it visibly appeard, that the hope of
reseeing Policrite had brought joy into his heart: yet did he fear displeasing
her, and to anger Cleanthes, by bringing the King thither: but there being no
remedy, he resolved to do it, neither did this fear justle out his joy.

When the King had sufficiently considered the greatness of Philoxypes his
affection, in respect of the meanness of Policrites Cottage; and that he had
notwithstanding acknowledged that there was somewhat of wild in that desert,
which was not displeasing: we went on, and came at last to that little
Palisadoe of of Laurels, wherewith Cleanthes his Court was enclosed. We entered
thereinto, and Philoxypes stepping before the king, went to the house, where he
found the door shut: he knocked, but no body answered, which made him at first
believe, that Cleanthes his whole family was gone to the Temple, where he once
saw Policrite.

Yet since there might be some body there who might not hear, he knocked again,
and knocked so hard, that a young slave who served Cleanthes, came and opened
the door, who very well knowing Philoxypes, told him, after that Philoxypes had
asked him where his master was, that he could not tell him what he desired to
know; and that all that he knew was, that Cleanthes, Megisto, Polycrite, and
Dorida, were gone from thence, and were not to return thither any more: that
they had carried along with them the women, which they had brought from their
own Country; and that his Master had commanded him to wait his further
directions there, not knowing wherefore he was gone, nor why he left him there.

Philoxypes, surpised and afflicted at this Discourse, was a good while
without speaking; The King thought at first that there was some trick in it,
and that Philoxypes had made me say what I had said, only to abuse him; but at
last this young Slave being stepped into the House, and returning presently; Sir,
said he to Philoxypes, when Policrite was ready to depart from hence, she drew
me aside, unseen by any one, and gave me this which I give to you, ordaining me
so to do if you should come hither. Philoxypes taking immediately what the
Slave presented him with, opened the Letter, whilst the King did me the honor
to speak with me, and read these ensuing words:

Policrite to Philoxypes.
I Know not Sir, whither it is that Policrite is conveyed, but I very well know
that Philoxypes is the cause of her exile: not being peradventure, likely ever
to have the Honor to see him. I thought I might without blame, let him know my
mind by this Letter, which I refused to acquaint him withal, the last time
which I spoke with him. He may then be pleased to know, that at first not
esteeming my self worthy of his affection, by reason of my birth, I withheld
mine from him as much as I was able; but that having learnt since, that I am
not of the condition I appeared to be, and that there have been Kings of my
Race: I confess I was gladded that I could not reproach Philoxipes for having
an inclination too disproportionable for his degree: and that I thought it
became me to let him know what I am, to the end he may not think he does any
thing unworthy of himself, if he sometimes think upon Policrite, who will alwais
with much contentment think upon his worth, whether his fortune be to lead his
life in a Cottage or in a Palace.

POLYCRITE.


PHILOXYPES, as soon as he had read this Letter, came to the King, and
presenting it unto him; Sir, said he, your Majesty may read in this Letter my
innocence, and my misfortune. The King began then to read aloud what Policrite
had written; but good God in what pain was the unfortunate Philoxypes that he
could not interrupt him; but as soon as he had read it out, looking upon him
with a fixed and grieved eye; how say you now? Sir, said he, am I yet in love
with Princess Aretaphile, or am I not the most unfortunate man in the world?
the King, embracing him, asked him pardon for his suspicions, and of the
trouble he had given him; but my dear Philoxypes said he, I shall be
sufficiently punished for it, as well in respect of your sorrow, which shall
always be mine; as for Aretaphile, who will not easily forgive me, yet said
he, you have wherein to rejoice, since you learn two things at once of great
importance, and of great consolation. For now you know that Policrite loves
you, and that she is of Princely descent: Could you have asked more of the
Gods, if you had been to have had your wishes granted you?

Ah! Sir, said Philoxypes, that which you allege to comfort me, is the
greatest part of my misfortune: For it is true, I find that Policryte does not
hate me, and that she is of birth equal with my self, but at the same time
this lovely and cruel personage tells me, she shall never see me more, and
that she knows not whither she is carried.

Oh! Sir, I should be more to blame were I in love with Princess Aretaphile,
but I should be less miserable: I should have reasons to gainsay my passion;
but here I see nothing which does not fortify and augment it.

In fine after Phyloxypes had sufficiently bemoned himself, he left the King,
and went to ask a hundred things of the young slave, without being able to
learn any thing, either of Policrites birth, nor whither Cleanthes and Megisto
were gone; all he could learn was only that it was above a fortnight since they
were gone: nothing else could be gotten out of this young Slave, neither by
prayers, promises, nor threats, whose fidelity Philoxypes, for all his rage,
could not choose but approve of: but not being able to learn any more, he waited
back upon the King to Claria.

For my part I was never more at my wits end; for the king was so sad, as well
for his own occasion, as for those of PHILOXIPES, as he could not resolve to
say any thing, neither by way of bemoning himself, nor yet of comforting
PHILOXIPES, whom he so dearly loved.

PHILOXYPES on his part was more perplexed: he was sorry to forgo that Cottage
though his beloved was no longer there; he sometimes looked back upon it,
sometimes he looked upon Policrites Letter, which the king had given him back.

He would sometimes lift up his eyes to heaven, then again fix them on the
earth, and walking sometimes without speaking, sometimes fetching deep sighs,
he seemed not to know whether the king were there or no, or whether he were
alone, so deep was his melancholy. At last we came to Glaria, but good Gods how
sad was the conversation the rest of that day.

At last said the king to Philoxypes, you have this advantage, to know that
Policryte is much obliged to you, that she has nothing to reproach you
withal, that you have not offended her, and that wheresoever she is, if she
think of you, it is only to bewail your absence: where on the contrary, I have
incen'st Aretaohile, whose aspiring soul does doubtlesly accuse me of want of
affection, and who will take it very ill, that I preferred your life before my
love to her.

But Sir, said the afflicted Philoxypes, you know where the Princess Aratephile
is, you may make your reasons known to her, you may ask her pardon for that
fault, which an excess of Generosity made you commit: you may sit and sigh by
her, and may appease her anger. But for my part Sir, should I complain, should
I sigh, should I pour forth torrents of tears amidst these Rocks, would all
this restore to me my Policryte? should I thereby learn where she lives? It
may be Cleanthes is put to sea, and it may be I shall never know, neither who
Policryte is, nor where she is.

Ah! Sir, said this disconsolate Prince, if you knew the cruelty of my
adventure, you would easily know that I am the most unfortunate man in the
world: for if I loved one that did hate me, despite might cure me: if I loved
one that were inconstant, the scorn I should have of her weakness, might
consolate me: if I were jealous, a part of my melancholy would pass away in
seeking how I might prejudice my Rivals: were Policrytes absence bounded, the
hope of her return, how long so e're it were, would allay my discontents Nay,
were any person whom I should love, dead, I think my sufferings would not be
so great as they are. For in fine, my mallady is such, as does stupifie reason,
and makes the soul almost insensible.

In this manner did the king and PHILOXYPES entertain themselves. I endeavored
to comfort them both, but to tell you truth, my reasons were not listened unto;
as for Philoxypes, he knew not what remedy to seek for; for having learned by
the slave who gave him Policrite's letter, that it was a good while since she
went away, he could not dream of following her, nor knew he where to seek after
her.

All he could do, was to give order to his people to watch night and day about
the Cottage, with directions to stay any who should come thither, that they
might learn by them what this too faithful Slave would not discover; and to
follow him whersoever he should go, believing probably that Cleanthes had not
left him alone in that house, without some secret reason, and without having a
design to return; or at least to send somebody thither on his behalf, or that
the Slave himself should return to him.

As for the King it fared not thus with him: he knew that it was at Aretephiles
feet that he was to seek for pardon: he would not, notwithstanding make his
dear Philoxypes return so soon to Paphos, but staid the next day at Claria.

But though there was no hope of finding Policrite, Philoxypes desired the King
that he would be pleased to send to all the ports of the Island, to know
whether Cleanthes had taken shipping in any of them or no, it being easy to be
known, by reason of the many women that were in his company, which would make
him remarkable. The King promised him to do what he desired, but conjured him
also not to refuse to go with him to Paphos, to assist him in getting
Aretaphiles pardon. Philoxypes appeared visibly displeased to be forced to
return to the Court, but being so much obliged to the King, and the king being
upon ill terms with his Mistress, only out of his Love to him, he thought it
became him to go, as he did. When we were come to Paphos, the King went that
very night to Princess Aretaphiles lodgings, and found her only accompanied
with her women. She received him with all the civility that was due to his
condition, but also with as much coolness as could be expected from an incensed
party.

Seeing Philoxypes with the king, Sir, said she, with a malicious smile, did
not I tell you Philoxypes would recover without my meddling with him. Madam,
said he, Philoxypes is much worse then I believed him to be; but thanks to
Heaven, I will not lay his death to your charge, since you are not the cause of
his disquiet. May it please the Gods that you put not Philoxypes in a condition
of reproaching you with my death!

No, no, Sir, said she, your life is in no danger, as long as Philoxypes
lives, your Majesty needs fear nothing. Alas Madam, cried the king, deal not so
hardly with me! Alas, Sir, said she, go not about I beseech you to persuade me
to things so directly opposite one to another, in so short a time; it is not
above four or five days since you did me the honor to tell me at Philoxypes
his lodging, that you would no more sue to me for your self; that my affection
was a thing wherein you did no longer desire a part; and if I remember well,
you did also entreat me not to deal so rigourously with Philoxypes, as I had
done with you. And it may be, said she, (expressing an extremity of Malice)
that yielding much to your entreaties upon that occasion, I should have granted
what you have demanded for Philoxypes, had my friendship been necessary to safe
his life; but since God be thanked, he needs it not, he may be pleased to
content himself with my esteem; and your Majesty may likewise be satisfied
with my respect, which is all I can, or ought to give you. For in fine to make
me believe that you love me, after being able to permit that another should
love me, and you your self wish me to love him, is a thing not easy to be
understood, nor yet easily disjested: believe me, Sir, said she, to love ones
rival, better then ones Mistress, is a thing whereof there are not many
examples, and which may allow me to let those know, who shall be acquainted
with the business, that it is an excellent way to make a faithful servant, and a
very bad invention to make a Princess love him, who treats her after that
manner. Shall the compassion I had of Philoxipes, Madam, replied the king, destroy
me for ever in your good opinion? me, I say, who underwent an unexpressable
torment, before I could resolve to pity him? me, who did not yield you up,
save only because I could not abandon you, and who found that PHILOXYPE'S
death did hasten mine? If you could have loved Aretaphile, answered the
princess, more then Philoxypes, you would have lamented his misfortune and
yours; you would have endeavored to have cured him by absence, or by a
thousand otherways; you would have bewaild his death when it should have
happened, and would yet have been comforted, by the sole sight of Aretaphile:
but because you love PHILOXYPES better then you love Aretapile, you resolve
without much difficulty to lose her. Yet Sir, you could yield up to PHILOXYPES
no more then that part which you held in her, which was not peradventure so
great as you believe.

Ah! inhumane princess said the king, make me not despair, and know that when
I made a surrender of you to Philoxypes, I was resolved to die. It may be Sir,
said she, If I had so much weaknesss as to lend a favorable ear to what you
now say, that upon the first occasion that should present it self,; and upon
the first suspicion you should have that any one should bear me never so little
good will, you would again conjure me to be his cure. No, no, Sir, said she,
with a yet more serious face, you never loved me, nor do you know what it is to
love: Love is somewhat above reason, or generosity, which has reasons of its
own: a man may give his own life for his friend, but as for the Mistress whom
he loves, it would be more just, and more usual, to quit all his friends for
her interest, then to yield her up to any one friend. In fine said she, you
may perchance have thought you could have lived without me; for had you dreamed
you must have dyed, me thinks you might as well have dyed without yiedling up
Aretaphile to Philoxypes, as after having surrendered her to him. But Sir,
since you have rather chosen to specify an extraordinary mark of Generosity,
then to give the commonest proof of love, I have no more to say; neither have
I more to do, but to preserve my heart as free as it has allwaies been. The
king seeing he could not appease this haughty spirit, called Philoxypes in into
his aid; come said he, come make amends for the fault which you have innocently
committed; and if you will preserve my life, as I would have done yours, be a
mean of replacing me in the condition wherein I was before I had compassion of
you. Madam, said Philoxypes, addressing his speech to the Princess, if you
judge of the Kings love to you, by his Friendship to me, what may you not
expect from thence; since to save my life, he could for some few moments only
renounce the possession of so inestimable a jewel. And will you not then
believe, That upon the least occasion which should present it self, he would
for your service sacrifice, not only Philoxypes, but even all his subjects,
nay, even his own life? No Sir, said she, you are not so much bound to the
King, as you imagine, and instead of your desiring me to judge of his love to
me, by the friendship he bears to you, I shall advise you to judge of his
friendship to you, only by his love to me; and to believe, that since he was
able to yield me up, he never had so resolute a passion for Aretaphile, as to
deserve that Philoxypes should be much beholden to him, for what he has done
for him, since he would have done the like for any other. But cruel princess,
said the King, what will you have me to do? me thinks said she, I should demand
no unjust thing of you, if I should humbly entreat you to think no longer on
Aretaphile, and quietly to enjoy the life of Philoxypes, which has cost you so
little.

Ah, said he, if I should have purchased the life of Philoxipes, at the loss
of your affection, I should have bought it more dear, then if I should have
given my Crown for it. Confess the truth, said this malicious Princess, if
Philoxypes had been as sick of Ambition, as you did think him love sick, he
would not for certain be yet cured, and you would not so soon have forgon your
Scepter, as you did Aretaphile. Phyloxipes, who easily conceived the hidden
sense of these words, whereunto the King replied not, so was he over born with
grief, said, Madam, if the King shall confess unto you that he has done amiss,
and shall ask your pardon for it, will you be more inexorable, then are the
Gods, and will you show no mercy? when the King said she, shall have done to
cure me of any malady of mind, if any such shall befall me, so extraordinary a
thing, as that which he has done for you, I shall then see of what mind I
shall be. In fine, Sir, All that the King and Philoxypes could do or say, did
no ways avail with this imperious Princess.

When they were come from her, and were returned to the Palace; Philoxypes who
was well acquainted with Aretaphiles humor, told the King, he knew a way how
to work his reconcilement with her: Alas, said the King, there are few things I
would not do to purchase that content: speak therefore, my dear Phyloxypes:
must I be long in pain? must I sigh abundantly, and pour forth abundance of
tears? and must I be everlastingly prostrate at her feet? No Sir, said he, you
shall only put the Crown upon her head. But replied the King, I would gladly
not have owed Aretephiles love to her Ambition; on the contrary, I would have
had the Crown of Cyprus to have been a reward of her affection to me.

Five or six days being thus past over, and Philoxypes, not being able to
tarry any longer at the Court, he desired leave of the King to return to
CLARIA. Those who the King had sent to the Port towns which were nearest to
Paphos, returned at the same time, but brought no news of Policrite; so as the
unfortunate Philoxypes returned to his solitariness in great despair.

He had yet engaged the King not to discover the cause of his melancholy; nor
were there any that knew it, but he, the Princess Aretaphile, and my self; nor
did the Princess know any more, then that Philoxypes was fallen in love vvi^
one that he knew not.

It would be very hard to relate unto you what life he led; when it was fair
weather, he went to visit Policrite's Cottage, and all the places where he had
seen her, or spoken with her; he went to ask more questions of the slave who
was there, and whom they had ever had an eye unto, not finding any one that
spoke with him, nor that he spoke with any one. But all the addresses this
Prince could make, could not prevail against the fidelity of this slave, who
deserved a better condition.

When Philoxypes could not walk abroad, he walked in his Gallery, gazing on the
picture of his dear Policrite. When he called to mind how contented a life he
led before he fell in love, he almost wished he had never seen Policrite; but
when he remembered her charming beauty, her bewitching mind, and the happy
hours which he had enjoied in her company, though she had always concealed
the esteem she had for him; he preferred all the sorrows he had suffered since
he was in love, before all his former pleasures.

Oh! would he sometimes say to himself, when he should read Polycrite's letter;
how sweet, how pleasing, and how cruel things have I learnt in one day?
Policrite is of illustrious birth, Policrite will always remember me, and
Policrite will never more see me. Alas, if it be so, said he, why have I not
recourse to death, and what shall I do with so unfortunate a life? Then
suddenly remembering that Policrite was alive, and that she did not hate him, he
conceived a beam of hope, that peradventure she might make inquiry after him,
and knowing how miserable a life he led, she might at last resolve to let him
know in what part she lived.

This thought afforded him only so much hope as to keep him from dying; not so
much as to comfort him in his misfortunes. Living then in this manner all the
rest of the Winter, he went sometimes to see the King, when the King could not
come to him; and despairing of all remedy, he only expected death, or news of
Policrite: the one or the other, whereof were the object of all his thoughts,
and the bounds of all his desires. The Spring it self, which seems to inspire
joy into whole nature, wrought no alteration in him. He beheld the roses in his
Gardens blush, with the same melancholy as he had seen his knots white with
Snow in Winter. Those who watched over Cleanthes his slave, brought him word
one morning, that he was suddenly dead. This anger some news did redouble his
grief, in as much as for that he seemed concerned in any thing which belonged
to Policrite; and that this slave appeared to him worthy of such good fortune,
as that in losing him, he lost almost all hopes of ever discovering where
Policrite was. He forbear not notwithstanding, to have watch kept for a while,
to see whether any body should come to that rural Cottage, or no: but at last,
weary of wearying out his people, he dispensed with their further trouble
therein; and abandoned his fortune absolutely to the guidance of the gods.

As he was one day in this sad mood, Solon came to Claria: he was at first
much joied to hear a name he so dearly loved; but considering what an
alteration there was in him, since he had seen him, and how confounded he
should be to acknowledge his weakness to him, though he knew that lawful love
was not a passion to which Solon had declared himself an enemy, this joy
suffered a little allay. He went notwithstanding with much eagerness to meet
him; but sadness having so deeply seized upon his heart and eyes, the
satisfaction which he received to see the famous Solon, was so inward, as there
hardly appeared any sign thereof in his countenance. Solon no sooner saw him,
but he observed his melancholy; and Philoxypes on his part, looking on Solon,
in stead of the peaceful physiognomy, and that cheerful and pleasing aspect
which he had wont to have in his eyes, he seemed to see a great deal of sorrow.

The first complements being over, and Philoxypes having brought Solon to his
chamber; Sir, said he, the sight of you would surely much rejoice me, did I not
see some signs of sorrow in you, of which I must needs request to know the
cause. Noble Prince, replied Solon, I should have prevented you, and have
desired to know the cause of your melancholy, before having afforded you
leisure to inform your self of mine. But I confess unto you, the Lawgiver of
Athens, is not at present in a condition of prescribing Laws unto himself; and
that the sorrow I feel, is stronger then my reason. Philoxypes, embracing him
then straightly, conjured him to tell him the reason thereof, and desired him to
believe he would do all that lay in his power to comfort him.

But Sir, said he, I thought that Philosophy had been a salve to you against
all the misfortunes of life; and that sorrow was a thing unknown to Solon, to
whom whole Greece gives the name of wise.

Philosophy said this famous Athenian, is a vainglorious art, which boasts of
governing in places, wherein she has no great power; she may doubtlesly said
he, teach men to be virtuous, make them know whole nature, teach them how to
discourse, and give them Laws and Precepts for the government of Kingdoms, and
Commonwealths; Nay, she may often times make us overcome our passions; but when
an equitable feeling, which nature gives us, is to be overcome, believe me
Philoxypes, the same Philosophy which has sometimes made us lose Crowns
without change of countenance, or which has made us not stick to refuse them,
is weak in less eminent occasions. And in my particular, I may say I have
been thrice in my life time abandoned by her; though peradventure I have been
assisted by her upon an hundred difficult occasions. But yet said Philoxypes,
shall I not know what it is that afflicts you? It very well behooves that I tell
it you, said Solon, since it is from you alone that I can expect any help. I
will not repeat unto you, said he, the so many particulars of my fortune which
formerly I have acquainted you withal, for I believe you have not forgot them;
but that you may perfectly know the cause of my grief, I must howsoever take
the rise of my discourse afar off; and tell you some circumstances of my life,
which you have not yet known. You know I never believed that marriage was
incompetible with Philosophy and true Wisdom, as Thales that famous Milesian
did imagine; you know likewise that I married a personage of great worth and
understanding, by whom I had children, who died soon after they were born; one
only son excepted, whom I have bred up carefully, intending to make him
worthy of that noble blood whence he is descended. He was about 14 or 15 years
old, when I was at Milet, about some affairs of mine; where I visited wise
Thales, who was one of my very good friends. He civily reproacht me with my
weakness, and said I did sufficiently witness my indulgencie to love, by a
little image of Cupid, which I one day consecrated to that Deity, and placed
in the park belonging to the Academie, there where they who run with the
sacred Torch, are wont to assemble themselves. Passing from one thing to
another, we spoke of the happiness, and of the misfortunes of marriage, and
thus our discourse varying, as it often falls out from our first subject, we
spoke of news and other such like matters.

Presently after, Thales feigning to have some order to give to one of his folk
about his own affairs, rose to speak to him in his ear, and came and took his
place again. Not long after, I might see a stranger come, whom I knew not, who
told him he was come from Ath^ns, not above ten days ago. Pressed by the natural
desire of curiosity, to know whether there was nothing of new befaln in my
Country, since my departure thence, I asked him whether he knew any thing of
considerable there or no? No, said he, save only that the day I came away on,
I saw the Funeral observed of a young youth of the best rank, vvhereat all the
people of note in the Town, were present, and were very sensible of the
sorrow this child's death would cause in his Father, who was not then at
Athens. I confess when I heard him speak thus, my color changed, fearing my
son might be concerned: which made me ask him whether he knew not the name of
that unfortunate Father? I have forgot it, said he, but I know he is a man of
great integrity, and who is much esteemed of in that place.

I confess, Sir, that since Philosophy teaches sincerity, as well as
modesty, I thought I might be the man spoken of; was willing to know the
truth, without offense to good manners; his name, doubtlesly, said I, was not
Solon: pardon me, said he, his name came just to my memory, as you pronounced
it. To what end serves it to deny it? I could not hear so sad news without
sorrow, and that so great as Thales pitied me, and jesting at my weakness,
asked me whether it were advantageous for a wise man to marry, or no? Putting
himself thereby in a condition to have studied Philosophy for others, not
being able to make use thereof himself. After this, he told me there was not
one word true of all that this man had said; that he had not so much as been at
Athens of a long time; and that he had said all this by his directions, which
he had caused to be given him, when he rose from me to speak in the ear with
one of his servants.

At my return to Athens, I found my son alive indeed, but I found the whole
Town in confusion, by reason of some disorder that had happened between those
that were descended from Megacles, and those that were come of them that had
been of the Citonien conspiracy. The Megarians surprised the port of Nisa, and
re took the Isle of Salamina, w^ had caused me so much trouble. And to add to
the misfortune, all the people were seized on with a superstitious snare,
which persuaded them that spirits returned; that fantosmes and apparitions
appeared; and this imagination prevailed so much with most of them, as there
was an universal humiliation.

Those who had the charge of the sacred things, said, that they found
infallible signs by the Victims, that the town needed purification, and that
the gods were incensed by reason of some secret offense committed.

To this effect, by the advice of the wisest sort, they sent an Express to
Creta, to Epimenides the Phaestien, who was and doubtleslie is still, an
incomparable man, a man whose life is altogether pure, innocent, and holy: who
eats no more then what is sufficient to maintain life, and whose soul leans as
little to the senses, as in this life it can: who is very learned in the
knowledge of heavenly things; and who passes in his Country, not only for one
who has sometimes Divine Revelations, but is by the people of Crete believed
to be the son of a Nymph, called, Balta. However it be sir, he is a man of
extraordinary knowledge, and virtue.

Epimenides, not refusing the entreaties that were made unto him, came to
Athens, and of so many famous men as were in that noted City, did me the
favor to choose me for his most intimate friend, having through his wisdom,
and through the peoples belief in him, dissipated all their false imaginations,
and that by prayers, Sacrifices, and Ceremonies, he had rid them of all their
fears, he would yet stay a while at Athens for my sake; where certainly he told
Prodigious predictions to a hundred several people. As we were speaking one
day of humane weaknesses, and how little a man ought to rely upon his own
strength, nor yet upon Philosophy; I acquainted him with what had befallen me
with Thales the Milesian, and how much ashamed I was, not to be master of my
first opinions. Solon (said he to me) is easy to be overcome on that side, and
as often as fortune will make use of the affections of nature against him, she
will certainly overcome him: For he has a soul as tender upon such eneounters,
as strong against ambition: But Solon, said he, you are to be bewailed if you
do not resolve to believe me; and believe that what you underwent whilst you
were with your friend Thales, is little in comparison of what you shall one day
suffer in the person of a Daughter, of whom your wife is at this present with
Child.

I have, said he, observed your birth, and your life, and I find that this
child, which will be soon born, will be a prodigy for beauty and virtue; and
will also be one of the happiest women in the world, if you will believe my
council: but also if you will not believe, and follow it, she will be most
unfortunate. In fine, saidhe, If you do not what I shall say unto you, you shall
have the discontent to see that your Daughters beauty will make your Country
desolate; and that after having refused the sovereign power (as you will one
day refuse it) she will make one of your Citizens fall in Love with her, who
will become the Tyrant of the Common wealth, which will make her resolve to
die, rather then to marry him.

I confese I was much troubled to hear Epimenides speak after this manner; for
I had heard him foretell diverse things, which I had seen punctually fall out
according to his predictions. I then desired him to tell me what he would have
me do, to preserve a man who did sacrifice his whole life to the glory of
Athens, from having a daughter who should cause love in him that would be the
Tyrant thereof. He told me then, That since it was not yet known in Athens that
my wife was with Child, I should conceal her great belly; send her into the
country, and when she should be brought to bed, that I should cause this
daughter to be secretly brought up, not suffering her to know whose child she
was, nor yet any other body whosoever, except those who were to have the care
of her education, that if it should so fall out, as I should be forced to
forsake my Country, I must during my exile, leave her in some Island upon the
Egean Sea; and that things being thus carried, she should be infallibly happy,
and I should not need to fear that she should be beloved by the Tyrant of
Athens. In fine, Sir, to shorten my discourse, I obeyed Epimenides his his
advise; I sent my wife into the Country, where when her time was come, she
was brought to bed of a Daughter: wondering at the accomplishment of the
beginning of this prediction, I continued to follow Epeminedes his directions,
who at his departure (after having refused all the presents that were made him,
and taking for his reward, only a branch of the Sacred Olive) told me that my
daughter would one day cause as much joy in me by her virtue, and good fortune,
as she would cause sorrow in me by reason of her loss. These obscure words
continued fixed in my memory, so as I put my daughter into the hands of a
Sister of mine whom I loved very well, who was married in Corinth, and was come
to see me: trusting only her, and her husband, with the secret which
Epeminedes had acquainted me withal.

I will not stay to tell you, that soon after I lost my wife, for which I was
very much grieved; neither will I entertain you with the disorders of Athens,
which are too well known to all men; nor yet with the relation how I was
solicited to accept of the sovereign power, being put in mind that there had
been Kings of my Race, and that one that was descended from the illustrious
Chodrus, need make no scruple to accept the Scepter: nor with what
stedfastness I rejected those who made so unjust a proposition to me,
follovving Epeminedes his predictions. Neither will I tell you what Laws I
there established, you know them, and know how they were observed; nor yet
the resolution which I took to quit my Country, for the space of ten years;
to the end that I might make no further alterations, and leave the people
leisure to accustom themselves to their new Laws.

But I will tell you, that being ready to take my voluntary banishment from
Greece, and not forgetting what Epeminedes had told me, I came to Corinth,
unknown: and having told my sister that I was obliged to leave my Daughter in
an Island during the time of my exile: This virtuous personage, who loved her
no less then a Daughter, which she had of her own, had married a Gentleman of
extraordinary worth, and who had long lived a retired live, so as as she
easily prevailed with him, not to abandon my Daughter, who really appeard to
me, to be the sweetest child I ever saw. I consulted the Gods touching my
design, who confirmed me therein. Thus I took this little Family along with me
in my ship; and being desirous that the place of exile for these whom I so
dearly loved, might be a pleasant place, I chose this Isle to leave them in.

Whilst Solon discovered thus at large, Philoxypes, who longed to interrupt
him, could no longer forbear: did you, Sir, said he, leave a Daughter in this
Island? Yes, said Solon, with a sigh, and I saw her here about four years ago,
when I would be seen by none but by you: and Sir, if I may be allowed to say
so, I saw her such a one as Epeminedes had desiphered her, to wit handsome, full
of wit and virtue.

When I first left those, to whose guidance I committed her, I willed them to
say they were of the Island of Crete: At this word, Philoxypes changed color,
remembering that it was of thence that Cleanthes said himself to be. But Sir,
said he, how was this daughter called, that the Gods gave you? Polycrite
replied, Solon. Policrite, said Philoxypes, is Policrite, Sir, then your
daughter? Solon surprised at Philoxypes question, changed color also, and
feared lest this Prince might have known somewhat of Policrite, which might
displease him more then the uncertainty he was in of her life or place of abode.

How Sir, said he, came you to know my daughter, whom to say truth, I left
near enough to you, but whom I had also left in a place, where I thought not
you should have met with her; and that when you should have met with her, you
should not have known her to be what she is? It was the Gods, replied
Philoxypes, who brought me to the knowledge of her; and it is the Gods likewise,
said he, who have taken her from her Cottage, doubtlesly to punish me for not
precisely knowing the daughter of that famous Solon. At last, he desired this
Lawgiver to go into his Gallery, which was painted since his last being at
Claria; and showing him the several pictures of Policrite, under the figure of
Venus Urania; behold, Sir, said he, the Goddess which made me know Policrite.
Solon surprised with the sight, looked on Philoxypes and not comprehending how
he could come by those pictures, without Policrites consent; Sir, said he,
Epimenides assured me that Policrite, should be virtuous; but these pictures
make me believe, that being bred up amongst the Rocks, she may have become too
indulgent. Ah, Sir, said Philoxypes! how far is Policrite from what you speak
of? but shall I dare to acquaint you with my boldness? and shall I dare to
enquire of you, before I acquaint you with my misfortune, and yours, wherefore
you left her in that place? Solon, who knew Cleanthes and Megisto's integrity,
who knew likewise how virtuous Policrite was, condemned his first suspicions,
and hasted to tell him how when he first arrived in our Island, he made
Cleanthes and his Family come on shore as passengers which he knew not, that
afterward he placed them near the sea, side, but that being afterward at
Claria, and whilst he assisted him in the building of that town to which he
would give his name, being walked abroad all alone, he had observed that little
desert place, where he placed Policrite, having given Cleanthes where withal
to build that little Cottage, and where withal to subsist commodiouslie during
the time of his exile. That passing from Africa, into Asia, to go to Cressus
his Court, he would first come once again to Cyprus, that he might see his dear
Policrite. That he had been a whole month in that Cottage, Policrite not having
all that while either known his name, nor that he was her Father; and that
afterward he came to visit him at Claria; that he confessed he had in that
journey discovered strange lights in the young maids understanding, which
obliged him to be very sensible of her loss: For said he, I can find no body
now in that Cottage, and cannot learn, neither why those that did inhabit there
have left it, nor how long it is since they went from thence, nor what way
they are gone.

But you Sir, said he, be pleased I beseech you to let me hear all whatsoever
you know of my daughter, and conceal nothing from me; for I confess I stand
upon thorns. Philoxypes having observed that Solon was really very impatient
to know how he came to know Policrite, and how he had got so many Pictures of
hers, told him the whole truth; he made him call to mind his former
inflexibility, and how he had told him long since that a man might once in his
life be overcome by love without any shame. Then he told him what glorious
and gallant company he had had at his house; how miraculously this Venus was
esteemed by them all: the contestation which he had with them thereupon; how
afterward he met with Policrite, at the head of the River Claria; how
surprised he was to see that the Pourtrait of his Venus, should be the picture
of this unknown maid; how much he was troubled that he could not find her
again; how happily he met Cleanthes as he was going with his Family to the
Temple: how he savv her the third time when he found her in the Temple; how
at last he discovered her Cottage, and his sundry thoughts thereupon: he
acquainted him with the first visit he made to Policrite, when he found her
making Garlands of Flowers; what speech he had with Cleanthes, and Megisto;
and in fine, how violently he was taken with her. He told him also, how he
had endeavored to suppress his passion, by reason of the supposed meanness of
her birth: what an alteration this passion had wrought in his mind: how the
Court was startled at his Melancholy; the Kings odd conceit thereupon, his
discourse with the King, and with the Princess Aretaphile: how angry this
Princess was, and how much he himself was perplexed: how it came to pass that
Mandroclus had drawn Policrite's Pictures; and in fine, he told him all that
had befallen him: and when he had ended his recital, not affording Solon
leisure to speak, thus you see, Sir, said he, I am no longer that Inflexible
Philoxypes which you formerly knevv me to be, but I may safely protest unto
you, that I loved Policrite in a Cottage, with the same respect as if she had
been seated on a Throne: and I may also assure you, that my passion for her was
as pure, as if I had known she had been your daughter.

Do not blame me then, I conjure you, since I have only adored Solons virtue
and worth in Policrite's person; for it is her virtuous mind which I am more
enamored of, then of her personal beauty; yet do I deserve to be punished, for
doubtlesly my frequent visits have caused Cleanthes to change his abode. He
knew not Philoxypes, and Imagined he might have abused him in Policrite: But to
prove, said he, that I lived respectfully with her, and that I never received a
favorable word from her, see (said he, Sir, showing him the letter which he
had received) the innocent and cruel sign of acknowledgement, that this Divine
Personage has given me, since that at the same time when she says she will
remember me, she says also she shall never see me more: yet Sir, said he, if
my passion do displease you, you shall see how ready I will be to die, as soon
as you shall have given me the least occasion so to do; since that is the only
way whereby I can pluck her from out my heart: but on the contrary, if you do
truly love me, you will rather bewail me, then accuse me; you will promise me
not to oppose me, if the Gods restore Policrite to you: and you will suffer her
to be Mistress of that stately town which was built by your directions.

I wish, Sir, I were able to offer her sundry Scepters; but I think not that he
who refuses them, will stick much to bestow his daughter on a Prince, who
thinks himself happy in being but near a Throne, and to assist his King to
sustain the weight of his Scepter.

When Philoxypes had made an end of speaking, and Solon had read Policrite's
letter; my Daughter said he, is yet wiser then I thought her to have been: and
since she has been able to resist the charms of Philoxype's greatness and
worth J find Epimenides had reason to speak of her, as of a miracle.

Be you then assured, said he, Sir, That if the Gods restore my Daughter to me,
I shall bring no other obstacle to your designs, then my humble desire that
you will seriously consider whether she be worthy or no of the honor you
would do her: for if you continue in your resolution, and that I shall know
that she does indeed deserve a part of the favors which you vouchsafe her, I
shall be ready to command her to look on you, as on him whom the gods have
chosen to make her happy and glorious.

I do not tell you Philoxypes, that the famous Excestides, my Father, who left
me poor only out of his own Magnificencie, was descended from the illustrious
blood of King Chodrus; for these are not things which I think men ought much to
boast of: But I will assure you, that all those of my House, since they have
left the Crown, have been as good Citizens, as their Forefathers were good
Kings; and that for my particular, I had always rather oppose my self to
Tyranny, then be a Tyrant.

In fine, said he, as it is not to your greatness that I give Policrite, I
pretend also, that Policrite's virtue, shall supply the place of a Crown.

But alas, said Philoxypes! how will you give me this Divine Policrite, if we
know not where she is? She must be begged of the Gods, replied Solon, since
it is from them alone that we are to expect all the good that can befall us.

In fine; sir, Philoxypes conceived an unexpressable joy, to find Solon so
favorably disposed toward him. But also his grief was no less extreme, to
think that Solons good intentions would prove of no use, if Policrite were not
found. Yet was he somewhat comforted with the sight of so famous a man, and the
conversation of one so perfectly wise, made his sorrow appear at least more
moderate, though really it was always very great. Nay, I remember he told me
that notwithstanding all his sadness, he forgot not you, sir, but entertained
Solon with the discourse of you, as of a very extraordinary Personage.

This mean while the King, having heard of Solons arrival, and how that
Policrite was his daughter, was exceeding glad, and would have him and
Philoxypes to come to Court; so as this Prince his love was no longer so great
a secret.

Imagining that Cleanthes was not gone out of the Island, command was sent
again to all the Towns and Vilages, to give an account of what strangers lived
in them, but do what they could, they could learn no acceptable news.

This mean while the Court grew very melancholy; for Princess Aretaphile, not
able to put on a resolution of pardoning the King, the King by an odd fancy
of Love, resolved also to win this Princess her heart, before he would assure
her to make her his Queen.

Philoxypes on his part was mad to think he could not find out Policrite, and
that he had been the cause why Solon had lost her: and Solon was also very sad
that he could hear no news of his daughter; especially at a time when he was
of necessity to return to Athens, where he had learned that there was great
disorders, and that all things tended toward Sedition.

He knevv that there were three several Factions there: that one Licurgus
was chief of those that inhabited the plains; that Megacles, son to Alcmeon,
commanded over those of the sea coast, and that Pisistrates, whom certainly you
knew when you went to Athens, was chief of the mountaineers. So as though all
that numerous people had punctually observed his Laws, since his departure, yet
the face of affairs was likely soon to alter.

Solon being then necessitated to be gone within a few days, told Philoxypes,
That the interest of a man's country, was to be preferred before all things else:
and that he who chose rather to conceal his daughter, then to expose her to the
love of a Tyrant, would not abandon his Country, to expect in vain to hear of
one whom certainly the Gods would preserve if she were worthy of their care; so
as he had no more to do, then give him full leave to marry her if he should
find her; Philoxypes being at that same time both much afflicted, and much
joyed; thankt Solon for the honor he did him; but the wind not serving for
his departure, and his ship not being ready, he must have patience for a while.
During this interval of time, Solon understood that there was a famous Temple
about some forty miles from Paphos, dedicated as were almost all the rest in
the Island, to Venus Urania, where 'twas said this Goddess delighted more to be
honored, then in any other Temple: because the custom there was, that all the
Ceremonies were performed by maids of good descent, who dedicated themselves to
the service of that Goddess, and who were to serve her three years in her
Temple before they were to marry.

Solon who believed he could not employ the time better, which much against his
will, he was to stay in Cyprus, then in praying to the Gods, moved Philoxypes
to go thither, who easily gave way thereunto: so as getting on horseback the
next morning and attended but by a few servants, they came to this Temple,
which is very delightfully seated.

I know Sir, I should not stay to acquaint you with all the Ceremonies of the
sacrifice, which upon this occasion was offered for Solon, and Philoxypes; yet
it being famous amongst us for what ensued thereupon, I will crave leave to do
it; as also because peradventure, you have not seen the like: For it is a
sacrifice which does not cost the victims lives, but on the contrary, makes
them recover their liberty.

This Temple is fairly enough built: the Altar is stately, at the foot whereof,
and just in the midst, is placed a great candlestick of Gold with twelve
branches, whereon Crystal Lamps hung which was all lighted instantly after.
Fifty maids, clothed in silver Tiffany, mingled with blew to denote the
original of that heavenly Venus whom they served, having each of them a Coronet
of flowers on their head, and sprigs of Myrrh in their hands, ranked themselves
on the two sides of the Temple, she only excepted who was to perform the
Ceremony, who staid in the middle.

At the foot of this golden Candlestick, there was a great Chest or Coffer of
the same metal, wherein there was fire which they termed sacred, because it is
only lighted by the agitation of certain stones consecrated to the Goddess:
she who offered the sacrifice in the name of Solon, and Philoxypes, put Amber,
Frankincense, Benjamin, and diverse other perfumes, into this Pile of wood: This
being done, and having made a little Pile of the dry boughs of Myrh upon the
Altar, she took a Torch made of perfumed wax, wherewith she set it on fire, and
with the same Torch she lighted fifty others which were placed in sundry parts
of the Temple: after this, one of these maids brought two Turtles tied together
with threads of gold and blew silk; and before her who carried the Birds, went
four other maids singing a Hymn after the Lydian manner: after these came four
others, bringing with them two Swans tied together with a string of blew and
gold, and followed by four more who sung as did the former.

These maids who carried the Victims, kneeled down before the Altar, which
being done, she who did the Ceremony, (to the end that she might not irritate
Venus Anadiomena, who had been formerly worshipped in that Temple, by the
honor that was done to Venus Urania) took Roses and Cockles, which she strowd
upon the Altar, and taking a great shel of the Mother of pearl full of sea
water, taken up toward the east, she sprinkled the Victims therewith.

The holy knife, adorned with Oriental Agget, was likewise prepared, as it
were to sacrifice them; but the maids who sung continually forbad them in the
behalf of Venus Urania, so as she who carried the Turtles, and the other who
carried the Swans, drawing near her who performed the Ceremony, she untied
them, and opening one of the windows of the Temple, at the same time when they
threw new perfumes into the pile of wood, they were lost in that cloud of
perfume which arose, and flying toward heaven, seemed as if they went to carry
up the vows of Solon and Philoxypes, to the Goddess to whom they were offered
up.

After this, all the maids which were in the Temple, began a Canticle of joy
and one of them taking a little Faggot of Myrh, which was bound about with
threads of Gold, swept together the ashes of the little pile, to see whether
all were quite consumed or no; for this is one of the tokens that the Sacrifice
has been well received.

In pursuit after this, they went to visit the sacred garden, wherein the
Turtles and Swans, destined to the service of the Goddess, are bred up, to see
whether those that were offered up unto her, were returned thither or no: for
when this falls not out, it is an infallible observation that the sacrifice has
not been well accepted of, and that the Goddess thinks not those birds pure
enough to be presented unto her another time. But as for Solon his Sacrifice,
it had all the marks of a happy Sacrifice; the Pile was totally consumed, the
perfumes mounted straight upright toward the Temples Roof, the birds flew
Eastward, and were found in the sacred Garden. In fine, these maids assured
Philoxypes and Solon, that their vows were well accepted of by the Goddess; and
that they had not of a long time offered any Sacrifice, which had been so well
accepted of.

Having then returned acknowledgements to the Divine Urania, these two returned
to Paphos: Solon did so pleasantly entertain Philoxypes, and said such fine
things to him, as not taking heed, he mist the way by which they came. Those
who followed them, thought that Philoxypes, who very well knew that way,
intended to go some whither that they knew not of, so as they let him go on.
Continuing to ride on thus by this by-way, they strayed not only from the way
they were to go, but came at last to a place where there was no beaten track at
all: finding themselves at the Sea side, amongst wild, and almost inaccessible
Rocks, the sight hereof recalled into Philoxypes memory the desert wherein he
had found Policrites abode.

But at the same time he found that he had lost his way; and that he knew not
where he was: yet it appearing delightful enough unto him, though sandy
enough, he said to Solon, that continuing to go along the sea side, they should
meet with some path which would lead them back into the right way; wherefore
they did not return back, but continued on their way; and Philoxypes rode
foremost, that he might be a guide to those that he had led out of the way.

Being advanced a good way, he might see five or six fishers Cottages, built
upon the sea side, and heard the voice of certain women who seemed to bewail
some misfortune.

He then mended his pace, not knowing why the voice of those women had had such
an operation in him: and being come near them, he knew Megisto, and Dorida, and
found them sorely weeping, and accompanied with many other women, who wept
as well as they, and who not minding him, looked all toward the sea.

He then looked the same way they did, where, alas! he might see Policrite,
all alone in a little boat floating, without either Oars or Rudder; who not
knovving what to do, was upon her knees praying to Heaven; for though the sea
went not very high, yet was it somevvhat moved; and moreover, the Rocks
bearing back the Waves on that side, and a breath of air blowing from land,
the boat went still further off.

Philoxypes seeing Polycrite in so great a danger, and not seeing any boat that
he might make use of, lighted suddenly off Horseback, and threvv himself into
the Water, svvimming straight toward Policrite.

So as when Solon, who was a little behind, was come to the sea shore, you
may easily imagine how much he was surprised to see Megisto covered with
tears, Policrite all alone in a boat, which the Waves bore toward the full
sea, and Philoxypes svvimming toward Policrite; but he was so far from her,
as it was to be believed that (the boat floating still forward) his strength
might fail him before he could get up to her; and that Solon might see his dear
daughter perish in his sight, as also a Prince whom he loved no less then her.

To tell you also how strangely astonished Megisto was, to see Philoxypes throw
himself into the sea, and presently after to see Solon come, is not a thing
easily done. Nor yet to set forth Policrites thoughts, when she knevv
Philoxypes, and savv him in so great danger for her sake.

This gallant personage told us notvvithstanding afterward, that she no
sooner knevv him, but the object of her vovvs altered; and that ceasing to
think on her own danger, all her prayers were poured forth for Philoxypes.
This mean while Solon was upon the shore with Megisto, whose mind was not
then at liberty enough to tell him how this misfortune happened, telling him
only that Policrite was lost.

And to say truth, I think that upon this encounter, Solons wisdom was put to a
greater trial, then ever it had been: and that it was much more easy for him
to refuse a Crown, then to see Policrite and Philoxypes in the danger they were
in, without giving apparent tokens of despair.

Yet this famous man kept himself within the lawful bounds of sorrow; and not
doing any thing unworthy of himself, did notwithstanding, feel what ever pains
a tender and generous soul could suffer under.

This mean while though Philoxypes was but lightly clad, for the spring was
already very hot in our Island, he could not swim with that facility as he
might have done, had he been naked; so as Policrites boat driving still away,
he could not get up unto it.

One might see this young maid use some bootless endeavors to stay this little
boat, but it was impossible for her to do it: nay, she did things which she her
self knew were of no avail, yet could not keep from doing them.

One might likewise observe Philoxypes to strive to his utmost, and then he
seemed to be ready to perish through weariness. But at last being got near the
boat, sometimes one might see the boat driven near unto him by one Wave, and
sometimes born from him by another; for it went too and fro with the wind.

It was so near him as he might hear Policrites voice, not being able to answer
her, so much was he out of breath with swimming.

Sir, said she, Let me perish; do you return to the shore: and strive not
bootlesly to save me.

You may imagine whether so obliging a command did not oblige Philoxypes to
redouble his forces. At last, Sir, after that Solon had seen the Waves rise up
more then once, ready to over-turn the boat, and swallow up Philoxypes, who was
now able to do no more, a great Wave having driven the boat toward him, he
luckily laid hold of the rope whereby it was fastened formerly to the Sea bank.

You may imagine, Sir, what Philoxypes joy was then, as likewise what that of
Policrite, Solon, Megisto, Dorida, and the other women that were upon the
shore; they all shouted for joy.

Yet was it not yet time to rejoice; For though it be not hard to guide a
floating boat, yet Philoxypes was so weary, as there was reason to despair of
his ever accomplishing what he had so happily begun: he was seen to sink twice
under water, yet never quit the rope which he had in his hand. Think sir, how
great Policrites grief was then, and with how many tears she repaid the pains
he took to save her. One might observe this Amorus Prince do two contrary
things; for he would look back upon the shore, that he might the sooner bring
back his Dear Policrite thither; and sometimes believing he should perish
without saving her, he would at least have the contentment of seeing her at his
last gasp.

He looked thus, sometimes toward the shore, sometimes on Policrite: and
things were in this condition; when Philoxypes and Solons servants, who tarryed
a good way behind by reason of some accident which had befallen one of their
horses, were come up, amongst which was one of Philoxypes his gentlemen, who
being skilful in swimming, threw himself instantly into the Water, and helped
his dear Master to guide Policrite back unto the shore, where this Prince was
no sooner arrived, but that his force failing him he swounded.

It Is needless to tell you what Solon, Megisto, and all the rest that were on
the shore, did to aid him. As for Policrite, she was so surprised and so
afflicted to see what condition Philoxypes was in, as she was not sensible of
the joy of having escaped so great a danger: but at last, after having carried
Philoxypes into one of those little Huts, and having by the means they used,
brought him to life again, and dried his apparel, he asked where Policrite
was? whom Solon brought to him out of a little chamber whither she had retired
her self, though she had not yet perfectly shook off the fear she had been in
of her self, and of Philoxypes.

But at last all being retired that were in that little hut, save Megisto,
Policrite, Dorida, Philoxypes, and Solon. Solon desired Megisto to tell him,
why she had quitted the little abode which he had caused be built for her?
wherefore she was come to this place, and where Cleanthes was? Wherefore they
had left no order to acquaint him with their removal? and how this last
misfortune had befallen Policrite? But, said he, sister, speak freely without
any wise disguising the truth. For Prince Philoxypes knows I am your brother,
that Policrite is my daughter: and I know also that he does her the honor to
love her; therefore conceal nothing for his respect, for he has now a deeper
share in Policrite, then I have, since I have given her to him; and that he may
now lay a new claim unto her, by having saved her life.

I leave you to imagine, Sir, how Policrite was surprised to know that she was
Solons daughter, whom she knew to be a great and excellent man, but whom she
knew not to be her father; and to know at the same time that she was bestowed
on Phyloxypes; she blushed, but with a great deal of modesty: and looking upon
Megisto, as if she would ask her whether it were true or no that she was Solons
daughter? she confirmed her in that belief; and afforded her leisure so to
confound the joy she had to see Philoxypes again, with that of her knowing her
self to be daughter to so famous a man, as nothing appeared in her countenance
but what so great an honor might cause in her.

Philoxypes beginning then to speak, said as obliging things to Solon in
Policrites behalf, as in his own; and Megisto was somewhile before she could
satisfy her Brothers curiosity. But at last she told him, That knowing the
love Prince Philoxypes bore to Policrite she had thought it fitting to acquaint
Policrite only, that she was more then what she took her self to be, to the
end she might know how to treat Philoxypes with more indifferency; and that she
might think her self the less obliged to him for his affection: That Cleanthes
and she, having observed that this had produced a contrary effect in Policrite,
and Prince Philoxypes having showed much passion in the last visit which he
made them, she confessed the ones worth, and the others youth had caused some
apprehension in her: that in pursuit hereof, knowing that the King was at
Claria, and fearing least Philoxypes might speak to him of Policrites beauty,
she had advised Cleanthes to quit his abode, which in effect they had done, and
were come to this little Maretine hamlet where Cleanthes was acquainted with an
old Fisherman, who had left them his hut, being himself gone to live with a
son of his: that they had left a young Slave at their former place of abode,
with direction, That if Solon should come thither, he should wish him to come
the first day of the next ensuing moon to a Temple which they named unto him,
where Cleanthes would not fail to be on the same days to meet him when he
should come thither.

That since that time, Cleanthes had learnt by the Priest of the little Temple
which was near their former abode, that this Slave was dead; so as knovving
that the time of Solons return drevv near, Cleanthes resolved to go live
himself alone at Paphos, knovving that when he should return to Cyprus, he
would not fail to vvait upon the King, and so he could not miss of him; to
which purpose he was gone thither that very morning: that Policrite, who had
no better pastime, especially since they had left their former abode, then to
draw every day something or other upon her Tablebooks: seeing all the fisher
men were gone from their little hamlet, leaving no boat behind them, save that
wherein they had seen her, and wherein there was neither Rudder nor Oar, sat
down in it, and not minding whether it were well fastened to the shore or no,
was designing forth that little rural float of boats which went still further
from her: that she was so attentive to her work in hand, that as she her self
had told them, she did not perceive the boat wherein she was, was loosened from
the land, and went floating as the winds blew it: so as said Megisto, coming
forth to look after Polycrite, I saw her in the posture I have told you, and
skreek'd out so loud, as I made her perceiv the danger she was in, not being
able to help her, there not being one man left it the whole Ham let; and all
the fisher boa, having already doubled a Cape of land whereby we lost sight of
them.

Megisto having ended her relation, Solon began admire the Providence of the Gods
in the guidance of worldly things; and considering that unless Philoxipes and
he had lost their way, Policrite in all appearance had been lost, he could not
sufficiently praise the Goddess, who had so well received his sacrifice; in
effect, this Temple of Venus Urania, has got much renown by this adventure.
But Sir! to abuse your patience no longer, I will only tell you, that instead
of going to Paphos, Philoxypes and Solon went the next day to Claria, whether
they brought Megisto, Policrite, Dorida, and all the women that attended them,
after that Philoxypes had largely rewarded all the fishermens wives for their
Hospitality and courtesy showed to Policrite. To tell you how great Philoxypes
and Policrites joy was, would be no easy matter, and to relate unto you in
what terms this happy Lover expressed his satisfaction to Policrite, and with
what an obliging modesty she received the testimony of his affection, and gave
him some marks of hers, would be to undertake to difficult a task. For to learn
in one and the same day, that she was daughter to the so Illustrious Solon, and
that she was to be wife to Philoxypes, were two things wherewith her soul was
divided. Philoxypes failed not to show Policrite her pictures in his Gallery,
which though rarely handsome, came much short of her. The next day Solon sent
to enquire out Cleanthes at Paphos, where he was found and brought to Claria.
Necessary order being taken for it, Cleanthes, Megisto, Policrite, and Dorida,
had clothes made answerable to their condition.

The next morning the princess of Salamis, and the Princess Agherista, being
advertised by their brother Philoxypes of the truth of his adventure: these two
fair Princesses, I say, who loved him dearly, who had learned Policrytes
illustrious birth by this advertisement, and who did reverence Solon as a God,
went to Claria, to conduct this beautiful creature to Paphos.

But good Gods! how they were surprised with her extreme beauty, comparing
which with her Pictures they found her to exceed them far; but if she appeared
fair unto them, she seemed yet more spiritual.

She had somewhat in her of admirable modesty, which having nothing in it of
Rustic, rendered her yet more pleasing: she had a soul doubtlesly, fraught with
all that innocence which she had preserved amidst those Rocks: but withal a
mind and humor wherein were all the Charms which the Court could afford.

For Megisto being rightly Solons sister, knew as well as any one what was
requisite in, and did necessarily become those of her Sex, and had perfectly
instructed Policrite therein.

Young Dorida appeared also to be very fair, and lovely at the Court, where the
King received Solon, Cleanthes, Megisto, Philoxypes, and Policrite, with
unexpressable joy and honor. And this so much the more, as that being at last,
resolved to content Princess Aretaphiles Ambition, that so he might satisfy
his own Love, had made her be told the day before, that it should be her fault
if she were not Queen.

But if Aretaphile were Queen of Cyprus, Policrite was the Queen of Beauty;
none but the Princess of Salamis could any ways dispute that glorious Empire
with her. In fine, Sir, there was nothing heard of now, but feasts and
rejoicing. Solon being of necessity to be gone, they hasted the co^summation of
these famous marriages: The King would have one Ceremony serve for them both;
nor did Cyprus ever see any thing of more glorious, though it were done with
precipitation. Solon called then to mind Epimenides his predictions, and
confessed there was somewhat of Divine in that holy man. But his Countries
interest prevailing more with him, then whatsoever other interests, he
departed for Athens, so as some tears of sorrovv did for a while a little
allay Policrite's Joy; but to comfort her, young Dorida was left with her,
when Cleanthes and Megisto imbarkt themselves with Solon. This was the
condition Sir, wherein this great man left the Court of Cyprus: to wit, the
King highly content: Queen Aretaphile as highly satisfied, and Philoxypes and
Policrite so happy, as vvishes could not add thereunto.

FINIS.

