A Brief ADVERTISEMENT, Concerning East-New-Jersey, in AMERICA.
THat whereas it has upon solid grounds been by very Judicious Men, judged as
well the Advantage of the Nation in general, as of the particular Undertakers,
to have an Interest in some of the America Plantations; and that in Order to
the promoting this Design: There went in July last, 1684. a Vessel from Leith,
with 160. Passengers, or thereby; an other from Montrose with 130. to
East-New-Jersey, in which two Vessels were some Gentlemen and Merchants, of
very good Repute; the account of their safe Arrival in eight weeks after their
parting from Aberdeen, and their several Opinions of that Country, all
agreeing anent the Fertility, Pleasantness, and Wholesomness thereof, as being
stored with all things necessar for the comfortable Accommodation and Life of
Man, being compared with former Relations of that Country, and both confirmed
as Truth, by several Gentlemen and Merchants at present in Edinburgh, who have
been there: The consideration of this, as of the reasonable constitution of the
Government; the Model whereof has been fully perused and found satisfactory,
has engaged many to pitch upon this Province of East-New-Jersey, as the most
proper seat for a Collony of this Nation; The same being a Climat agreeable to
our Constitutions, and a place fit for Trade; and of great Security, being as
it were, the Center of the English Plantations, and a place affording in
plenty, all desirable Accommodations.

And seeing the Approbation of these in Authority is absolutely requisite, for
countenancing and encouraging such a Design, without which, it cannot be
expected, that any such Attempt can be made effectual; Mr. George Scot of
Pitlochie resolving to settle his Family in that place, has procured the
following, Pass,

By the Right Honorable Earl of Perth, Lord High Chancellor of Scotland, etc.
These are permitting, and allowing Mr. George Scot of Pitlochie, with his
Lady, Children, and Family; and such other Persons as he shall engage to pass
from this Kingdom, either by Sea or Land, to any of His Majesty's Foreign
Plantations, providing such persons to be transported by him, be not declared
Traitors, Rebels, Fugitives; and that without any Let, Impediment, or
Molestation, from any person whatsoever; they always behaving themselves
peaceably, and according to Law.

Given at Edinburgh the first of January, 1685. For all Magistrates, Officers,
and Soldiers within the Kingdom of Scotland, whom these do or may concern.
PERTH, Cancel.

By the perusual of the foresaid Pass, it will appear that such who intend to
be concerned with the said Mr. George Scot, in prosecuting this Design, are
hereby included as well as himself, they being qualified according to the
contents thereof.

And for his further encouragement, the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council
have been pleased by an Act, to condescend, That such as are under Bond, to
compear before them when called, shall have up their said respective Bonds, upon
their going with him; Whereby they are secured from the Apprehension of any
Process to be in their absence, intented against them upon that head.

Whereas there are several people in this Kingdom, who upon account of their
not going that length, in conformity required of them, by the Law do live very
uneasy; Who beside the other agreeable Accommodations of that place, may there
freely enjoy their own principles, without hazard or the least trouble; seeing
there are Ministers of their own persuasion going along with the said Mr.
George Scot, who by the fundamental Constitutions of that Country, are allowed
the free Exercise of their Ministry, such as Mr. Archibald Riddel, brother to
sir John Riddel of Riddel, Mr. Thomas Paterson late Minister of Borthwick, and
several other Ministers. It is hereby signified to all who desire this Voyage,
That the Henry and Francis of Newcastle, a ship of 350. Tun, and 20. great
Guns; Richard Hutton Master, is freighted for the Transportation of them
Families, and will take in Passengers and Goods at Leith, and take in Goods and
Passengers at Montrose, and Aberdeen, and Kirkwa in Orknay, and set sail thence
for East-New-Jersey, against the 20. day of June, GOD willing. It being
resolved by these concerned in the freight of the Vessel, to Accommodate such
other Passengers as may be conveniently done, without crouding themselves, and
their Families; the inconveniences of which they are fully resolved to avoid;
as what is certainly very troublesome in such a Voyage. Such therefore who
desires to go Passengers in this Vessel, may apply in time, between and the 12.
of May, to Mr. George Scot of Pitlochie, at his Lodging in Bailie
Robisons-land; and at John Johnstouns Drogist, at the sign of the Unicorn in
Edinburgh, to Mr. John Gordon of Colinston Doctor of Physic, at his Lodging in
Montrose; to James Armor Younger Merchant in Glasgow; To Heugh Broun, or James
Nisbet Merchant in Irvine; To Bailie Boyd in Kilmarnock; To Bailie Ma'keuen; or
Ralph Holland Merchant in Air; To Bailie Burt in Stirling; To Bailie James
Gordon in Kirkcudbright, William Corbet Apothecary in Drumfries, To sir Robert
Hamilton at Dubline, one of His Majesty's Privy Councilfor the Kingdom of
Ireland; To Andrew Maxwel, Thomas Loch, and James Stuart Merchants in Belfast,
in that Kingdom; and David Sherwood, at the Black Eagle, in New Castle; (...)
in Berwick; whereby they may have their passage secured upon Reasonabble
Conditions in the said Vessel; And Accounts of the Prepositions to be made to
them, in Order to the promoting effectually of that Design, seeing after the
number condescended upon, as proper to be carried without Crowd in the said
Ship; there will be no more admitted there; and so such as incline to go the
Voyage, may loss their passage in the said Vessel, delaying to secure their
place in time.

In has been judged proper for the more full Information of such as intend to
be concerned in this Design, to make public some of the many Letters come from
East-New-Jersey, that are known to be sent from Persons of good Credit; and
therefore are to be trusted; which is published by the Proprietors, and Printed
by John Reid, 1685. in Edinburgh, And who are desirous may have them there.

FINIS.

