Funeral Sermon AT THE Interrment of the very Great and Noble CHARLES LATE Earl
of Southeske, Who Died at His Castle of Leuchars in the Shire of Fife, upon the
9th. of August.

And was Interred at His Burial-place near His House of Kinnaird in the Shire
of Angus, upon the 4th. of October 1699.

By R. S. D.D.

CHRYSOSTOM: in x. MATTHEW: Offeramus Deo pro munere, quod pro debito tenemur
reddere.

PHILIPP. i. 23. -- Having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is
far better.

AUGUSTINE: de Civit: Dei. Mala Mors putanda non est, quam bona vita praecessit.

EDINBURGH, Printed by James Watson, in Craig's-Closs. M.DC.XC.IX.

TO The right Honorable, truly Virtuous, and truly Noble, MARY Countess
Dowager of Southeske.
MADAM,
I Know nothing can offer it self with more Advantage for Acceptance at your
Hands, than what bears the Name of Him who is gone, that other part of your
Self; whom it has pleased Almighty God to Call, sometime before you, to the
Blessedness of another Life: Whose Image in Writing, or the just account of His
signal Virtues, must do Him, and all Men of the like Endowments, more Honor
than the most beautiful Strokes of a skilful Pincil. Whatever Sweetness was in
His Nature shining through every Line of His Countenance, what Sageness, what
Honor, what Authority; yet to know Him better, and have a fuller scheme of the
Capacities of His Soul expanded and laid open, the Philosopher Plato
would have found his Experiment to good purpose in Him: who thus expressed the
Trial he took of a Man, Loquere ut te videam, i. e. Speak that I may See thee.
Whose Words never missed to set forth a clear and wel-digested Mind. I have
said but what is just of His Virtues in the short following Narrative, and I
conceive all this may contribut to stir again your wonted Sorrows for the Loss
of Him, against which I have often labored to fortify you; but I hope the
Grace of God with the measures of Natural Prudence you are endowed with, shall
secure agninst the Alarm of these few Lines. And I shall further excuse them,
on this head; because I know that a generou^ and affectionat Regret has its
own Sweetness in it, only make it Christian and all is safe: And do His Memory
so much Honor, and the Christian Laws so much Justice, as to imitat His
Excellent Virtues, and add your own to them: which I will not flatter you to
name: And, I am hopeful, you will go very near to complete the Chain, which is
the earnest Prayer alsewel as the humble Request of,

MADAM, Your most affectionat Well-wisher and most obedient humble Servant R. S.

Christian Reader,
I Set: before thee what I hope thou art careful every Morning to take a view
of, that the August Roman may not outdo the serious Christian: Severus Imp.
who caused make his Coffin and set it by him, to mind him of his End and Exit
out of the World, which the Business of our Life is but too ready to make us
forget. I only add this, That none of the Advantages of this World can secure
thee against it: else neither That nor This Great Man had died. Farewell.

JOB xxx. 23. For I know that Thou will bring me to Death, and to the House
appointed for all Living.


THESE Words exhibit and set forth to us a Truth carefully to be Remembered and
seriously Pondered, as by all the Individuals of Mankind, so by every
particular Person in this Great and Noble Audience; as containing a Mean Tekel
and irreversible Sentence of our being necessarly and inevitably separated from
all the Kingdoms of the World and the Glory thereof. They are spoken to us by
the Excellent Job, as bottomed upon a twofold Certainty.

1. The Infallible Forsight of his own particular Fate, For I know Thou will
bring me to Death. Words obliging us to a Serious Pause, and a very Inquisitive
Recollection. What a Me is this? and by whom are these Words uttered? Not by
one of the Common Rout of Mankind at a venture; whose Pretensions commonly are
but very small to the Indulgences and Dispensations of Heaven; but by a great
and singular Friend of the most High, Characterised by Him in the first Chapter
of this Book of Job, and 8th Verse, in these Words spoken to the most exact
Check and inveterat Destroyer of Mankind, the Devil: Have thou considered My
Servant Job, that there is none like him in the Earth, a perfect and an upright
Man, one that fears God and esheweth evil? And in the view and prospect of
Death, what Favor, think we, might he justly have expected? was Enoch
translated and did not see Death? had Elijah a fiery Chariot to carry him to
the Regions of Blessedness? and might not Job have looked for some
extraordinary way of being brought into the same Courts? Nay; but I know Thou will bring me to Death. And since he has said so, let us make ready for it,
the more wretched Sinners of Mankind. But,

2. These Words are uttered not only upon the Forsight of his own particular
Fate, but upon the Inevitable Destiny and Fate of all Mankind: And therefore
does he, here, term Death (which is a Metonymie of the Effect for the Cause)
the House appointed for all Living. The blessed Apostle expresses it thus, 1
Cor. 15.22. In Adam all die, speaking of the Great Argument of the
Resurrection, Perfected and truly Instructed by the Death and Resurrection of
the Blessed Jesus. And when Men, that are Vain upon the Antiquity of their
Pedigree and Extract, begin to Enumerat their Ancestors; It Is to tell the World
that so many more Mortals lived once upon the Earth: And though never so Great,
and never so Wise, though never so Rich, and never so Potent, yet behoved they
to yield to the Common Fate of Mankind. And with one of them, very lively to
express their Conviction in that Matter, who upon the Death of a Dear Child,
and the surprising Advertisement given of it, made no other Account of it than
this, Scio me genuisse mortalem: I know I did beget a Mortal. To which we shall
only add the Statutum est Heb. 9.27. It is appointed for Men once to Die. Or,
if we need to say further upon that Point, let the Experience of all Ages, and
our own daily Experience end the Inquiry.

And now, how deeply is it to be regreted, that however Death be the most
familiar Comerad of Humane Life, yet of all Others it is least Acquainted with
it! Though he that bears the Passing Bell in any tolerable Populous Place, as
he opens the Morning, so he shuts up the Evening with it: Besides the Noise of
his Fatal Monitor at the Common Funeral Hours and Appointments, and more
Plentifully in these Times, wherein God has showed his Anger against Us, by
breaking the Staff of Bread, and with it the Common Stock of Health, and gives
Death so frequently in all the Streets of our Cities, and in the High Ways of
the Country. Or does either the Urgency of our Affairs, or the duty we owe to
our friends settle us in any Society, seldom, or never do we dismiss or part
from one another without some Notice or Memorial of Death given from the Fate
of our Friends or Neighbors. Or take we History in our hand, whether Sacred or
Profane, and scarce have we Celebrated the Birth, and but a little Traced the
Life, when we are surprised with the Death of the greatest Hero's in the World.
How Familiar is Death made to us Day by Day in the common Occurrents of our
Life? and yet how little are we acquainted with the Shibboleth and Language of
it, or with the Work of the Grave? For,

1. So little Impression does it make upon the Minds of Men, to Day they are in
the House of Mourning, and either are, or or ought to be deeply Affected with
the Stupendous Changes that Death makes upon the Persons and Families of their
Friends, and to Morrow, their Discourses are as much Larded as ever, with
Foolish and Profane, Nauseating, and truly defileing Jests and Entertainments.
Others are proud of having a Roman Spirit ascribed to them, and therefore talk
of Death with as much Superciliousness and Indifferency, as these Sadducees
against whom the Holy Apostle reasons in the forcited 1 Cor. 15.32. And of whom
the Holy Prophet Esaias takes notice in his days, Isai. 22.13. the common Jargon
of whose Communications was, Let us eat, drink, and be merry, for to morrow we
must die. Plutar.


Let Epaminondas his Fortitude have all the Praise that the Grecian Ethics did
then deserve, who being wounded at the Battle of Mantinea with a Dart or Spear,
the feathered end of which being broke off stuck in his Body; and being told
that so soon as it were plucked out, he behoved to die; took no other notice of
the direful Advertisement, than to ask first, if his Shield were Safe, and next
if his Army was Victorious; and being answered to both in the affirmative,
thought then fit to tell his Friends, that he had lived long enough since he
died unvanquished, and then bid pluck out the Dart, and with it breathed out
his last. But forgive me to prefer the digested Seriousness of the wise
Solomon, Eccles. 12. who understood the Consequents* and weighed the Work of
Death in a deeper Recollection of Mind, and therefore thought fit to pen a
whole serious Chapter upon the different steps of its Approach though in a
Natural way: And the more ponderous account that Job's. Friend makes of it Job
18.14. when he calls it the King of Terrors. How great a Stranger and yet how
familiar soever a Comerad it be found to the most of Men, how little soever
they seem to understand the Language of Death and the Work of the Grave, so
little impression does it take upon the Minds of Men.

II. So little Change does it work upon their Lives, they are alse False and
Treacherous, they are alse Proud and Vain, they are alse Unjust and
Unrighteous, they are alse Intemperat and Unclean, they are alse much sunk in
Dotage upon the World, they are alse much Strangers to the things of another
Life, as ever. This is too too obvious in the Practice of many Profligats, who
in the time of their witnessing the Severity of Justice upon the Persons, if
not of their Accomplices yet of their Neighbors and Acquainrances, can have
the Hardiness, or rather Stupidity, to perpetrat the very Crimes for which they
die. So Picking and Stealing are commonly enough to be found at the Executions
of Thieves and Robbers: Or at the out-breaking of accidental Fires, when the
Lives and Goods of some are consumed in Merciless Flames, the Hellish Hands of
others are busied in carrying away what remains. And when these Wicked and
Ungodly Men, Men Cruel and Unjust, come themselves within View of Death, seldom
do we find them inclined to restore what they have unjustly taken. How great
Strangers must these needs be to the right Improvement of the Approaches of
Death, or to the Work of the Grave, made Plainly evident in our two former
Condescendences, however familiar Death be made to them in the common
Occurrents of their Lives? O Tempora! O Mores! And thence it is that,

III. When they come to die, they are either shaken with Fears, or sunk in
Confusion of Mind, and no wonder, for Death to them is die Executioner of a
double Sentence, at once strikeing off their Present Beeings and their future
Hopes. Their Life has been bad, and their Conscience is no better. GOD is at
Enmity with them, and the Pit must needs stand open for them. Thence come
Horrors and deep Concussions of Mind, the exact Reverse of Saint Paul his
Prospect of Death, Philipp. 1.21. To me to live is Christ, and to die is Gain.
But their Life being but a total Alienation from the Life of Christ, their
Death must necessarly lead them to these Fears and Confusions, we speak of:
For, a Wounded Spirit who can bear? And it was an excellent Observation of
Tacitus upon the Horrors that Tiberius the Emperor professed he daily endured
for his Bloody Cruelty, Tandem (said he) Facinora and Flagitia in Supplicium
vertuntur.

At length Men's Sins become their Punishments, Witnessing how little these Men
have been acquainted with Death, or busied about the Work of the Grave.

May we ask, What can make Men Serious? It seems, nothing from without them
can: Should Almighty God order a Dreadful Spectre, in all the Formidable
Shapes, in which we can fancy or represent Death, to hang about a Man's Body
from his Cradle to his Grave; at least, from his Riper Years, when he becomes
capable of Rational and Solid Fear: We may presume, after a short times
Familiarity, it should become but like the common Scar-Crow, which is set up to
fright Birds from the early or tender Seed, which in a little sit down upon it
without Fear.

This has been the common Disease of Mankind from the beginning of the World
to this day. Hence was it, that by all the terrible Appearances that GOD made
in his Theocracy, and immediate Government he took over die Jews, they were not
frighted unto their Duty, or at least kept in it for any considerable time. So
was it with all the Miracles that the Blessed Jesus did in his Theophania, or
Divine Appearance amongst Men: Notwithstanding of all which, His very Disciples
and Apostles were not inviolably knit to him, or the Work which he came to do
in the World. You know that one betrayed, another denied, and all forsook him
upon the first Approach of a Trial; but the Truth is, these were Men not yet
arrived at these Measures of Grace and Divine Illumination they attained to at
the Descent of the Holy Ghost upon them, after the Resurrection of our Lord; so
that nothing from without is like to work upon the Spirits of Men. How just is
that Answer, which Abraham gave to Dives? Luke 15.29. When he was asking of
him, that he would send one from the Dead to his five Brethren upon the Earth,
who were in hazard of coming to the same Place of Torment: They have Moses and
the Prophets, (said he) let them hear them. But (replied the rich Glutton) if
one went unto them from the Dead, they will repent. To which again was made
that most Righteous Return, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither
will they he persuaded, though one rose from the Dead.

So that nothing from without us is like to make Men Serious. All the Funeral
Parads on Earth, all the Paleness that sits upon the Faces of our dead Friends,
and all the Solitude it leaves upon their Families, serve but a little to amuse
the Minds of Natural Men, and, e're we are aware, the Impressions are gone. But
a right and Habitual Seriousness is the Effect of a great deal more
Recollection than the Generality of Men allows themselves; and of a great
deal more Application to Almighty God, than is ordinarily found with them.
Thence indeed comes the Work of God upon the Heart: And except you think you
cannot learn, except you ask, you cannot receive: Except you seek, you cannot
find: Except you knock, it cannot be opened to you.

And were I able to awaken you out of your Securities, and quicken your
Meditations, and set you forward in your Applications to Almighty God, by
suggesting to you any such Rouzing Considerations as this Subject may afford
us, I have my End, and you have yours (I hope) in coming to this Audience.
There be therefore these two Serious Thoughts I would have you to weigh with
me, in order to this End, and as arising genuinely enough from this important
Subject.

I. Death makes a total and final Separation betwixt us and all our Temporal
Enjoyments, as

First, From all the Stations in which we are placed. Indeed, by the way, it is
by different Stations and due Subordinations, that the Societies in Heaven and
Earth are governed: And if any pretend by another Method to subsist, it is
Heteroclite and Singular, and must necessarly terminat in the deepest
Confusions. But let us reflect, all the Beauty of Order, and all the Measures
of a true and Temporal Felicity upon these Stations of Men, and the Peaceful
Effects of them throughout the World: Yet, as to the Men themselves, it is
perhaps fit enough to tell them, at least to bring them to Remembrance at all
Occasions of this Nature, that they must drop from their Benches, and, as the
Holy Psalmist speaking of the Highest of them, Psalm. lxxxii. v. 6, 7. I have
said, Ye are Gods: And all of you the Sons of the most High, but ye shall die
like Men, and fall like one of the Princes. And since it is so, behave your
selves as these that live in a continual Prospect of Death, and not as such who
have nothing but Worldly Projects before their Eyes. Pray, do not either desire
these Stations, while you have them not; nor cajol your selves in them, while
you have them, merely upon these following Heads, with Worldly and Carnal Men,
as

1. To Deck your selves with Plumes of Glory to be admired of your Fellow
Creatures. Thus do the Vain affect the Heights of the World, and whom in this
place, I shall only call to Mind of that Advertisement of our Blessed Lord and
Savior, Matthew. vi. v. 2. Given with Respect unto the right Distribution of
Charity, When thou do thine Alms, do not sound a Trumpet before thee, as the
Hypocrites do in the Synagogues, and in the Streets, that they may have Glory
of Men. Verily, I say unto you, they have their Reward. And no other, indeed,
can I promise them in another World. But, upon the contrary, when they are by
Death, which hastes upon them, stripped of all their Plumes of Glory, and
covered with the Beggars Mantle of common Grass, they shall be brought to the
Blush before the Throne of God, (where they have nothing to cover the Vileness
and Nakedness of their Crimes and Faults) and from thence to the lowest and
loathsomest Pit of Miseries. Neither,

2. Use these your Stations Majori fastu incedere, to step with a loftier paw,
or to exercise an higher hand over the same thy fellow Creatures: For so do the
Proud affect their Stations. But remember, Thou must ly by the side of him,
whom sometime thou thought unworthy to stand before thee. And therefore Walk
softly, and Speak with an humble Voice, and remember the Regions of endless
Darkness, and the Place of remediless Torments, for the Vain and the Proud are
there. And,

3. Use not your Stations to this purpose, to act Revenge upon thine Enemy; by
so doing thou may prompt Revenge in him to thine own Dishonor, if he chance to
Survive thee, to set his Foot with Indignation upon thy Breast, while thou
lie upon thy Back in the Dust, and so may bring him with thy self into the
very same place of Torment. Nor,

Use your Stations for no other end, than to enhaunse a Naboth's Vineyard, or a
poor Man's Ewe-lamb. Thy Possessions shall not avail thee, when for an inch of
the Earth thou finds thou have lost a spann of Heaven, even all the Regions of
Blessedness. Nor shall thy Pleasures relish with thee in the midst of these
Flames thy Lusts have kindled upon thee. Remember how narrow thy Lodgings are
in the Grave, and how scant thy Provisions are among the Damned.

This is the first serious Thought I have offered thee, That Death shall make a
total and final Separation betwixt us and all our temporal Enjoyments. As from
all the Stations in which we are placed, so

II. From all the Natural Endowments in Body or Mind, with which we are
blessed. I speak of these as they consist in conjunction with one another in
this perishing and imperfect Life. For after Death the Souls of the Blessed
shall be infinitely better endued, when brought nearer unto God, and in
fellowship with the Spirits of just Men made perfect. Here we see but in part,
and know but in part; but but there we shall see as we are seen, and know as we
are known. So after the Resurrection, our Bodies shall have infinitely more
perfect powers, 1 Cor. xv. 42. Sown in Corruption, raised in Incorruption;
Sown in Weakness, raised in Power? Sown a Natural, raised a Spiritual body.

Only here as the powers of the body and faculty of the Soul exist in
Conjunction with one another in this perishing and imperfect state, at least in
so far as they ad upon temporal beeings and objects, they are quite broken of
and cut short, for which reason in like manner (as I have already said) we are
to take special care not to use them to unrighteous ends.

In the body, is it strength? Use it not to Oppress, but to rescue and defend
the Weak, as Moses would have done ( Exodus ii. 13.) betwixt the two contending
Israelites. Because Solomon's evil days haste upon thee. Eccles. xii. 3. When
the keepers of the house shall tremble and the strong Men shall bow themselves.

Is it Nimbleness and Agility? Use it not to be swift to shed innocent blood,
and to execute evil offices with wicked Men, but to be quick in the measures of
thy duty to God, thy Neighbor and thy Self. I will run the way of thy
Commandments (satih the Psalmist) when thou have enlarged my Heart. Because the
same evil days come, when the Almond Tree shall flourish and the Grasshopper
shall become a burden: And in the withered stalk of Old Age, thy joints shall
deny their Offices.

Is it Beauty? Use not this as a snare to thy own or thy neighbors Soul, to
become a Trap in the hand of the unclean Spirit; but further to set off the
virtues of the mind, as an Emerauld in pure Gold, or, as Solomon terms Words
fitly spoken, Prove. xxv. 11. As Aples of Gold in Pictures of Silver. Because
these evil days also come upon thee, when these that look out at the Windows
wax dim. The most sparkling Eyes shall become Dull and Lifeless: They shall
move no more in the Head, or entice into the works of Darkness, but in a little
their Imperial Seat shall become the Windows of a Lizard, or a loathsome Toad.
Such is the End and Exit that all the powers of the Body do make at Death, and
in the house of the Grave.

So likeways it is with all the natural endowments of the Mind as existing in
Conjunction with the Body, as I have already said, and as acting upon temporal
Beeings and Objects. Profound searches and nimble Wit and Facetious Humor, and
all evanish, Psalm. cxlvi. v. 4. When his Breath goes out, and he returns to
his Dust, in that very day his thoughts perish. So,

III. It is with all the great Acts and Conquests of a Man's Life. We have heard
of the House which Solomon built, 1 King. 10. v. 4, 5. And of the Ascent by
which he went up to the House of God admired, by the Southern Queen; for the
Temple it was ordered by a Greater Architect. We have heard of the great Babel
which Nebuchadnezzar built, and of the Tower and Cities of Nimrod: Of the
Conquests of Alexander, and of the great Achievements of all, both Roman
Emperors and Hero's. And whatever may be the fullest Extent of Men's Acquests,
or the most beautiful Ornaments of their Habitations, from all these does Death
make a total and final Separation, even from all the Enjoyments of this Life.
And which, is yet of far greater Importance.

The Second Serious Thought which I offer to you, That they are concluded under
an Irreversible State, and Condition of Felicity or Misery in another World. As
the Tree fallcth, so it lies, and as Death leaves, so Judgment finds.

This is the Import of all that Doctrine, which our Blessed Lord and Savior
delivered, when he was in the World, and of all these Parables, by which he
represented the State of another Life: As in that of the Sheep and the Goats,
Mat. 25. How plain are the Words? And he said to these upon his Right Hand,
Come ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
Foundation of the World. Again to those upon the left Hand; Depart from Me ye
Cursed, into Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And in
the Conclusion of all, and these went into Everlast Punishment, but the
Righteous into Life Eternal. So in that Parable of Dives and Lazarus, Luk 15.
There is made mention of a great Gulf betwixt the two, and declared to be
Impassible, so that the one cannot come to the other. Pray, for what is all
this? but to tell us of an Irreversible State, as of Bless and Glory to the
One, so of Misery and Sorrow to the Other, and that without End or Period.

And as this was the Doctrine of the Blessed Jesus, so of all his Servants the
Apostles in their time, and under the Trust put into their Hands. Rom: 2.6. Who
will render to every Man according to his Works; and so forward in the 7, 8, 9,
10, Verses. To them who by patient Continuance in Well-doing, seek for Glory
and Honor and Immortality, Eternal Life: But unto them that are Contentious
and do not obey the Truth, but obey Unrighteousness; Indignation and Wrath,
Tribulation and Anguish upon every Soul of Man that does Evil, of the Jew
first, and also of the Gentile: But Glory, Honor and Peace, etc.

And now if it be so, whence has arisen the new Doctrine of some of our late
Discanters upon the State of another Life, who quite Annihilat the Punishments
of the Wicked, to the great Encouragement and Increase of Atheism and
Irreligion? Nay, though there were no revealed Religion owned amongst Men, (as
these New and Dark Tapers would have it, who take the Boldness to set
themselves in the Light of the Sun) which is a Supposition so contrary to all
the Motives of Credibility, the History of our Saviors Life, Death,
Resurrection and Doctrine does give us, the plain Analogy and Proportion
betwixt Him and all the Types and Prophecies, which have been concerning him
throwout the whole Jewish Dispensation, the Confession of Enemies both Jews and
Heathens, and the Acknowledgment of Devils themselves; That a Man may alsewel
deny every thing that he has not seen, though never so convincingly
instructed: Which were a Practice so absurd, that the whole Learned World
should run to his Condemnation. Far less ground of Certainty do Men acquiesce
in and rest upon in other Matters which concern not Religion. No Body denies a
Hector and an Achilles, a Pompey and an Alexander: And it is much they deny not
a Julius Caesar, because an Augustus is made mention of in the New Testament.
But I say, supposing all this, (only absit Blasphemia) yet if we own the Being
of a God, which none amongst all the new sprung spawn of Deists or
Demi-Atheists has yet denied, then we must own Him, among all the rest of His
excellent Attributes, to be purely Just and Righteous. But how shall He be so,
if He have not reserved Rewards and Punishments for another Life? while in this
we see prosperous Villainy set before our Eyes throughout all the Ages of the
World, and the most excellent Virtues groaning under the heaviest Oppressions:
So that we may easily stumble upon the stumbling Block of the holy Prophet Ps.
73. passim throughout the same. I was envious at the Foolish when I saw the
Prosperity of the Wicked. They have no Bands in their Death, neither are they
in trouble as other Men. And further is he led unto the very brink of Atheism:
In vain have I cleansed my Heart and washed my hands in Iunocency; for I am
Plagued and Chastned every Morning. But immediately he pulls in the Roynes, amd
gives himself the Check from the 15. Verse. and downward. When I sought to know
this, it was too Painful for me. Until I went into the Sanctuary of God, then
understood I their end. And so forth. But in the 24 Verse. Thou shall guide me
with thy Counsel, and afterward receive me to Glory And in the 27 Verse. Lo,
they that are far from Thee, shall Parish. They, that is, All they: An
Indefinite being equivalent to an Universal. And since not all of them Perish,
but some of them Prosper in this Life, we must necessarly conclude, that
Punishments are reserved for them in an other.

Except you say in the next place with the forementioned Deists and Disciples
of Epicurus, that Almighty God exercises no Providence, nor regards what is
done upon the Earth. If so; what account shall we make of the Misgivings of the
best laid Designs and Projects amongst Men, and the success of those things,
that having less Counsel and Contrivance in them, pass commonly under the Name
of Accidents? What Accounts can we make of many Instances in Profane History?
If these disingenuous Creatures will not admit Sacred History to the benefit of
Common Credit and Repute, least they read their own Condemnation in the midst
of it? What Account can we make of the disappointment of Brennus and the Gauls
in their designed surprise of the Capitol of Rome by the keckling of the Geese
in Juno's Temple? What Account can we make of Sardanapalus his burning himself
with his own Women in a Pile of Wood, who loved so much to live in the Flames
of his Lusts? What Account shall we make of St. Augustine his Digression, (which
he thought not of) in a Sermon against the Manichees, by which Firmus a
Manichee was happily Converted? What shall we make at another time of his
mistaking his Way, by which he escaped the bloody Hands of the Donatists who
lay in wait for him?

Or, if they will carry any regatd only to the History of the Old Testiment so
anciently and closly asserted by the then Learned and most Celebrated Nation of
the Jews, and so firmly adhered to till this very Day: And what a Providence do
you think was the saving of Moses in the Ark of Bulrushes? Exodus ii. And what a
Providence that Pharaoh's Daughter should own and inhaunse him? and what a
Providence that his Mother was allowed to Nurse him? and what a Providence that
he should refuse, when he came to riper Years, to be called the Son of
Pharaoh's Daughter, that he might step up to a far more Glorious Trust, through
a Thicket of interwoven Dangers and Contradictions, to be the Deliverer of the
People of God? What a Providence was it that Joseph was sold into Egypt, and by
the way of a Prison was sent to Pharaoh's Court, for the safety of these very
Brethren that sold him? Nay, what a Providence, that David escaped out of the
City of Keilah, where he thought himself so secure; when afterward he was made
to understand the Keilits would certainly have delivered him up? Or if these be
interpreted Accidents still, and this be all the account that can be made of
the singular Providence, which every considering Person is able to find out in
the Tract of his own Life. Let us again mind these Athe^sts in Masquerad of the
essential and inseparable Attributs of that God whom they still own in His
Being. If that God be Omniscient and infinitely Wise, (which they must agree
to) He must needs see all the wicked Actions of ungodly Men. And then if He be
alse Just as He is Wise, He must alse necessarly Punish them, or then acquiesce
in a very great Disorder in the Economy of that World which He made.

But not to trouble the World more with that Sect of Men; let us only bid them
reflect upon the Quiet of their own Minds, when they do that which is Good: And
the Resentments of a natural Conscience upon perpetrated Wickedness. And
remember who said,

-- Hic murus abeneus esto
Nil conscire sibi --
And again

Integer vitae scelerisque purus
Non eget Mauri jaculis nec arcu etc.
Horat: But, if otherways

-- Cur hos.
Evasisse putes quos diri conscia facti
Men's habet attonitos -- etc. Inven:
Nay these bitter Resentments of a Natural Conscience, are but the Fore-runers
of that Worm that never dies in the Regions of the Damned. And indeed, as we
have already said, they pass into an irreversible and Irremediless State of
Misery. And if so,

In the next place, To what purpose are all the Soul Masses that are offered up
in the Church of Rome for such as pass into the State of the Dead, to shorten
or totally to remove their Sorrows; And that according to the offerings of
Charity, that are made for them, at least Sums of Money, which are cast into
the Treasury of the Church? If our Savior had meaned any such State of Life
from which Redemption could have been so Purchased, how should Dives have been
concluded under this irreversible Condition, while he lest such vast Substance
behind him, which might have been happily employed to so good purpose? But
Abraham insinuats no such thing in his Answers to Dives in the forecited
Parable.

And now, Christians, if these things be True, as I think, there is enough said
to evince the Truth of them; That Death makes a total and sinal Separation
betwixt us and all the Enjoyments of this World, and concludes us under an
irreversible* State and Condition in an other Life: How serious ought we to be
improving the Advertisement my Text gives us? It is the Custom of Children only
to throw away Pearls for Peeble-stones, and real Gold for the more glistering
Counterfeit; but Wise Men part with the lesser always for the greater
Advantages. And what Comparison is there betwixt Time and Eternity? betwixt the
pleasures of Sin, that last but for a Season, and the never ending Joys and
Felicities of another Life? Nay, betwixt the Lusts and Passions, that really
toss Men amidst the Diseases they bring upon their Bodies, and the resentments
they break up in their Minds and Spirits, and these equal and continual
Satisfactions of the Blessed in the presence of God, and the Societies of just
Men made Perfect?

And to this blessed State and Conditions, we are hopeful, ^ur truly Great,
our truly Noble, our truly Virtuous Friend is gone: Whose Dust lies now
before us, to be returned to that Dust of the Earth out of which it was taken.
Not do I say this out of any Complement to His Friends and Memory; but from
very considerable Evidences and Grounds of Charity. And therefore shall presume
to set before you, for your Christian Imitation, some of these excellent
Virtues which did most luculently shine forth in his Lise: And by which, there
was a considerable Obedience given to some of the most important of the Gospel
Precepts. And this I take to be the chief Design of Funeral Discourses upon our
dead Friends; to make their Light so shine before Men, that others seeing their
Good Works (at least hearing of them) may Glorify their Father which is in
Heaven. We find the Virtues of Dorcas much talked of, and the Product of her
Handy-labour exhibited to her Praise in the sight of the Apostle, who was
allowed to raise her from the Dead.

The first two I shall make mention of, are coupled together by our Blessed
Lord and Savior in the Eleventh Chap. of St. Matt. Gospel Verse 24. In a grand
Lesson he offers unto, and enjoins upon his Disciples; It is in these Words,
Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in Heart. And sufficiently to understand
the Value of these Graces, it will be fit to mention another Scripture Isa:
57.15. Thus says the high and lofty One that inhabiteth: Eternity, whose Name
is Holy, I dwell in the High and Holy Place; with him also that is of a Contrit
and Humble Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the Humble, and to revive the Heart
of the Contrit Ones. Where it is obviously observable, That these Virtue so
qualify the Soul as to make it a Habitation for God, and do make up a
considerable part of the Image of Christ. Nor do I say that these alone can
qualify Us for an Union with God; but that they are two of the most
considerable Virtues, in the exercise of which we may hope to attain to the
Blessedness of an other World.

For the Meekness of our Great and Noble Friend, it was such as that seldom he
was found to be Angry. For my self I have heard his Ears provoked, but never
saw his Countenance changed. And if we take in the Holy St. Augustine his
Description of the Meek, which is in these Words (Commenting upon our Saviors
Sermon upon the Mount) mites qui cedunt Improbitatibus and non resistunt in
malo. He knew to bear evil Offices done him in the World with as equal a Mind
as any amongst Men: Nor did he take pleasure to render Evil for Evil, but
rather in the Meekness of his Spirit to overcome Evil with Good. And without
either Fondness or Hyperbole, I may adventure to say that, if he came not up to
the Meekness of Moses in the exercise of this Virtue, he was one of the Meekest
Men of all the Societies where he happened to be found.

For his Humility it was as Signal as it was Singular. He ever shunned all
pompous Appearances and proud Competitions. He was assable and easy in his
Conversation, even with these of inferior Quality, and yet with his Equals
setting forth a Greatness suitable to his Birth, attended with all the possibly
attainable Effects that his Noble and Generous Education at Foreign Courts
could have been expected to produce. For his Table it was ever opulent and
honest, and upon all solemn and singular Occasions, second to none amongst his
Peers; but nothing Vain or savouring of Ostentation. In his Apparel, though he
never wanted by him the richest and finest, yet he looked upon himself as Great
in the Virtue of his Country, as in the Product of the Indies, and truly he
was so. Whatsoever he had to boast beyond his Neighbors, in considerable
acquired Parts, he had no itch to show them, but industriously kept them up,
except when the common Benefit of others did require it. Nor were his
Seize only in that which we call the Gentile-Learning, especially the
Classick Authors, whereof a Copy is extant in his Library, than which there can
be none found finer in the Nation; but in other Sciences, that are of greater
Use, and require closser and more serious Application. And I have been witness
to his modest and bashful Concealing of them, when he had good opportvnity to
set them forth to his Praise, making good that Description St. Bernard gives of
Humility, Gloriari non solet, contendere non consuevit, it does not Boast, it
uses not to Wrangle.

The next Virtue that shined in him, was his remarkable Justice, in observance
of that great Gospel Precept. Matthew. 7.12. All things whatsoever ye would that
Men should do to you, do you even so to them: For this is the Law and the
Prophets. This Virtue did he practice to a great Pitch, in all the Transactions
of his greater Affairs, and in lesser Concerns in his State and Family; still
Allowing, Approving, and Commending, upon all Occasions, all Actions of that
Nature. And was frequently heard to say that, however unjust any were to him,
he would be Just to all the World. And in some time his Singular Justice, in
most Signal Acts of it, may be made, appear.

To these add his Eminent Charity and Bounty to all that were in want, so
necessary a Virtue in these pinching times, and that likewise in obedience to a
very great Gospel Precept. Heb. 13.16. To do Good and Communicate forget not,
for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased. This is a Virtue that admits not
of such public Evidences, because we are forbid to sound a Trumpet before it.
And that is indeed the great difference betwixt true Charity and vain
Ostentation. Only this I can say, as upon certain Knowledge, that sometimes I
have been called to find out fit objects for his Charitable Distributions.

Now here is a short Catalogue of some of the most Excellent Christian Virtues,
which very eminently dwelt in him. And might we stay longer upon this to
highten the Morality of his Life, we might call in as Auxiliaries the Cardinal
Moral Virtues, admired, practiced and recommended by the Ancients, as founded
upon the Light of Nature. One of these is already touched, to wit, Justice; the
other three are Prudence, Temperance and Fortitude of Mind.

Of the first of these he was Blessed with very large Measures. And if we speak
the Language of the Moralists nullum Numen abest, si fit prudentia.

For his Temperance in eating, he could show himself Sober in the midst of
great Abundance. For the other part of it in Liquors; many times have I heard
him remonstrat against the use of them betwixt Meals: And if at any time the
corrupt Customs of the Age did impose upon his Gentle and condescending Spirit,
he bore both the trouble and Resentment of it to a Christian Measure.

For that of Fortitude of Mind, which is indeed the Stay and Anchor of all the
rest, he was a Phaenix for it; which cannot miss to be attested by all that had
the Honor to Converse with him. Never a more equal and immovable temper of
Spirit found ordinarily amongst Men upon the Earth. You ever found him, where
you left him, and what he was, he was unto the End.

So that Relative to all these, both Christian and Moral Virtues, he seemed to
inhaunce that Precept of the Blessed Apostle. 1 Cor. xv. 58. Be Steadfast and
Immovable.

Signal Evidences of this Fortitude of Mind did appear to a Wonder in the sight
of many Witnesses at his Death, his Noble and Honorable Friends whom he had
called to the Christian Office of attending him at that Season. There did he
seem so far to Triumph over Death, that the ordinar Temper of his Mind suffered
no imaginable Change; speakihg with all the Deliberation and Digestedness, a
very little time before his Death, as he used to do in the time of his Health;
with all Demonstration of Kindness, taking by the Hand all that were about him
committing them to God; Pardoning and praying for all his Enemies; and heartily
Blessing his Hopeful Son.

One Passage did very much instruct the Christian Magnaminity, als well as Moral
Fortitude of his Mind; when the Surprise of a very excuseable Passion made his
Dearest and truly Noble Consort break out in some kind and deep Resentments at
her Thoughts of his parting from the World: He thus expressed himself as with a
Challenge; Why! should not I resign my Soul unto God at His pleasure? All the
Greatness and Wealth, and numerous Circumstances of Temporal Felicity were not
so much as in his View. The seriousness of his Devotions, als well as the
Fortitude of his Mind, left no place for such low and mean Thoughts. To this
add a singular Instance of that orderly and digested Regard, which he paid to
God all that Night over, before it pleased God to call him out of this Mortal
Life. As often as Prayers were offered for him, (the returns of which were very
frequent) and that most Just and Righteous Conclusion of our Requests (in the
Words of our Blessed Lord and Saviors form of Prayer, which rectifies all our
undigested Thoughts) sounded in his Ears, he pulled off the thin Covering of
his Head (with which he was abundantly discovered when it was upon him) and
with the profundest Devotion joined in the Petitions thereof.

Here is a Chain of Virtues, (made mention of before you) hanging about this
Great and Noble Personage. Virtues have always their proper Luster where ever
they are to be found; but set forth a greater deal of Beauty and Glory, when
made Conspicuous by so high a Station, like Pallas or Minerva sitting upon a
Triumphal Arch, and commanding the profoundest Regard from all their Votaries,
passing by them upon the common Level of the Earth. O! What Obligations ly upon
Great Men to be Virtuous, provocking to Imitation the Multitudes of such as
stand upon a lower Ground, considerably reforming the World, and putting common
Debauchry and Dissolutness of Life to the Blush: And, by so doing, greatly
advancing the Kingdom of God.

But, to live this Digression, I say here is a Chain of Virtues, Meekness and
Humility, Twins of Paradise, fit for the Fellowship of Jesus, and meet to enter
into the Societies of the Blessed; without which, they cannot abide in these
Regions of true Felicity, more than Lucifer in Heaven, or Adam in the Garden of
Eden. Justice and Charity the two profitable Handmaids of Human Society,
Ministering to the present Exigences of his lower World; without which neither
could the Poor Subsist, nor the Rich be Happy. Again, here are Prudence,
Fortitude, and Temperance. The Philosophers have left us little to say of
these, only they Treat them likeways with respect to this Life, and the
constituting and carrying on of a Temporal Happiness and summum bonum under the
Sun. But in the other World, our Prudence shall be swallowed up of a perfected
Wisdom, whereof it is but a Spice or Sire: Fortitude shall lose it self in a
fearless and inconcussible State: And Temperance shall surrender its Dominion
to a total Exemption from the use of the Creature. To all these add Pure and
Holy Devotion, and this is a lasting Tribut payable to our Great Lord and
Maker, as in this World, so in that which is to come.

And now, with this Climax or Chain of Virtues, in their different Positions
and Gradations, in their proper Exercises and Operations, did our Great and
Noble Friend and Fellow Christian show himself forth in the World: Having them
so closs hanging about him, and knit unto him, that so long as he was capable
of Communion with Us, and the common Union of Soul and Body was allowed to
subsist, they shined forth with a Meridian Brightness. Only the last of these
(as most becoming his Business of appearing before God) seemed in the last
place totally to possess his Soul, and to show forth a great work of God upon
his Heart, making him to breath forth a total Abnegation and cheerful
Dereliction of all the enjoyments of this Life.

And in this manner did he spend his Time in the approaches of Death, as he had
done for a considerable time before, having, also received the Holy Eucharist
from the Hand of one who was Worthy, and had right to Celebrat and Administer
it. Thus did he in the strength of a firm Mind, and in the returns of continual
Devotions wait for the coming of his Lord, uttering these Words, and never any
after them; Into thy Hands, O Lord I ecommend my Spirit.

Thus, this Noble and Excellent Personage, with this upright Job. (whose
Patience in a most lively manner he transcribed, as in the course of his Life,
where he wanted not singular enough trials, so most Eminently in his last Fatal
Sickness) was brought unto Death and to the House Appointed for all Living.

What was Great and Noble about Him, either in the Extract or Alliances of his
Family (where there wants no Ground enough to Celebrat his Greatness) we cannot
so much consider the Subject of a Funeral, as the work of a Pencil. And
therefore recommends you to his Escutcheon, where you will find the Ensigns
Armorial of the Noblest and Greatest Families of this Nation.

Or, if there were any Faults or Failings in his Life, (As what Man lives and
finneth not?) that is as little my Business. What I have already said of Him,
seems to speak Him more than a Penitent even a Favorite of Heaven, and yet
boasting of no Seize; but in the wonted Humility of his Soul, throwing
himself entirely upon the Merits of the Blessed Jesus, the only true and solid
Plea of the best of Christians. And here we shall leave Him, where we hope to
be found in the day of our Appearrance.

And what now remains but the last Duty of his Noble and Honorable Blood
Friends? To commit his Body to the Dust, since his Spirit is returned to God
who gave it. And Blessed are the Dead which Die in the Lord, from henceforth
for they rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them.

FINIS.

