SCRINIA SACRA; Secrets of Empire, IN LETTERS Of illustrious Persons.

A SVPPLEMENT OF THE CABALA.

IN WHICH Business of the same Quality and Grandeur is contained: With many
famous Passages of the late Reigns of K. HENRY 8. Q. ELIZABETH, K. JAMES, and
K. CHARLES.

LONDON, Printed for G. Bedel, and T. Collins, and are to be sold at their Shop
at the Middle-Temple-gate in Fleet Street. 1654.

THE STATIONERS To the READER.
WE cannot suppose here that words will be needed to raise opinion; yet it may
be expected we should give some account of what we have done, and we will do
it. Not long agone we printed that excellent collection of Letters known by the
name of Cabala, which the world has seen and approved. Since, another volume of
Letters has come to our hands; a volume which may justly be called a second
Cabala, not unworthy to keep that company, a part which must add much to the
other, as illustrious in its titles, as considerable and as weighty for the
matter. In which, besides not a few noble monuments of the former years from
the deserting of the Roman Church by our great Henry downward, of his daughter
the most glorious virgin Queens life and government recorded, some of the same
great actions are begun, many continued; much of the policy, contrivances, and
workings of the same succeeding Princes and their Ministers, of the carriage of
the same things farther prosecuted, and more fully discovered. Like
sister-twins of lovely faces they have both apart their native sweetness, their
several worths and graces; yet they are not so fully taking, so perfectly
beautiful, as where they are drawn together in one frame. In the new more is
discovered, not only of the foreign affairs in Germany, Italy, France, Spain,
and other Countries whither the interest of the late Reigns engaged the
Sovereign actors; but of our home-Councels, Orders, and provisions both for the
Church and Commonwealth, enough to show the prudence, judgment; and foresight
of those who swayed in chief then, and to let us know now the Ages past have
had the honor to be governed by men, who did not permit all things to fortune;
who if they could not assure themselves of the events, yet they could command;
design, and understand: Their designs and counsels (which will be admirable to
some, but ridiculous to others) being ever directed and ruled by equity and
justice, ever aiming at honest ends, such as may venture abroad, such as will
appear fair and handsome in the light: whereas if we cast our eyes upon the Popes
in the same leafs, we shall find nothing but combustions, nothing but fire,
brimstone and alarums to war and blood. If upon the French, nothing but
inhumane cruelty and violence upon the conscience too. If upon the Imperialists
and Spaniards, nothing but artifice, nothing but cunning perfidiousness; all
their plots and consultations, their cheating Treaties, tending merely to the
advancement of the Austrian house, without any respect to piety and justice,
faith or honor. A taste of which unworthiness we find in this second Part,
where the Spanish Match is first moved by the Duke of Lerma, the grand Minion
in Philip the 3. his reign; this Duke damns himself in oaths for his sincerity
and reality toward the Match, which Olivarez, the present Kings Favorite, tells
his Master here was never intended. It would be too tedious but to touch in
passing by, upon the generals in these Letters; upon the calamities and
miseries of the Palatine Germans, of the Hugonots, the siege and taking in of
Rochel, etc. Heresy and Superstition every where triumphing over truth. To
speak of the spirit and worthiness of our Hero's were impossible; we might cull
out some Letters here, of which (were there no more) might be said,

-- An hand or eye
By Hyliard drawn, is worth a History.
Of these Letters we may safely be believed, though they come out thus late,
and are so little known, their merit will easily weigh down the age and fame of
those which have gone before.

Temple-Gate, May 1. 1654. G. B. T. C.


ERRATA.
Page 13. movendis for moventib. p. 16. l. 13. dele Statue of usus. l. 17. d.
port-corn. p. 21. d. a few days before my departure. p. 20. l. 22. d. opera. p.
33. l. 22. put in not. p. 50. taglaes, r. tailles. 61. tain, r. retein. 75.
Quadruials, r. Quadrivials. 77. im, r. in. 80. r. cartel. 81. Lo, r. Lee. 83.
nos, r. eos. p. 85. l. 14. put in no less. l. 17. Claudius, r. Clodius. 88.
temeriti, r. emeriti. 93. Fintons, r. Fenton. 98. Almonte, r. Ayamonte. 105. d.
nimis. l. 13. vel quod in villa villae and in incolarum, etc. l. 17. dislata,
r. dilatata, tenenda, r. tenendae. aucupandam, r. aucupanda, obstrictam and
reverentiam, r. obstricta est reverentia. vetera, r. veteri. 124. Bristol, r.
Digby. 130. l. ult. add requires. 145. r. ewig and einig. 15^. Inijosa, r.
Ynoyosa. p. 202. d. Mook or. 229. sacrum and sacrum, r. sacrum and saxum.
eadem, r. iter. 241. solely, r. fully.

A Table of the Letters contained in this COLLECTION.
KIng Henry 8. to the Clergy of the Province of York, An. 1533. touching his
title of Supreme head of the Church of England. P. 1 Q. Anne of Bullen to K.
Henry from the Tower, May 6. 1536. P. 9 Q. Elizabeth's Letter to the Lady Norris
upon the death of the son. P. 10 Thomas Duke of Norfolk to Queen Elizabeth. P.
11 A Defiance sent by the Grand-Seignieur to Maximilian the second. P. 12 Sir
John Perrots Commission for Lord Deputy of Ireland. P. 13 The whole Contents of
the Commission for the Lord Deputy. ibid. The Queens Warrant to the Lords etc.
of Ireland for ministering the Oath, and delivery of the sword to him, Jan. 31.
1583. P. 14 Another for his Entertainment there. P. 15 The Queens Instructions
to him. ibid. Sir John Perrot to the Lords of the Council, Jan. 31. 1583. P. 16
Earl of Desmond to the Earl of Ormond, June 5. 1583. P. 18 Sir Henry Wallop to
the Queen, Aug. 12. 1583. P. 19 The Earl of Essex to Mir. Secretary Davison. P.
20 Again to Secretary Davison. P. 21 Again to Secretary Davison, July 11. 1589.
P. 22 Again to Secretary Davison, ibid. E. of Essex to K. James concerning
Secretary Davison, April 18. 1587. P. 23 Earl of Essex to Mr. Secretary
Davison. P. 24 Again to Secretary Davison, upon the death of Secr. Walsingham.
P. 25 Earl of Essex to the Queen. ibid. Again to the Queen. P. 26 Sir Tho.
Egerton L. Chancellor to the Earl of Essex. P. 27 The Earls Answer. P. 29 Two
Letters framed, one as from Mr. Anthony Bacon to the Earl of Essex, to other as
the Earls answer. P. 31. and 34 Lord Mountjoy to the Earl of Essex. P. 35 Sir
Robert Cecil, after Earl of Salisbury, to the Lord Burleigh his father, from
France, Feb. 26. 1597: P. 36 Sir Francis Walsingham Secr. to Mr. Critoy
Secretary of France. P. 38 Sir Fr. Bacon to the Earl of Essex, when Sir To.
Cecil was in France. P. 42 Sir Fr. Bacon to the Earl of Essex concerning the
Earl of Tyrone. P. 43 Another to the Earl before his going to Ireland. P. 45
Another to him after his enlargement. P. 48 Sir Fr. Bacon to Sir To. Cecil,
after defeat of the Spaniards in Ireland. ibi Considerations touching the
Queens service in Ireland. P. 49 Sir Fr. Bacon to the L. Treasurer, touching
his Speech in Parliament. P. 54 Sir Francis Bacon to the Earl of Northampton.
P. 55 To the Lord Kinloss, upon the entrance of King James. P. 56 To King
James. ibid. To the Earl of Northumberland, concerning a Proclamation upon the
Kings entry. P. 58 To the Earl of Southampton. ibid. To the Earl of
Northumberland. P. 58 To Sir Edward Coke, expostulatory. P. 60 To the same
after L. Chief Justice, and in disgrace. ibid. To Sir Vincent Skinner,
expostulatory. P. 66 Sir Francis Bacon to the Lord Chancellor. P. 71 To King
James. P. 72 Mr. Edmond Andersons Letter to Sir Francis Bacon. P. 73 Sir Thomas
Bodeley to Sir Francis Bacon, upon his new Philosophy. P. 74 Mr. George Brook
to a Lady in Court. P. 79 To his Wife. P. 80 King James to the Major and
Aldermen of London, after he was proclaimed, Mar. 28. 1603. P. 81 The Roman
Catholics Petition to King James for Toleration. P. 82 Sir Walter Raleigh to
King James before his Trial. P. 85 Sir Walter Raleigh to Sir Robert Car, after
Earl of Somerset. P. 86 Sir Tho Egerton Chancellor, after L. Ellesmere, to the
E. of Essex. P. 87 Lord Chancellor Ellesmere to King James. ibid. Again to the
same King. P. 88 Sir Francis Norris to King James. P. 89 A Patent for the
Admiralty of Ireland. P. 90 A Commission to diverse Lords, etc. for the delivery
of Flushing, Brill, etc. May 14. Jac. 14. P. 92 A Commission to Visc. Lisle
Governor, to deliver them up, May 22. J. 14. P. 93 Countess of Nottingham to
the Danish Ambassador. P. 94 Sir Charles Cornwallis Lieger in Spain, to the
Spanish King, July 23. 1608. ibid. Again to the Spanish King, Jan. 16. 1608. P.
98 Again to the Spanish King, P. 100 and 101 K James to the University of
Cambridge, Mar. 14. 1616. P. 105 Mr. Ruthen to the Earl of Northumberland, P.
106 Sir Henry Yelvertons submission in the Star Chamber, P. 107 Ferdinand the
second, Emperor, to the Catholic King, P. 109 Ferdinand Emperor to Don
Balthazar de Zuniga, October. 15. 1621. P. 110 K. James to Ferdinand Emp.
concerning the Palatinate, Nov. 12. 1621. P. 113 His Imperial Majesty to King
James, Jan. 14. 1621. P. 116 Earl of Bristol to King James, P. 117 Ab ignoto to
Conde Gondomar, concerning the death of Philip 3. P. 125 K. James to the Earl
of Bristol Ambassador in Spain, October. 3. 1622. P. 127 Earl of Bristol to King
James, October. 21. 1622. P. 129 K. Philip the third of Spain to the Conde of
Olivarez, P. 133 Conde Olivarez his answer to the King, ibid. K. James to the
Earl of Bristol, October. 8. 1623 P. 136 Earl of Bristol in answer to King James,
October. 9. 1623. P. 137 Again to King James, November. 1. 1623. P. 141 King James
to the Palsgrave, P. 143 The Palsgraves answer to King James, P. 145 Ab Ignoto
from Madrid, P. 151 A Memorial to the King of Spain, by Sir Walter Ashton
Ambassador in Spain, Aug. 29. 1624. P. 152 The Petition of Francis Philips to
King James, for the release of Sir Robert Philips prisoner in the Tower, P. 155
Oliver St. John to the Major of Marlborough, against the Benevolence. P. 159
The Justices of Peace in Com. Devon to the Lords of the Council. P. 182 The
Archbishop of Canterbury to the Bishops, concerning K. James his Directions for
Preachers, with the Directions, Aug. 14. 1622. P. 183 King James his
Instructions to the Archbishop of Canterbury, concerning Orders to be observed
by Bishops in their Dioceses, 1622. P. 187 Bishop of Winchester to his
Archdeacon to the same effect, P. 189 The Bishop of Lincoln Lord Keeper, to the
Bishop of London concerning Preaching and Catechizing. P. 190 Instructions for
the Ministers and Churchwardens of London, P. 193 Mons. Bevayr Chancellor of
France, discharged to the French King. ibid. Mons. Richere forced, recants his
opinions against the Papal supremacy over Kings, P. 196 Car. Richlieu to the
Roman Catholics of Great Britain, Aug. 25. 1624. P. 197 Mons. Balsac to the
Cardinal de la Valette, ibid. Mons. Balsac to the King Louis, P. 200 Mons.
Toyrax to the Duke of Buckingham, P. 201 Ab ignoto, concerning the estate of
Rochel after the surrender, P. 202 The Protestants of France to Charles King of
Great Britain, P. 204 The Duke of Rohan to his Majesty of Great Britain, Mar.
12. 1628. P. 208 Pope Greg. 15. to the Inquisitor-general of Spain, April 19.
1623. P. 210 Pope Urban to Lewis the 13. Aug. 4. 1629. P. 211 The Duke of
Buckingham, Chancellor Elect, to the University of Cambridge, June 5. 1626. P.
213 King Charles to the University of Cambridge, in approbation of their
election, June 6. 1626. P. 214 The University of Cambridge its answer to the
Duke, June 6. 1626. P. 215 The University of Cambridge its answer to the King,
P. 216 A Privy Seal for transporting of Horse, June 6. 1624. P. 217 The
University of Cambridge to the Duke, P. 218 The Dukes answer, P. 219 The
Vice Chancellor of Cambridge to the King upon the Dukes death, ib. King Charles
to the University of Cambridge for a new election, P. 220 The Earl of Holland
to the University, P. 221 The Vnimersity of Cambridge to the King, P. 222 An
Order made at Whitehall betwixt the University and Town of Cambridge, December.
4. 1629. P. 223 The University of Cambridge to the Archbishop of York, P. 224
The University of Cambridge to the Earl of Manchester, P. 225 The University of
Cambridge to Sir Humphrey May, P. 226 Instructions by K. Charles to the
Vicechancellor and Heads of Cambridge for Government, etc. Mar. 4. 1629. P. 127
The University of Cambridge to the Lord chief Justice Richardson, P. 228 The
Bishop of Exeter to the Lower House of Parliament, P. 229 King Charles to the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, P. 230 A Councel-Table Order against hearing Mass
at Ambassadors houses, March 10. 1629. P. 232 The King of Spain to Pope Urban,
Sept. 11. 1629. P. 234 The Council of Ireland to King Charles, in defense of the
Lord Deputy Faulkland, Aug. 28. 1629. P. 235 Ab ignoto, Of the affairs of
Spain, France, and Italy, June 5. 1629. P. 239 The Lords of the Council of
England, to the Lords of the Council of Ireland, Jan. 31. 1629. P. 240 The Lord
Faulklands Petition to the King, P. 242 The Duke of Modena to the Duke of
Savoy, July 30. 1629. P. 243 Sir Kenelm Digby to Sir Edward Stradling, P. 244
Mr. Gargrave to the Lord Davers, P. 253 A Declaration of Ferdinand Infanta of
Spain, July 5. 1636. P. 257
FINIS.
King HENRY the 8. to the Clergy of the Province of York, An. 1533. Touching
his Title of Supreme Head of the Church of England.
RIght Reverend Father in God, Right trusty and welbeloved, We greet you well,
and have received your Letters dated at York the 6. of May, containing a long
discourse of your mind and opinion concerning such words as has passed the
Clergy of the Province of Canterbury in the Proeme of their Grant made unto
us, the like whereof should now pass in that Province. Albeit ye interlace such
words of submission of your Judgment, and discharge of your duty toward us
with humble fashion and behavior, as we cannot conceive displeasure nor be
miscontent with you, considering what you have said to us in times past in
other matters, and what ye confess in your Letters your self to have heard and
known, noting also the effect of the same; We cannot but marvail at sundry
points and Articles, which we shall open unto you, as hereafter follows.

First, ye have heard (as ye say ye have) the said words to have passed in the
Convocation of Canterbury, where were present so many learned in Divinity and
Law, as the Bishops of Rochester, London, S. Assaph. Abbots of Hyde, S.
Bennets, and many other; and in the Law the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
Bishop of Bath; and in the Lower House of the Clergy so many notable and great
Clerks, whose persons and learning you know well enough. Why do ye not in this
case with your self as you willed us in our great matter, conform your
conscience to the conscience and opinion of a great number? Such was your
advice to us in the same (our great matter) which now we perceive ye take for
no sure counsel; for ye ^earch the grounds, not regarding their sayings.
Nevertheless forasmuch as ye examine their grounds, causes and reasons, in
doing whereof ye seem rather to seek and examine that thing which might
disprove their doings, then that which might maintain the same, We shall answer
you briefly without long discourse to the chief points of your said Letters:
wherein taking for a ground, that words were ordained to signify things, and
cannot therefore by sinister interpretation alter the truth of them, but only
in the wits of perverse persons that would blind or color the same, by reason
whereof to good men they signify that they mean only doing their office, and
to men of worse sort they serve for maintenance of such meaning as they would
imagine: so in using words we ought only to regard and consider the expression
of the truth in convenient speech and sentences, without overmuch scruple of
super-perverse interpretations, as the malice of men may excogitate: wherein
both overmuch negligence is not to be commended, and too much diligence is not
only by daily experience in men's writings and laws showed frustrate and void;
insomuch as nothing can be so clearly and plainly written, spoken and ordered,
but that subtle wit has been able to subvert the same; but also the Spirit of
God, which in his Scripture taught us the contrary, as in the places which ye
bring in and rehearse: -- if the Holy Ghost had had regard to that which might
have been perversely construed of these words, Pater major me est; and the
other, Ego and Pater unum sumus* there should have been added to the first
humanitas, to the second substantia. And wherefore does the Scripture call
Christ primogenitum? whereupon, and the Adverb donec, was maintained the error
contra perpetuam virginitatem Mariae. Why have we in the Church S. Paul's
Epistle, which S. Peter writes to have been the occasion of errors? Why did
Christ speak of many words, which the Jews drew ad calumniam, and yet reformed
them not? as when he said, Solvam Templum hoc, etc. meaning of his body, where
Templum with them had another signification; And such other like? There is none
other cause but this, Omnia quae scripta sunt, ad nostram doctrinam scripta
sunt. And by that Learning we ought to apply and draw words to the truth, and
so to understand them as they may signify truth, and not so to wrest them as
they should maintain a lie. For otherwise as Heretics have done with the holy
Scripture, so shall all men do with familiar speech; and if all things shall be
brought into familiar disputation, he that shall call us Supremum and unicum
Dominum, by that means, and as goes your argument, might be reproved: For
Christ is indeed unicus Dominus and Supremus, as we confess him in the Church
daily; and now it is in opinion that Sancti be not Mediators: The contrary
whereof ye affirm in your Letters, because of the Text of S. Paul, Vnus est
Mediator Deum and hominum. And after that manner of reason which ye use in the
entry, if any man should say, This Land is mine own, and none has right in it
but I; he might be reproved by the Psalm, Domini est terra: For why should a
man call terram aliquam only his, whereof God is the chief Lord and Owner? Why
is it admitted in familiar speech to call a man dead, of whom the soul which is
the chief and best part yet lives? How is it that we say this man or that man
to be founder of this Church, seeing that in one respect God is only founder?
We say likewise that he is a good man to the Church, a special benefactor of
the Church: and that the Church is fallen down, when the stones be fallen down,
the people preserved and living. And in all this manner of speech when we hear
them, it is not accustomed ne used to do as ye do, that is to say, to draw the
word Church to that sentence wherein the speech may be a lie, but to take it in
that wherein it signifies truth. Which accustomed manner if ye had followed,
you should not have needed to have labored so much in the declaration of the
word Ecclesia, in that signification wherein it is most rarely taken, and
cannot without maintenance of too manifest a lie be applied to any man. For
taking Ecclesia in that sense ye take it, S. Paul wrote amiss writing to the
Corinthians, saying, Ecclesia Dei quae est Corinthi: for by your definition,
non circumscribitur loco Ecclesia. In the Gospel where Christ said Dic
Ecclesiae, must needs have another interpretation and definition then ye make
de Ecclesia in your said Letters, or else it were hard to make complaint to all
Christendom, as the case in the Gospel requires. Sed est candidi pectoris
verba veritati accommodare, ut ipsam refer quod eorum officium est non
corrumpere videantur. Furthermore the Lawiers that write how Ecclesia fallit
and fallitur, what blasphemy do they affirm, if that definition should be given
to Ecclesia which you write in your Letters, wherein albeit ye write the truth
for so far, yet for as much as ye draw that to the words spoken of us to the
reprobation of them, yet ye show your selves contrary to the teaching of
Scripture, rather inclined by applying a diverse definition to make that a lie
which is truly spoken, then genuino sensu addita and candida interpretatione to
verify the same. It were nimis absurdum, Us to be called Caput Ecclesiae
representans corpus Christi mysticum, and Ecclesiae quae sine ruga est and
macula quam Christus sibi Sponsam elegit, illius partem vel oblatam accipere
vel arrogare. And therefore albeit Ecclesia is spoken of in these words,
touched in the Proeme, yet there is added, Et Cleri Anglicani: which words
conjoined restrains by way of interpretation the word Ecclesiam, and is as
much to say as the Church, that is to say the Clergy of England. Which manner
of speaking in the Law ye have professed ye many times find, and likewise in
many other places.

But proceeding in your said Letter, ye have showed Christ to be Caput
Ecclesiae, ye go about to show how he divided his power in earth after the
distinction temporalium and spiritualium, whereof the one ye say he committed
to Princes, the other Sacerdotibus; for Princes, ye alleadg Texts which shows
and proves obedience due to Princes of all men without distinction, be he
Priest, Clerk, Bishop, or Layman, who make together the Church: and albeit
your own words make mention of temporal things, wherein ye say they should be
obeyed; yet the Texts of Scripture which ye alleadg having the general words
obedite and subditi estote contain no such words, whereby spiritual things
should be excluded; but whatsoever appertains to the tranquillity of man's life
is of necessity included, as the words plainly import, as ye also confess;
wherefore Gladium portat Prince ps not only against them that break his
Commandment and Laws, but against him also that in any wise breaks Gods Law;
For we may not more regard our Law then God, ne punish the breach of our Laws,
and leave the transgressor of Gods Laws unreformed: so as all spiritual things
by reason whereof may arise bodily trouble and inquietation, be necessarily
included in Princes Power, and so proves the Text of Scripture by you
alleged: and also the Doctors by you brought in, confirm the same. After that
ye intend to prove, which no man will deny, the ministration of spiritual
things to have been by Christ committed to Priests to Preach and minister the
Sacraments, them to be as Phisicians to men's souls; but in these Scriptures
neither by spiritual things so far extended, as under color of that vocabule
be now adays, ne it proves not that their office being never so excellent,
yet their persons, acts and deeds, should not be under the power of their
Prince by God assigned, whom they should knowledge as their Head; the excellency
of the matter of the Office does not always in all points extol the dignity
of the Minister. Christ who did most perfectly use the Office of a Priest, and
nihil aliud quam vere curavit animas, gainsaid not the authority of Pilate upon
that ground; and St. Paul executing the Office of a Priest, said, ad tribunal
Caesaris sto, ubi me judicari oportet: And commanded likewise indistinctly all
others to obey Princes, and yet unto those Priests being as members executing
that Office, Princes do honor, for so is Gods pleasure and commandment;
wherefore howsoever ye take the words in the proheme, we indeed do show and
declare that Priests and Bishops preaching the word of God, ministering the
Sacraments according to Christ's Law, and refreshing our people with ghostly and
spiritual food, we not only succor and defend them for tranquillity of their
life, but also with our presence, and otherwise do honor them as the case
requires, for so is Gods pleasure: Like as the husband, although he be head of
the wife, yet says S. Paul, Non habet vir potestatem sui corp^ris, sed mulier,
and so is in that respect under her: And having our Mother in our Realm, by the
commandment of God we shall honor her, and yet she for respect of our dignity
shall honor us by Gods commandment likewise: And the Minister is not always
the better man, sed cui ministratur; the Physician is not better then the
Prince, because he can do that the Prince cannot, viz. curare morbum. In
consecration of Archbishops, do not Bishops give more dignity by their
ministration then they have themselves? The Doctors ye bring in, taking for
their Theme to extol Priesthood, prefer it to the dignity of a Prince; after
which manner of reasoning it may be called dignius imperare affectibus quam
populis, and so every good man in consideration of every dignity to excel a
King not living so perfectly as he does. And why is a Bishop better then a
Priest, seeing and considering in the matter of their office Episcopus etiam si
administret plura, non tamen administrat majora. Emperors and Princes obey
Bishops and Priests as doers of the message of Christ, and his Ambassadors for
that purpose: which done, statim fiunt privati, and in order and quietness of
living knowledge Princes as head. For what meant Justinian the Emperor to make
Laws de Episcopis and Clericis, and such other spiritual matters, if he he had
not been persuaded Illi esse curam Ecclesiae a Deo mandatam? This is true, that
Princes be filii Ecclesiae, that is to say, illius Ecclesiae which ye define:
wherewith it may agree that they be nevertheless Suprema Capita of the
Congregations of Christian men in their Countries; like as in smaller number of
Christian men, Non est absurdum vocare Superiores capita, as they be called
indeed, and may be called Primi and Supremi, in respect of those Countries. And
why else does the Pope suffer any other besides himself to be called
Archbishop, seeing that he himself indeed challenges to be Princeps
Apostolorum and Episcoporum in Peter's stead, which the name of an Archbishop
utterly denies. But by addition of the Country they save the sense: whereunto
in us to be called Ecclesiae Anglicanae ye at the last agree, so that there
were added in temporalibus; which addition were superfluous, considering that
men being here themselves earthly and temporal, cannot be head and Governor to
things eternal, nor yet spiritual, taking that word spiritual not as the common
speech abuses it, but as it signifies indeed: For, quae spiritu aguntur,
nulla lege estr^^guntur, as the Scripture says, Quae Spiritu Dei aguntur
libera sunt. And if ye take Spiritualibus for Spiritual men, that is to say,
Priests, Clerks, their good acts and deeds worldly, in all this both we and all
other Princes be at this day chief and heads, after whose ordinance either in
general or in particular they be ordered and governed. For, leaving old
stories, and considering the state of the world in our time, is there any
Convocation where Laws be made for the order of our Clergy, but such as by our
authority is assembled? And why should not we say as Justinian said, Omnia
nostra facimus quibus a nobis impartitur aucthoritas? Is any Bishop made but he
submits himself to us, and acknowledges himself as Bishop to be our
subject? Do not we give our License and assent to the election of Abbots? And
this is concerning the Persons and Laws spiritual. As touching their goods, it
is in all men's opinions learned in our Laws, Extra controversiam, that debate
and controversy of them appertains to our decision and Order. And as for the
living of the Clergy, some notable offenses we reserve to our correction, some
we remit by our sufferance to the Judges of the Clergy; as murder, felony and
treason, and such like enormities we reserve to our examination; other crimes
we leave to be ordered by the Clergy; not because we may not intermeddle with
them, for there is no doubt but as well might we punish adultery and insolence
in Priests, as Emperors have done, and other Princes ate this day do; which ye
know well enough; so as in all those Articles concerning the persons of
Priests, their Laws, their Acts and order of living, forasmuch as they be
indeed all temporal, and concerning this present life only, in those we (as we
be called) be indeed in this Realm Caput; and because there is no man above us
here, be indeed supremum Caput. As to spiritual things, meaning by them the
sacraments, being by God ordained as instruments of efficacy and strength,
whereby grace is of his infinite goodness conferred upon his people; forasmuch
as they be no worldly nor temporal things, they have no worldly nor temporal
head but only Christ that did institute them, by whose ordinance they be
ministered here by mortal men, elect, chosen and ordered as God has willed for
that purpose, who be the Clergy; who for the time they do that, and in that
respect tanquam ministri versantur in his quae hominum potestati non
subjiciuntur, in quibus si male versantur sine scandalo Deum ultorem habent si
cum scandalo hominum cognitio and vindicta est. Wherein, as is before said,
either the Prince is chief doer, r his authority proceeded to the execution of
the same; as when by sufferance or privilege the Prelates intromit themselves
therein; wherefore in that which is derived from the Prince at the beginning,
why should any obstacle or scruple be to call him Head from whom that is
derived? Such things as although they be amongst men, yet they be indeed
Divina, quoniam supra nos sunt nihil ad nos. -- And being called Head of all we
be not in deed nor in name to him that would sincerely understand it head of
such things being not spiritual as they be not temporal, and yet to those
words spoken of us adevitandam illam calumniam, there is added quantum per
legem Christi licet; for interpretation of which Parenthesis your similitude
added of homo immortalis est quantum per naturae legem licet, is nothing like;
for naturae lex is not immortality, as is lex Christi to superiority: for lex
naturae ne speaks, ne can mean of any immortality at all, considering that
the law of Nature ordains mortality in all things; but Christ's law speaks
of superiority, admits superiority, shows also and declares obediendum
esse Principibus, as ye do allege. Wherefore if the law of God permits
superiority, and commands obedience: to examine and measure modum obedientiae
and superioritatis, there can to no other thing so good a relation be made. For
as ye understand the Scripture, though it say nay to part, it says not nay to
the whole, whereas nature denies utterly all immortality; and so though in
speaking of immortality of man it were superfluous to say quantum per naturae
legem licet; yet is not so speaking de superioritate and modo Principatus,
referring the certain limits to the law or Christi, ad cujus normam quicquid
quadrat planum and rectum est, quicquid non quadrat pravum and iniquum. And as
touching the doubt and difficulty you make to give a single answer yea or no,
for that the question propounded contains two things, whereof the one is true
the other false, as ye say, meaning as ye write, that in temporalibus we be
Caput, and in spiritualibus we be not. It seems that neither your example
agrees in similitude with that ye bring it in for, nor is there in learning
or common speech used the scrupulosity in answers ye write of. Truth it is,
that the question in plain words contains two parts expressly, whereof the
one is true, the other false; our yea or nay cannot be answered* for there
should appear a manifest lie, which Gods law detesteth, and naturally is
abhorred: as if it should be asked Us, if We were King of England and of
Denmark our nay or yea should not suffice: But it is far otherwise both in
matters of Learning and common speech, where the words in the question may by
diverse interpretations or relations contain two things, and yet in expression
contain but one: As if a man should ask Us, An filius and pater unum sunt? We
would not doubt to answer and say, Yea, as the Scripture says, for it is truly
answered, and to make a lie is but Sophistication, drawing the word unum to
person, wherein it is a lie. If one were asked the question, Whether the man
and wife were one, he might boldly and truly say, Yea, and yet it is
distinctione corporum naturalium a lie, and to the question, Vtrum Ecclesiam
constet ex bonis and malis; Yea, and yet as ye define Ecclesiam it it is a
lie. The reason of diversity is this, for that it is not supposed men would
abuse words, but apply them to signify truth, and not to signify a lie,
wherein the Arrians offending, took occasion of heresies.

For that which is in Scripture written is a most certain truth; and as it is
there written, so and no otherwise would Christ have answered, if the question
had been asked An Pater esset major illo? he would have said yea, as it is
written. And if the Arrians would have taken for a truth that of him that is
truth, and speaks truth, and from whom proceeds but truth, they would have
brought a distinction with them to set forth truly, and not disprove that it
was truly written, by sophistication of the word. When S. James wrote, Fides
sine operibus mortua est, he wrote truth; and so did S. Paul, Quod fides
justificat absque operibus legis: which it could not do, if it were mortua.
Either of these made a single asseveration of a sentence, by interpretation
containing two; trusting that the Reader would pio animo so understand them, as
their sayings might, as they do indeed, agree with truth. It is never to be
thought men will willingly and without shame lie; And therefore the sense, if
any may be gathered true, or like to be true, is to be taken, and not that
which is a lie. And when we write to the Pope Sanctissimo, we mean not holier
then S. Peter, though it sound so; and he that in our Letters should object
that, should be thought ridiculous. He that should say he rode beyond the sea,
were not conveniently interrupted in his tale by him that would object sailing
upon the sea, where he could not ride at all. And rather then men would note a
lie when they know what is meant, they will sooner by allegory or methaphor
draw the word to the truth, then by cavillation of the word note a lie. Has
not the Pope been called Caput Ecclesiae? and who has put any addition unto
it? Have not men said that the Pope may dispense cum Jure divino, and yet in a
part Juris divini, viz. moralis and naturalis, the same men would say he might
not dispense: wherefore if in all other matters it was never thought
inconvenient to speak absolutely the truth without distinction, why should
there be more scruple in our case? The truth cannot be changed by words: that
we be, as Gods law suffers us to be, whereunto we do and must conform our
selves. And if ye understand, as ye ought to understand Temporalibus for the
passing over this life in quietness, ye at last descend to agree to that which
in the former part of your Letters you intend to impugn; and sticking to that,
it were most improperly spoken to say, We be illus Ecclesiae Caput in
temporalibus, which has not temporalia.

Queen Anne of Bullen to King Henry from the Tower, May 6. 1536.
SIR, YOur Graces displeasure and my imprisonment are things so strange unto
me, as what to write or what to excuse I am altogether ignorant. Whereas you
send unto me (willing me to confess a truth, and so to obtain your favor) by
such a one whom you know to be my ancient professed enemy, I no sooner received
this message, then I rightly conceived your menning: And if, as you say,
confessing a truth indeed may procure my safety, I shall with all willingness
and duty perform your command; but let not your Grace ever imagine that your
poor wife will ever be brought to acknowledge a fault, where not so much as a
thought ever proceeded: And to speak a truth, never Prince had wife more loyal
in all duty and in all true affection, then you have ever found in Anne Bullen:
with which name and place I could willingly have contented my self, if God and
your Graces pleasure had so been pleased. Neither did I at any time forget my
self in my exaltation, or received Queenship, but that I always looked for such
an alteration as now I find, the ground of my preferment being on no surer
foundation then your Graces fancy, the least alteration whereof I knew was fit
and sufficient to draw that fancy to some other subject.

You have chosen me from a low estate to be your Queen and Companion, far
beyond my desert or desire. If then you find me worthy of such honor, Good
your Grace let not any light fancy or bad council of my Enemies withdraw your
Princely favor from me; neither let that stain, that unworthy stain of a
disloyal heart toward your good Grace ever cast so foul a blot on your most
dutiful wife, and the Infant-Princess your daughter. Try me, good King, but let
me have a lawful trial, and let not my sworn enemies sit as my accusers and
Judges: yea let me receive an open Trial, for my truths shall fear no open
shames: then shall you see either my innocence cleared, your suspicion and
conscience satisfied, the ignominy and slander of the world stopped, or my
guilt openly declared. So that whatsoever God or you may determine of me, your
Grace may be freed from an open censure; and my offense being so lawfully
proved, your Grace is at liberty both before God and man, not only to execute
worthy punishment on me as an unfaithful wife, but to follow your affection
already settled on that party for whose sake I am now as I am, whose name I
could some while since have pointed to, your Grace being not ignorant of my
suspicion therein. But if you have already determined of me, and that not only
my death, but an infamous slander must bring you the enjoying of a desired
happiness, then I desire of God that he will pardon your great sin herein, and
likewise my enemies the instruments thereof, and that he will not call you to a
strict account for your unprincely and cruel usage of me at his general
Judgment Seat, where both you and my self must both shortly appear, and in
whose just judgment I doubt not, whatsoever the world may think of me, my
innocence shall be openly known and sufficiently cleared.

My last and only request shall be, That my self may bear the burden of your
Graces displeasure, and that it may not touch the innocent souls of those poor
Gentlemen who as I understand are in strait imprisonment for my sake. If ever I
have found favor in your sight, if ever the name of Anne Bullen have been
pleasing in your ears, let me obtain this last request, and I will so leave to
trouble your Grace any further, with my earnest prayers to the Trinity to have
your Grace in his good keeping, and to direct you in all your actions.

From my doleful prison in the Tower, this sixth of May. Your most loyal and
faithful wife, ANNE BULLEN.

Queen Elizabeth's Letter to the Lady Norris upon the death of her Son.
ALthough we have deferred long to represent unto you our grieved thoughts,
because we liked full well to yield you the first reflections of our
misfortunes, whom we have always sought to cherish and comfort; yet knowing now
that necessity must bring it to your ears, and nature consequently must move
many passionate affections in your heart, we have resolved no longer to smother
either our care for your sorrow, or the sympathy of our grief for his death;
wherein if society in sorrowing work diminution, we do assure you by this true
messenger of our mind, that Nature can have stirred no more dolorous affections
in you as a mother, for a dear son, then the gratefulness and memory of his
services past has wrought in Us his Sovereign, apprehension of the miss of so
worthy a servant. But now that natures common work is done, and he that was
born to die has paid his tribute; let that Christian discretion stay the flux
of your immoderate grieving, which has instructed you both by example and
knowledge, that nothing of this kind has happened but by Gods providence; and
that these lines from your loving and gracious Sovereign, serve to assure you,
that there shall ever appear the lively characters of you and yours that are
left, in our valuing rightly all their faithful and honest endeavors. More we
will not write of this subject, but have dispatched this Gentleman to visit
both your Lord, and condole with you in the true sense of your love, and to
pray you, that the world may see, that what time cures in weak minds, that
discretion and moderation may help in you in this accident, where there is so
opportune occasion to demonstrate true patience and true moderation.

Thomas Duke of Norfolk to Queen Elizabeth.
O Most dear and dread Sovereign and Lady Queen, and most gracious Mistress,
when I consider with my self how far I have transgressed my duty to your most
gracious Majesty, I dare not now presume to look up or hope for your gracious
favor, I confess my self so far unworthy thereof: but again, when I look into
your Highness manifold merciful and most pitiful nature, of which so many
have so abundantly tasted of since your Majesty's most prosperous reign, I am
emboldened with penitent and sorrowful heart, to make my trembling hand to
offer unto your Highness my most ruful and lowly submission, having none other
means to ease my oppressed mind, I am for my sins and disobedience to ask
pardon, that is, of Almighty God, and of your most excellent Majesty: the first
I have done to Almighty God, and so I by the grace of him will continue with a
new heart and full mind of amendment, not doubting but asking mercy, to receive
it, according to the Scripture, he that knocks at the door shall have it
opened unto him. Now do I prostrate my self at your Highness most gracious
feet, my poor children, and all that I have, hoping more in your Majesty's most
gracious clemency, then in any of mine unadvised deserts; I seek to excuse my
self no way, but wholly submit my self to what shall please your most merciful
heart like a most gracious Queen to a man that has been astray, who finding
mercy has afterward with bad service oftentimes redoubled his former folly. O
most noble Queen, it is in your most gracious power to make of my wretched
mould what it pleases you, my faith and religion reserved to my Savior, my
body being already to your Highness subject, and imprisoned for my most just
desert, I dedicate my mind and heart to be hereafter as it shall please your
Majesty to direct it; I do not seek favor at your Majesty's hands in respect
of my former good service, I confess undutifulness has now blotted the same
out, neither dare I remmeber which heretofore was my greatest comfort, because
I deserve not that honor which was that it has pleased your Highness to
account me indeed your unworthy kinsman. Woe wretch that day when I entered into
that matter which has made such alteration of your Majesty's most gracious
favor unto me, and has heaped upon my self these intolerable troubles. O
unworthy that I am, that in all the days of my life counting upon nothing but a
quiet life, I take God to witness, whatsoever some have judged the contrary of
me, I was so unhappy to give ear to that which has done, and ever was like to
bring me to the contrary.

A Defiance sent by the Grand Seigniour to Maximilian the second.
BY the sufferance of the great God, We Solomon, God in earth, great and high
Emperor of all the world, Patron and Distributer of all Christians, We send
and declare unto thee Maximilian, all wrath and ill fortune and infidelity, and
to all thy Princes, subjects and helpers, We give it known unto thee, That We
by the sufferance of the great God, named the Perpetual and Universal God in
earth, most mighty Emperor, Sultan in Babylon, Lord of Armenia, the most
mightiest in Persipolis and Numidia, the great helper of God, Prince from the
Rode of Barbary unto the mountains of Achaia, King of Kings from the Meridian
to the Septentrian of the earth, from the rising place of the Sun to the
setting of it, the first and chiefest, placed in the Paradise of Mahomet, the
destroyer of all Christendom, and of all Christians, and that do profess
Christianity, the keeper and defender of the Sepulcher of thy God crucified,
the only victorious and triumphant Lord of all the world, and of all Circuits
and Provinces thereof: Thou Maximilian, which writest thy self King of our
Kingdom of Hungary, which is under our Crown and obeisance, We will visit thee
for that cause, and also persuade thee that with our strength and force of
thirteen Kingdoms with might and strength, to the number of one hundred
thousand as well Horsemen as Footmen prepared for war, with all the power and
strength of Turkish munition, and with such power as thou nor none of thy
servants have seen, heard, or had knowledge of, even before thy chief City
Vienna, and the Country thereabouts: We Solomon, God on earth, against thee
with all thy assisters and helpers, with our Warlike strength, do pronounce and
protest your uttermost destruction and depopulation, as we can by all means
possible devise it. And this we we will signify unto thee, to the which thou
and thy miserable people may prepare your selves. With us it is determined,
with our men appointed, thee and all thy German Kingdoms and Provinces
altogether to spoil: This misery we have consented unto against thee and thy
Princes, and have thou no doubt but we will come.

Dated in the City of Constantinople, out of the which we did expulse your
predecessors, their wives, children and friends, and made them most miserable
slaves and captives, the year of our reign forty seven.
Sir John Perrots Commission for Lord Deputy of Ireland.
ELizabetha Dei gratia etc.
omnibus ad quos presents literae pervenerint, salut.
Sciatis quod nos certis urgentibus causis and considerationibus nos
specialiter movendis, de provida circumspectione and industria praedilecti and
fidelis nobis Johannis Perrot milit. before confidentes de advisamento
Concilii nostri assignavimus, fecimus, ordinavimus, constituimus and
deputavimus, and per praesentes assignavimus, etc. eundem Johannem Perrot
milit. Deputat. nostrum Generalem Regni nostri Hiberniae, habend. tenend.
gaudend. exercend. and occupand. officium praedict. eidem Johanni Perrot milit.
durante beneplacito nostro dantes and concedentes eidem Deputat. nostro
Generali plenam tenore praesentium potestatem ad pacem nostram ac ad leges and
consuetudines regni nostri praedict. custodiend. and custodirifaciend. and ad
omnes and singulas leges nostras, etc.

The whole Contents of the Commission for the Lord Deputy.
TO conserve the peace, to punish offenders, to make Orders and Proclamations,
to receive offenders to grace, to give pardons and impose fines, to levy
forces, to fight and make peace, to dispose Rebels lands, to pardon all
treasons saving touching the Queens person, and counterfeiting of coin; to give
offices, saving the Chancellor, Treasurer, two chief Justices, chief Baron and
Master of the Rolls; to dispose of Ecclesiastical livings, except Archbishops
and Bishops; to receive homage and the oath, to make provision for his household
according to the ancient custom; to assemble the Parliament with her Majesty's
privity, to receive the account of Officers, saving the Treasurers, to exercise
martial law.

The Queens Warrant to the Lords, etc. of Ireland for ministering the Oath, and
delivery of the Sword to him, 31 Ian. 1583.
RIght Reverend Father in God, right trusty and welbeloved, and trusty and
right welbeloved, we greet you well: Whereas upon the departure from thence of
our right trusty and welbeloved the Lord Gray of Wilton, late our Deputy there,
we thought it meet for our government there, to appoint you jointly to have the
place of our Justices, until such time as we should resolve to send another
thither to be our Deputy there; We let you wit, that meaning now no longer to
burden you with such a charge; wherein you have, according to the trust
imposed in you, very wisely behaved your selves, greatly to our contentation,
we have chosen and appointed our right trusty and welbeloved Sir Jo. Perrot
Knight, this bearer, to be our Deputy of that our said Realm, and that for that
purpose to send him presently thither: Wherefore our will and pleasure is, and
by virtue of these our Letters we authorize you, upon the view of our letters
Patents made and delivered unto him in that behalf, both to minister unto him
the oath accustomed to be given unto the Deputy there, and also to deliver unto
him the Sword, as heretofore has been used. And further, that you communicate
unto him amply the present estate of that our Realm, and of all our affairs
there for his better instruction, at his entrance into that Government, and the
advancement of our service. And these our Letters shall be your sufficient
warrant and discharge in this behalf*

Given under our Signet, etc. the last of January 1583. the 26 year of our
reign.
Another for his Entertainment there.
TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you well.
Whereas we have now appointed our right trusty and welbeloved Sir John Perrot
Knight to be our Deputy in that our Realm of Ireland, for which Office
allowance as well of dyets as of entertainments for certain Horsemen is to be
given him: These be therefore to let you wit, that we allow unto him for his
ordinary diet one hundred pounds sterling, according to the last Establishment
in March 1589. and for his Retinue fifty Horsemen and fifty Footmen, with such
wages for every Horsman and Footman and for their Officers, as was allowed to
Sir William Fitzwilliams and Sir Henry Sydney Knights, in the late times of
their Governments in that Realm. After which rates as well for his own diet, as
for the said fifty Horsemen and fifty Footmen, and for their Officers, We will
and command you to make payment to him during his employment and service in
that place, from the date of our Letters Patent authorizing him to that
government; And these our Letters shall be sufficient Warrant as well to you as
to any Treasurer or Vice-treasurer there for the time being, and to your and
their Substitutes, as also to the Auditor or his Deputies, and to all other
Commissioners to be appointed over your Accounts, to pass and allow the same
payments to you accordingly.

Given etc. the fourth of April 1583. in the 26. year of our Reign of England,
etc.
The Queens Instructions to him.
YOU shall see immediately upon your arrival into that Realm assembled our
Council there, and confer with them what course of Government upon due
consideration had of the present estate of the said Realm may be held, so as
Justice may take place, our Charges be lessened, our Revenues increased, and
our Subjects there not oppressed.

You shall also consider what Forces are meet to be continued in pay, and how
the rest chargeable unto us and burthensom unto the Country may be discharged;
and also how the Horsemen and Footmen serving there may be reduced to their old
pay, which by reason of the general Rebellion in that Realm (the Country being
wasted) we were driven to increase: And therefore we see no reason but the Band
residing in those Countries that are not wasted may live well enough of the old
pay, especially being victualled by us; and for the ease and diminishing of our
charges in that behalf, We do think it meet that you should treat with those
Countries that are not wasted, as well in Munster or elsewhere in that Realm, to
see if you can draw them with good contentment to contribute something toward
the finding of that Garrison, at Carberrie heretofore has done.

And for that our Subjects in that Realm, etc.

To advise of the inhabiting of Munster, the attainted Lands to be let out at
easy rents. Survey, certify what States, Statute of Vsus. 5. Port-Corn. 6.
Th'attainted Lands to be bestowed in reward upon Servitors. 7. Younger Brothers
of Noblemen, Diminish Pensioners. 9. Review former Instructions. 10 -- 11.
Renewing of forfeited Leases for three years: Beef, Port-Corn, Remittal of
Arrearages. 12. Reversion of Lands to the Governors. 13. Lands of the
attainted to be appointed to housekeeping. 14. Reservation of Timber-woods.
15. Residence of Officers. 16. Report to the State outrages of disloyal
Subjects. 17. Profits of Customs, Escheats, etc. 19. Establishment for
Connaught. 20. President for Munster, allowance begin at May, Transportation.
21. Counselors, B. of Mead, John Norris, Richard Bi^gham, Tho. Strange. 22.
Refer the choice of a person to the Chancellor and others. 23. Certificate of
the last Treasurers Receipts and Expenses.

Every one of these Articles does contain half a side of Paper, and therefore I
have rather thought fit to abbreviate them then to transcribe them at large,
the whole Contents being contained in this Abbreviation.

Sir John Perrot to the Lords of the Council. Jan. 31. 1585.
May it please your good Lordships,
ALthough I and this Council have by our joynt-Letters truly declared unto you
the dutiful state of things here, and the causes both foraign and domestical
whereupon we gather it; and withal have showed our extreme wants, and what
supplies are desired: Yet understanding thence, but not from your Lordships,
(for I have had no kind of advertisements, answer, or resolution from the same
these twelve months) that there is a great preparation made by the Spanish
King against the Realm, and that your Lordships have intelligence thereof; I
cannot but as one whose chief charge and care it is, importune your Lordships
to cast your eye more carefully this way, humbly praying you to consider what
case we are in to try with a most mighty Prince, whether this Realm shall be
still her Majesty's or his, if there be any such matters (as your Lordships
know best) then I beseech your Lordships to think whether it be more safety to
say that we have sent provision to encounter the danger, or else you will send
when perhaps it will be too late. And withal for mine own discharge, if I
shall tarry, and have nothing wherewith: I have but a life to yield for her
Majesty and my Country; for the loss thereof I grieve not, but rather for the
harm that through defects I fear may come to her Majesty and the State, and the
shame I shall leave behind me. This foreign preparation, if there be any such
thing, is likely to be spent against Munster, to seize upon and to spoil the
Cities and Towns of the same, which in truth are very weak. If I shall go
thither, what for the late wars, and this last bad season, there is not so much
to be had there as will maintain that one Band of 200. that is under Mr. Thomas
Norris the Vice President there, but that I am enforced to shift them from Town
to Town, who by reason of their extreme penury do receive them with great grief
and grudge. And though I had men sufficient to encounter the Enemy that should
come, yet for want of victuals I should be driven to abandon the place with
danger and shame, where they that are to come over are like to bring their
provision with them, and to settle it in some Town that they will soon seize
upon for that purpose: whereof what may ensue amongst this unconstant people
naturally delighting in change, your Lordships may soon gather. Besides this
that I have said of the bare estate of Munster, where there is not so much to
be had as will serve for mine own family, or yet to feed my horses till grass
grow, I refer you to understand not only the same more fully, but also the
great wants of the rest of the Realm by the declaration here enclosed, which as
Beverley the Victualler makes it, so I know it to be true. And therefore I
most humbly beseech your Lordships to send speedy order, that such a Staple of
victuals may be provided and be sent over, as your Lordships shall think
requisite to serve as well for the numbers here already, as also for those that
are to be sent over to encounter such an accident as may fall out. And herein I
would wish your Lordships to consider the winds and weather, how untowardly
they have framed this year: for as some have lain at Chester nine weeks to come
over hither, so has there been no passage since this six weeks. Moreover if
there be such purposes in hand, it were good some shipping were dispatched for
the guard of the Coasts. And to all these and other difficulties, may I with
your Lordships favor add one more to be considered of, How weakly I am
seconded, if need fall out by those foreign attempts, whereof I would say little
for any other cause: The Marshal is old, and not able either to ride on go; the
Master of the Ordnance is both absent, and old, and I wish there were a more
sufficient man in his place: The Lord President and Sir William Stanley, who
are men of good conduct, are drawn away: Sir H. Harrington, Mr. Edward Barkley,
and the Senescal Dantry are suffered to remain still there; but I humbly pray
they may be sped away, together with all other that are Servitors by any manner
of pay there. And so having herein discharged my duty, I humbly end.

From the Castle of Dublin, the last of January 1585. Your Lordships most
humble at commandment, JOHN PERROT.

Earl of Desmond to the Earl of Ormond, June 5. 1583.
My Lord,
GReat is my grief when I think how heavily her Majesty is bent to disfavour
me; and howbeit I carry the name of an undutifull Subject, yet God knows that
my heart and mind are always most lowly inclined to serve my most loving
Prince, so it may please her Highness to remove her heavy displeasure from me.
As I may not condemn my self of disloyalty to her Majesty, so cannot I excuse
my faults, but must confess that I have incurred her Majesty's indignation; yet
when the cause and means which were found and devised to make me commit folly
shall be known to her Highness, I rest in an assured hope that her most
gracious Majesty will both think of me as my heart deserves, and also of those
that wrung me into undutifulness, as their cunning device meriteth. From my
heart I am sorry that folly, bad councels, sleights, or any other thing has
made me to forget my duty: And therefore I am most desirous to get conference
with your Lordship, to the end I may open and declare to you how tyrannously I
was used, humbly craving that you will vouchsafe to appoint some time and place
where and when I may attend your Honor, and then I doubt not to make it appear
how dutiful a mind I carry, how faithfully I have at mine own charge served
her Majesty before I was proclaimed, how sorrowful I am for my offenses, and
how faithfully I am affected ever hereafter to serve her Majesty.

And so I commit your Lordship to God, the 5. of June 1583. Subscribed GIRALD
DESMOND.

Sir Henry Wallop to the Queen, 12. Aug. 1583.
IT may please your Majesty, a rumor has been raised not long since at Dublin
(I know not how, nor by what particular person, but strongly confirmed since
the last passage out of England) (neither does your service now in hand upon
this Northern border, suffer me to examine it) that your Majesty conceived some
hard opinion of me, from which your Highness is not yet removed; but what the
offense is, or how conceived, is neither by the reporters published, nor
secretly revealed unto me: And like as it is casie to judge what effects this
may work in the service of your Majesty, or to a man in public office, as I
am, in such a government as this is, where the obedience for the most is
constrained, and all reputation with the people either growing or diminishing
as your Majesty graceth or disgraceth your Officers; so how much this quiet
burden over-presseth my most devoted and dutiful mind toward your Majesty. I
feel to my exceeding grief and discomfort. In examining my self in what root
this your judgment should spring, I confess Madam, I have viewed in my self
many imperfections, some in nature, others perhaps for lack of ability and
sufficiency to be a cooperator or an assistant in so great and so ticklish a
government and charge, into which not ambition in me, but your Majesty's will
and commandment has intruded me. But in all that my memory can hitherto
present unto me, I find my loyalty in your service, and my sincerity in
employing your Majesty's treasure according to your intent, so unspotted and
direct, as I cannot but comfort my self in opposing my innocence to the envy of
the informer, or to any other his hard construction whatsoever: yet since in
general consideration I cannot feel such a particular error, as might settle
in your Majesty's grave judgment, an offense meriting your disfavour, I am
most humbly to beseech your Majesty, that by knowing my fault I may either
purge my self by a just denial, or by confessing it crave pardon of your
Highness, and reform my self. If therefore it shall stand with your Majesty's
good pleasure to declare to my honorable good friend Mr. Secretary Walsingham,
commanding him to charge me with it, I will thereupon simply answer, even as
before the Lord God, without concealing any matter of truth any wise, for mine
own defense. This grace the sooner I shall obtain, the apter I shall be found
for your other services, from which I find my self distracted, because the end
of my travels is none other but to purchase that grace and favor which I may
now fear to be alienated from me till my cause be better explained.

And so I humbly end, praying the Lord to bless you with a long and prosperous
reign. At your town of Dundalk, August 11. 1583. Your Majesty's most humble
servant and subject, HENRY WALLOP.

The Earl of Essex to Mr. Davison.
IF this Letter do not deliver you my very affectionate wishes, and assure you
that I am both careful to deserve well, and covetous to hear well of you, it
does nor discharge the trust that I have committed unto it. My love to your
worthy Father, my expectation that you will truly inherit his virtues, and the
proof that I have seen of your well spending your time abroad, are three strong
bands to tie my affection unto you; to which when I see added your kindness to
my self, my reason tells my heart, it cannot value you, or affect you too much:
you have laid so good a foundation of framing your self, as if now you do not
perfect the work, th'expectation you have raised will be your greatest
adversary: slack not your industry in thinking you have taken great pains
already, Nusquam enim nec opera sine emolumento, nec emolumentum sine impensa
opera est: Labor voluptasque dissimilia natura, societate quadam naturali inter
se conjuncta sunt. Nor think your self at any time so rich in knowledge or
reputation, as you may spend on the stock: For as the way to virtue is steep
and craggy, so the descent from it is headlong. It is said of our bodies, that
they do lent augescere and cito extinguntur, it may be as properly said of our
minds. Let your virtuous Father, who in the midst of his troubles and
discomforts, has brought you by his care and charge to what you are now in,
you receive perfect comfort and contentment; Learn virtutem ab illo, fortunam
ab aliis. I write not this as suspecting you need be admonished, or as finding
my self able to direct; but as he that when he was writing, took the plainest
and naturallest style of a friend truly affected to you: Receive it therefore I
pray you as a pledge of more love then I can now show you. And so desiring
nothing more then to hear often from you, I wish you all happiness, and rest,

White Hall, Jan. 8. Your affectionate and assured friend, R. ESSEX.

Earl of Essex to Secretary Davison.
SIR,
AS I have ever loved you, so now taking leave of my good friends, I cannot
forget you of whose love I desire to be ever assured, and whom I would desire
to satisfy in all things that I shall do. If you be troubled with the
suddenness of my unlooked for journey, let my resolute purpose to perform it,
which could not be without secrecy, excuse me: if you call it rashness, I will
better allow it to be heresy then error; for many months ago it was resolved:
if you doubt of the success or event thereof, I say, that the same God who
has given me a mind to undertake, may according to his good pleasure make me
in it, or it with me to prosper or die, as it shall seem best unto him. And so
purposing that you shall see me return happy, or never, I take my leave a few
days before my departure. Let me be commended to your good self, and such
other of my good friends, as in my absence you find I am beholding to,
especially to Sir Drew Drury, and Sir Edward Waterhouse.

Your assured friend, R. ESSEX.

Earl of Essex to Secretary Davison, July 11. 1589.
SIR,
AS at my departure, so upon my return, I must needs salute you, as one whom
then, and now, and ever, I must love very much. I would gladly see you, but I
am tied here a while, when I may have occasion to show my love to you, I will
do more then I now promise. In the mean time wishing you that happiness which
men in this world ought to seek, I take my leave

At the Court this 11. of July 1589. Your assured Friend R. ESSEX.

Again to Secretary Davison.
SIR,
I Had speech with her Majesty yesternight after my departure from you, and I
find that the success of my speech (although I hoped for good) yet did much
overrun my expectation. To repeat many speeches and by-matters, as of my
acquaintance with you, and such like, it will be fitter for such a time when I
shall have conference with you. But in effect, our end was thus: I made her
Majesty see, what in your health, in your fortune, and in your reputation with
the world you had suffered since the time that it was her pleasure to commit
you; I told her how many friends and well-wishers the world did afford you, and
how for the most part, throughout the whole Realm her best subjects did wish
that she would do her self the honor to repair for you, and restore to you
that state which she had overthrown; your humble suffering of these harms, and
reverend regard to her Majesty, must needs move a Princess so noble and so
just, to do you right; and more I had said, if my gift of speech had been any
way comparable to my love. Her Majesty seeing her judgment opened by the story
of her own actions, showed a very feeling compassion of you, she gave you many
praises, and among the rest, that which she seemed to please her self in, was,
that you were a man of her own choice. In truth she was so well pleased with
those things that she spoke and heard of you, as I dare (if of things future
there be any assurance) promise to my self that your peace will be made to your
own content, and the desire of your friends, I mean in her favor and your own
fortune, to a better estate then, or at least the same you bad, which with all
my power I will employ my self to effect. And so in have I commit you to God.

Your friend most assured, R. ESSEX.

Earl of Essex to King James concerning Secretary Davison. April 18. 1587.
MOst excellent King, for him that is already bound for many favors, a style
of thankfulness is much fitter then the humor of suing; but so it falls out,
that he which to his own advantage would have sought nothing in your favor,
but your favor it self, does now for another become an humble petitioner to
your Majesty: your Majesty cannot be such a stranger to the affairs of this
Country, but as you know what actions are done in this place, so you
understand the minds of the men by whom they are done. Therefore I doubt not,
but the man for whom I speak, is somewhat known to your Majesty, and being
known, I presume of greater favor, Mr. Secretary Davison fallen into her
Majesty's displeasure and disgrace; beloved of the best and most religious of
this land, does stand as barred from any preferment or restoring in his place,
except out of the honor and nobleness of your own Royal heart, your Majesty
will undertake his cause. To leave the nature of his fault to your Majesty's
best judgment, and report of your own servant, and to speak of the man, I must
say truly, that his sufficiency in Council, and matters of State, is such, as
the Queen her self confesses, in her Kingdom she has not such another; his
virtue, religion and worth in all degrees is of the world taken to be so great,
as no man in his good fortune has had more general love then this Gentleman
in his disgrace: And if to a man so worthy in himself, and so esteemed of all
men, my words might avail any thing, I would assure your Majesty would get
great honor, and great love, not only here amongst us, but in all places of
Christendom where this Gentleman is any thing known, if you should now be the
author of his restoring to his place, which in effect he now is, but that as a
man not acceptable to her Majesty, he does forbear to attend. I do in all
humbleness commend this cause to your Majesty, having the warrant of a good
conscience, that I know to be both honorable and honest; and your Majesty to
the blessed protection of that mighty God, to whom will pray for your Majesty's
happy and prosperous estate, He that will do your Majesty all humble service,

Greenwich April 18. R. ESSEX.

Earl of Essex to Mr. Secretary Davison.
SIR,
I Have as I could, taken my opportunity since I saw you, to perform as much as
I promised you; and though in all I have been able to effect nothing, yet even
now I have had better leisure to solicit the Queen then in this stormy time I
did hope for. My beginning was, as being amongst others entreated to move her
in your behalf: my course was to lay open your sufferings and your patience; in
them you had felt poverty, restraint and disgrace, and yet you showed nothing
but faith and humility; faith, as being never wearied nor discouraged to do her
service; humbleness, as content to forget all the burdens that had been laid
upon you, and to serve her Majesty with as frank and willing a heart as they
that have received greatest grace from her. To this I received no answer but in
general terms, that her honor was much touched, your presumption had been
intolerable, and that she could not let it slip out of her mind. When I urged
your access, she denied it, but so as I had no cause to be afraid to speak
again. When I offered in them both to reply, she fell into other discourse, and
so we parted. So all that I have done you know; what I shall do ye shall
prescribe. If you hear any man's else -- I pray you let me know, for so I shall
perceive whether she will open her heart more to me then them, which being
known I may deal accordingly. And so I commit you to God.

Windsor, October. 2. Your most assured friend, R. ESSEX.

Again to Mr. Secretary Davison, upon the death of Mr. Secretary Walsingham.
SIR,
Upon this unhappy accident, I have tried to the bottom what the Queen will do
for you, and what the credit of your Solicitor is worth. I urged not the
comparison between you and any other: But in my duty to her, and zeal to her
service, I did assure her that she had not any other in England that would for
these three or four years know how to settle himself to support so great a
burden. She gave me leave to speak, heard me with patience, confessed with me
that none was so sufficient, and could not deny but that which she lays to your
charge was done without hope, fear, malice, envy, or any respect of your own,
but merely for her safety both of state and person. In the end she absolutely
denied to let you enjoy that place, and willed me to rest satisfied, for she
was resolved. Thus much I write to let you know, I am more honest to my
friends, then happy in their cases. What you will have me do for your suit, I
will as far as my credit is any thing worth. I have told most of the Council of
my manner of dealing with the Queen; my Lord Chamberlain tells me he has dealt
for you also, and they all say they wish as I do; but in this world that is
enough. I will commit you to God for this time, and rest

Your constant and true friend, R. ESSEX.

Earl of Essex to the Queen.
MY dutiful affections to your Majesty always overweighed all other worldly
respects; that seeking in all particulars to manifest my truth, I have maimed
my estate in general, as I dare in the heat of my thoughts compare with the
greatest that ever vowed for faithful service, so is there not the meanest that
has overslipped me, I will not say in recompense, but in some gracious estate
of service. Thus whilst my faith wrestleth with my fortune, the one winns
breath to beat the other down. Though I have no hope to repair the ruins of my
oversight, yet I cannot but presume your Majesty will suffer me to preserve
them from blowing up; and what youth and forward belief has undermined in mine
estate, providence by a retired life may underlay. In which discontinuance from
Court there shall be added (if any thing be added) increase of loyalty: Nor so
solitary shall be my course, as it shall seem to proceed of coffeehouse, but
of necessity; and all actions both with living and my life so forward, as
though some may have overrun me in fortunes, none shall in duty.

Next my allegiance to your Majesty, which shall be held most sacred and
inviolable, the report of mine Honor challenges chief interest; which that I
may preserve in my wonted state, reason draws me to stay my self slipping from
falling. That of late (by what secret and venomous blow I know not) my faith
has received some wounds, your Majesty's wonted grace withdrawn assures me:
But truth and my patience in this case were one with me, and time in your
Princely thoughts did wear it out from me. Let time be Judge; I will leave you
with as great lothness as I were to lose what I love best. But your favor
failing, in which I have placed all my hopes, and my self less graced after
seven years then when I had served but seven days, may be a reason to excuse,
if there were no other reason. These things pressed out of a distressed mind,
and offered in all humility, I hope it shall not be offensive if I choose this
wearisom course, rather to be retired then tired. If any of envy take advantage
of absence, seeking by cunning to draw me into suspicion of coffeehouse, my
conscience is settled in your never erring Judgment, that if he come with Esau's
hands and Jacob's voice, your Highness will censure it a wrought malice under
such simplicity. It is true that grief cannot speak; but this grief has made
me write, lest when I leave you I should so far forsake my self as to leave
this unsaid. To your gracious acceptance I commit it, and with all humble and
reverent thoughts that may be, rest ever to be commanded to die at your
Majesty's feet,

TO. ESSEX.

Again to the Queen.
FRom a mind delighting in sorrow, from spirits wasted with passion, from a
heart torn in pieces with care, grief and travel, from a man that hates
himself and all things that keeps him alive, what service can your Majesty
expect, since your service past deserves no more then banishment or
prescription in the cursed'st of all other Countries? Nay, nay, it is your
Rebels pride and success that must give me leave to ransom my life out of this
hateful prison of my loathed body: which if it happen so, your Majesty shall
have no cause to mislike the fashion of my death, since the course of my life
could never please you.

Your Majesty's exiled Servan^, TO. ESSEX.

Sir Thomas Egerton Lord Chancellor to the Earl of Essex.
My very good Lord,
IT is often seen, that he that stands by sees more then he that plays the
game; and for the most part every one in his own cause stands in his own
light, and sees not so clearly as he should. Your Lordship has dealt in other
men's causes, and in great and weighty affairs with great wisdom and judgment;
now your own is in hand, you are not to contemn or refuse the advice of any
that love you, how simple soever. In this order I rank my self among others
that love you, none more simple, and none that love you with more true and
honest affection; which shall plead my excuse, if you shall either mistake or
mistrust my words or meaning: but in your Lordships honorable wisdom I neither
doubt nor suspect the one nor the other. I will not presume to advise you, but
shoot my bolt and tell you what I think. The beginning and long continuance of
this so unseasonable coffeehouse you have seen and proved, by which you aim
at the end: If you hold still this course, which hitherto you find to be worse
and worse, (and the longer you go, the further you go out of the way) there is
little hope or likelihood the end will be better: You are not yet gone so far,
but that you may well return: The return is safe, but the progress is dangerous
and desperate in this course you hold. If you have any enemies, you do that for
them which they could never do for themselves: Your friends you leave to scorn
and contempt, you forsake your self and overthrow your fortunes, and ruinate
your honor and reputation: You give that comfort and courage to the foreign
enemies, as greater they cannot have; for what can be more welcome and pleasing
news then to hear that her Majesty and the Realm are maimed of so worthy a
Member, who has so often and so valiantly quailed and daunted them? You
forsake your Country, when it has most need of your Council and aid: And
lastly you fail in your indissoluble* duty which you owe unto your most
gracious Sovereign, a duty imposed upon you not by nature and policy only, but
by the religious and sacred bond wherein the divine Majesty of Almighty God
has by the rule of Christianity obliged you.

For the four first, your constant resolution may perhaps move you to esteem
them as light; but being well weighed, they are not light, nor lightly to be
regarded. And for the four last, it may be that the cleerness of your own
conscience may seem to content your self, but that is not enough; for these
duties stand not only in contemplation or inward meditation, and cannot be
performed but by external actions, and where that fails, the substance also
fails. This being your present state and condition, what is to be done? what
is the remedy, my good Lord? I lack judgment and wisdom to advise you, but I
will never want an honest true heart to wish you well; nor being warranted by a
good conscience, will fear to speak that I think. I have begun plainly, be not
offended if I proceed so. Been cedit qui cedit tempori: and Seneca says,
Cedendum est fortunae. The medicine and remedy is not contend and strive, but
humbly to yield and submit. Have you given cause, and yet take a scandal unto
you? then all you can be is too little to make satisfaction. Is cause of
scandal given unto you, yet policy, duty and religion enforce you to sue,
yield and submit to our Sovereign, between whom and you there can be no equal
proportion of duty, where God requires it as a principal duty and care to
himself, and when it is evident that great good may ensue of it to your
friends, your self, your Country, and your Sovereign, and extreme harm by the
contrary. There can be no dishonor to yield; but in denying, dishonor and
impiety. The difficulty (my good Lord) is to conquer your self, which is the
height of true valor and fortitude, whereunto all your honorable actions have
tended. Do it in this, and God will be pleased, her Majesty (no doubt) well
satisfied, your Country will take good, and your Friends comfort by it; and
your self (I mention you last, for that of all these you esteem yourself least)
shall receive honor; and your Enemies (if you have any) shall be disappointed
of their bitter sweet hope.

I have delivered what I think simply and plainly, I leave you to determine
according to your own wisdom: if I have erred, it is error amoris, and not amor
erroris. Construe and accept it, I beseech you, as I meant i^; not as an
advice, but as an opinion to be allowed or cancelled at your pleasure. If I
might conveniently have conferred with your self in person, I would not have
troubled you with so many idle blots. Whatsoever you judge of this my opinion,
yet be assured my desire is to further all good means that may tend to your
Lordships good. And so wishing you all happiness and honor, I cease.

Your Lordships most ready and faithful, though unable poor Friend, Tho.
Egerton, Cust. Sigil.

The Earls Answer.
MY very good Lord, though there is not that man this day living whom I would
sooner make Judge of any question that might concern me, then your self; yet
you must give me leave to tell you, that in some cases I must appeal from all
earthly Judges: And if in any, then surely in this, when the highest Judge on
earth has imposed upon me the heaviest Punishment without trial or hearing.
Since then I must either answer your Lordships Arguments, or else forsake mine
own just defense, will force mine aching head to do me service for an hour. I
must first deny my coffeehouse (which was forced) to be an humorous
discontent; and in that it was unseasonable, or is so long continuing, your
Lordship should rather condole with me then expostulate: natural seasons are
expected here below, but violent and unreasonable storms come from above: There
is no tempest to the passionate of a Prince, nor yet at any time so
unseasonable as when it lights on those that might expect an harvest of their
careful and painful labors. He that is once wounded must needs feel smart
till his hurt be cured, or the part hurt become senseless. But cure I expect
none, her Majesty's heart being obdurate; and be without sense I cannot, being
of flesh and blood. But you may say, I may aim at the end: I do more then aim,
for I see an end of all my fortunes, I have set an end to all my desires. In
this course do I any thing for mine enemies? when I was present I found them
absolute, and therefore I had rather they should triumph alone, then have me
attendant upon their Chariots: Or do I l^^ve my friends? When I was a Courtier
I could sell them no fruit of my love, and now that I am an Hermit, they shall
bear no envi^ for their love to me. Or do I forsake my self? because I do not
enjoy my self? Or do I overthrow my fortunes, because I build not a fortune of
paperwalls, which every puff of wind blows down? Or do I ruinate mine honor,
because I leave following the pursuit, or wearing the false mark or the shadow
of honor? Do I give courage or comfort to the enemies, because I neglect my
self to encounter them, or because I keep my heart from business, though I
cannot keep my fortune from declining? No, no, I give every one of those
considerations his due right, and the more I weigh them, the more I find my
self justified from offending in any of them. As for the two last objections,
that I forsake my Country when it has most need of me, and fail in that
indissoluble duty which I owe to my Sovereign: I answer, That if my Country
had at this time any need of my public service, her Majesty that governs it,
would not have driven me to a private life. I am tied to my Country by two
bonds; one public, to discharge carefully and industriously that trust which
is committed to me; the other private, to sacrifice for it my life and
carcass, which has been nourished in it. Of the first I am free, being
dismissed by her Majesty: Of the other nothing can free me but death, and
therefore no occasion of performance shall sooner offer it self, but I will
meet it half way. The indissoluble duty I owe unto her Majesty, the service of
an Earl and of Marshall of England, and I have been content to do her the
service of a Clerk; but I can never serve her as a villain or a slave. But you
say I must give way to time. So I do, for now that I see the storm come, I have
put my self into harbor. Seneca says, we must give way to Fortune: I know
that Fortune is both blind and strong, and therefore I go as far as I can out
of the way. You say the remedy is not to strive: I neither strive nor seek for
remedy. But you say, I must yield and submit: I can neither yield my self to be
guilty, nor this my imprisonment lately laid upon me, to be just; I ow so much
to the Author of Truth, as I can never yield Truth to be Falsehood, nor Falsehood
to be Truth. Have I given cause, you ask, and yet take a scandal? No, I gave
no cause to take up so much as Fimbria his complaint: for I did totum telum
corpore accipere, I patiently bear and sensibly feel all that I then received
when this scandal was given me. Nay, when the vilest of all indignities are
done unto me, does religion enforce me to sue? Does God require it? Is it
impiety not to do it? Why? cannot Princes err? Cannot subjects receive wrong?
Is an earthly power infinite? Pardon me, pardon me, my Lord, I can never
subscribe to these principles. Let Solomon's fool laugh when he is stricken; let
those that mean to make their profit of Princes, show to have no sense of
Princes injuries; let them acknowledge an infinite absoluteness on earth, that
do not believe an absolute infiniteness in heaven. As for me, I have received
wrong, I feel it; my cause is good, I know it; and whatsoever comes, all the
powers on earth can never show more strength or constancy in oppressing, then I
can show in suffering whatsoever can or shall be imposed upon me. Your Lordship
in the beginning of your Letter makes me a Player, and your self a looker on;
and me a player of my own game, so you may see more then I; but give me leave
to tell you, that since you do but see, and I do suffer, I must of necessity
feel more then you. I must crave your Lordships patience to give him that has
a crabbed fortune, leave to use a crooked style. But whatsoever my style is,
there is no heart more humble, nor more affected toward your Lordship, then
that of

Your Lordships poor friend, ESSEX.

Two Letters framed, one as from Mr. Anthony Bacon to the Earl of Essex, the
other as the Earls answer.
My singular good Lord,
THis standing at a stay does make me in my love toward your Lordship jealous
lest you do somewhat, or omit somewhat that amounts to a new error: For I
suppose that of all former matters there is a full expiation; wherein for any
thing which your Lordship does, I for my part (who am remote) cannot cast or
devise wherein my error should be, except in one point, which I dare not
censure nor dissuade: which is, that as the Prophet says, in this affliction
you look up ad manum percutientem, and so make your peace with God. And yet I
have heard it noted, that my Lord of Leicester, who could never get to be taken
for a Saint, yet in the Queens disfavour waxed seeming religious. Which may be
thought by some, and used by others as a case resembling yours, if men do not
see, or will not see the difference between your two dispositions. But to be
plain with your Lordship, my fear rather is, because I hear how some of your
good and wise friends, not unpractised in the Court, and supposing themselves
not to be unseen in that deep and unscrutable Center of the Court, which is her
Majesty's mind; do not only toll the bell, but even ring out peals, as if your
fortune were dead and buried, and as if there were no possibility of recovering
her Majesty's favor; and as if the best of your condition were to live a
private and retired life, out of want, out of peril, and out of manifest
disgrace. And so in this persuasion to your Lordship-wards, to frame and
accommodate your actions and mind to that end, I fear (I say) that this
untimely despair may in time bring forth a just despair, by causing your
Lordship to slacken and break off your wise, loyal, and seasonable endeavor
and industry for reintegration to her Majesty's favor, in comparison whereof
all other circumstances are but as Atomi, or rather as a Vacuum without any
substance at all.

Against this opinion it may please your Lordship to consider of these reasons
which I have collected; and to make judgment of them, neither out of the
melancholy of your present fortune, nor out of the infusion of that which
comes to you by others relation, which is subject to much tincture, but ex
rebus ipsis, out of the nature of the persons and actions themselves, as the
truest and less deceiving ground of opinion. For though I am so unfortunate as
to be a stranger to her Majesty's eye, much more to her nature and manners, yet
by that which is extant I do manifestly discern that she has that character of
the Divine nature and goodness, as quos amavit, amavit usque ad finem; and
where she has a creature, she does not deface nor defeat it: insomuch as if I
observe rightly in those persons whom heretofore she has honored with her
special favor, she has covered and remitted not only defections and
ingratitudes in affection, but errors in state and service.

2. if I can Scholar-like spell and put together the parts of her Majesty's
proceedings now toward your Lordship, I cannot but make this construction,
That her Majesty in her Royal intention never purposed to call your doings into
public question, but only to have used a cloud without a shower, and
censuring them by some restraint of liberty and debarring from her presence.
For both the handling the cause in the Star Chamber was enforced by the
violence of libelling and rumors, wherein the Queen thought to have satisfied
the world, and yet spared your appearance: And then after, when that means
which was intended for the quenching of malicious bruits, turned to kindle
them, because it was said your Lordship was condemned unheard, and your
Lordships Sister wrote that private Letter, then her Majesty saw plainly that
these winds of rumors could not be commanded down without a handling of the
Cause by making you party, and admitting your defense. And to this purpose I do
assure your Lordship, that my Brother Francis Bacon, who is too wise to be
abused, though he be both reserved in all particulars more then is needful,
yet in generality he has ever constantly and with asseveration affirmed to me,
That both those days, that of the Star Chamber, and that at my Lord Keepers,
were won of the Queen merely upon necessity and point of honor, against her
own inclination.

3. In the last proceeding I note three points which are directly significant,
that her Majesty did expressly forbear any point which was irrecuperable, or
might make your Lordship in any degree incapable of the return of her favor,
or might six any character indeleble of disgrace upon you: For she spared the
public places, which spared ignominy; she limited the Charge precisely not to
touch disloyalty, and no Record remains to memory of the Charge or Sentence.

4. The very distinction which was made in the sentence of Sequestration from
the places of service in State, and leaving to your Lordship the place of
Master of the Horse, does in my understanding point at this, that her Majesty
meant to use your Lordships attendance in Court, while the exercises of other
places stood suspended.

5. I have heard, and your Lordship knows better, that now since you were in
your own custody, her Majesty in verbo Regio, and by his mouth to whom she
commits her Royal grants and Decrees, has assured your Lordship she will
forbid, and not suffer your ruin.

6. As I have heard her Majesty to be a Prince of that magnanimity, that she
will spare the service of the ablest Subject or Peer, where she shall be
thought to stand in need of it; so she is of that policy, as she will not
blaze the service of a meaner then your Lordship, where it shall depend merely
upon her choice and will.

7. I held it for a principle, That those diseases are hardest to cure, whereof
the cause is obscure; and those easiest, whereof the cause is manifest.
Whereupon I conclude, that since it has been your errors in your lowness
toward her Majesty which have prejudiced you, that your reforming and
conformity will restore you, so as you may be Faber fortunae propriae.

Lastly, Considering your Lordship is removed from dealing in Causes of State,
and left only to a place of Attendance, methinks the Ambition of any which can
endure no Partners in State-matters may be so quenched, as they should not
laboriously oppose themselves to your being in Court. So as upon the whole
matter, I cannot find neither in her Majesty's person, nor in your own person,
nor in any third person* neither in former precedents nor in your own case, any
cause of peremptory despair. Neither do I speak this, but that if her Majesty
out of her resolution should design you to a private life, you should be as
willing upon the appointment to go into the wilderness as into the land of
promise; only I wish that your Lordship will not despair, but put trust (next
to God) in her Majesty's grace, and not be wanting to your self. I know your
Lordship may justly interpret, that this which I persuade may have some
reference to my particular, because I may truly say testante non virebo, for I
am withered in my self; but manebo, or tenebo, I should in some sort be, or
hold out. But though your Lordships years and health may expect return of grace
and fortune, yet your E^clipse for a time is an ultimum vale to my fortune: And
were it not that I desired and hope to see my Brother established by her
Majesty's favor, as I think him well worthy for that he has done and
suffered, it were time I did take that course from which I dissuade your
Lordship. Now in the mean time I cannot choose but perform those honest duties
unto you, to whom I have been so deeply bound, etc.

The Earl of Essex his Answer to Mr. Anthony Bacons Letter.
Mr. Bacon,
I Thank you for your kind and careful letter; it persuades that which I wish
for strongly, and hope for weakly, that is, possibility of restitution to her
Majesty's favor: Your arguments that would cherish hope, turn into despair:
You say the Queen never meant to call me to public censure, which shows her
goodness; but you see I passed it, which shows others power. I believe most
steadfastly, her Majesty never intended to bring my cause to a public censure;
and I believe as verily, that since the sentence she meant to restore me to
tend upon her person: but those which could use occasions (which it was not in
me to let) and amplify and practice occasions to represent to her Majesty a
necessity to bring me to the one, can and will do the like to stop me from the
other. You say, my errors were my prejudice, and therefore I can mend my self.
It is true; but they that know that I can mend my self, and that if I ever
recover the Queen, that I will never lose her again, will never suffer me to
obtain interest in her favor: and you say, the Queen never forsook utterly
where she has inwardly favored; but know not whether the hourglass of time
has altered her, but sure I am, the false glass of others informations must
alter her, when I want access to plead mine own cause, I know I ought doubly,
infinitely to be her Majesty's both jure creationis, for I am her creature; and
jure redemptionis, for I know she has saved me from overthrow. But for her
first love, and for her last protection, and all her great benefits, I can but
pray for her Majesty; and my endeavor is now to make my prayers for her and my
self better heard. For thanks be to God, that they which can make her Majesty
believe I counterfeit with her, cannot make God believe that I counterfeit with
him; and they that can let me from coming near to her, cannot let me from
drawing nearer to him, as I hope I do daily. For your brother, I hold him an
honest Gentleman, and wish him all good much rather for your sake; your self I
know has suffered more for me and with me, then any friend that I have: But I
can but lament freely* as you see I do, and advise you not to do that I do,
which is to despair. You know Letters what hurt they have done me, and
therefore make sure of this: and yet I could not, as having no other pledge of
my love, but communicate openly with you for the ease of my heart and yours.

Your loving friend, R. ESSEX.

Lord Mountjoy to the Earl of Essex.
MOst noble Lord,
the Queen is now removing toward a Progress; wherein, after I have somewhat
waited upon her, I shall have a desire to write to your Lordship of some things
more at large, which I will do as safely as I can; your Lordships virtue, and
your clear conscience must be your own brazen wall: for we that are not of the
Council do see no hope to keep long together this State from assured ruin. I
pray God the Queen may with all prosperity outlive their negligence, and your
care, to be a just Judge, if not a rewarder thereof. In the mean time you owe
unto her, and your own virtue, extraordinary patience. Your Lordships mind ( I
do protest) cannot labor more in the storm wherein you are, then mine does in
this dangerous and miserable calm. For it is some comfort to perish doing
somewhat; and yet, my Lord, why should we despair, since there is a Providence
that looks beyond, and concludes contrary to the practices of the world; which
Providence has showed us ways, how rugged soever they be, which will bring
unto true happiness; and though we lose these mortal Barks we sail in, yet he
will assuredly save the passengers. Noble Lord, in respect of that great Haven,
contemn these tempests and shipwracks at sea. Your Lordships servant Mr.
Bushel, does fear to have you impute his slow dispatch unto any want of his
diligence, and has showed his fear in exceeding sorrow that it could not be
sooner, and with as much care by all his best means to effect it. I much thank
your Lordship for your favor to Sir Charles Blunt, of whom (if he be not
thankful) I shall not only be deceived, but also revenged. I will pray
continually for your Lordships prosperity, -- and that it shall be impossible
to make me otherwise then

Your Lordships most honest and faithful servant, MOUNTJOY.

Sir Robert Cecil, after Earl of Salisbury, to the Lord Burleigh his Father,
from France. Febr. 26. 1597.
MY duty humbly remembered to your Lordship: Having lately made dispatches from
Diep, and having made little way in France, by reason of Sir Thomas Wilks
indisposition, your Lordship can expect little from me; especially having
joined with my associates in a letter to your Lordship: Nevertheless, because
love and duty will find easily occasion to express themselves, I am bold to
yield your Lordship some more trouble by my private Letter. I have met here
with the primier President of Roan, a man of great credit and reputation, one
that until mere necessity did force him, kept much hold here for this King: he
afterward retired, and kept the Parliament at Caen; he is learned, grave, of
good person, good discourse, and well affectionate to England, his name is
Claude Grollart; he is now next the Duke Monpencier, the stay of all those
quarters, insomuch that when the King will be merry with him, he calls him one
of the petty Dukes in Normandy: he did visit me with great respect, and fell
into familiar discourse with me of your Lordship, whom he had known in England
many years since, and has had correspondency with your Lordship by letters in
Mr. Secretary Walsinghams time: And being talking thereof, he desired me to
tell your Lordship by occasion, that when these troubles were like to grow by
the League, you writ him a letter of advice to stick fast to the King, and not
to be doubtful though he saw difficulties; for you did hold it for a true
Oracle, That the Kings on earth are like the Sun, and that such as do seek to
usurp are like falling Stars: For the Sun, although it be ecclipsed and
obfuscated with mists and clouds, at length they are dispersed, where the other
are but figures of stars in the eyes view, and prove no more but exhalations,
which suddenly dissolve and fall to the earth, where they are consumed. Because
I have little else to fill my paper, I presume to trouble your Lordship thus
far, to whom I think it cannot be offensive to hear that for your sake I am by
many the better used, and that by your own wisdom you are by men of place and
gravity both honored and remembered. The marriage of the Duke of Tremouille to
the Count Maurice his sister, has drawn the Duke of Bovillon toward Britany,
where I am informed by this President, that he means to stay, and to attend
the King, to whom he will clear himself if he take any knowledge of any
jealousy; and the rather because he is there well fortified in a Country full
of those that are of the religion. It shall behove me being there to carry my
self tenderly toward him. The Kings prosperity in Britany, has already made
his Catholics begin to quarrel with the Accord which has been made at the
Assembly: For the persons that were appointed to frame the Articles into an
Edict, have varied upon some principal points, only to trifle out the time,
thereby to discover whether the King may need their assistance or no. But the
Duke of Bovillon hearing inckling of it, made more haste, and has been with
the King and does return forthwith to him as soon as he has been at the
marriage of the Lady Tremoville. Your Lordship knows the circumstances of my
journey are not such as can afford me any means to judge; but this your
Lordship may assure, that by that time I have spoken to the King, things will
break out one way other so far as it will appear whether it be worth the
tarrying to treat or no; after once the King has been dealt with, to which I
will address my self with all speed, and not tarry for the States, who may be
come to Paris by that time I do return: for I believe they will be content to
treat any where. I shall have a miss of Sir Thomas Wilks* were it not we were
well instructed; and surely, he was grown very heavy of late, and dull: If I
should stay here to attend his recovery, it would comsume me to no purpose. I
have written a Letter to the Queen of some such gathering as I have gotten, and
of the speeches between me and the President, because her Majesty may not be
offended that I write not particularly to her self of something. Although the
Spaniards from Callis have spoiled Base-Bologne, yet it is not holden here that
the Cardinal will sit down before any Town speedily, for he will not be able.
Nevertheless the Constable is come into Picardy, to give stay to the Province;
if that be the fruit of the Treaty, we shall have less need to dissuade the
King.

I much fear Sir Tho. Wilks to be in a Lethargy. Since your Lordships Letter
of Feb. 15. which found me at Dover a little before my imbarking, the wind has
not served to bring me any Letter out of England. The Lord of heaven send me
tidings of your Lordships health, for whom I will daily pray. I received also a
Letter from the Earl of Essex of the 16. and did imbark the 17. I humbly take
my leave, and rest

Feb. 26. 1507. Your Lordships humble and obedient Son, TO. CECIL.

Sir Francis Walsingham Secretary, to Monsieur Critoy Secretary of France.
SIR,
WHereas you desire to be advertised touching the proceedings here in
Ecclesiastical causes, because you seem to note in them some inconstancy and
variation, as if we sometimes inclined to one side, sometimes to another, and as
if that clemency and lenity were not used of late, that was used in the
beginning; all which you impute to your own superficial understanding of the
affairs of this State, having notwithstanding her Majesty's doing in singular
reverence, as the real pledges which she has given unto the world of her
sincerity in Religion, and of her wisdom in Government well meriteth: I am glad
of this occasion to impart that little I know in that matter to you, both for
your own satisfaction, and to the end you may make use thereof toward any that
shall not be so modestly and so reasonably minded as you are. I find therefore
her Majesty's proceedings to have been grounded upon two principles.

1. The one, That consciences are not to forced, but to be won and reduced by
the force of truth, with the aid of time and the use of all good means of
instruction and persuasion.

2. The other, That the Causes of Conscience wherein they exceed their bounds,
and grow to be matter of faction, lose their nature; and that Sovereign Prince
ought distinctly to punish the practice in contempt, though colored with the
pretense of Conscience and Religion.

According to these principles, her Majesty at her coming to the Crown, utterly
disliking the tyranny of Rome, which had used by terror and rigor to settle
commandments of men's faiths and consciences, though as a Prince of great wisdom
and magnanimity she suffered but the exercise of one Religion, yet her
proceedings toward the Papists was with great lenity, expecting the good
effects which time might work in them: And therefore her Majesty revived not
the Laws made in the 28. and 35. of her Fathers reign, whereby the Oath of
Supremacy might have been offered at the Kings pleasure to any Subject, though
he kept his conscience never so modestly to himself; and the refusal to take
the same oath without further circumstance was made Treason. But contrariwise
her Majesty not liking to make windows into men's hearts and secret thoughts,
except the abundance of them did overflow into overt and express acts or
affirmations, tempered her Laws so as it restrains every manifest
disobedience in impugning and impeaching advisedly and maliciously her
Majesty's supreme power, maintaining and extolling a foraign jurisdiction. And
as for the Oath, it was altered by her Majesty into a more grateful form, the
hardness of the name and appellation of Supreme Head was removed, and the
penalty of the refusal thereof turned only into disablement to take any
promotion, or to exercise any charge, and yet with liberty of being reinvested
therein if any man should accept thereof during his life. But after when Pius
Quintus had excommunicated her Majesty, and the Bulls of Excommunication were
published in London, whereby her Majesty was in a sort proscribed; and that
thereupon as upon a principal motive or preparative followed the Rebellion in
the North: yet because the ill humors of the Realm were by that Rebellion
partly purged, and that she feared at that time no foreign invasion, and much
less the attempt of any within the Realm not backed by some potent succor from
without, she contented herself to make a Law against that special case of
bringing and publishing of any Bulls or the like Instruments, whereunto was
added a prohibition upon pain not of treason, but of an inferior degree of
punishment against the bringing in of Agnus Dei, hallowed bread, and such other
merchandise of Rome, as are well known not to be any essential part of the
Romish religion, but only to be used in practice as Love Tokens to inchant the
peoples affections from their allegiance to their natural Sovereign. In all
other points her Majesty continued her former lenity: but when about the 20.
year of her reign she had discovered in the King of Spain an intention to
invade her Dominions, and that a principal point of the plot was to prepare a
party within the Realm that might adhere to the Foreigner; and that the
Seminaries began to blossom and to send forth daily Priests and professed men,
who should by vow taken at Shrift reconcile her Subjects from their obedience,
yea and bind many of them to attempt against her Majesty's sacred person; and
that by the poison which they spread, the humors of most Papists were altered,
and that they were no more Papists in conscience and of softness, but Papists
in faction; then were there new Laws made for the punishment of such as should
submit themselves to such reconcilements or renunciations of obedience. And
because it was a Treason carried in the clouds, and in wonderful secrecy, and
came seldom to light, and that there was no presuspition thereof so great as
the Recusants to come to Divine Service, because it was set down by their
Decrees, that to come to Church before reconcilement was absolutely heretical
and damnable: Therefore there were added Laws containing punishment pecuniary
against such Recusants, not to enforce Conscience, but to enfeeble and
impoverish the means of those of whom it rests indifferent and ambiguous
whether they were reconciled or no. And when notwithstanding all this provision
this poison was dispersed so secretly, as that there was no means to stay it
but by restraining the Merchants that brought it in; then lastly there was
added another Law, whereby such seditious Priests of new erection were exiled,
and those that were at that time within the Land shipped over, and so commanded
to keep hence upon pain of Treason.

This has been the proceeding, though intermingled not only with sundry
examples of her Majesty's grace toward such as in her wisdom she knew to be
Papists in conscience, and not in faction and singularity, but also with an
ordinary mitigation toward the offenders in the highest degree committed by
Law, if they would but protest that in case this Realm should be invaded with a
foreign Army by the Popes authority for the Catholic cause, as they term it,
they would take party with her Majesty, and not adhere to her enemies. For the
other part which have been offensive to this State, though in other degree,
which named themselves Reformers, and we commonly call Puritans, this has been
the proceeding toward them a great while: When they inveighed against such
abuses in the Church, as Pluralities, Non-residence, and the like; their zeal
was not condemned, only their violence was sometimes censured: When they
refused the use of some Ceremonies and Rites as superstitious, they were
tolerated with much connivencie and gentleness; yea when they called in
question the Superiority of Bishops, and pretended to bring a Democracie into
the Church, yet their Propositions were heard, considered, and by contrary
writings debated and discussed. Yet all this while it was perceived that their
course was dangerous and very popular: As because Papistry was odious,
therefore it was ever in their mouths, that they sought to purge the Church
from the relics of Popery, a thing acceptable to the People, who love ever to
run from one extreme to another. Because multitudes of Rogues, and Poverty were
an eyesore and dislike to every man, therefore they put it into the Peoples
head, that if Discipline were plaintive, there should be no Beggars nor
Vagabonds; a thing very plausible. And in like manner they promise the people
many other impossible wonders of their Discipline. Besides they opened the
People a way to Government by their Consistory and Presbytery, a thing though
in consequence no less prejudicial to the liberties of private men then to the
sovereignty of Princes, yet in the first show very popular. Nevertheless this
(except it were in some few that entered into extreme contempt) was borne with,
because they pretended but in dutiful manner to make Propositions, and to
leave it to the Providence of God, and the authority of the Magistrate. But now
of late years, when there issued from them a Colony of those that affirmed the
consent of the Magistrate was not to be attended* when under pretense of a
Confession to avoid slanders and imputations, they combined themselves by
Classes and Subscriptions; when they descended into that vile and base means of
defacing the Government of the Church by ridiculous Pasquils; when they began
to make many Subjects in doubt to take an Oath, which is one of the fundamental
points of Justice in this Land and in all places; when they began both to vaunt
of their strength and number of their partisans and followers, and to use the
communications that their Cause would prevail, though with uprore and violence;
then it appeared to be no more zeal, no more conscience, but mere faction and
division: And therefore though the State were compelled to hold somewhat a
harder hand to restrain them then before, yet it was with as great moderation
as the peace of the Church and State could permit. And therefore to conclude,
consider uprightly of these matters, and you shall see her Majesty is no
Temporizer in Religion. It is not the success abroad, nor the change of
servants here at home can alter her; only as the things themselves alter, so
she applied her religious wisdom to correspond unto them, still retaining the
two rules before mentioned in dealing tenderly with consciences, and yet in
discovering Faction from Conscience. Farewell.

Your loving Friend, Francis Walsingham.

Sir Francis Bacon to the Earl of Essex, when Sir Robert Cecil was in France.
My singular good Lord,
I Do write because I have not yet had time fully to express my conceit, nor
now to attend you, touching Irish matters, considering them as they may concern
the State, that it is one of the aptest particulars that has come, or can come
upon the stage for your Lordship to purchase honor upon, I am moved to think
for three reasons: Because it is ingenerate in your House in respect of my Lord
your Fathers noble attempts; because of all the accidents of State at this
time, the labor rests most upon that; and because the world will make a kind
of comparison between those that set it out of frame, and those that shall
bring it into frame: which kind of honor gives the quickest kind of
reflection. The transferring this honor upon your self consists in two
points: The one, if the principal, persons employed come in by you, and depend
upon you; the other, if your Lordship declare your self to undertake a care of
that matter. For the persons, it falls out well, that your Lordship has had
no interest in the persons of imputation: For neither Sir William
Fitz-Williams, nor Sir John Norris was yours: Sir William Russel was conceived
yours, but was curbed: Sir Coniers Clifford, as I conceive it, depends upon
you, who is said to do well; and if my Lord of Ormond in this interim do
accommodate well, I take it he has always had good understanding with your
Lordship. So as all things are not only whole and entire, but of favorable
aspect toward your Lordship, if you now choose well: wherein in your wisdom you
will remember there is a great difference in choice of the persons, as you
shall think the affairs to incline to composition or to war. For your
caretaking, popular conceit has been, that Irish causes have been much
neglected, whereby the very reputation of better care will be a strength: And I
am sure her Majesty and my Lords of the Council do not think their care
dissolved, when they have chosen whom to employ; but that they will proceed in
a spirit of State, and not leave the main point to discretion. Then if a
Resolution be taken, a Consultation must proceed; and the Consultation must be
governed upon Information to be had from such as know the place and matters in
fact: And in taking of information I have always noted there is a skill and a
wisdom. For I cannot tell what account or inquiry has been taken of Sir
William Russel, of Sir Ralph Bingham, of the Earl of Tomond, of Mr. Wilbraham:
but I am of opinion much more would be had of them, if your Lordship shall be
pleased severally to confer, not obiter, but expressly upon some Caveat given
them to think of it before; for, been docet qui prudenter interrogat. For the
points of opposing them, I am too much a stranger to the business to deduce
them: but in a -- Topique methinks the pertinent interrogations must be either
of the possibility and means of Accord, or of the nature of the War, or of the
reformation of the particular abuses, or of the joining of practice with force
in the disunion of the Rebels. If your Lordship doubt to put your sickle in
others men's harvests, yet consider you have these advantages. First, Time being
fit to you in Mr. Secretaries absence: Next, Vis unita fortior: Thirdly, the
business being mixed with matters of war, it is fittest for you: Lastly, I know
your Lordship will carry it with that modesty and respect toward aged Dignity,
and that good correspondencie toward my dear Ally and your good friend now
abroad, as no inconveniencie may grow that way. Thus have I played the ignorant
Statesman, which I do to no body but your Lordship, except I do it to the Queen
sometimes when she trains me on. But your Lordship will accept my duty and good
meaning, and secure me touching the privateness of that I write.

Your Lordships to be commanded, FR. BACON.

Sir Francis Bacon to the Earl of Essex, concerning the Earl of Tyrone.
THose advertisements which your Lordship imparted to me, and the like, I hold
to be no more certain to make judgment upon, then a Patients water to a
Physician: Therefore for me upon one water to make a judgment, were indeed like
a foolish bold Mountebank or Doctor Birket. Yet for willing duties sake, I will
set down to your Lordship what opinion sprung in my mind upon that I read. The
Letter from the Council there leaning to distrust, I do not much rely upon for
three causes. First, because it is always both the grace, and the safety from
blame of such a Council, to err in caution: whereunto add, that it may be they
or some of them are not without envy toward the person who is used in treating
the Accord. Next, because the time of this Treaty has no show of
dissimulation, for that Tyrone is now in no strai^s, but like a Gamester that
will give over because he is a winner, not because he has no more money in his
purse.

Lastly, I do not see but those Articles whereupon they ground their suspicion,
may as well proceed out of fear as out of falsehood for the reteining of the
dependence of the protracting the admission of a Sheriff, the refusing to give
his son for hostage, the holding from present repair to Dublin, the refusing to
go presently to accord without including O Donell and others his associates,
may very well come of a guilty reservation, in case he should receive hard
measure, and not out of treachery, so as if the great person be faithful, and
that you have not here some present intelligence of present succors from
Spain, for the expectation whereof Tyrone would win time. I see no deep cause
of distrusting the cause if it be good. And for the question, her Majesty
seems to me a winner three ways: First, her purse shall have rest: Next, it
will divert the foreign designs upon that place. Thirdly, though her Majesty
is like for a time to govern Precario in the North, and be not in true command
in better state there then before, yet besides the two respects of ease of
charge, and advantage of opinion abroad before mentioned, she shall have a time
to use her Princely policy in two points: In the one to weaken by division and
disunion of the heads; the other by recovering and winning the people by
justice, which of all other causes is the best. Now for the Athenian question
you discourse well, Quid igitur agendum est, I will shoot my fools bolt, since
you will have it so. The Earl of Ormond to be encouraged and comforted above
all things, the Garrisons to be instantly provided for: For opportunity makes a
thief, and if he should mean never so well now* yet such an advantage as the
breaking of her Majesty's Garrisons, might tempt a true man. And because he may
as well waver upon his own inconstancy as upon occasion, and wont of
variableness is never restrained but with fear, I hold it necessary he be
menaced with a strong war, not by words, but by Musters and preparations of
forces here, in case the Accord proceed not; but none to be sent over lest it
disturb the Treaty, and make him look to be overrun as soon as he has laid
down Arms. And but that your Lordship is too easy to pass in such cases from
dissimulation to verity, I think if your Lordship lent your reputation in this
case, it is to pretend that if not a defensive war as in times past, but a full
reconquest of those parts of the Count^ey be resolved on, you would accept the
charge, I think it would help to settle him, and win you a great deal of honor
gratis. And that which most properly concerns this action, if it prove a
peace, I think her majesty shall do well to cure the root of the disease, and
to profess by a commission of peaceable men chiefly of respect and countenance,
and reformation of abuses, extortions, and injustices there, and to plant a
stronger and surer government then heretofore for he ease and protection of the
subject; for the removing of the sword or government in Arms from the Earl of
Ormond, or the sending of a Deputy which will eclipse it if peace follow, I
think unseasonable. Lastly, I hold still my opinion, both for your better
information, and your fuller declaration of your care, and meddling and meriting
service, that your Lordship have a set conference with the persons I named in
my former writing. I rest,

At your Lordships service FR. BACON.

Another to the Earl before his going to Ireland.
MY singular good Lord,
your note of my silence in your occasions has made me set down these few
wandering lines, as one that would say somewhat and can say nothing touching your
Lordships intended charge for Ireland; which my endeavor I know your Lordship
will accept graciously and well, whether your Lordship take it by the handle of
the occasion ministered from your self, or of the affection from which it
proceeds, your Lordship is designed to a service of great merit and great
peril; and as the greatness of the peril must needs include no small
consequence of peril if it be not temperately governed: for all immoderate
success extinguisheth merit, and seareth up distaste and envy, the assured
forerunner of whole changes of peril. But I am at the last point first, some
good spirit leading my pen to presage to your Lordships success: wherein it is
true, I am not without my Oracle and Divinations, none of them superstitious,
and yet not all natural: For first, looking into the course of Gods providence
in things now depending, and calling into consideration how great things God
has done by her Majesty, and for her collect he has disposed of this great
dissection in Ireland, whereby to give an urgent occasion to the reduction of
that whole kingdom, as upon the rebellion of Desmond there ensued the reduction
of that Province. Next, your Lordship goes against three of the unluckiest
vices of all other, Disloyalty, Ingratitude, and Insosolence: which three
offenses in all examples have seldom their doom adjourned to the world to
come. Lastly, he that shall have had the honor to know your Lordship inwardly,
as I have had, shall find bona extra, whereby he may better ground a divination
of good, then upon the diffection of a Sacrifice. But that part I leave; for it
is fit for others to be confident upon you, and you to be confident upon the
cause; the goodness and justice whereof is such, as can hardly be matched in
any example, it being no ambitious war of Foreigns, but a recovery of subjects,
and that after lenity of conditions often tried; and a recovery of them not
only to obedience, but to humanity and policy from more then Indian Barbarism.
There is yet another kind of divination familiar in matters of State, being
that which Demosthenes so often relieth upon in his time, where he says, That
which for the time past is worst of all, is for the time to come the best,
which is, that things go ill, not by accident, but by error; wherein if your
Lordship have been a waking Censor, but must look for no other now but Medice
cura teipsum: And although your Lordship shall not be the blessed Physician that
comes to the declination of the disease, yet you embrace that condition which
many Noble Spirits have accepted for advantage, which is, that you go upon the
greater peril of your fortune, and the less of your reputation; and so the
honor countervaileth the adventure: of which honor your Lordship is in no small
possession, when that her Majesty known to be one of the most judicious Princes
in discerning of spirits, that ever governed, has made choice of you merely
out of her Royal judgment (her affection inclining rather to continue your
attendance) into whose hands and trust to put the commandment and conduct of
so great forces, the gathering in the fruit of so great charge, the execution
of so many Councels, the redeeming of the defaults of so many former Governors,
and the clearing of the glory of so many happy years reign only in this part
excepted. Nay further, how far forth the peril of that State is interlaced
with the peril of England; and therefore how great the honor is to keep and
defend the approaches of this kingdom, I hear many discourse; and indeed there
is a great difference whether the Tortoise gather her self into her shell hurt
or unhurt: And if any man be of opinion, that the nature of an enemy does
extenuate the honor of a service, being but a Rebel and a Savage, I differ
from him; for I see the justest Triumphs that the Romans in their greatest
greatness did obtain, and that whereof the Emperors in their styles took
additions and denominations, were of such an enemy, that is, people barbarous
and not reduced to civility, magnifying a kind of lawless liberty, prodigal of
life, hardened in body, fortified in woods and bogs, placing both justice and
felicity in the sharpness to their swords. Such were the Germans and ancient
Britains, and diverse others. Upon which kind of people whether the victory be a
Conquest, or a Reconquest upon a rebellion or revolt, it made no difference
that ever I could find in honor. And therefore it is not the enriching
predatory war that has the pre-eminence in honor; else should it be more
honor to bring in a Carrock of rich burden, then one of the twelve Spanish
Apostles. But then this nature of people does yield a higher point of honor
(considering in truth and substance) then any war can yield which should be
achieved against a civil enemy, if the end may be Pacique imponere morem, To
replant and refound the policy of that Nation, to which nothing is wanting but
a just and civil Government. Which design as it does descend to you from your
noble Father, who lost his life in that action, though he paid tribute to
nature, and not to fortune; so I hope your Lordship shall be as fatal a Captain
to this war, as Africanus was to the war of Carthage, after that both his Uncle
and his Father had lost their lives in Spain in the same war.

Now although it be true, that these things which I have writ (being but
representations unto your Lordship of the honor and appearance of success of
the enterprise) be not much to the purpose of my direction, yet it is that
which is best to me being no man of war, and ignorant in the particulars of
Estate: for a man may by the eye set up the white right in the midst of the
But, though he be no Archer. Therefore I will only add this wish, according to
the English phrase, which terms a wel-willing advice a wish, That your
Lordship in this whole action looking forward set down this Position, That
merit is worthier then fame; and looking back hither would remember this text,
That obedience is better then sacrifice. For designing to fame and glory, may
make your Lordship in the adventure of your person to be valiant as a private
Soldier rather then as a General; it may make you in your commandments rather
to be gracious then disciplinary; it may make you press action in the respect
of the great expectation conceived, rather hastily then seasonably and safely;
it may make you seek rather to atchieve the war by force, then by intermixture
of practice; it may make you (if God shall send you prosperous beginnings)
rather seek the fruition, of that honor then the perfection of the work in
hand And for your proceeding like a good Protestant (upon warrant, and not upon
good intention) your Lordship knows in your wisdom, that as it is most fit
for you to desire convenient liberty of instruction, so it is no less fit for
you to observe the due limits of them, remembering that the exceeding of them
may not only procure (in case of adverse accident) a dangerous disadvow, but
also (in case of prosperous success) be subject to interpretation, as if all
were not referred to the right end.

Thus I have presumed to write these few lines to your Lordship in methodo
ignorantiae, which is, when a man speaks of any subject not according to the
parts of the matter, but according to the model of his own knowledge. And most
humbly desire your Lordship, that the weakness thereof may be supplied in your
Lordship by a benign acceptance, as it is in me by my best wishing.

FR. BACON.

Another to him after his enlargement.
My Lord,
NO man can expound my doings more then your Lordship, which makes me need to
say the less, only I humbly pray you to believe that I aspire to the conscience
and commendation of Bonus Civis and Bonus Vir, and that I love some things
better I confess then I love your Lordship; yet I love few persons better, both
for gratitudes sake and for virtues, which cannot hurt but by accident. Of
which my good affection it may please your Lordship to assure your self of all
the true effects and offices that I can yield: for as I was ever sorry your
Lordship should fly with many wings, doubting Icarus fortune; so for the
growing up of your own feathers, be they Ostridges or other kind, no man shall
be more glad; and this is the Axel-tree, whereupon I have turned and shall
turn. Which having already signified unto you by some near means, having so fit
a Messenger for mine own Letter, I thought good to redouble also by writing.
And so I commend you to Gods protection.

From Grayes Inn, etc. FR. BACON.

Sir Francis Bacon to Sir Robert Cecil after defeat of the Spaniards in Ireland.
It may please your Honor,
AS one that wishes you all increase of Honor, and as one that cannot leave
to love the State, what interest soever I have, or may come to have in it, and
as one that now this dead Vacation time have some leisure ad aliud agend. I
will presume to propound unto you that which though you cannot but see, yet I
know not whether you apprehend and esteem it in so high a degree, that is, for
the best action of importation to your self, of sound honor and merit of her
Majesty and this Crown, without ventosity or popularity, that the riches of any
occasion, or the tide of any opportunity can possibly minister or offer. And
that is the Causes of Ireland, if they be taken by the right handle: For if the
wound be not ripped up again, and come to a festered sense by new foreign
succors, I think that no Physician will go on much with letting blood in
declinatione morbi, but will intend to purge and corroborate. To which purpose
I send you mine opinion without labor of words in the enclosed; and sure I am
that if you shall enter into the matter according to the vivacity of your own
spirit, nothing can make unto you a more gainful return: For you shall make
the Queens felicity complete, which now as it is incomparable: and for your
self, you shall make your self as good a Patriot, as you are thought Politic;
and to have no less generous ends, then dexterous delivery of your self toward
your ends; and as well to have true arts and grounds of government, as the
facility and felicity of practice and negotiation; and to be as well seen in
the periods and tides of estates, as in your own circle and way: then the which
I suppose nothing can be a better addition and accumulation of honor unto you.

This I hope I may in privateness write, either as a Kinsman that may be
bolder, or as a Scholar that has liberty of discourse without committing of
any absurdity. If not, I pray your Honor to believe I ever loved her Majesty
and the State, and now love your self; and there is never any vehement love
without some absurdity, as the Spaniard well says, De suario con la calentura.
So desiring your Honors pardon, I ever continue, etc.

FR. BACON.

Considerations touching the Queens service in Ireland, by Sir Francis Bacon.
THe Reduction of the Country as well to Civility and Justice, as to Obedience
and Peace, which things as th'affairs now stand I hold to be unspeakable,
consists in four points.

1. The extinguishing of the Relics of War. 2. The Recovery or the hearts of
the People. 3. The removing of the root and occasions of new trouble^ 4.
Plantation and buildings.
For the first, concerning the places, times and particularities of further
prosecution in fact, I leave it to the opinion of men of war, only the
difficulty is to distinguish and discern the propositions which shall be
according to the ends of the State here, that is, final and summary toward the
extirpation of the trouble, sfrom those, which though they pretend the public
ends, yet may refer indeed to the more private and compendious ends of the
Council there, or other particular Governors or Captains. But still as I
touched in my letter, I do think much letting blood in declinatione morbi, is
against method of cure and that it will but exasperate necessity and despair,
and per case discover the hollowness of that which is done already, which none
blazeth to the best show: For Taglaes* and proscription of two or three of the
principal Rebels, they are, no doubt jure Gentium lawful, in Italy usually
practiced upon the Banditi, best in season when a side goes down, and may do
good in two kinds; the one if it take effect, the other in the distrust which
follows amongst the Rebels themselves. But of all other points (to my
understanding) the most effectual is, the well expressing or impressing of the
design of this State, upon that miserable and desolate kingdom, containing the
same between these two lists or boundaries: the one, that the Queen seeks not
an extirpation of the people, but a reduction; and now that she has chastised
them by Royal power and Arms, according to the necessity of the occasion, her
Majesty takes no pleasure in effusion of blood, or displanting of ancient
generations; the other, that her Majesty's Princely care is principally and
intentionally bent upon that action of Ireland; and that she seeks not so
much the ease of charge, as the Royal performance of her Office of Protection,
and reclaim of those her Subjects: And in a word, that the case is allowed as
far as may stand with the honor of the time past, which it is easy to
reconcile, as in my last note I showed. And again I do repeat, that if her
Majesty's design be ex professo to reduce wild and barbarous people to civility
and justice, as well as to reduce Rebels to obedidience, it makes weakness
true Christianity, and conditions turn graces, and so has a fineness in
turning utility upon point of honor or these times. And besides, if her Majesty
shall suddenly abate the lists of her Forces, and shall do nothing to
countervail it in the point of reputation of a public proceeding, I doubt
things may too soon fall back into the state they were in. Next to this, adding
reputation to the cause by imprinting an opinion of her Majesty's care and
intention upon this action, is the taking away the reputation from the contrary
side, by cutting off the opinion and expectation of foreign succors: to which
purpose this enterprise of Algiers, if it hold according to the advertisement,
and if be not wrapped up in the period of this Summer, seems to be an
opportunity Coelitus demissa. And to the same purpose nothing can be more fit
then a Treaty, or a shadow of Treaty of a Peace with Spain, which methinks
should be in our power to fasten, at least rumore tenus, to the deluding of as
wise a people as the Irish. Lastly, for this point that the Ancients called
potestas facta redeundi ad sanitatem, and which is but a mockery when the Enemy
is strong or proud, but effectual in his declination; that is, a liberal
Proclamation of grace and pardon to such as shall submit and come in within a
time prefixed, and of some further reward to such as shall bring others in,
that our sword may be sharpened against another, as a matter of good
experience; and now I think will come in time. And per case though I wish the
exclusions of such a Pardon exceeding few, yet it will not be safe to continue
some of them in their strength, but to translate them and their generation into
England, and give them recompense and satisfaction here for their possessions
there, as the King of Spain did by diverse families of Portugal. The effecting
of all the which fall within the points aforesaid, and likewise those which
fall within the divisions following: Nothing can be in priority either of time
or matter precedent to the sending of some Commission of the continuance ad res
inspiciendas and componendas. For it must be a very significant demonstration
of her Majesty's care of that Kingdom, a credence to any that shall come in and
submit, a bridle to any that have their fortunes there, and shall apply their
propositions to private ends, and an evidence of her Majesty's politic
courses without neglect or respiration; and it has been the wisdom of the
best examples of Government. Toward the recovery of hearts of the people,
there be but three things in natura rerum.

1. Religion. 2. Justice and Protection. 3. Obligation and reward. For
Religion, to speak first of Piety, and then of Policy. All Divines do agree,
that if Consciences be to be enforced at all whereby they differ, yet two
things must precede their inforcement; the one means of information, the other
time of operation: Neither of which they have yet had. Besides till they be
more like reasonable men then they yet are, their society were rather
scandalous to true Religion then otherwise, as pearl cast before swine: For
till they be cleansed from their blood, incontinencie, and theft, and which are
now not the lapses of particular persons, but the very laws of the Nation, they
are incompatible with Religion formed with Policy. There is no doubt but to
wrestle with them now, is directly opposite to their reclaim, and cannot but
continue their alienation of mind from this government. Besides, one of the
principal pretenses whereby the heads of the Rebellion have prevailed both with
the people and the Foreigner, has been the defense of the Catholic religion;
and it is that likewise has made the Foreigner reciprocally more plausible
with the Rebel. Therefore a Toleration of Religion for a time not definite,
except it be in some principal Towns and Precincts, after the manner of some
French Edicts, seems to me to be a matter warrantable by Religion, and in
Policy of absolute necessity; and the hesitation of this, I think, has been a
great casting back of the affairs there. Neither if any English Papist or
Recusant shall for liberty of his conscience transfer his person, family and
fortunes thither, do I hold it a matter of danger, but expedient to draw on
undertaking, and to further population. Neither if Rome will cozen it self by
conceiving it may be some degree to the like Toleration in England, do I hold
it a matter of any moment, but rather a good mean to take off the fierceness
and eagerness of the humor of Rome, and to stay further Excommunications and
Interdictions of Ireland. But there would go hand in hand with this some course
of advantage. Religion indeed, where the people is capable of it, is the
sending over of some good Preachers, especially of that sort which are vehement
and zealous perswaders, and not Scholastical, to be resident in the principal
Towns, endowing them with some stipend out of her Majesty's revenues, as her
Majesty has most religiously and graciously done in Lancashire; and the
recontinuing and replenishing the College begun at Dublin, the placing of good
men Bishops in the Sea there; the taking care of the versions of Bibles,
Catechisms, and other books of Instruction into the Irish language, and the
like religious courses, both for the honor of God, and for the avoiding of
scandal and insatisfaction here, by a toleration of Religion there. For
instance, the Barbarism and desolation of the Country considered, it is not
possible they should find any sweetness at all of it, (which has been the
error of times past) formal and fetched far off from the State, because it will
require running up and down for process of polling and exactions by fees, and
many other delays and charges: And therefore there must be an interim in which
the Justice must be only summary, the rather because it is fit and safe for a
time the Country do partioipate of Martial government. And therefore I do wish
in every principal Town or place of habitation there were a Captain or a
Governor, and a Judge, such as Recorders and learned Stewards are here in
Corporations, who may have a Prerogative-Commission to hear and determine
secundum sanam discretionem, and as near as may be to the Laws and Customs of
England, and that by Bill or Plaint without Original Writ, reserving from their
sentence matter of Freehold and Inheritance to be determined before a superior
Judge itinerant, to be reversed if cause be, before the Council of the Province
to be established with fit Informations.

For obligation and reward, it is true no doubt which was anciently said, That
a State is contained in two words, Praemium and Poena: And I am persuaded, if a
penny in the pound which has been spent in poena, a chastisement of Rebels,
without other fruit or emolument of this State, had been spent in praemio, that
in rewarding, things had never grown to this extremity. But to speak forwards:
The keeping of the principal Irish persons in term of contentment, and without
particular complaint, as generally the carrying of an eaven course between the
English and the Irish, whether it be in competition, or whether it be in
controversy, as if they were one Nation, without the same partial course which
has been held by the Governors and Counselors, that some have favored the
Irish, and some contrary, is one of the best medicines for that State. And as
for other points of governing their Nobility as well in this Court as there, of
Knighthood, of Education of their Children, and the like points of comfort and
allurement, they are things which fall into every man's consideration.

For the extirpating of the seeds of troubles, I suppose the main roots are but
three: The first, the ambition and absoluteness of the chief of the Families
and Sects; the second, the licentious idleness of their Kerns and Soldiers
that lie upon their Country by sesses and such oppressions; the third, the
barbarous customs in habits of apparel, in these Poets or Heralds that inchant
them in savage manners, and sundry other such dregs of Barbarism and Rebellion,
which by a number of politic Statutes of Ireland meet to be put in execution
are already forbidden, unto which such additions may be made as the present
time requires. But the reducing of this branch requires a more particular
notice of the state and manners there then falls within my compass.

For Plantations and buildings, I do find it strange, that in the last plot for
the population of Munster, there were limitations how much in Demesnes, and how
much in Farm and Tenantry, how many buildings should be erected, how many Irish
in mixture should be admitted; but there was no restraint that they might not
build sparsim at their pleasure, much less any condition that they should make
places fortified and defensible, the which was too much secureness to my
understanding. So as for this last point of plantations and buildings, there be
two considerations which I hold most material; the one of quickening, the other
for assuring: The first is, that choice be made of such persons for the
government of Towns and places, and such undertakers be procured as be men
gracious and wel-beloved, and are like to be well followed; wherein for Munster
it may be, because it is not Res integra, but that the former undertakers stand
interessed there, will be some difficulty; but surely (in mine opinion) either
with agreeing with them, or by overruling them by a Parliament in Ireland
(which in this course of a politic proceeding, infinite occasions will
require speedily to be held) it will be fit to supply fit qualified persons for
underakers. The other, that it be not left as heretofore, to the pleasure of
the undertakers and adventurers, where and how to build and plant, but that
they do it according to a prescript or formality. For first, the places both
Maritine and Inland, which are fittest for Colonies or Garrison, as well for
doubt of Foreigners, as for keeping the Country in bridle, would be found
surveighed and resolved upon; and then that the Patentees be tied to build
those places only, and to fortify as shall be thought convenient. And lastly,
it follows of course in Countries of new populations, to invite and provoke
inhabitants by ample liberties and Charters.

FR. BACON.

Sir Francis Bacon to the Lord Treasurer touching his speech in Parliament.
It may please your good Lordship,
I Was sorry to find by your Lordships speech yesterday, that my last speech in
Parliament delivered in discharge of my conscience, my duty to God, her
Majesty, and my Country, was offensive: if it were misreported, I would be
glad to attend your Lordship to disavow any thing I said not; if it were
misconstrued, I would be glad to expound my words to exclude any sense I meant
not; if my heart be mis-judged by imputation of popularity, or opposition, I
have great wrong, and the greater because the manner of my speech did most
evidently show, that I spoke most simply, and only to satisfy my conscience,
and not with any advantage or policy to sway the cause, and my terms carried
all signifification of duty, and zeal toward her Majesty and, her service. It
is very true, that from the beginning, whatsoever was a double Subsidy, I did
wish might for presidents sake appear to be extraordinary, and for discontents
sake might not have been levied upon the poverty; though otherwise I wished it
as rising as I think this will prove, or more. This was my mind, I confess it:
and therefore I most humbly pray your good Lordship, first to continue me in
your own good opinion, and then to perform the part of an honorable good friend
toward your poor servant, and all in drawing her Majesty to accept of the
sincerity and simplicity of my zeal, and to hold me in her Majesty's favor,
which is to me dearer then my life. And so, etc.

Your Lordships most humble in all duty, FR. BACON.

Sir Francis Bacon to the Earl of Northampton.
May it please your good Lordship,
AS the time of sowing of a seed is known, but the time of coming up and
disclosing is casual, or according to the season; so I am witness to my self,
that there has been covered in my mind a long time, a seed of affection and
zeal toward your Lordship, sown by the estimation of your virtues, and your
particular honors and favors to my brother deceased, and to my self; which
seed sti l springing now bursteth forth into this profession. And to be plain
with your Lordship, it is very true, and no winds or noyses of evil matters
can blow this out of my head or heart, that your great capacities and love
toward studies and contemplations of an higher and worthier nature then
popular, a matter rare in the world, and in a person of your Lordships quality
almost singular, is to me a great and chief motive to draw my affection and
admiration toward you: and therefore, good my Lord, if I may be of any use to
your Lordship, I humbly pray your Lordship to hold me your own: and therefore
withal, not to do so much disadvantage to my good mind, as to conceive that
this commendation of my humble service proceeds out of any straits of my
occasions; but merely out of an election, and indeed the fullness of my heart.
And so wishing your Lordship all prosperity, I continue yours, etc.

FR. BACON.

To the Lord Kinloss, upon the entrance of K. James.
My Lord,
THe present occasion awaketh in me a remembrance of the constant amity and
mutual good offices which passed between my Brother deceased and your Lordship,
whereunto I was less strange then in respect of the time I had reason to
pretend; and withal I call to mind the great opinion my Brother (who seldom
failed in judgment of a person) would often express to me of your Lordships
great wisdom and soundness both in head and heart toward the service and
affairs of the Lord our Sovereign King. The one of those has bred in me an
election, and the other a confidence to address my good will and sincere
affection to your good Lordship, not doubting in regard that my course of life
has wrought me not to be altogether unseen in the matters of the Kingdom, that
I may be in some use both in points of service to the King and your Lordships
particular: And on the other side I will not omit to desire humbly your
Lordships favor in furthering a good conceit and impression of my most humble
duty and true zeal toward the King, to whose Majesty words cannot make me
known, neither mine own nor others, but time will to no disadvantage of any
that shall ^orerun his Majesty's experience by their humanity and
commendations. And so I commend your Lordship to Gods protection.

From Grays-Inne, etc. Your etc. FR. BACON.

To King James.
MAy it please your most excellent Majesty:
It is observed upon a place in the Canticles by some, Ego sum Flos Campi and
Lilium Convallium; that it is not said, Ego sum flos horti and lilium montium:
because the Majesty of that Person is not enclosed for a few, nor appropriate
to the great. And yet notwithstanding this Royal virtue of access, which nature
and judgment has placed in your Majesty's mind as the portal of all the rest,
could not of it self (my imperfections considered) have animated me to have
made oblation of my self immediately to your Majesty, had it not been joined to
a habit of like liberty which I enjoyed with my late dear Sovereign Mistress, a
Princess happy in all things, but most happy in such a Successor. And yet
further and more nearly I was not a little encouraged, not only upon a supposal
that unto your Majesty's sacred ears (open to the air of all virtues) there
might have come some small breath of the good memory of my Father, so long a
principal Councellor in your Kingdom, but also by the particular knowledge of
the infinite devotion and incessant endeavors beyond the strength of his body,
and the nature of the times, which appeared in my good Brother toward your
Majesty's service, and were on your Majesty's part through your singular
benignities by many most gracious and lively significations and favors
accepted and acknowledged, beyond the thought of any thing he could effect: All
which endeavors and duties for the most part were common to my self with him,
though by design between brethren dissembled. And therefore, most high and
mighty King, my most dear and dread Sovereign Lord, since now the cornerstone
is laid of the mightiest Monarchy in Europe, and that God above, who is noted
to have a mighty hand in bridling the floods and fluctuations of the seas, and
of peoples hearts, has by the miraculous and universal consent (the more
strange, because it proceeds from such diversity of causes) in your coming
in, given a sign and token what he intends in the continuance; I think there
is no Subject of your Majesty, who loves this Island, and is not hollow and
unworthy, whose heart is not on fire not only to bring you Peace Offerings to
make you propitious, but to sacrifice himself as a Burnt-offering to your
Majesty's service: Amongst which number no man's fire shall be more pure and
fervent; but how far forth it shall blaze out, that rests in your Majesty's
employment. For since your fortune, in the greatness thereof, has for a time
debarred your Majesty of the fruitly virtue which one calls the principal,
(Principis est virtus maxima nosse suos) because your Majesty has many of
yours which are unknown unto you, I must leave all to the trial of further
time; and thirsting after the happiness of kissing your Royal hand, continue
ever

Your etc. FR. BACON.

To the Earl of Northumberland, concerning a Proclamation upon the Kings entry.
It may please your Lordship,
I Do hold it a thing formal and necessary for the King to forerun his coming,
be it never so speedy, with some gracious Declaration for the cherishing,
entertaining, and preparing of men's affections. For which purpose I have
conceived a draught, it being a thing to me familiar in my Mistress her times
to have my pen used in politic writings of satisfaction. The use of this may
be in two sorts: First properly, if your Lordship think convenient to show the
King any such draught, because the veins and pulses of this State cannot but be
known here; which if your Lordship should, then I would desire your Lordship to
withdraw my name, and only signify that you gave some heads of direction of
such a matter to one of whose style and pen you had some opinion. The other
collateral, that though your Lordship make no other use of it, yet it is a kind
of pourtraicture of that which I think worthy to be advised to the King, to
express himself according to those points which are therein conceived, and
perhaps more compendious and significant then if I had set them down in
Article* I would have attended your Lordship, but for some little Physic I
took. To morrow morning I will wait on you. So I ever continue, etc.

FR. BACON.

To the Earl of Southampton.
It may please your Lordship,
I Would have been very glad to have presented my humble service to your
Lordship by my attendance, if I could have foreseen that it should not have
been unpleasing unto you. And therefore because I would commit no error, I
chose to write, assuring your Lordship how credible soever, yet it is as true
as a thing that God knows, that this great change in me has wrought no other
change toward your Lordship then this, that I may safely be now that which I
was truly before: And so craving no other pardon then for troubling you with
this letter, I do not now begin to be, but continue to be

Your Lordships most humble and devoted, FR. BACON.

To the Earl of Northumberland.
It may please your Lordship,
I Would not have lost this journey, and yet I have not that I went for: For I
have had no private conference to purpose with the King, no more has almost
any other English; for the speech his Majesty admits with some Noblemen, is
rather matter of grace then matter of business: with the Attorney he spoke,
urged by the Treasurer of Scotland, but no more then needs must. After I had
received his Majesty's first welcome, and was promised private access, yet not
knowing what matter of service your Lordship carried, for I saw it not, and
knowing that priviness in advertisement is much, I chose rather to deliver it
to Sir Thomas Hoskins then to let it cool in my hands, upon expectation of
access. Your Lordship shall find a Prince the furthest from vainglory that may
be, and rather like a Prince of the ancient form then of the latter time; his
speeches swift an cursory, and in the full Dialect of his Nation, and in speech
of business short, in speech of discourse large: he affects popularity by
gracing them that are popular, and not by any fashions of his own; he is
thought somewhat general in his favors; and his virtue of access is rather
because he is much abroad, and in press, then that he gives easy audience:
he hasteneth to a mixture of both kingdoms and nations, faster perhaps then
policy will well bear. I told your Lordship once before my opinion, that
methought his Majesty rather asked counsel of the time past, then of the time
to come. But it is yet early to be found in any settled opinion. For other
particularities I refer to conference, having in these generals gone further in
these tender arguments then I would have done, were not the bearer hereof so
assured. So I continue your, etc.

FR. BACON.

To Sir Edward Coke expostulatory.
Mr. Attorney,
I Thought best once for all to let you know in plainness what I find of you,
and what you shall find of me. To take to your self a liberty to disgrace and
disable my Law, experience, discretion: what it pleases you, I pray think of
me. I am one that know both mine own wants and other men's, and it may be
perchance that mine may mend when others stand at a stay: And surely I may not
in public place endure to be wronged, without repelling the same to my best
advantage to right myself. You are great, and therefore have the more enviers,
which would be glad to have you paid at another cost. Since the time I missed
the Sollicitors place, the rather I think by your means, I cannot expect that
you and I shall ever serve as Attorney and Solicitor; but either to serve with
another upon your remove, or to step into some other course. So as I am more
free then ever I was from any occasion of unworthy conforming my self to you,
more then general good manners, or your particular good usage shall provoke:
And if you had not been short-sighted in your own fortune (as I think) you
might have had more use of me; but that tide is past. I write not this to show
any friends what a brave Letter I have writ to Mr. Attorney, I have none of
those humors: but that I have written is to a good end, that is, to the more
decent carriage of my Masters service, and to our particular better
understanding one another. This Letter, if it shall be answered by you in deed,
and not in word, I suppose it will not be worse for us both; else it is but a
few lines lost, which for a much smaller matter I would adventure: So this
being to your self, I for my part rest

Your etc. FR. BACON.

To the same after Lo. Chief Justice, and in disgrace.
My very good Lord,
THough it be true, that who considers the wind and the rain; shall neither
sow nor reap, Eccles. 9.15. yet there is a season for every action: And so
there is a time to speak, and a time to keep silence; there is a time when the
words of a poor simple man may profit: and that poor man in the Preacher which
delivered the City by his wisdom, found, that without this opportunity, the
power both of wisdom and eloquence lose but their labor, and cannot charm the
deaf Adder. God therefore, before his Son that brings mercy, sent his servant
the Trumpeter of repentance to level a very high hill, to prepare the way
before him, making it smooth and straight. And as it is in spiritual things,
where Christ never comes before his Way-maker has laid even the heart with
sorrow and repentance, since self-conceited and proud persons think themselves
too good and too wise to learn of their inferior, and therefore need not the
Physician: so in the rules of earthly wisdom it is not possible for nature to
attain any mediocrity of perfection, before she be humbled by knowing her self
and her own ignorance. Not only knowledge, but also every other gift (which we
call the gifts of fortune) have power to pull up earthly -- Afflictions only
level these Molehils of pride, plough the heart, and make it fit for Wisdom to
sow her seed, and for Grace to bring forth her increase. Happy is that man
therefore both in regard of heavenly and earthly wisdom, that is thus wounded,
to be cured; thus broken, to be made straight; thus made acquainted with his
own imperfections, that he may be perfected.

Supposing this to be the time of your affliction, that which I have propounded
to my self is, by taking this seasonable advantage, like a true friend (though
far unworthy to be counted so) to show you your true shape in a glass, and that
not in a false one to flatter you, nor yet in one that should make you seem
worse then you are, and so offend you, but in one made by the reflection of your
own words and actions, from whose light proceeds the voice of the people, which
is often not unfitly called the voice of God: but therein (since I purposed a
truth) I must entreat liberty to be plain, a liberty that at this time I know
not whether or no I may use safely, I am sure at other times I could not: yet
of this resolve your self, it proceeds from love, and a true desire to do you
good, that you knowing the general opinion, may not altogether neglect or
contemn it, but mend what you find amiss in yourself, and tain what your
judgment shall approve; for to this end shall truth be delivered as naked as if
your self were to be anatomized by the hand of opinion. All men can see their
own profit, that part of the wallet hangs before. A true friend (whose worthy
office I would perform, since I fear both your self and all great men want
such, being themselves true friends to few or none) is first to show the other,
and which is from your eyes.

First therefore behold your errors: In discourse you delight to speak too
much, not to hear other men; this some say becomes a pleader, not a Judge: for
by this sometimes your affections are entangled with a love of your own
arguments though they be the weaker, and rejecting of those which when your
affections were settled, your own judgment would allow for strongest. Thus while
you speak in your own Element, the Law, no man ordinarily equals you; but when
you wander, (as you often delight to do) you then wander indeed, and give never
such satisfaction as the curious time requires. This is not caused by any
natural defect, but first for want of election, when you having a large and
fruitful mind, should not so much labor what to speak, as to find what to
leave unspoken; rich soils are often to be weeded.

Secondly, you cloy your auditory when you would be observed, speech must
either be sweet or short.

Thirdly, you converse with Books, not men, and Books specially humane, and
have no excellent choice with men, who are the best Books: for a man of action
and employment you seldom converse with, and then but with your underlings,
not freely, but as a Schoolmaster with his Scholars, ever to teach, never to
learn. But if sometimes you would in your familiar discourse hear others, and
make election of such as know what they speak, you should know many of these
tales you tell to be but ordinary, and many other things which you delight to
repeat and serve in for novelties, to be but stale. As in your pleadings you
were wont to insult over misery, and to inveigh bitterly at the persons (which
bred you many enemies whose poison yet swells, and the effects now appear) so
are you still wont to be a little careless in this point to praise or disgrace
upon slight grounds, and that sometimes untruly, so that your reproofs or
commendations are for the most part neglected and contemned; when the censure
of a Judge (coming slow, but sure) should be a brand to the guilty, and a crown
to the virtuous. You will jest at any man in public, without respect of the
persons dignity or your own. This disgraceth your gravity more then it can
advance the opinion of your wit, and so do all actions which we see you do
directly with a touch of vainglory, having no respect to the true end. You make
the Law to lean too much to your opinion, whereby you show your self to be a
legal Tyrant, striking with tha^ weapon where you please, since you are able
to turn the edge any way. For thus the wise Master of the Law gives warning to
young Students, that they should be wary lest while they hope to be instructed
by your integrity and knowledge, they should be deceived with your skill armed
with authority. Your too much love of the world is too much seen, when having
the living of 10000l. you relieve few or none. The hand that has taken so
much, can it give so little? Herein you show no bowels of compassion, as if you
thought all too little for your self; or that God had given you all that you
have (if you think wealth to be his gift, I mean that you get well, for I know
sure the rest is not) only to that end you should still gather more, and never
be satisfied, but try how much you could gather to account for all at the great
and general Audit-day. We desire you to amend this, and let your poor Tenants
in Norfolk find some comfort, where nothing of your estate is spent toward
their relief, but all brought up hither to the impoverishing of your Country.

In your last, which might have been your best piece of service to the State,
affectioned to follow that old rule which gives Justice leaden heels and iron
hands, you used too many delays, till the Delinquents hands were loosed, and
yours bound. In that work you seemed another Fabius, here the humor of
Marcellus would have done better: What needed you have sought more evidences
then enough? While you pretended the finding out of more, (missing your aim)
you discredited what you had found. This best Judgments think, though you never
used such speeches as are fathered upon you, yet you might well have done it,
and but rightly: For this crime was second to none but the Powder Plot: That
would have blown up all at one blow, a merciful cruelty; this would have done
the same by degrees, a lingering, but a sure way; one might by one be called
out, till all opposers had been removed. Besides, that other Plot was
scandalous to Rome, making Popery odious in the sight of the whole world: This
has been scandalous to the truth of the whole Gospel, and since the first
nullity to this instant, when Justice has her hands bound, the Devil could not
have invented a more mischievous practice to our State and Church then this
has been, is, and is like to be. God avert the evil.

But herein you committed another fault, that you were too open in your
proceedings, and so taught them whereby to defend themselves; so you gave them
time to undermine Justice, and to work upon all advantages both of affections
and honor, and opportunity, and breach of friendship: which they have so well
followed, sparing neither pains nor cost, that it almost seems an offense in
you to have done so much indeed, then that you have done no more: you stopped the
confessions and accusations of some, who perhaps had they been suffered, would
have spoken enough to have removed some stumbling blocks out of your way: and
that you did not this in the favor of any one, but of I know not what present
unadvised humors, supposing enough behind to discover all, which fell not out
so. Howsoever, as the Apostle says in another case, you went not rightly to
the truth, and therefore though you were to be commended for what you did, yet
you were to be reprehended for many circumstances in the doing; and doubtless
God has an eye in this cross to your negligence, and the briers are left to be
pricks in your sides, and thorns in your eyes. But that which we commend you
for, are those excellent parts of Nature, and knowledge in the Law, which you
are endued withal; but these are only good in their good use: wherefore we
thank you heartily for standing stoutly in the Commonwealths behalf, hoping it
proceeds not from a disposition to oppose Greatness (as your enemies say) but
to do justice, and deliver truth indifferently without respect of persons; and
in this we pray for your prosperity, and are sorry that your good actions
should not always succeed happily. But in the carriage of this you were faulty,
for you took it in hand in an evil time, both in respect of the present
business which it interrupted, and in regard of his present sickness whom it
concerned, whereby you disunited your strength, and made a gap for the enemies
to pass out at, and to return and assault you.

But now, since the case so stands, we desire you to give way to power, and
so to fight that you be not utterly broken, but reserved entirely to serve the
Commonwealth again, and do what good you can, since you cannot do all the good
you would; and since you are fallen upon this rock, cast out the goods to save
the bottom, stop the leaks and make toward land, learn of the Steward to make
friends of the unrighteous Mammon. Those Spaniards in Mexico who were chased of
the Indians, tell us what to do with our goods in our extremities, they being
to pass over a river in their flight, as many as cast away their gold swam
over safe; but some more covetous, keeping their gold, were either drowned with
it, or overtaken and slain by the Savages: you have received now learn to give.
The Beaver learns us this lesson, who being hunted for his stones, bites them
off: You cannot but have much of your estate (pardon my plainness) ill got,
think how much of that you never spoke for, how much by speaking unjustly or in
unjust causes. Account it then a blessing of God if thus it may be laid out for
your good, and not left for your heir to hasten the wasting of much of the
rest, perhaps of all; for so we see God oftentimes proceeds in judgment with
many hasty gatherers: you have enough to spare, being well laid, to turn the
Tide, and fetch all things again. But if you escape (I suppose it worthy of an
if) since you know the old use, that none called in question must go away
uncensured; yet consider that accusations make wounds, and leave scarres; and
though you see your tale behind your back, your self free, and the Covert
before, yet remember there are stands, trust not a reconciled enemies, but
think the peace is but to secure you for further advantage, expect a second and
a third encounter, the main battle, the wings are yet unbroken, they may
charge you at an instant, or death before them: walk therefore circumspectly;
and if at length by means of our good endeavors and yours, you recover the
favor that you have lost, give God the glory in action, not in words only,
and remember us with sense of your past misfortune, whose estate has, does,
and may hereafter lie in the power of your breath. There is a great mercy in
dispatch, delays are tortures wherewith we are by degrees rent out of our
estates: do not you (if you be restored) as some others do, fly from the
service of virtue to serve the time, as if they repented their goodness, or
meant not to make a second hazard in Gods House; but rather let this cross make
you zealous in Gods cause, sensible in ours, and more sensible in all, which
express thus. You have been a great enemy to Papists, if you love God, be so
still, but more indeed then heretofore: for much of your zeal was heretofore
wasted in words: call to remembrance that they were the persons that prophesied
of that cross of yours long before it happened, they saw the storm coming, being
the principal contrivers and furtherers of the plot, the men that blew the
coals, heat the Iron, and made all things ready, they owe you a good turn, and
will, if they can, pay it you, you see their hearts by their deeds, prove then
your faith so too. The best good work you can do, is to do the best you can
against them, that is, to see the Law severely, justly, and diligently
executed. And now we beseech you, my Lord, be sensible both of the stroke, and
hand that strikes: learn of David to leave Shimei, and call upon God, he has
some great work to do, and he prepares you for it, he would neither have you
faint, nor yet bear this cross with a Stoical resolution. There is a Christian
mediocrity worthy of your greatness I must be plain, perhaps rash. Had some
notes which you have taken at Sermons, been written in your heart to practice,
this work had been done long ago, without the envy of your enemies: But when we
will not mind our selves, God (if we belong to him) takes us in hand; and
because he sees that we have unbridled stomachs, therefore he sends outward
crosses, which while they cause us to mourn, do comfort us, being assured
testimonies of his love that sends them: to humble our selves therefore before
God, is the part of a Christian; but for the world, and our enemies, the
counsel of the Poet is apt, Tune cede malis, sed contra andentior ito.

The last part of this counsel you forget, yet none need be ashamed to make
use of it, that so being armed against casualties, you may stand firm against
the assaults on the right hand and on the left. For this is certain, the mind
that is most prone to be puffed up with prosperity, is most weak and apt to be
dejected with the least puff of adversity. Indeed she is strong enough to make
an able man stagger, striking terrible blows; but true Christian wisdom gives
us armor of proof against all assaults, and teaches us in all estates to be
content: for though she cause our truest friends to declare themselves our
enemies, though she give heart then to the most cowardly to strike us, though
an hours continuance countervail an age of prosperity, though she cast in our
dish all that ever we have done, yet has she no power to hurt the humble and
wise, but only to break such as too much prosperity has made stiff in their
own thoughts, but weak indeed and fitted for renewing, when the wise rather
gather from thence profit and wisdom by the example of David, who said, Before
I was chastised, I went wrong. Now then, he that knows the right way, will
look better to his footing. Gardan says, That weeping, fasting, and sighing,
are the chief purgers of griefs: Indeed naturally they help to assuage sorrow;
but God in this case is the only and best Physician: the means he has
ordained are the advice of friends, the amendment of our selves: for amendment
is both Physician and Cure. For friends, although your Lordship be scant, yet I
hope you are not altogether destitute; if you be, do but look on good books,
they at true friends, that will neither flatter nor dissemble; be you but true
to your self, applying what they teach unto the party grieved, and you shall
need no other comfort nor counsel. To them, and to Gods holy Spirit directing
you in the reading of them, I commend your Lordship, beseeching him to send you
a good issue out of these troubles, and from henceforth to work a reformation
in all that is amiss, and a resolute perseverance, proceeding, and growth in
all that is good, and that for his glory, the bettering of your self, this
Church and Commonwealth, whose faithful servant whilst you remain, I remain a
faithful servant to you.

To Sir Vincent Skinner, expostulatory.
Sir Vincent Skinner, I See that by your needless delays this matter is grown
to a new question: wherein for the matter it self, if it had been staid at the
beginning by my Lord Treasurer and my Lord Chancellor, I should not so much have
stood upon it: For the great and daily travels which I take in his Majesty's
service either are rewarded in themselves, in that they are but my duty, or
else may deserve a much greater matter. Neither can I think amiss of any man,
that in furtherance of the Kings benefit moved the doubt, that I knew not what
warrant you had: But my wrong is, that you having had my Lord Treasurers and
Mr. Chancellors warrant for payment above a month since, you (I say) making
your payments belike upon such differences as are better known to your self,
then agreeable to due respect of his Majesty's service, have delayed all this
time, otherwise then I might have expected either from our ancient
acquaintance, or from that regard as one in your place may owe to one in mine.
By occasion whereof there ensues to me a greater inconvenience, that now my
name in sort must be in question amongst you, as if I were a man likely to
demand that that were unreasonable, or to be denied that that is reasonable:
And this must be, because you can pleasure men at pleasure. But this I leave
with this, that it is the first matter wherein I had occasion to discern of
your friendship: which I see to fall to this, That whereas Mr. Chancellor the
last time, in my man's hearing, very honorably said that he would not
discontent any man in my place, it seems you have no such caution. But my
writing to you now is, to know of you where now the stay is, without being any
more beholden to you, to whom indeed no man ought to be beholden in those cases
in a right course.

And so I bid you farewell, FR. BACON

To Mr. Toby Matthews.
Mr. Matthews,
DO not think me for get full, or altered toward you: But if I should say I
could do you any good, I should make my power more then it is. I do fear that
which I am right sorry for, that you grow more impatient and b^sie then at
first; which make^ me exceedingly fear the issue of that which seems not to
stand at a stay. I my self am out of doubt, that you have been miserably abused
when you were first seduced; and that which I take in compassion, others may
take in severity. I pray God, that understands us all better then we understand
one another, continue you, as I hope he will, (...) least within the bounds of
loyalty to his Majesty, and natural piety to (...) our Country. And I entreat
you much to meditate sometimes upon the effect of Superstition in this last
Powder Treason, fit to be tabled and pictured in the chambers of Meditation as
another Hell above the ground; and well justifying the censure of the Heathen,
that Superstition it far worse then Atheism: by how much it is less evil to
have no good opinion of God at all, then such as are impious toward his divine
Majesty and goodness. Good Mr. Matthews, receive your self back from these
courses of perdition. Willing to have written a great deal more, I continue

Your etc. FR. BACON

To the Lord Treasurer, concerning the Sollicitors place.
AFter the remembrance of my humble duty, though I know by late experience how
mindful your Lordship vouchsafes to be of me and my poor fortune; and since
it pleased your Lordship during your indisposition, when her Majesty came to
visit your Lordship, to make mention of me for my employment and preferment:
yet being now in the Country, I do presume that your Lordship, who of your self
had an honorable care of the matter, will not think it a trouble to be
solicited therein. My hope is this, that whereas your Lordship told me her
Majesty was somewhat gravelled upon the offense she took at my Speech in
Parliament, your Lordships favorable endeavor, who has assured me that for
your own part you construe that I spoke to the best, will be as a good tide to
remove her from that shelf: And it is not unknown unto your good Lordship, that
I was the first of the ordinary sort of the lower House that spoke for the
Subsidy; and that which I after spoke in difference, was but in circumstance
of time, which methinks was no great matter, since there is variety allowed in
Council as a Discord in Music to make it more perfect.

But I may justly doubt her Majesty's impression upon this particular, as her
conceit otherwise of my insufficiency and unworthiness: which though I
acknowledge to be great, yet it will be the less, because I purpose not to
divide my self between her Majesty and the causes of other men, as others have
done, but to attend her business only; hoping that a whole man meanly able, may
do as well as half a man better able: And if her Majesty thinks that she
shall make an adveuture in using one that is rather a man of study then of
practice and experience, surely I may remember to have heard that my Father (an
example I confess rather ready then like) was made Solicitor of the
Augmentation (a Court of much business) when he had never practiced, and was
but 27 years old: And Mr. Brograve was now in my time called Attorney of the
Duchy, when he had practiced little or nothing, and yet has discharged his
place with great sufficiency. But those and the like things are as her Majesty
shall be made capable of them: wherein knowing what authority your Lordships
commendations has with her Majesty, I conclude with my self that the substance
of strength which I may receive will be from your Lordship. It is true, my life
has been so private, as I have had no means to do your Lordship service: but
yet, as your Lordship knows, I have made offer of such as I could yield. For
as God has given me a mind to love the public, so incidently I have ever had
your Lordship in singular admiration, whose happy ability her Majesty has so
long used to her great honor and yours. Besides, that amendment of state or
countenance which I have received has been from your Lordship: And therefore
if your Lordship shall stand a good friend to your poor Ally, you shall but
tueri opus which you have begun; and your Lordship shall bellow your benefit
upon one that has more sense of obligation, then of selflove.

Thus humbly desiring pardon of so long a Letter, I wish your Lordship all
happiness.

Your Lordships in all humbleness to be commanded, FR. BACON
June 6. 1595.
To the Earl of Salisbury concerning the same.
It may please your Lordship.
I Am not privy to my self of any such ill deserving toward your Lordship; as
that I should think it an impudent thing to be a Suitor for your favor in a
reasonable matter, your Lordship being to me as (with your good favor) you
cannot cease to be: but rather it were a simple and arrogant part in me to
forbear it.

It is thought Mr. Attorney shall be Chief Justice of the Commonplace; in case
Mr. Solicitor rise, I would be glad now at last to be Solicitor: chiefly
because I think it will increase my practice, wherein God blessing me a few
years, I may mend my state, and so after fall to my studies and ease, whereof
one is requisite for my body, and the other serves for my mind: wherein if I
shall find your Lordships favor, I shall be more happy then I have been, which
may make me also more wise. I have small store of means about the King, and to
sue my self is not fit; and therefore I shall leave it to God, his Majesty, and
your Lordship: for I must still be next the door. I thank God, in these
transitory things I am well resolved. So beseeching your Lordship not to think
this Letter the less humble, because it is plain, I rest, etc.

FR. BACON.

Again to the Earl of Salisbury.
It may please your good Lordship,
I Am not ignorant how mean a thing I stand for, in desiring to come into the
Sollicitors place: For I know well it is not the thing it has been, time
having wrought alteration both in the profession, and in that special place.
Yet because I think it will increase my practice, and that it may satisfy my
friends, and because I have been voiced to it, I would be glad it were done.
Wherein I may say to your Lordship, in the confidence of your poor Kinsman, and
a man by you advanced, In idem fer opem qui spem dedisti: For I am sure it was
not possible for a man living to have received from another more significant
and comfortable words of hope: your Lordship being pleased to tell me during
the course of my last service, That you would raise me; and that when you were
resolved to raise a man, you were more careful of him then himself; and that
what you had done for me in my marriage, was a benefit for me, but of no use to
your Lordship, and therefore I might assure my self you would not leave me
there, with many like speeches: which I know too well my duty to take any other
hold of, then the hold of a thankful remembrance: And I know, and all the
would knows, that your Lordship is no dealer of Holy Water, but noble and
teal; and on my part on sure ground, that I have committed nothing that may
deserve any alteration; and if I cannot observe you as I would, your Lordship
will impute it to my want of experience, which I shall gather better when I am
once settled.

And therefore my hope is, your Lordship will finish a good work, and consider
that time grows precious, and that I am now vergentibus annis; and although I
know your fortune is not to want an hundred such as I am, yet I shall be ever
ready to give you my best and first fruits, and to supply, as much as in me
lies, a worthiness by thankfulness.

FR. BACON.

Sir Fr. Bacon to the Lord Chancellor.
It may please your Lordship,
AS I conceived it to be a resolution both with his Majesty, and among your
Lordships of his Council; that I should be placed Solicitor, and the
Solicitor to be removed to be the Kings Sergeant; so I most humbly thank your
Lordships furtherance and forwardness therein, your Lordship being the man that
first devised the mean: wherefore my humble request unto your Lordship is, That
you would set in with some strength to finish this your work, which (I assure
your Lordship) I desire the rather; because, being placed, I hope for your many
favors, to be able to do you some better service: for as I am your Lordship
cannot use me, nor scarcely indeed know me; not that I vainly think I shall be
able to do any great matters, but certainly it will frame me to use a more
industrious observance and application to such as I honor so much as I do your
Lordship, and not, I hope, without some good offices, which may deserve your
thanks. And herewithal, good my Lord, I humbly pray your Lordship to consider
that time grows precious with me, and that a married man is seven years
^older in his thoughts the first day: And therefore what a discomfortable thing
it is for me to be unsettled still. For surely were it not that I think my self
born for to do my Sovereign fervice, and therefore in that station will I live
and die; otherwise for mine own private comfort, it were better for me that the
King should blot me out of his book, or that I should turn my course to
endeavor to serve him in some other kind, then for me to stand thus at a stop,
and to have that little reputation which by my industry I gather, to be
scattered and taken away by continual disgraces, every new man coming in before
me; and sure I am I shall never have fairer promises and hope from all your
Lordships, and I would believe you in a far greater matter; and if it were
nothing else, I hope the modesty of my suit deserves somewhat: for I know well
the Solicitors place is not as your Lordship left it, time working alteration
somewhat in the profession, much more in that special place. And were it not
to satisfy my wives friends, and to get my self out of being a common gaze,
and a speech (I protest before God) I would never speak word for it. But to
conclude, as my honorable Lady was some mean to make me to change the name of
another: so if it please you to help me, as you said, to change mine own name,
I cannot be but more and more bounden to you. And I am much deceived, if your
Lordship find not the King well inclined; as for my Lord of Salisbury, he is
forward and affectionate.

Yours, etc. FR. BACON.

To King JAMES.
It may pleaase your excellent Majesty,
HOw honestly ready I have been, most gracious Sovereign, to do your Majesty
humble service to the best of my power, and in a manner beyond my power as I
now stand, I am not so unfortunate but your Majesty knows; both in the
Commission of Union* the labor whereof for men of my profession, rested most
upon my hands; and this last Parliament for the Bill of Subsidy, both body and
preamble. In the Bill of Attainders; of Tresham, and the rest; in the matter of
Purveyance, in the Ecclesiastical Petitions, in the grievances, and the like,
as I was ever careful not without good success, sometime to put forward that
which was good, sometime to keep back that which was worse: so your Majesty was
ple sed kindly to accept of my services, and to say to me, such conflicts were
the wars of peace, and such victories the victories of peace; and therefore
such servants as obtained them, were by Kings that reign in peace, no less to
be esteemed then Conquerors in the wars. In all which nevertheless I can
challenge to my self no sufficiency, that I was diligent and reasonably happy
to execute those directions which I received either immediately from your Royal
mouth, or from my Lord of Salisbury. At that time it pleased your Majesty also
to assure me that upon the remove of the then Attorney, I should not be
forgotten, but be brought into ordinary place: and this was after confirmed
unto me by many of my Lords. And toward the end of the last Term, the manner
also in particular spoken of, that is, that Mr. Solicitor should be made your
Majesty's Sergeant, and I Solicitor, for so it was thought best to sort with
both our gifts and faculties for the good of our service. And of this
resolution both Court and Country took notice. Neither was this any invention
or project of mine own, but moved from my Lords, I think first from my Lord
Chancellor: whereupon resting, your Majesty well knows I never opened my
mouth for the greater place, although I am sure I had two circumstances that
Mr. Attorney that now is could not allege: the one, nine years service of the
Crown; the other, the being Cousin-german to my Lord of Salisbury; for of my
Fathers service I will not speak. But for the less place, I conceive it was
never meant me: but after that Mr. Attorney Hubbard was placed, I heard no more
of any preferment, but it seemed to be at a stop, to my great disgrace and
coffeehouse. For, gracious Sovereign, if still when the waters be stirred,
another shall be put in before me, your Majesty had need work a miracle, or
else I shall be a lame man to do your services. And therefore my most humble
suit unto your Majesty is, That this which seemed to me intended, may speedily
be performed, and I hope my former service shall be but as beginnings to better
when I am better strengthened. For sure I am, no man's heart is fuller, I say
not but many may have greater hearts, but I say, not fuller of love and duty
toward your Majesty and your children, as I hope time will manifest against
envy and detraction, if any be. To conclude, I humbly crave pardon for my
boldness, etc.

Your, etc. FR. BACON.

Mr. Edmond Andersons Letter to Sir Francis Bacon.
Noble Sir,
THere is ever a certain presumption to be had of the favor of great men, so
as there be a reason added to accompany their justice; mine, that gives
boldness to call upon your succor, is, that I am fallen more under the
malignity of rumor, then severity of laws, though that has ever set mine
offense at the blackest mark: to force this latter cloud away, none can but the
breath of a King: the other which threatens and oppresses move, every good
Spirit may help to disperse. In this name, honorable Sir, I beseech your
goodness to spend some few words to the putting of false same to flight, which
has so often endangered even the innocent: And if the saving of a poor
penitent man may come to be part of your care, let it ever be reckoned to your
virtue, that you have not only assisted to preserve, but create a person so
corrected by necessity, as the example of his repentance was not worthy to be
lost, who will live and die thankfully yours,

EDMOND ANDERSON.

Sir Thomas Bodeley to Sir Francis Bacon upon his new Philosophy.
Sir,
AS soon as the Term was ended, supposing your leisure was more then before, I
was coming to thank you two or three times, rather choosing to do it by word
then letter; but I was still disappointed of my purpose, as I am at this
present upon an urgent occasion, which does tie me fast to Fulham, and has
made me now determine to impart my mind in writing. I think you know I have
read your Cogitata and visa, which I prote^ I have done with great desire,
reputing it a token of your singular love, that you joined me with those your
friends, to whom you would commend your first perusal of your draught: for
which I pray you give me leave to say but this unto you, First, that if the
depth of my affection to your person and spirit, to your works and your words,
and to all your ability, were as highly to be valued as your affection is to
me, it might walk with yours arm in arm, and claim your love by just desert;
but there can be no comparison where our states are so uneven, and our means to
demonstrate our affections so different, insomuch as for mine own I must leave
it to be prized in the nature that it is, and you shall evermore find it most
addicted to your worth. As touching the subject of your Book, you have set
afoot so many noble speculations, as I cannot choose but wonder, and I shall
wonder at it ever, that your expense of time considered in your public
profession, which has in a manner no acquaintance with Scholarship or
Learning, you should have culled forth the quintessence, and sucked up the sap
of the chiefest kind of Learning. For howsoever in some points you do vary
altogether from that which is and has been ever the received doctrine of our
Schools and was always by the wisest (as still they have been deemed) of all
Nations and Ages adjudged the truest, and yet it is apparent that in those very
points, in all your proposals and plots in that book, you show your self a
Master workman. For my self, I must confess, and I speak it Ingenue that for
the matter of learning I am not worthy to be reckoned in the number of
smatterers; and yet because it may seem that being willing to communicate your
Treatise with your friends, you are likewise willing to listen to whatsoever I
or others can except against it: I must deliver unto you for my private
opinion, that I am one of the crew that say there is, and we profess a greater
holdfast of certainty in your Sciences, then you by your discourse will seem to
acknowledge: For where at first you do object the ill success and errors of
practitioners of Physic, you know as well they do proceed of the Patients
unruliness: for not one of an hundred does obey his Physician in their own
indisposition, for few are able in that kind to explicate themselves, or by
reason their diseases are by nature incurable, which is incident, you know, to
many sorts of maladies, or for some other hidden cause which cannot be
discovered by course of conjecture; Howbeit I am full of this belief, that as
Physic is ministered nowadays by Physicians, it is much to be ascribed to
their negligence or ignorance, or other touch of imperfection that they speed
no better in their practice: for few are found of that profession so well
instructed in their Art, as they might by the precepts which their Art does
afford, which though it be defective in regard of such perfection, yet for
certain it does flourish with admirable remedies, such as tract of time has
taught by experimental effects, and are the open highway to that knowledge
that you recommend. As for Alchimie and Magic, some conclusions they have that
are worthy the preserving: but all their skill is so accompanied with
subtilties and guiles, as both the Crafts and the Crafts-masters are not only
despised, but named with derision. Whereupon to make good your principal
assertion, methinks you should have drawn the most of your examples from that
which is taught in the liberal Sciences, not by picking out cases that happen
very seldom, and may by all confession be subject to reproof, but by
controlling the generals, and grounds, and eminent Positions and Aphorisms
which the greatest Artists and Philosophers have from time to time defended:
for it goes for current among all men of learning, that those kind of Arts
which Clerks in times past did term Quadruials, confirm their propositions by
infallible demonstrations. And likewise in Trivials, such lessons and
directions are delivered unto us, as will effect very near, or as much
altogether, as every faculty does promise. Now in case we should concur to do
as you advise, which is to renounce our common notions, and cancel all our
Theorems, Axioms, Rules and Tenants, and so to come babes ad regnum naturae, we
are willed by Scriptures to come ad regnum coelorum. There is nothing more
certain in my understanding, then that it would instantly bring us to
Barbarism, and after many thousand years leave us more unprovided of Theoricall
furniture then we are at this present: For that were indeed to become Tabula
rasa, when we shall leave no impression of any former principle, but be driven
to begin the world again, to travel by trials of actions and sense; (which are
your proofs by particulars) what to place in intellectu for our general
conceptions, it being a Maxim of all men's approving, In intellectu nihil esse
quod non prius fuit in sensu. And so in appearance it would befall us, that
till Plato's year be come about, our insight in learning would be of less
reckoning then now it is accounted: As for that which you inculcate of a
knowledge more excellent then now is among us, which experience might produce
if we would but essay to extract it out of Nature by particular probations, it
is no more upon the matter, but to incite us unto that which without
instigation by a natural instinct men will practice of themselves: for it
cannot in reason be otherwise thought, but that there are infinite in all parts
of the world, (for we may not in this case confine our cogitations within the
bounds of Europe) which embrace the course which you propose, with all
diligence and care, that any ability can perform. For every man is born with an
appetite of knowledge, wherewith he cannot be glutted, but still as in a
dropsy thirst after more. But yet why men should hearken to any such
persuasions, as wholly to abolish those settled opinions, and general Theories
to which they have attained by their own and their Ancestors former experience,
I see nothing yet alleged to induce me think it. Moreover, I may speak as I
suppose with good probability, that if we should make a mental survey what is
like to be effected all the world over, those five or six inventions which you
have selected, and imagined to be but of modern standing, would make but a
slender show among so many hundreds of all kinds of natures which are daily
brought to light by the enforcement of wit or casual events, and maybe
compared or partly preferred above those that you have named. But were it so
here, that all were admitted that you can require for the augmentation of our
knowledge, and that all our Theorems and general Positions were utterly
extinguished with a new substitution of others in their places, what hope may
we have of any benefit of learning by this alteration? Assuredly as soon as the
new are brought ad (...) by the Inventors and their followers by an
interchangeable course of natural things, they will fall by degrees in
oblivion to be buried, and so in continuance to perish outright; and that
perchance upon the like to your present pretenses by proposal of some means to
advance all our knowledge to an higher pitch of perfectness; for still the same
defects that antiquity found, will reside in mankind, and therefore other
issues of their actions, devices and studies, are not to be expected then is
apparent by Records were in former time observed. I remember here a note which
Paterculus made of the incomparable wits of the Grecians and Romans in their
flourishing state, that there might be this reason of their notable downfall in
their issue that came after, because by nature, Quod summo studio petitum est
ascendit in summum, difficilisque imperfecto mora est: insomuch that men
perceiving that they could not go further, being come to the stop, they turned
back again of their own accord, forsaking those studies that are most in
request, and betaking themselves to new endeavors, as if the thing they sought
had been by prevention fore-prized by others. So it fared in particular with
the eloquence of that age, that when their successors found that hardly they
could equal, by no means excel their predecessors, they began to neglect the
study thereof, and speak for many hundred years in a rusticall manner, till
this later revolution brought the wheel about again by inflaming gallant
spirits to give the onset a-fresh, with straining and striving to climb unto
the top and height of perfection, not in that gift alone, but in every other
skill in any part of learning. For I do not hold it any erroneous conceit to
think of every science, that as now they they are professed, so they have been
before in all precedent ages, though not alike in all places, nor at all times
alike in one and the same; but according to the changes and turning of times
with a more exact and plain, or with a more rude and obscure kind of teaching.

And if the question should be asked what proof I have of it, I have the
doctrine of Aristotle, and of the deepest learned Clerks of whom we have any
means to take any notice, That as there is of other things, so there is of
Sciences ortus and interitus: which is also the meaning (if I should expound
it) of nihil novum sub sole, and is as well to be applied ad facta as ad dicta;
ut nihil neque dictum neque factum, quod non est dictum aut factum prius. I
have further for my warrant that famous complaint of Solomon to his son against
the infinite making of books in his time, of which in all congruity great part
were of observations and instructions in all kind of literature, and of those
there is not now so much as one Pamphlet (only some parcels of the Bible
excepted) remaining to posterity. As then there was not in like manner to be
found any footing of millions of Authors that were long before Solomon, and yet
we must give credit to that which he affirmed; that whatsoever was then or
before, it could never be truly pronounced of it, Behold this is new. Whereupon
I must for my final conclusion infer, Seeing all the endeavors, study and
knowledge of mankind in whatsoever art or science have ever been the same as
they are at this present, though full of mutabilities according to the changes
and accidental occasions of ages, and Countries and Clerks dispositions, which
can never but be subject to intention and remission both in their devices and
in their practices of their knowledge. If now we should accord in opinion with
you, First to condemn our present knowledge of doubt and incertitude (which you
confer but by averment) without other force of argument, and then to disclaim
all our Axioms and Maxims, and general assertions that are left by tradition
from our Elders to us, which (for so it is to be pretended) have passed all
probations of the sharpest wits that ever were Abecedarii, by the frequent
spelling of particulars to come to the notice of new generals, and so afresh to
create new principles of Sciences, the end of all would be, that when we should
be dispossessed of the learning which we have, all our consequent travel will
but help us in a circle to conduct us to the place from whence we set forwards,
and bring us to the happiness to be restored in integrum, which will require as
many ages as have marched before us to be perfectly achieved. And this I write
with no dislike of increasing our knowledge with newfound devices (which is
undoubtedly a practice of high commendation) in regard of the benefit they will
yield for the present, that the world has ever been, and will assuredly
continue very full of such Devisers, whose industry that way has been very
obstinate and eminent, and has produced strange effects above the reach and
the hope of men's common capacities; and yet our Notions and Theorems have
always kept in grace both with them and with the rarest that ever were named
among the learned.

By this you see to what boldness I am brought by your kindness, That (if I
seem to be too saucy in this contradiction) it is the opinion that I hold of
your noble disposition, and of the freedom in these cases that you will afford
your special friend, that has induced me to do it. And although I my self,
like a Carriers horse, cannot bawk the beaten way in which I have been trained;
yet since it is my censure of your Cogitata that I must tell you, to be plain,
you have very much wronged your self and the world, to smother such a treasure
so long in your coffer: For though I stand well assured (for the tenor and
subject of your main discourse) you are not able to impanel a Jury in any
University that will give up a verdict to acquit you of error, yet it cannot be
gainsaid that all your Treatise over does abound with choice conceit of the
present state of learning, and with so worthy contemplations of the means to
procure it, as may persuade with any Student to look more narrowly to his
business, not only by aspiring to the greatest perfection of that which is now
adays divulged in the Sciences, but by diving yet deeper as it were into the
bowels and secrets of nature, and by enforcing of the powers of his judgment
and wit to learn of St. Paul, Consectari meliora dona: which course would to
God (to whisper so much into your ear) you had followed at the first when you
fell to the study of such a study as was not worthy such a Student.
Nevertheless being so as it is, that you are therein settled, and your Country
soundly served, I cannot but wish with all my heart, as I do very often, that
you may gain a fit reward to the full of your deserts. Which I hope will come
with heaps of happiness and honor.

From Fulham, Feb. 19. 1607. Yours to be used and commanded, THO. BODELEY.
Sir, one kind of boldness does draw on another, insomuch as methinks I should
offend to signify, that before the transcript of your book be fitted for the
Press, it will be requisite for you to cast a Censors eye upon the style and
the elocution; which in the framing of some periods, and in diverse words and
phrases, will hardly go for current, if the Copy brought to me be just the
same that you would publish.


THO. BODELEY.

Mr. George Brook to a Lady in Court.
Madam,
THe message which you sent me of her Majesty's gracious purpose altered
toward me, has put me into that ecstasy, that I know not whereupon to rest my
self, not having power to believe that which I am bound to know. Is it possible
that you should be so weak in grace with her Majesty, as not to prevail in so
small a matter for any man but of an entire reputation? or shall I believe that
her Majesty, who suffers not the merit of her servants to be buried with them,
should not hold me equivalent with any new Melchisedech without father or
mother. I protest (Madam) I could not presage any ill success to my self, but
only out of the means of my ambition, and have held it therefore superfluous
to claim any favor in virtue of supererogation, esteeming it too great a
derogation from my self for so poor a thing as a Spittle-house to raise the
dead to speak for me, or challenge any thing more then my own. But it is
neither the strangeness of the matter, nor the hardness of my belief that can
alter the decree of a Prince. But I must take it in good payment, that is no
less then for as great a disgrace as can outwardly befall me; yet must I ever
hold my self beholding to this suit: for though I lose the Hospital, yet have I
lost many errors; withal I have weighed my friends in a balance, and taken a
just measure of my fortune. I must not despair, it is not impossible for a man
well taught to make a retreat into himself, neither will I yet despair of my
suit, only for this reason, that this change cannot proceed of her Majesty's
proper motion, but must be procured by some blind practice that dares not see
the light, though it may be my fortune to bring it forth blushing; howsoever it
be, it shall never distemper my dutiful affection toward her Majesty, though
that be for ever barred from her knowledge: for they who are able to prevent
her goodness, will be ever likely to prevent my service. That the place is
already meant to a Divine, cannot be true, nor my impediment: For there is no
kind of her Majesty's servants and subjects so provided for, there being such
store of places that fall daily both better then this in value, and more proper
for their function. Your Ladyship has been hitherto an honorable and faithful
intercessor for me; Good Madam, be not weary to continue so still, as I shall
do ever to acknowledge it, and if I be able, in part to deserve it.

G. B.

To his Wife.
LEt me entreat you to read my Letter once again, and if you can find no cause
of quarrel, do but then think what you have done all this time to send me such
a Cartoll; you cannot be more void of fault then I of suspicion, and what you
speak I cannot understand. But does my imprisonment abridge me that I cannot
give you counsel? Or have you resolved to follow the counsel of the Lady you
know? Know then, as my ill fortune cannot deject me, so ought it much less to
make you brave and insolent. You have your choice of two courses, let me know
which you will take, that l trust not to a broken Reed. And yet what need I
care, seeing that you who were my chief care, do now begin to sever your self:
I will not yet condemn you, you may see how unapt I am to entertain ill
thoughts. I will yet both hold and write my self

Your loving Husband, G. BROOKS.

King James to the Major and Aldermen of London after he was proclaimed, March
28. 1605.
To our trusty and wel-beloved Robert Lo, Lord Major of our City of London,
and to our welbeloved the Aldermen and Commons of the same.
TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you heartily well.
Being informed of your great forwardness in that just and honorable action of
proclaiming us your sovereign Lord and King, immediately after the decease of
our late deceased Sister the Queen; wherein you have given a singular good
proof of your ancient fidelity, a reputation hereditary to that our City of
London, being the Chamber of our Imperial Crown, and ever free from all shades
of tumultuous and unlawful courses; We could not omit with all possible speed
we might to give you hereby a Test of our thankful mind for the same; and
withal assurance that you cannot crave any thing of us fit for the maintenance
of you all in general, and every one of you in particular, but it shall be
most willingly performed by us, whose special care shall ever be to provide
for the continuance and increase of your present happiness, desiring you in the
mean time to go constantly forward in doing all and whatsoever things you shall
find necessary or expedient for the good government of our said City, in
execution of justice, as you have been used to do in our said dearest Sisters
time, till our pleasure be known to you in the contrary. Thus not doubting but
you will do, as you may be fully assured of our gracious favor toward you in
the highest degree, we bid you heartily farewell.

Hallyrud-House March 28. 1603. JAMESR.

The Roman Catholics Petition to King James for Toleration.
MOst puissant Prince, and orient Monarch! Such are the rare perfections and
admirable gifts of wisdom, prudence, valor, and justice, wherewith the
bountiful hand of Gods divine Majesty has endued your Majesty, as in the
depth of your provident judgment we doubt not but you foresee what concerns
both the spiritual and temporal Government of all your Kingdoms and Dominions.
Notwithstanding your Graces most afflicted Subjects and devoted Servants the
Catholics of England, partly to prevent, sinister informations which happily
may possess your sacred ears before our answer be heard, partly as men almost
overwhelmed with persections for our considences, we are enforced to have
speedy recourse in hope of present redress from your Highness, and to present
these humble lines unto your Royal person to plead for us some commiseration
and favor. Alas, what allegiance or duty can any Temporal Prince desire or
expect at his Vassals hands, which we are not addressed to perform? How many
Noblemen and worthy Gentlemen, most zealous in the Catholic Religion, have
endured, some loss of lands and livings, some exile, others imprisonment, some
the effusion of blood and life, for the advancement of your blessed Mothers
right unto the Scepter of Albion? Nay, whose finger did ever ache but
Catholics, for your Majesty's present title and dominions? How many fled to
your Court, offering themselves as hostages for their friends to live arid die
in your gracious quarrel, if ever adversary had opposed himself against the
equity of your cause? If this they attempted with their Princes disgrace to
obtain your Majesty's grace, what will they do, nay what will they not do to
live without disgrace in your Graces favor? The main of this Realm, if we
respect Religion, setting petty Sects aside, consists of four parts:
Protestants, who have domineered all the Queens days; Puritans, who have crept
up apace amongst them; Atheists or Politicians, who were bred upon their brawls
and contentions in matters of faith; and Catholics, who as they are opposite
to all, so are they detested of all, because error was ever an enemy to truth.
Hardly all, or any two of the first three can be suppressed: Therefore we
beseech your Majesty to yield us as much savor, as others of contrary Religion
to that which shall be publicly professed in England shall obtain at your
hands; For if our fault be like less, or none at all, in equity our punishment
ought to be like less, or none at all. The Gates, Arches, and Pyramids of
France proclaimed the present King Pater patria and Pacis restitutor, that is,
the Father of his Country, and Restorer of their peace; because that Kingdom
being well near torn in pieces with Civil wars, and made a prey to foraign
foes, was by his providence, wisdom and valor acquitted in it self, and
hostile strangers expelled; the which he principally effected by condescending
to tolerate them of an adverse Religion to that which was openly professed.
Questionlessm Dread Sovereign, the Kingdom of England through the cruel
persecution of Catholics, has been almost odious to all Christian Nations:
Trade and traffic is exceedingly decayed, Wars and blood has seldom ceased,
Subsidies and Taxes never so many, discontented minds innumerable. All which
your Princely Majesty's connivance to your humble suppliants the afflicted
Catholics, will easily easily redress, especially at this your Highness fisft
ingress. Si loquaris ad nos verba levia, erunt tibi servi cunctis diebus. (1
King 7.7.) that is, if you speak comfortable things unto them, or if you
hearken unto them in this thing, they will be servants unto you, or they will
serve all their days,] say the sage Counselors of Solomon to Roboam. For,
enlargement after affliction resembles a pleasant gale after a vehement
tempest; and a benefit in distress, doubleth the value thereof How grateful
will it be to all Catholic Princes abroad, and honorable to your Majesty, to
understand how Queen Elizabeth's severity is changed into your Royal clemency;
and that the lenity of a man reedified what the misinformed anger of, a woman
destroyed; that the Lion rampant is passant, whereas the passant had been
rampant. How acceptable shall your Subjects be to all Catholic Countries, who
are now almost abhorred of all, when they shall perceive your Highness
prepares not pikes or prisons for the Professors of their Faith, but
permits them Temples and Altars for the use of their Religion. Then we shall
see with our eyes, and touch with our fingers that happy benediction of Isa.
14.7. in this Land, that swords are turned into mattocks or ploughs, and lances
into sithes; and all Nations admiring us will say, Hi sunt semen cui benedixit
Dominus, that is, these are the seed which the Lord has blessed.

We request no more favor at your Graces hands, then that we may securely
believe and profess that Catholic Religion which all your happy Predecessors
professed, from Donaldus the first converted, unto your late blessed Mother
martyred; a Religion venerable for antiquity, majestical for amplitude,
constant for continuance, irreprehensible for doctrine, inducing to all kind of
virtue and piety, dissuading from all sin and wickedness; a religion beloved by
all primitive Pastors, established by all Occumenicall Councels, upholden by
ancient Doctors, maintained by the first and best Christian Emperors, recorded
almost alone in all Ecclesiastical Histories, sealed with the blood of
millions of Martyrs, adorned with the virtues of so many Confessors, beautified
with the purity of thousands of virgins, so conformable unto natural sense and
reason; and finally, so agreeable with the sacred Texts of Gods Word and
Gospel: The free use of this Religion we request, if not in public Churches,
at the least in private houses; if not with approbation, yet with toleration
without molestation. Assuring your Grace, that howsoever some Protestants or
Puritans incited by moral honesty of life, or innated instinct of nature, or
for fear of some temporal punishment, pretend obedience unto your Highness
Laws; yet certainly the only Catholics for conscience sake observe them: For
they defending that Princes Precepts and Statutes oblige no subject under the
penalty of sin, will have little care in conscience to transgress them, which
principally are tormented with the guilt of fin. But Catholics professing
merit in obeying, and immerit in transgressing, cannot but in Soul be
grievously tortured for the least prevarication thereof: Wherefore, most
merciful Sovereign, we your loving afflicted subjects, in all dutiful
subjection, protest before the Majesty of God, and all his holy Angels, as
loyal obedience, and immaculate allegiance unto your Grace, as ever did
faithful subjects in England or Scotland unto your Highness Progenitors, and
intend as sincerely with our goods and lives to serve you, as ever did the
loyallest Israelites King David, or the trustiest Legions the Roman Emperors.
And thus expecting your Majesty's customary favor and gracious bounty, we rest
your devoted suppliants to him whose hands do manage the hearts of Kings, and
with reciprocate mercy will requite the merciful.

Your Majesty's most devoted servants the Catholics of England.

Sir Walter Raleigh to King James before his trial.
IT is one part of the Office of a just and worthy Prince, to hear the
complaints of his vassals; especially such as are in great misery. I -- know
not amongst many other presumptions gathered against me, how your Majesty has
been persuaded, that I was one of them who were greatly discontented, and
therefore the more likely to prove disloyal But the great God so relieve me in
both worlds as I was the contrary, and I took as great comfort to behold your
Majesty, and always learning some good, and bettering my knowledge by hearing
your Majesty's discourse. I do most humbly beseech your Sovereign Majesty not
to believe any of those in my particular, who under pretense of offenses to
Kings, do easily work their particular revenge. I trust no man under the color
of making examples, should persuade your Majesty to leave the word Merciful
out of your Style; for it will be no less profit to your Majesty, and become
your greatness then the word Invincible. It is true, that the Laws of England
are no less jealous of the Kings then Caesar was of Pompey's wife: for
notwithstanding she was cleared for having company with Claudius, yet for being
suspected, he condemned her. For my self, I protest before Almighty God, and I
speak it to my Master and Sovereign, that I never invented treason against him;
and yet I know I shall fall in manibus little a quibus non possum evadere,
unless by your Majesty's gracious compassion I be sustained. Our Law therefore
(most merciful Prince) knowing her own cruelty, and knowing that she is wont
to compound treason out of presumptions and circumstances, does give this
charitable advice to the King her Supreme, Non solum sapiens esse sed and
misericors, etc. cum tutius sit reddere rationem misericordiae quam judicii. I
do therefore on the knees of my heart beseech your Majesty from your own sweet
and comfortable disposition, to remember that I have served your Majesty twenty
years, for which your Majesty has yet given me no reward; and it is fitter I
should be indebted unto my Sovereign Lord, then the King to his poor Vassal;
Save me therefore, most merciful Prince, that I may ow your Majesty my life it
self, then which there cannot be a greater debt. Limit me at least, my
Sovereign Lord, that I may pay it for your service when your Majesty shall
please. If the Law destroy me, your Majesty shall put me out of your power, and
I shall have none to fear but the King of Kings.

WALTER RALEIGH.

Sir Walter Raleigh to Sir Robert Car, after Earl of Somerset.
SIR,
AFter many losses, and many years sorrows, of both which I have cause to fear
I was mistaken in their ends: It is come to my knowledge, that your self (whom
I know not but by an honorable favor) has been persuaded to give me and mine
my last fatal blow, by obtaining from his Majesty the Inheritance of my
Children and Nephews, lost in Law for want of a word. This done, there
remains nothing with me but the name of life: His Majesty, whom I never
offended, (for I hold it unnatural and unmanlike to hate goodness) staid me at
the graves brink; not that I thought his Majesty thought me worthy of many
deaths, and to behold mine cast out of the world with my self, but as a King
that knows the poor in truth, has received a promise from God that his
Throne shall be established.

And for you, Sir, seeing your fair day is but in the dawn, mine drawn to the
setting; your own virtues and the Kings grace assuring you of many fortunes and
much honor: I beseech you begin not your first building upon the ruins of the
innocent, and let not mine and their sorrows attend your first plantation. I
have ever been bound to your Nation as well for many other graces, as for the
true report of my trial to the Kings Majesty; against whom had I been
malignant, the hearing of my cause would not have changed enemies into friends,
malice into compassion, and the minds of the greatest number then present into
the commiseration of mine estate. It is not the nature of foul Treason to beget
such fair passions; neither could it agree with the duty and love of faithful
Subjects (especially of your Nation) to bewail his overthrow that had conspired
against their most natural and liberal Lord. I therefore trust that you will
not be the first that shall kill us outright, cut down the tree with the fruit,
and undergo the curse of them that enter the fields of the fatherless: which,
if it please you to know the truth, is far les^ in value then in sa^ne. But
that so worthy a Gentleman as your self will rather bind us to you (being six
Gentlemen not base in birth and all^ance) which have interest therein: And my
self with my uttermost thankfulness will remain ready to obey your commandments.

WALTER RALEIGH.

Sir Thomas Egerton Chancellor, after Lord Ellesmere, to the Earl of Essex.
SIR,
HOw things proceed here touching your self, you shall partly understand by
these enclosed. Her Majesty is gracious toward you, and you want not friends
to remember and commend your former services. Of these particulars you shall
know more when we meet. In the mean time by way of caution take this from me:
There are sharp eyes upon you, your actions public and private are observed:
It behooves you therefore to carry your self with all integrity and sincerity
both of hands and heart, lest you overthrow your own fortunes, and discredit
your friends that a^^ tender and careful of your reputation and well-doing* So
in haste I commit you to God, with my very hearty commendations, and rest

At the Court at Richmond, 21 October. 1599. Your assured loving Friend, THO.
EGERTON. C.S.

Lord Chancellor Ellesmere to King James.
Most gracious Sovereign,
I Find through my great age, accompanied with griefs and infirmities, my sense
and conceit is become dull and heavy, my memory decayed, my judgment weak, my
hearing imperfect, my voice and speech failing and faltering, and in all the
powers and faculties of my mind and body great debility. Wherefore, conscientia
imbecilitatis, my humble suit to your most sacred Majesty is, to be discharged
of this great Place wherein I have long served, and to have some comfortable
Testimony under your Royal hand, that I leave it at this humble suit with your
gracious favor: So shall I with comfort number and spend the few days I have
to live, in meditation, and prayers to Almighty God, to preserve your Majesty
and all yours in all heavenly and earthly felicity and happiness.

This suit I intended some years past, ex dictamine rationis and conscientiae:
Love and fear stayed it; now Necessity constrains me to it, I am utterly unable
to sustain the burden of this great service; for I am come to St. Paul's
desire, Cupio dissolvi and esse Christo. Wherefore I most humbly beseech your
Majesty most favorably to grant it.

Your Majesty's most humble and loyal poor Subject and Servant, THO. ELLESMERE
Canc.

Again to the same King.
Most gracious Sovereign,
YOur royal favor has placed and continued me many years in the highest place
of ordinary Justice in this your Kingdom, and has most graciously borne with
my many, but unwilling errors and defects, accepting in stead of sufficiency,
my zeal and fidelity, which never failed. This does encourage and stir in me an
earnest desire to serve still. But when I remember St. Paul's rule, Let him that
has an office wait on his office, and do consider withal my great age and
many infirmities, I am dejected and do utterly faint: For I see and feel
sensibly, that I am not able to perform those duties as I ought, and the place
requires; and thereupon I do seriously examine my self what excuse or answer I
shall make to the King of Kings, and Judge of all Judges, when he shall call me
to account; and then my conscience shall accuse me, that I have presumed so
long to undergo and weild so mighty and great a charge and burden: and I
behold a great Cloud of witnesses ready to give evidence against me.

1. Reason tells me, and by experience I find, Senectus est tarda and
obliviosa, and insanabilis morbus. 2. I heard the precepts and council of many
reverend, sage, and learned men, Senectuti debitur otium, solve senectutem
mature, etc. 3. I read in former Laws, that old men were made temeriti and rude
donati: And one severe Law that says, Sexagenarius de ponte, whereupon they
are called Depontanei. And Plato lib. 6. de legibus, speaking of a great
Magistrate which was Praefectus legibus servandis, determines thus, Minor
annis 50 non admittatur; nec major annis 70 permittatur in eo perseverare. And
to this Law, respecting both mine office and my years, I cannot but yield. But
leaving foreign Laws, the Stat. anno 13. E. 1. speaks plainly* Homines
excedentes aetatem 70 annorum non ponantur in Assissis and Juratis. So as it
appears that men of that age are by that Law discharged of greater painful
and careful, especially Judicial Offices. 4. Besides, I find many examples of
men of great wisdom, knowledge and judgment, meet and worthy to be followed; of
which (leaving all other) I will remember that of William Warham Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Chancellor of England, who after long service, was upon his
humble suit discharged or the office of Chancellor of England in respect of his
great age. Seeing then such a cloud of witnesses against me, which in my
private Soliloquies and Meditations, are daily and continually represented to
my view, and mine own conscience (more then a thousand witnesses) concurring
with me: Pardon me, my most gracious Sovereign, to conclude with good
Barzillai, Quot s^nt dies annorum vitae meae, quare servus tuus sit oneri
domino nostro Regi, obsecro ut revertar servus tuus and moriar, etc. So I most
humbly beseech your sacred Majesty, graciously to regard the great age,
infirmity, and impotency of your most devoted, obedient, loyal and faithful
servant. Let me not be as Domitius after was, Maluit deficere quam desinere.
But with your Princely favor give me leave to retire myself from the careful
service of this great office, and from the troubles of this world, and to spend
the small remnant of this my life in meditation arid prayer, and I will never
cease to make my humble supplications to Almighty God to bless and prosper your
Majesty, the Queen, the Prince, all your Royal issue, with all heavenly and
earthly felicity, which is the last and best service your poor, aged, weak and
decayed servant can do for you.
THO. ELLESMERE Canc.

Sir Francis Norris to King James.
Most gracious Sovereign,
THe advantage which mine adversary has taken, in first presenting his
complaint freely and uncontrolled, would have afflicted me greatly, had I not
known that your Majesty has given to your Judges Injunction, Auditne alteram
partem. That I entered into discourse with the Lord Willoughby in Church or
Churchyard, may make it manifest, that I had no disposition at all to
quarrel. The rest of the world is wide enough for men fo affected. They that
profane such places, trust more to the place the ntheir own worth. That I was
improvidently in such a place by him surprised, muffled in my own Cloak, and
treacherously buffeted, showed that I suspected no such assault as was there
made upon me, and where I was so disgracefully and ignobly assaulted by the
Lord Willoughby, and he in no sort by me, yet well I hope to satisfy every
indifferent judgment, much more the supreme Judge, that I had nothing in my
intention either toward the Master or the Man. It is true, most gracious
Sovereign, that after the Lord Willoughby's dishonorable indignity by me
expelled, I seeing an unknown face coming fiercely with his sword upon me for
my life, (in defense whereof God himself, the law of Nature and Nations does
warrant us to contend) I was forced to have forgone it at a Ruffins command, or
by resisting to yield it up to your Majesty, to whom I have vowed it
(whenever you shall command it) to your service. This I presume to write to a
King in whom rests the spirit of honor; and by that spirit I hope your Majesty
will judge, that he which will run from his own defense, being injuriously
assaulted, will also run from the defense of his Sovereign Master. I also
presume in all humility to address my self to a Prince endued with the spirit
of Justice, joined to the divine virtue of compassion; by both which I nothing
doubt your Majesty will judge when you shall be truly informed, of the
preceding and succeeding wrongs offered me, that I am and will be

Your Majesty's most humble and loyal subject, FR* NORRIS.

A Patent for the Admiralty of Ireland.
RIght trusty and welbeloved Cousin and Councellor, We greet you well.
Whereas we are graciously pleased, as well for the increase of our Navy and
Navigators, as also for the better enabling and enriching of our subjects in
our Realm of Scotland, to give way and liecnce unto our loving subjects of
Scotland, and so many of them as may make a full, able, and complete company
for Traffic and Merchandising into the East Indies, to erect and set up among
themselves a Company, to be called The East Indian Company of Scotland, making
their first Magazin Storehouse for the said Company in some parts of our Realm
of Ireland. But for that our Ports and Seas upon the Coasts of our said Realm
of Ireland, have of late, and still are likely, without our special aid and
assistance, to be much troubled and annoyed with Pirates, and other Sea-Robbers,
to the great discouragement of our loving Subjects and Merchants passing that
way: We, for the avoiding of those inconveniences, and for the better heartning
of the said Company in their intended voyage and traffic, have, for reasons to
us best known, resolved (notwithstanding any other employments of our Ships
there) by our Letters Patents under our great Seal of England, and at the
humble request and Petition of our loving Subjects of the said Company, to
nominate and appoint A. B. our trusty servant, to be employed in those Seas and
Coasts of Ireland, as fully and amply as our servant Sir F.H. is now for our
narrow Seas. And to the end he may with more courage and less prejudice to our
said servant Sir F. H. by his diligence and industry in the said employment
free those Seas from the said annoyances, our pleasure is, That you by your
Deed Poll do give unto our said Servant such and the like power and authority
for the Irish Seas and Channel of St. George, as the said Sir F. H. has for
the Narrow Seas: So always as the power and authority of the said A. B. may
begin where the power and authority of the said Sir F. H. does end, that is to
say, from our Island of Scilie in our Realm of England, unto and along the
Coast of Ireland, and the Channel of St. George. So not doubting of your speedy
effecting of what is here required for the furtherance of so good a work, We
bid you heartily farewell.

From our Court at, etc.
A Commission to diverse Lords, etc. for the delivery of Ulushing, Brill, etc.
May 14. Jac. 14.
JAMES by the grace of God King of England, etc.
To the right Reverend Father in God, our right trusty and welbeloved
Councellor George Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and to our right trusty and
welbeloved Councellor Tho. Ellesmere Lord Chancellor of England, and to our
right trusty and welbeloved Cousins and Counselors Tho. Earl of Suffolk Lord
Treasurer of England, Edward Earl of Worcester Lord Keeper of our Privy Seal,
Lodowick Duke of Lennox Lord Steward of our household, Charles Earl of Nottingham
Lord Admiral of England, William Earl of Pembroke Lord Chamberlain of our
household, Tho. Earl of Exeter, John Earl of Mar, and Alexander Earl of
Dumfermlin; and to our right trusty and right welbeloved Counselors, Tho.
Viscount Fenton, Tho. Bishop of Winton, Edward Lord Zouch Lord Warden of our
Cinque Ports, William Lord Knowls Treasurer of our household, John Lord Stanhop,
and Tho. Lord Bannings; and to our right trusty and welbeloved Counselors, Sir
John Digby Knight our Vice-Chamberlain, Sir John Herbert Knight one of our
principal Secretaries of State, Sir Fulk Grevil Knight Chancellor and
Under-Treasurer of our Exchequer, Sir Tho. Parry Knight Chancellor of our
Duchy of Lancaster, Sir Edward Coke Knight Chief Justice of our Bench, and Sir
Julius Caesar Knight Master of our Rolls, greeting.
Whereas the States-Generall of the United Provinces of the Low Countries have
diverse times solicited us by their resident Ambassador Sir Noel Caron Knight,
that we would be pleased to render into their hands the Towns of Flushing in
Zeland, with the Castle of Ramakins, and of Bril in Holland, with the Forts and
sconces thereunto belonging, which we hold by way of caution, until such sums
of money as they owe unto us be reimbursed, upon such reasonable conditions as
should be agreed on between us and them for the reimbursing and repayments of
the said moneys: And whereas we have recommended the consideration of this so
mighty and important an affair to the judgment and discretion of you the Lords
of our Privy-Councel, and have received from you after long and mature
deliberation and examination of the circumstances an advice, That as the
present condition of our State now stands, and as the nature of those Towns
is mere cautionary, wherein we can challenge no interest of propriety; it would
be much better for our service, upon fair and advantageous conditions to render
them, then longer to hold them at so heavy a charge. Now forasmuch as in our
Princely wisdom we have resolved to yield up our said Towns, with the said
Castle and Sconces belonging unto them, upon such conditions as shall be most
for our advantage as well in point of honor as of profit, Know ye therefore
that we have assigned and appointed you the said Archbishop, L. Treasurer, L.
Privy Seal, L. Steward, L. Admiral* L. Chamberlain, E. of Exeter, E. of Mar, E.
of Dunfermlin, Vicount Fintons, L. Bishop of Winton, L. Zouch, L. Knowls, L.
Stanhop, L. Banning, Sir John Digby, Sir John Herbert, Sir Ralph Winwood, Sir
Tho. Lake, Sir Fulk Grevil, Sir Tho. Parry, Sir Edw. Coke, Sir Julius Caesar,
our Commissioners, and do by these presents give full power and authority unto
you or the more part of you for us and in our name to treat and conclude with
the said Sir Noel Caron Knight Ambassador from the States of the United
Provinces, being likewise for that purpose sufficiently authorized from the
said States his superiors, touching the rendition and yielding up of the said
Town of Flushing, with the Castle of Ramakins in Zeland, and of the Town of
Bril in Holland, with the Forts and Sconces thereto belonging, and of the
Artillery and Munition formerly delivered by the States, with the same which
are now remaining in them or any of them, and have not been spent and consumed.
And for the delivery of them into the hands of the said States on such terms as
by you shall be thought fit for our most honor and profit; and for the manner
thereof to give instructions to our said several Governors of the said
Garrisons, according to such your conclusion. And this our Commission or the
enrollment or exemplification thereof shall be unto you and every of you a
sufficient warrant and discharge in that behalf.

In witness etc. Witness our self at Westminster, the 31 day of May, in the 14
year of our Reign, etc. and of Scotland the 49.
A Commission to Viscount Lisle Governor, to deliver them up, 22 May, 14. Jac.
JAMES by the grace of God, etc.
To our right trusty and welbebeloved Cozen, Robert Lord Viscount Lisle, Lord
Chamberlain to our dear Consort the Queen, and our Governor of our Town of
Vlushing, and of the Castle of Ramakins, greeting.
Whereas we by Our Letters Patents sealed with Our great Seal of England,
bearing date at Westminster the 22. day of April, in the fifth year of Out
reign of England, France, and Ireland, of Scotland the 36. for the
consideration therein expressed, did make, ordain, and constitute you the said
Viscount Lisle, by the name of Sir Robert Sydney Knight, for Us to be the
Governor and Captain of the said Town of Vlushing, and of the Castle of
Ramakins in the Low Countries, and of all the Garrisons and Soldiers that then
were, or hereafter should be there placed for Our service and guard of the said
Town and Castle, to have, hold, exercise and occupy the Office of the said
Governor and Captain of the said Town and Castle by your self, or your
sufficient Deputy or Deputies, to be allowed by Us during Our pleasure; giving
unto you full power and authority by your said Letters Patents, to take the
Oath and Oaths of all Captains and Soldiers then serving, or that hereafter
should serve in the same Town and Castle, as in like causes was requisite, with
diverse other powers therein mentioned, as by Our said Letters Patents at large
appears. And whereas the States general of the United Provinces of the
Low Countries, have diverse and sundry times for many years together solicited
Us by their Resident Ambassador Sir Noel Caron Knight, that We would be pleased
to render into their hands the said Town of Vlushing in Zealand, with the said
Castle of Ramakins, and the Town of Brill in Holland, with the Forts and
Sconces thereunto belonging, which We hold by way of Caution until such sums of
money as they owe unto Us, be reimbursed upon such reasonable conditions as
should be agreed upon between Us and them for the reimbursing and repaiment of
the said moneys. And whereas thereupon We recommended the consideration of this
so weighty and important an affair to the judgment and discretion of the Lords
of the Privy Council, and have received from them (after long and mature
deliberation and examination of Circumstances) an advice, that as the present
condition of Our State now stands, and as the nature of those towns is lying
only Cautionary, wherein we can challenge no interest of propriety, it should
be much better for our service upon fair and advantangious conditions to render
them, then longer to hold them at so heavy a charge. Now forasmuch as in Our
Princely Wisdom We have resolved to yield up Our said Towns with the said
Castle, and Sconces belonging unto them, upon such conditions as shall be most
fit for Our advantage, as well in point of honor as of profit: And to that end
by Our Commission under Our great Seal of England, have assigned and appointed
the Lords and others of Our Privy Council Our Commissioners, and thereby give
full power and authority unto them, or the more part of them for Us, and in Our
name to treat and conclude with the said Sir Noell Caron Knight, Ambassador
from the States of the United Provinces, being likewise for that purpose
sufficiently authorized from the said States his superiors, touching the
rendition and yiedling up of the said Town of Vlushing, with the Castle of
Ramakins in Zealand, and of the said town of Brill in Holland, with the Forts
and Sconces thereunto belonging, and of the Artillery or Munition formerly
delivered by the said States, with the same Towns, and Castles, and Forts, and
which are now remaining in them, or any of them, and have not been spent or
consumed. And for the delivery of the said Towns, Castle, Forts, Artillery, and
Munition into the hands of the said States, upon such terms as by the said
Lords, and other of our Privy Council, or the more part of them, shall be
thought fit for our most honor and profit, and for the manner thereof to give
instructions to our several Governors of our said Garrisons according to such
their conclusion, which conclusion according to our said Commission is already
made and perfected.

We do therefore hereby give power and authority unto, and do charge and
command you the said Lord Lisle for us and in our name to render and yield up
into the hands of the said States of the United Provinces, or to such persons
as shall be lawfully deputed by them, the aforesaid Town of Vlushing, and
Castle of Ramakins, whereof now you have charge by virtue of our
Letters Patent aforesaid, together with the Artillery and Munition now
remaining in them or any of them, heretofore delivered by the said States with
the said Town and Castle, and as yet not spent or consumed; observing and
performing in all points such instructions as you shall receive under the hands
of the said Lords and others of our Privy-Councel, or the more part of them,
concerning the rendering up and delivery of the said Town. And we do further
give you full power and authority, and by these presents do charge and command
you, for us and in our name to discharge and set free all the subordinate
Officers, Captains and soldiers under your charge, of that oath and trust
which heretofore they have taken for the keeping and preserving of that Town
and Castle to our use and service: and for that purpose to make such
Declaration, Proclamation, and other signification of our Royal pleasure,
commandment and ordinance in that behalf, as in your wisdom you shall think
fit; and these our Letters Patent, or the inrollment or exemplification
thereof shall be your sufficient warrant and discharge in that behalf.

In witness, etc. Witness our self at Westminster, the 22 day of May in the 14
year of our reign of England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland the 49.
Countess of Nottingham to the Danish Ambassador.
SIR,
I Am very sorry this occasion should have been offered me by the King your
Master, which makes me troublesome to you for the present. It is reported to me
by men of honor, the great wrong the King of the Danes has done me, when I
was not by to answer for my self: For if I had been present, I would have
letten him know how much I scorn to receive that wrong at his hands. I need not
to urge the particular of it, for the King himself knows it best. I protest to
you Sir, I did think as honorably of the King your Master, as I did of my own
Prince; but now I persuade my self there is as much baseness in him as can be
in any man: For although he be a Prince by birth, it seems not to me that there
harbors any Princely thought in his breast; for either in Prince or Subject,
it is the basest that can be to wrong any woman of honor: I deserve as little
that name he gave me, as either the mother of himself or of his children; and
if ever I come to know what man has informed your Master so wrongfully of me,
I should do my best for putting him from doing the like to any other: but if it
has come by the tongue of any woman, I dare say she would be glad to have
companions. So leaving to trouble you any further, I rest,

Your friend M. NOTTINGHAM.

Sir Charles Cornwallis Lieger in Spain, to the Spanish King, July 23. 1608.
YOur Majesty has showed the sincerity of your Royal heart in applying remedy
to many inconveniences and injustice offered by your Ministers to the King my
masters subjects in their goods and bodies, and therein have performed not only
what belongs to your Kingly dignity, but also what might be expected from a
Prince so zealous of justice and of so good intention. It rests that now I
beseech you to cast your Royal eyes upon another extreme injustice offered not
only to their bodies and goods, but to their very souls; who being by your
Majesty's agreement confirmed with your oath to live within these your Kingdoms
free from molestation for matter of opinion and conscience, except in matters
of scandal to others, are here laid hold on and imprisoned by your Majesty's
Officers of Inquisition continually upon every light occasion of private
information of some particular persons of their own Country, who being
fugitives out of their own houses, and having according to the nature of our
people removed not only their bodies, but their hearts from the soil that bred
them, and from their brethren that were nourished with them, do here seek to
grace themselves by professing and teaching the observations of the Romish
Church; and that not out of any zeal, but as plainly appears by many of their
actions, out of malice and envy. By the Commissioners authorized by both your
Majesty's for the agreeing of the Peace, it was clearly discerned, that if upon
private or particular informations his Majesty's vassals here should be
questioned for matter of Religion, it was not possible that they should
exercise any commerce in these kingdoms, where they should be no one moment
assured either of their goods or liberties. It was therefore provided that they
should in no sort be impeached but in case of scandal; and that scandal, with
your Majesty's favor, must be understood to grow out of some public action,
not out of private opinion or single conscience; for if otherwise, very vain
and inutile had been that provision. How the word scandal is in the most usual
and common sense to be understood, is in no books more evident then in the
Divine Scriptures themselves. Our Savior, in regard of his public teaching
of the Gospel, and the abolishing of the Law-Ceremonial, was said to be to both
houses of Israel a stone of scandal. The sin of David, if it had lain covered
in his own heart, or been committed in private, should not have been either
published or punished as a scandal to the enemies of God. St. Paul himself
declares, that his own eating of flesh offered to Idols could not be an
offense, but only his eating before others of weak conscience whereby to give
the scandal. Besides, I humbly beseech your Majesty consider how fitly that of
the Apostle Quis es qui judicas alienum servum, may be applied to those
Officers of the Inquisition attempting to lay hands on the subjects of another
Prince your Majesty's confederate, offering none offense to the Laws, or
public prejudice to their profession: yea, in diverse parts of your Majesty's
dominions the subjects of my Master have suffered this restraint. The
Inquisitor-Generall lately deceased, who in all his actions showed himself a
considerate Minister, and careful in regard of your Majesty's honor of the
observing of what you have capitulated, upon my complaint never failed to give
the remedy that in justice I required. He being now with God, and one of my
Sovereigns subjects having been long without cause detained by the Inquisitors
in Lisbon, and another of good account, a man moderate and temperate in all his
actions, lately apprehended by that Office in Almonte, and restrained in their
prison at Sivil: I am commanded from his Majesty, and importuned by my
Countrymen, who all with one voice complain and protest that they dare not
longer continue their commerce without present order for remedy of so extreme
and perilous an injustice, do beseech your Majesty that you will be pleased
not only to give present order for the release of those that without scandal
are known for the present in your prisons, but also that in time to come the
true intention of that Article be observed, which is, That without known
offense and scandal the King my Masters subjects be not molested. The
accomplishment of this (considering how much it imports your Majesty in honor,
your Majesty and the Archduke having in that Article in no other sort then in
all the rest covenanted by especial words, that your selves would provide that
in no case but only in giving scandal to others, the subjects of my Sovereign
should be troubled for their consciences) I cannot but expect from so just and
sincere a Prince: And therefore will not trouble your Majesty with more words;
but offering my self in all things within my power to your Majesty's service, I
remain with a desire to be reckoned in the number of your Majesty's humble and
affectionate servants,

C. C.
July 23 stilo novo, 1608.
Sir Charles Cornwallis to the Spanish King, Jan. 16. 1608.
THe largeness and liberality of your Majesty's Royal hand being such, that it
has made your Greatness and Munificence of so much note through most parts of
this world; I assure my self it is far removed from the thoughts of your
Princely heart to straiten in matter of Justice, that so naturally and
necessarily belongs to your Kingly Office: your Majesty has been pleased to
refer to the Constable, the Duke of Infantasque, and two of the Regents of your
Council of Arragon, the understanding and determining of the extreme and
barbarous usage, outrage and spoil committed by ships set out in course under
the commission, and at the charge of your Majesty's Viceroy of Sardinia, and
his son-in-law Don Lewis de Calatana, and others by their procurement: those
Lords and others there authorized by that Commission, very nobly and justly
desiring that of the spoil committed there might be made entire satisfaction,
gave order diverse months since; but your Majesty's Viceroy adding to his former
offense, contempt of your Majesty's authority, has not only disobeyed in his
own person, but contradicted and withstood in others the accomplishment of your
commandments; it seems that God is pleased for the good of your Majesty's
Estate and Government to disvizard that man, and make apparent to the world how
unfit he is to be trusted with your command of so great importance, whose
covetous and ungodly condition is come to such height, is has drawn him not
only to spoil unlawfully, and so barbarously to use the subjects of so great a
King your confederate, and thereby to hazard a breach of the amity between your
Majesty's so necessary for both your Estates, and so utile to the whole
Commonwealth of Christendom, but also to neglect and contemn the authority of
your Majesty his own Sovereign, to whom, besides the obligation of his natural
allegiance, he is so infinitely bound for preferring and trusting him with a
matter of so great consequence and dignity. By this paper enclosed your Majesty
shall understand the manner of proceeding of the King my Master against such of
his subjects as commit the like crimes and outrage against any of yours, and
thereby conceive what my said Sovereign expects of your Majesty in this and
the like, and what I am commanded in conformity thereof to require, which is,
that there be no proceeding in so clear and plain a case, by way of process or
suit in Law, which in this kingdom as by experience is known, are immortal;
but that according to the sixth Article of the Peace, and the most Christian
and just example showed by my Sovereign, who so punctually and conscionably in
all things observes with your Majesty, you will be pleased that there be not
only an entire and immediate satisfaction to the parties, but that as well
your said Viceroy, and Don Lewis his son-in-law, as all others their aiders,
partners, and receivers in that crime may be criminally proceeded against, and
suffer such punishment as so enorm and unlawful actions have justly deserved:
The performance of this (considering with what patience the King my Master out
of his love to your Majesty, notwithstanding the daily complaints and
importunities, of the parties, and the general exclamation of other his
subjects, who hold it rather agreeable with his honor and Kingly Office, not so
long to permit unsatisfied or unpunished so intolerable an outrage, has more
then three whole years attended it) I cannot but expect from so just and pious
a Prince without further delay or protraction of time..

Jan. 16. novo stilo. 1608
Sir Charles Cornwallis to the Spanish King.
WEll knows your Majesty in your Royal wisdom, how necessary to Kings is the
conservation of authority and respect to their Kingly dignities; as also that
the greatest and most absolute precept of Justice, is to do to others what we
would be done unto our selves: How religiously and punctually the King my
master has observed these unto your Majesty, has appeared by many
demonstrations, and not the least in the denial he made to Antonio de Perez to
abide in his Kingdom, or to have access to his person; only out of a conceit
he had, that he came with a mind determined to disauthorize your Majesty in his
speeches, or to make offer of some practice against your estates in his
overtures. Your Majesty's own Royal and grateful inclination I know to be
such, as you are not without desire to pay my Sovereign with the like
equivalent retribution: but with your Majesty's pardon and favor, duty
inforceth me plainly to tell you, that the Ministers of these your Kingdoms
show not the like affection; where not one, but many my of Sovereigns worst
affected subject are daily received, cherished and honored with entertainments
in your service. Were that sort of people contented only to abuse your
Majesty's Kingly munificence and Christian charity, and to deceive your
Ministers with their falsified genealogies, and with putting the Don upon many
whose fathers and Ancestors were so base and beggarly, as they never arrived to
be owners of so much as convenient apparel to cover their nakedness, it were
much more tolerable: but when having here tasted the warmth of your Majesty's
liberal and pious hand, they become furnished in such ample and abundant
manner, as their poor and miserable ancestors durst never so much as dream of,
like Aesops serpent they turn their venomous stings toward the bosoms that
gave them heat and life, and endeavor with all the force and Art they have, to
give cause of distaste, and by consequence of division between your Majesty and
your faithfullest and most powerful Confederate, in uneven payment for your
Majesty's so great and gracious favor. With generalities for the present I
will not deal, as he whose cares and desires have ever been to soften, and not
to sharpen. Two Irish in your Court, the one a son, as by his own Countrymen
is generally reported, either to a vagabond Rimer, a generation of people in
that Country of the worst account; or to give him his best title, of a poor
Mechanical Surgeon. The other descended rather of more base and beggarly
parents; neglecting what by the Laws of God they ow to their own Sovereign, and
as little regarding their obligation to your Majesty, who from the dust of the
earth and miserable estate has made them what they are, notwithstanding that
they cannot be ignorant of the strait charge and commandments your Majesty
has given, that all due respect be had to the King my Master, and his
Ministers and subjects; the first in irreverend and irrespective behavior
toward my self and some of mine; the other in obstinate defending his
companions unmannerliness, delivering by way of direct asseveration, that I am
an heretic, and such an one as to whom it is not lawful under the pain of
deadly sin, to use any courtesy or reverence whatsoever, have of late
miscarried themselves, as I hold it not agreeable either with what I ow to the
King I serve, or the honor I have to represent his person, to pass over with
silence, but to present it instantly to your Majesty. The names of the parties
are, Magg Ogg, a Solicitor (as here is said) for the fugitive Earl of Tyrone,
condemned by the verdict of his own Contreymen, besides his delict of Treason,
of thirteen several murders. The other names himself Condio Mauricio, and is
here (as I am informed) allowed for a -- for his vagabonding Countrymen, has
put on the habit of a Priest, and has of your Majesty thirty crowns a month
in Pension. The parties and the offenses I have made known unto your Secretary
of State, and I cannot doubt your Majesty in conformity of what the King my
master has by so many arguments demonstrated toward your Majesty and your
Ministers, will command such exemplary punishment to be made of them, as a
behavior so undecent, a slander and reproach so intolerable, and an opinion so
desperate and dangerous, and so contrary to what your Majesty and all those of
your Council, Nobility and Clergy do practice, do worthily merit, etc.

Feb. 1608.
Sir Charles Cornwallis to the Spanish King.
YOur Majesty to whom God has given so large an Empire, and so much exceeding
that of other Princes, and whom he has blessed with so great an inclination to
piety, clemency, and other virtues becoming your Royal dignity and Person,
will I know hold it evil beseemmg so rare a greatness, to come behind any King
how pious and virtuous soever, either in the observance of the laws of mutual
charity and friendship, or in love or zeal to justice, which to all Kingdoms
and Governments gives the assuredst foundation; and in defect whereof by the
Spirit of God himself, Kingdoms are said to be translated from one Nation to
another. The first King that God gave unto his people, he elected of higher
stature then the rest by the shoulders upwards, signifying thereby how much
Kings are to strive to exceed and excel in the height and measure of virtue
and justice; also how fit it is for them to overlook with their authorities
and providence the highest head of their Ministers, and to observe how they
guide themselves.

By the contents of this paper enclosed, your Majesty shall perceive the
Christian and Kingly care the King my Master has had, not only of the
observances of the Articles of Peace since the same between your Majesty's were
concluded; but of the punctual accomplishment of the true Laws of amity and
friendship, which are more surely and expressively imprinted in Royal and
Noble hearts, then possibly they can be written or charactered by any pen in
paper. In your Majesty's Kingdoms (pardon I humbly beseech you if I speak
plainly) much contrary to that example, the King my Masters subjects suffer all
manner of spoils, oppressions and miseries, and are (as well I may term them)
made a very prey to the hungry and greedy; your Viceroyes and others enter
their ships under cover and color of Peace and Justice, finding them rich,
they lay crimes to their charge, whereof there appears neither proof nor
probability; yet serve their pretenses to possess them of their goods, and to
put the poor Merchants to a demand in Law: wherein were truth alone the
balance they should be weighed by, (though that form of redress were far short
of the immediate remedy provided by the King my Sovereign for your Majesty's
subjects) yet were it much more allowable and to be endured; but having here
complained two whole years without any course at all taken for redress, as in
the cause with the Duke of Feria three entire years, as in that with the
Viceroy of Sardinia one year and more, as in that of his Majesty's servant
Adrian Thibaut, taken and spoiled by your Majesty's General Don Luis; as in
that of Estry and Bispich, imprisoned and bereaved of their goods by Iuan de
Vendorza Alcalde of Madrid, we are after so long a time spent in misery and
charge countervailing a great part of the value of the goods taken from us,
enforced still to all punctualities and extremities of forms of law, and to
abide the uttermost peril of all advantages that by the inventions, wits and
tongues of Lawyers can be devised, to obscure and hide the light and right of
truth. The false color given by every of these, and the barbarous cruelty used
to the parties, would require too long and tedious a declaration. It satisfies
that none of their pretenses are proved; nay, which is more they are so false
and fabulous as to no indifferent underderstanding they appear so much as
probable.

My humble desire is, your Majesty would be pleased to pass your own Royal eyes
upon this paper; and therefore to affect all possible brevity, I will pass unto
your Majesty's other inferior ministers of your Ports, of which few there are
(those in Biscay, and some in Portugal only excepted) where we have not diverse
oppressions, imprisonments, and unjust imbargements, in Sivil especially;
whereof forty several suits, and as many false sentences given, raised and
pursued by a man now dead, and therefore in charity left unnamed. We have
hitherto in your Majesty's Council of war (where before those noble Lords all
passed by the equal line of Justice) not failed in my remembrance in the
overthrowing of any, save one mistaken that passed in a wrong name, and another
concerning merchandise that had their manufacture in Embden, (whereof I suppose
those Lords were not rightly informed) only excepted. In that Court I must
acknowledge we have had redress, but yet with your Majesty's favor a miserable
one; our gain being whether we shall be owners of our own or not, our expenses
and charges certain, and the time without measure large, whereby many have been
undone, some dead in prison in England for want of what was unjustly detained
from them here. Yet neither the false Judges in Sivil nor Promoters ever
chastised, or for any thing that I yet have understood, so much as ever
reprehended or found fault with.

I haste to a conclusion, fearing lest I should dwell too long in a matter so
unsavory and unpleasing to your Majesty's pitiful ears and Christian heart,
so much of it self disposed to all clemency and piety. I will for the next
resort to the ships, cordage, corn, and other victuals and provisions taken
from the King my Sovereigns subjects for your Majesty's own services, and the
relief of the extreme necessity in your Galleys, and Garrisons of the Navy, of
whom some have been enforced for want of payment of their moneys to send their
ships home unfreighted, a loss extreme to poor Merchants that live by trade and
time, to repair to this Court, and here remain some of them 14 months, and
others two years and more, till their very charges had eaten out a great part
of what was due unto them, and in the end recover only their own without any
relief or recompense either for their expenses, times lost, or damages. I will
only instance two, because their causes are most strange and pitiful, and yet
unsatisfied; the one named Thomas Harrison, and the other Richard Morris: The
first served your Majesty with his ship, till the same with one of his sons and
all of his men were swallowed with the seas, and has been here more then four
years suing for his recompense and salary, recommended by the King my
Sovereign, by Letters from your Majesty's Ambassadors in England, and by my
self all that long time furthered with my earnest solicitation; which has
begot infinite promises, but to this day no manner of payment or performance:
The other, who sometimes has been a man of wealth and reputation, and falling
into great poverty, served your Majesty with all that in the world he was
worth, and all that in value above 6000 Ryals. I blush I protest to think of
it, and my heart is grieved to mention it to so great a King, of whose
liberality and magnificence the world takes so much notice. His right and his
necessity being well known unto your Officers, he has been more then three
years and a half fed with hopes, and put off with schedules and sending from
one Port to another for the receipt of his money, till he has indebted himself
the most part of the sum, and at present wants wherewith both to feed and
cover him. Now at last he is promised payment out here of your Royal chests,
but after so many ceremonies and circumstances to be performed with your
Officers in other parts, as God knows hunger may end the poor man before they
begin to satisfy him. By all this will plainly appear to your Majesty, that
your Majesty's subjects are by the favor and Christian justice of the King my
master entered into the new Testament and law of Grace, haying restitution and
remedy without the delays of ceremony and formality; and we still remain under
the old, and tied in ail things to the handwriting of the Law, to the
burthenous circumstances and intolerable dilatory formalities of proceeding in
this your Kingdom, and what else your unpittifull Ministers will out of
uncharitable and unsensible minds of other men's harms charge and impose upon us.

Well does your Majesty conceive, that would the King my Master wink at the
like courses to be taken by his subjects and ministers with such of yours as
they might meet upon the seas, the English are not of so little invention, but
they could devise as good colors and pretenses; nor their Lawyers of so small
skill and so much conscience, but they could form and protract suits; nor the
ships of England so weakened and lessened, but they could equal and surmount
their losses. I have out of mine own humble affection to your Majesty, out of
my general and ever continuing desire to hold firm the ancient amity so
necessary for your own estates, and utile for the whole commonweal of
Christendom, out of the force of duty I owe to my King and Country, thus far
adventured to unburthen my soul and thoughts, not doubting but your Majesty's
magnanimous and Christian heart will be moved as well in desire to equal the
pious and immutable example of the King my Master, as in a just compassion of a
Nation now confederate with you, and that so gladly would entertain any cause
to love and serve you, to give present remedy to those woeful and intolerable
oppressions; and that since you have firmed and consented by your Articles of
Peace of new orders (which being confirmed by your oath stand now in force of
Laws) you would be pleased in like manner to give them a new form of indilatory
execution, conformable to that of the King my Sovereign, etc.

King James to the University of Cambridge, Mar, 4. 1616.
JACOBVS Dei gratia Magnae Britanniae, Franciae and Hiberniae Rex, Fidei
defensor, etc.
Acadmiae Cantabrigiae communi salutem.
SI jus civitatis impetret a nobis Cantabrigia, veremur ne aemula urbis
potentia crescente minuatur Academiae securitas, sat erit apud nos metus vestri
judicium fecisse, nec enim tam vobis convenit Academiae periculum deprecari
quam nobis, sponte nostra quicquid in speciem illi noxium sit avertere.
Glorietur urbs illa se a Majoribus nostris electam doctrinarum sedem,
ingeniorum officium, sapientiae palestram. Quicquid his titulis addi potest
nimis, and non honestatur plebeia Civitatis appellatione Musarum domicilium vel
sane literatorum dicatur Civitas, vel quod in villa nostrae villae and in
incolitarum tegitur celebritate. Haec ejus fuerint privilegia Academiae
dignitatem comiter observare (cujus frequentia facta and seipsa major
affluentia bonarum artium studiosos amice excipere quorum congressu dislata
est) Literatorum deinque honori ancillari unde haec illa nata est felicitas,
hae arts quibus crevit tenenda, non aucupandam titulorum novitas incerti
eventus facessat popularis vocabuli fastus, unde certa oriatur aemulationis
necessitas quae eo turpior urbi est futura quo majori erga Academiam obstrictam
and reverentiam, nolumus sacrum illum musarum asylum minuti praetoris ense
temerari nec strepere tetrica edicta, ubi septem geminus vestri Chori auditur
concentus satis and in vetera purpura invidiae nova pompa tam illi futura, and
supervacua quam vobis suspecta. In nostra solvis tutela and post Deum opt. max.
Alma scientiarum Matter nostro fovebitur sceptro indefessa illius foecunditas
non abortiet ad praetorii gladii terriculum nullum honoris titulum Cantabrigiae
indulgemus, qui cum Academiae sollicitudine conjunctus sit.

Valete. Datum e Palatio nostre Westmonast. 4 Calend. Mar. 1616. JACOBUS REX.

Mr. Ruthen to the Earl of Northumberland.
My Lord,
IT may be interpreted discretion sometimes to wink at private wrongs,
especially for such a one as my self, that have a long time wrastled with a
hard Fortune, and whose actions, words and behavior are continually subject to
the censure of a whole State; yet not to be sensible of public and National
disgrace, were stupidity and baseness of mind: For no place, nor time, nor
State can excuse a man from performing that duty and obligation wherein Nature
has tied him to his Country and to himself. This I speak in regard of certain
infamous verses lately by your Lordships means dispersed abroad to disgrace my
Country and my self, and to wrong and stain by me the honor of a worthy and
virtuous Gentlewoman, whose unspotted and immaculate virtue your self is so
much more bound to admire and uphold, in that having dishonorably assaulted it,
you could not prevail. But belike, my Lord, you dare do any thing but that
which is good and just. Think not to bear down these things either by greatness
or denial; for the circumstances that prove them are so evident, and the veil
wherewith you would shadow them, is too transparant. Neither would I have you
flatter your self, as though, like another Giges, you could pass in your
courses invisible. If you owe a spite to any of my contrymen, it is a poor
revenge to rail upon me in verse: or if the repulse of your lewd desire at the
Gentlewomans hands, has inflamed and exasperated your choler against her, it
was never known that to refuse Northumberlands unlawful lust was a crime for a
Gentlewoman deserving to have her honor called in question. For her part, I
doubt not but her own unspotted virtue will easily wipe out any blot which your
malice would cast upon it; and for me and my Countrymen (know my good Lord)
that such blows as come in rhyme, are too weak to reach or harm us. I am
ashamed in your Lordships behalf for these proceedings, and sorry that the
world must now see how long it has been mistaken in Northumberlands spirit:
and yet who will not commend your wisdom in choosing such a safe course to wrong
a woman and a prisoner; the one of which cannot, and the other by nature and
quality of the place, may not right his own wrongs. Wherefore (setting aside
the most honorable order of the Garter, and potesting that whatsoever is here
said, is no way intended to the Nobility and Gentry of England in general,
which I doubt not but will condemn this your dishonorable dealing, and for
which both my self, and I dare truly say all my Countrymen shall be even as
ready to sacrifice our bloods as for our own mother Scotland) I do not only in
regard of our own persons affirm, that whatsoever in those infamous Verses is
contained is utterly false and untrue, and that your self has dealt most
dishonorably, unworthily, and basely, but this I Will ever maintain. If these
words sound harshly in your Lordships ear, blame your self, since your self
forgetting your self have taught others how to dishonor you: And remember that
though Nobility make a difference of persons, yet Injury acknowledges none.

PATRICK RUTHEN.

Sir Henry Yelvertons submission in the Star Chamber.
My Lords,
I Humbly beseech you to think that I stand not here either to outface the
Court, or to defend this cause otherwise then justly I may; only I desire in
mine own person to second the submission which has been opened by my Council:
for hitherunto has nothing been opened unto you, but that which has passed
under the advised pen of others, and hitherto has appeared from my self
neither open nor inward acknowledgment.

My Lords, it may seem strange to the hearers, that against a Bill so sharpened
I should abruptly fall upon a submission or confession, whereby I may seem to
bow down my neck to the stroke. But my Lords, in this I weighed not my self,
but I did it to amplify the honor and mercy of his Majesty, from whom I may
say Clemency springs as the blood that runs in his own veins. For, my Lords,
when this Charter was sometime questioned, and diverse of my Lords here present
had out of their great wisdoms discovered that shame in it (which I must here
confess I did not then see) and had related the same to his Majesty, it pleased
his Maj. out of his great favor to me his unworthy servant to send me this
message by two great honorable persons here present, and therefore under your
Lordships favor I think not fit to hide so great a favor of his Maj. from the
eyes of the people, who offered to my choice either to submit to himself in
private, or defend here openly; and when I saw I fell into such faithful hands,
I remember my answer then was, that the offer was gracious, and the choice was
easy, and his mercy free. After came this Information against me: I took it
but as trial whether I would make his Majesty King of my confidence, or not:
And though there was offered unto me and my Council such a way of defense as I
might have escaped, yet I protest I did reject it, because I would not distrust
his Majesty's mercy to let go the anchor-hold I had thereof; and whatsoever
becomes of me, I protest I shall still honor the King, though I go lame to my
grave. I humbly confess the manifold errors of this Charter to your Lordships,
wherein I have miscarried; and I beseech his Majesty and your Lordships to
think they are rather crept in unawares, then ushered in by consent. The errors
are of diverse natures, some of negligence, some of ignorance, some of
misprision; I mistook many things, I was improvident in some things, too
credulous in all things. But I who was chosen, when I had so much provoked his
Majesty by mine unexperienced years, and having since found so many favors
from his Majesty's hands, and this day having served him full seven years, who
this day has translated me from a low estate unto a place whereof I enjoy now
only the name, and now since has so much quickened and enlightened me by his
gracious countenance, and assured me by his daily favors to make me to depend
upon him; and that I should deliberately and determinately take any flowers
from his Crown to place them on the heads of others, or to betray his Majesty's
interest into the hands of others, I hope his Majesty will vouchsafe me so much
favor not to value me at so low a rate, as to think these things came in de
industria: For if I had felt any such Echo arise in my breast, I protest I
would have laid hands on my self, and judged my self unworthy of any society.

My Lords, the corruption of my hands are far inferior to the corruption of the
heart; and the hand that runs wilfully into error, works merely from the
corruption of the heart, and that makes it the more inexcusable, as the
bleeding of a wound inwardly ever becomes mortal; and were I conscious to my
self, I would not have any color of excuse. I thank his Majesty's Council that
howsoever these hands were at first mistrusted, yet since they are not at all
misdoubted, nor the least corruption laid to my charge. But this does most
grieve me, that my faithfulness to his Majesty should be suspected: And I
humbly desire upon my knees, that his Clemency in this case may stop the issue
of his Justice; that though a long time his face has been hid, yet now at
length his mercy will break through the clouds to support me that am now
fallen. I lay my self at his Majesty's feet to do with me as it pleases him,
and humbly desire his Majesty would take me to his own sentence. I never
thought of my self otherwise then clay in his Majesty's hands, to mould me to
honor or dishonor. When I look and behold this solemnity and spectacle about
me, I make no other account of it then Pompa mortis; and such a Prince as he
is, knows that Lise and Reputation are equal, if the last be not the greatest.
I know your Lordships have such power, and his Majesty takes such pleasure in
you, you are so dear in his eyes, that he can deny you nothing, and therefore I
would desire you that you would be suitors in my behalf, that his favor might
once again shine upon me. I know his grace and clemency sleeps, if I be not
unworthy to partake, and the rather because the River that did run another way,
is now turned into the Sea again, and the Charter given up, surrendered and
cancelled. I know much life might be added to the sinews of my happiness by
your Lordships intercessions for me; in vouchsafing, whereof I shall pledge a
perpetual assurance of better service for the time to come, and shall be bound
and engaged to every one of your Lordships: so that my desire is, that his
Majesty might first be acquainted with this submission before you proceed into
the merits of the cause, remaining still a prisoner to his Justice, knowing his
Majesty may if he please, turn me to vanity.

Ferdinand the second, Emperor, to the Catholic King.
Most gracious King, my most loving Nephew,
FAther Jacinthus comes over to your Court to negotiate with your Majesty in
the Popes name, about a business much concerning the conservation of our holy
Faith, and consequently the support of our Pamily, as your Majesty shall
understand of the said Father, to whom I refer my self, as also to Don
Balthazar de Zuniga, to whom I have written more distinctly, fearing to be
over-tedious to your Majesty, and being well assured how well your Majesty
stands inclined to either of these points.

Ferdinand the Emperor to Don Balthazar de Zuniga, October 15. 1621.
To the Honorable and sincerely beloved Don Balthazar de Zuniga, Cousin and
Counselor of State to the most excellent and Catholic King of Spain.
Honorable and sincerely beloved,
WHat my mind and purpose is touching the translating of the Electorship to the
Duke of Bavaria, according to the promise I made him, and wherefore I think
that business so necessary and profitable, as for Germany in general, so
particularly for securing our House from all attempts of Heretics, as his
Holiness exhorts me not to be further delayed: You shall understand as well by
conference with Father Jacinthus, whom his Holiness has for that purpose
addressed unto me, his Majesty of Spain my Nephew, and other Catholiqne Princes
of Germany, as by these ensuing reasons, whereof the principal are, That when
I repeat from the beginning the whole course of my Reign, and the difficulties
through which I have attained my Kingdoms and Provinces, I behold with
reverence the admirable providence of God over me, which makes me the more
bound to repose my trust in him, and not to omit any occasion which may tend to
the advancement of his glory, and the honor of so admirable tried providence:
and therefore that I should use that most notable victory to the honor of God,
and extirpation of all seditions factions, which are nourished chiefly among
the Calvinists, and that I should withdraw my self from that judgment that the
Prophet threatens to the King of Israel, Because thou have dismissed a man
worthy of death, thy Son shall be for his soul. The Palatine keeps now in
Holland, exiled not only from the Kingdom which he rashly attempted, but
despoiled almost of all his own Territories, expecting as it were the last cast
of Fortune; whom, if by an impious kind of commiseration and subtle Petitions,
I be persuaded to restore to his Electorall dignity, and nourish in my bosom
as a trodden half living snake, what can I expect less then a deadly stinging?
For it is in vain for me to think that he should be able to discern the
greatness of such a benefit: For the Politicians saying is true, Vltionem
quaesivi, gratiam oneri habere, especially since the injuries he did me are so
heinous, his projects so subtle, that although I should overcome him with
Christian charity, yet I should never be able to take him from the guilt of his
offenses, and make him soundly faithful unto me; but he will always gape at
all occasions whereby he may free himself from fear of his ill deservings, and
cover his own prostituted honor with new attempts. Add hereunto the Calvinists
institution, of whose Sect the proper genius is to hold nothing either fraud or
wickedness, which is undertaken for the Religion; no sanctity of oath, nor fear
of dishonor hinders them. From such an one, what caution can either the house
of Austria, or other Catholic Princes with whom he is no less in enmity,
because for Religion, as because they are interessed in the war, receive? The
King of England will be engaged, but of the same Religion; nor is there any
thing more easy then when there is occasion of perpetrating any wickedness, to
palliate it with a pretext of a breach of the League. Histories are fraughted
with examples; in some there are no cautions sufficient in such a business:
then to drive him where he cannot hurt, all other means are frail, and he which
once believed is despised. It is likewise a consideration of no less moment,
that the Palatine being restored will draw all his power and policy; as
hitherto, so hereafter, where he thinks he can do most hurt, and that most
easily, to wit, to Bethlem-Gabor and the Turks, whom he has already incited to
hostility against me, and will never cease hereafter to instigate the
Galvinists entire hopes in them. These, until they recover breath, and
recollect their forces, they endeavor to disarm and exhaust me of moneys,
ranging in my territories as they have done hitherto by fire and sword. But if
with them also, whom notwithstanding I cannot trust alike, I should make peace,
what conditions will Gabor who remains yet unconquered require, if I should
restore the Palatine (already conquered) to his Electoral dignity?

Therefore since long before God granted me that famous victory, I firmly
forecast with my self, that the Palatine could not be restored to his Electoral
dignity without the extreme danger of the Catholics and my house, I offered
freely on my own motion, but being directed questionless by God, the
Electorship to the Duke of Bavaria, a most eager Defender of the Catholic
cause, whose territories on the other side lie as a Rampire between me and
other Princes of Germany; and since I made so good use of his help, and so
profitable in the recovery of my Kingdoms and Provinces, and continue yet to
this day, time it self more then the said Duke does cry out that I should
accomplish my promise without further delay, and by translation of the
Electorship take away quite all hopes from the Palatine and them that solicit
us so importunately for a restitution, that we may be freed from all
molestation; which thing, since it needs the help of his Majesty of Spain,
although I know his Majesty be propense enough of himself to all things which
appertain to the honor of God, and the security of our House, yet I thought
good to admonish you of this occasion, lest this opportunity of establishing of
our Religion and Family escape, which I conceive might conveniently be done by
you. Neither do I suppose his Majesty to be ignorant, that it was always
judged of our Ancestors, that the House of Austria, which by Gods permission
does now signiorize far and near upon the earth, to have its chief foundation
here in Germany, which is the more to be defended, the nearer its mine depends
thereupon. In times past this House has had proof of many adversaries to its
greatness, as the Histories under Maximilian the first, Charles the fifth,
Ferdinand the second, and Rodulf the second do show: the perfidiousness of
Holland against his Majesty's Grandfather Philip the second, fetched her food
from the Palatinate, neither can his Majesty ever reduce the rebellious
Hollanders to obedience, unless his root be plucked up; which only motive,
besides these which I alleged before, might justly induce him not to suffer a
fallen enemy to rise and resume (as his stomach will never fail him) strength
again.

But albeit it is not to be dissembled that the Lutheran Princes, especially
the Elector of Saxony, will not approve happily of this translation, because they
fear it conduces too much to the corroborating of the Catholic Cause:
Nevertheless, since he cannot accuse that act of Charles the fifth, who for a
far lighter cause deprived John Frederick of the Electorship, and conferred it
on Maurice this Dukes great Uncle; and perceiving that all the Councels of the
Calvinists do aim to bring in the Turk, he will not condemn his translation:
For no less is the Lutherans hatred against the Calvinists, as the Catholics
and they think less danger do proceed from the later. It is to be hoped
therefore, that the Elector of Saxony, and other Lutheran Princes, when they
see the business brought to this point, will not so far disapprove thereof, as
to put themselves in Arms; which I shall shortly understand of the most
excellent Archduke Charles my brother, who is for this cause to treat with the
Elector of Saxony. And these motives as they are of great consequence, so I
imagine you, which are daily of his Majesty's Council, have pondered them as
diligently as my self, and therefore that you will omit nothing that is
pertinent to establish this business, whereby we obtain the long and wished
fruit thereof, which is the propagation of the honor of Almighty God through
the Empire, and the augmentation of the common safety, Family and Dignity.

Beloved Don Balthazar I understand that there was a motive of great
consideration omitted in my Letter; to wit, that if we had more countenance of
his Catholic Majesty then we have at this present, the Empire should always
remain in the hands of Catholics, and so according to reason in our House, to
whose advancement the Duke of Bavaria will willingly concur in recognition of
such a benefit, being promoted by an Emperor of that House, to so eminent and
high a dignity as in our letters.

Vienna October. 15. 1621.
King James to Ferdinand the Emperor concerning the Palatinate. November. 12.
1621.
James by the grace of God King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc.
wishes health and constant peace unto the most mighty and invincible Prince
Ferdinando, by the same grace elected Roman Emperor, King of Germany, Hungary
and Bohemia, Archduke of Austria, etc. our loving friend and cousin.
Most mighty and invincible Prince, Brother, Cousin, and special loving
Friend; It is not unknown unto the whole world, much less to your Imperial
Majesty, how earnestly we have hitherto sought and endeavored as well by the
diligence of our Ambessadors whom we have sent, as by the intercession of the
chief German Princes, the appeasing of those Bohemian wars ever since they
first began, and with what ardent zeal and affection we have so much hunted
after the desire of peace: Let it not therefore seem strange unto any man, that
we take it ill, that all the very time when we were (to the uttermost of our
power) treating of peace, and giving our best furtherance for the overture of
wholesome means to effect it; even then notwithstanding, we found clean contrary
effects to ensue thereupon; whereat we much marvelled, seeing the Treaty was in
hand, and already begun on all sides: as namely among the rest, that our
son-in-law was wholly despoiled and robbed of his hereditary patrimony that
remained unto him, excepting the ^lower Palatinate, which was all by
commandment of your Imperial Majesty, taken and possessed by the Duke of
Bavaria, according as himself confessed, with strong hand and force of Arms,
and that for such reasons as are merely new, and such as the like were never
hitherto once heard of. That notwithstanding it plainly appears by the answer
given unto our Ambassador, that your Imperial Majesty had caused the suspension
of that Ban or prescription in those Countries, yet did your Imperial Majesty
permit the taking of Arms again in hand: which also after the same your
Imperial Majesty's answer, was yet again likewise commanded to be done in the
Lower Palatinate, whereby there has therein been since raised a grievous and
cruel war, and most part of the Country taken in by the Spaniards powerful
strength. But as we diligently observed those things, we clearly see what great
trouble and misery has been occasioned by this our great patience and long
delaying, forbearing and doubtfulness, which without all doubt may be hereafter
further occasioned, and which may perhaps prove heavier then the chief reasons
of this misery it self. And therefore we hold it best and most expedient that
your Imperial Majesty do at length put a period to this most unhappy business:
And for that end and purpose have thought good at this time so propound what we
prescribe our Son in law on the one part to perform toward your Imperial
Majesty, which we have always councelled and exhorted our Son in law to do, nor
will we so much as in the least once doubt of the contrary and adverse success
therein, but are persuaded that your Imperial Majesty will be most graciously
moved to receive our Son in law into grace and favor, to redeliver unto him
his hereditary lands and titles which he had enjoyed before those Bohemian
wars, and fully to restore him to his former honors and dignities. In regard
whereof the Count Palatine shall perform unto your Imperial Majesty as
follows.

1. He shall for himself and his Son wholly renounce and acquit all pretense of
right and claim unto die Crown of Bohemia and the incorporated Countries
thereof. 2. He shall from henceforward yield all constant due devotion unto the
Imperial Majesty, as do other obedient Princes Electors of the Empire. 3. He
shall upon his knee crave pardon of the Imperial Majesty. 4. He shall not
hereafter any manner of way either unfittingly carry or demean himself toward
the Imperial Majesty, or disturb your Kingdoms or Countries. 5. He shall upon
reasonable conditions reconcile himself with other his neighbor Princes and
States of the Empire, and hold good friendship with them. 6. And shall really
do all other like things as is above contained, and that shall be reasonable
and necessary.
Which proposed Conditions if your Imperial Majesty shall please to receive and
accept of, the same will be a notable testimony of your Imperial Majesty's
goodness and grace: which how well and acceptable it will be unto us, shall be
acknowledged and showed by our very willing service and unfeigned friendship as
well toward your Imperial Majesty as toward the most renowned house of
Austria. But if it shall fall out contrary to our expectation, that these our
just demands and well-willed presentation shall not find acceptance, or after
this our diligent endeavor you shall seek to delay us by the using some new
tergiversation, and pretend to use that long council and deliberate advice of
the Princes of the Empire upon these our propounded conditions, whereas
notwithstanding your Imperial Majesty expressly promised in your last answer
freely to declare what should be your purpose and resolution therein: So that
there being no ground to the contrary (as we call God and the world to witness
there is not) and being forced and constrained by the duty and natural
affection which we owe and bear to our Children for the preservation of their
honor and welfare, we are resolved to try the uttermost of our power for their
relief; especially seeing we sue for, desire, and would obtain and retain no
new title of honor for our Son in law, but only to have again those of his own
now lost, which he then had and enjoyed when we matched him with our dear and
only daughter: For if in this distress we should leave our Children and their
Partisans without council help and protection, it would be a foul stain to our
honor.

Let not therefore your Imperial Majesty in regard hereof blame us at all, if
we with a mighty and puissant Army by force and strong hand seek to recover
that which by propounded and reasonable conditions we could not obtain for the
continuance of our friendship. But for as much as it is most certain this
cannot be without the great hurt and prejudice of all Christendom, the breach
of public peace, and the wounding of our contracted amity and friendship with
the house of Austria, which we have ever hitherto by manifold testimonies
uprightly, faithfully and inviolably observed: It is therefore requisite and
necessary that your Majesty of your innate gracious mildness and goodness, and
of that most reverent discretion wherewith you are endowed, to seek in time to
meet with and prevent these so great evils likely to ensue, and use brotherly
love and good will. God almighty long preserve your Imperial Majesty's life,
and at last so direct your heart, that sweet peace and the concord of all
Christendom now rent asunder, may be recovered and again maintained.

At our Royal Residence-Town of Royston, November. 12. 1621. JACOBUS REX.

His Imperial Majesty to King James, Ian. 14. 1621.
COnstans atque eadem nobis semper fuit men's, idem desiderum, non tam verbis
quam re ipsa demonstrandi quanti tranquillitatem in Imperio publicam and mutuae
amicitiae cum vicinis Principibus, potissimum Serenitatis vestrae sincere
colendae studium aestimaremus. Inde si praeteriti temporis successus de rebus
in utroque Palatinatu tam superiore quam inferiore innovat. de quo literis ad
nos datis Serenitas vestra conqueritur deflexisse videri possint, illi culpa
venit omnis imputanda, quem ab improba cupiditate aliena regna captantem, nec
divini nec humani juris respectus, nec supremi Domini sui reverentia, nec sacri
Jus-jurandi religio, nec prudentissimi Soceri concilium cohibere potuerint; imo
qui justo Dei judicio ca acie in fugam profligatus usque adeo obstinatione sua
pertinaciter etiamnum inheret, ut continuis machinationibus per Jagarndorfium,
Mansfeildum, aliosque crudeles pacis publica perturbatores, Acharonta potius
movere quam sanioribus acquiescere consiliis ab usurpatoque regni nostri titulo
desistere (non officiis per Serenitatem vestram per quam sane diligenter
interpositis. sua ex part quid deferens) videatur, nec ullum in hanc usque
horam animi poenitentis signum dederit. Itaque in tractatu de pace instituenda
uti condescendamus videt Serenitas vestra ab cis quos principaliter id
concernit quam nulla nobis causa vel occasio praebeatur. Id quidem ingenue
profitemur, in exulceratissimo eo negotio, cujus calamitas universum pene orbem
involvit, cum Serenitatis vestrae candorem, came animi moderationem, and
equitatis justitiaeque respectum enituisse, ut nihil sit vicissim quod non
ejusdem desideriis salva suprema auctoritate nostra Caesarea, salvisque Imperii
legibus libenter tribuamus, qui pro innata nobis benignitate -- aequisque
conditionibus Arma poni and optatam afflictissimae Germaniae pacem restitui,
quam legitime executiones insisti per caedes and sanguinem Christianum gloriosa
nomini nostra trophaea figi nunquam non maluimus. In gratiam itaque Serenitatis
vestrae, ut ret ipsa deprehendat quanti nobis sit perpetuum cum eadem amicitia
cultum novo fomite subinde revocari, licet hactenus prosperos militiae nostrae
successus divina benignitas tribuit, acquiescimus, ut benevolo tractatis almae
pacis redintigrandae rations opportunae ineantur, cumque in finem ad evitandum
viarum temporumque dispendia nunc in eo sumus ut serenissimae Principi Dominae
Elizabethae Clarae Eugeniae natae, Infanti Hispaniarum, Archiducissae Austriae,
Ducissae Burgundiae, Stiriae, Carinthiae, Canniolae, and Wirtinburgiae, and
Provinciarum Belgii Burgundiarumque Dominae, Consobrinae ac sorori nostrae
charissimae, ut istic in aula sua, quorsum vestra quoque Serenitas si ita
libuerit suos cum plena facultate ablegare poterit primum cumque proximum
assequende pacis gradum cessationem ab armis aequis conditionibus nomine nostro
Caesari stabiliendum permittemus, prope diem expedituri Legatum nostrum virum
nobilem, qui diligentissime in gravissimo hoc negotio mentem nostram before
aperiet, atque inde ad Serenitatem vestram animum nostrum ad redintegrandae
pacis studia proclivem, qui non aliter quam quibuscunque benevolentiae officiis
cum Serenitate vestra certare studet magis magisque testificetur, cujus interim
consilia generosa praepotens Deus publico orbis commodo in faelicissimos
^ventus disponat.

Dat. Viennae, 14 Jan. 1621.
Earl of Bristol to King James.
MOst gracious Sovereign,
it may please your Majesty to remember, that at my coming out of Spain I
signified unto your Majesty how far the Duke of Lerma had upon several
occasions intimated unto me an extraordinary desire of this King and State, not
only to maintain peace and amity with your Majesty, but to lay hold of all
things that may be offered for the nearer uniting of your Majesty and your
Crowns; and that from this generality he had descended often to have discourse
with me of a match for the Princes Highness with the second daughter of Spain,
assuring me, that in this King and his Ministers there was a forward
disposition thereunto. But from me he received no other answer but to this
effect, That I in the treaty of the former match for the late Prince, had
received so strange and unexpected answer from them, and that their demands
seemed so improper and unworthy, that I conceived that your Majesty had little
reason to be induced again to give ear to any such overture, or that I should
again enter into any such treaty, much less to be the motioner thereof:
Although I would confess, that if I were fully persuaded of the sincerity of
their intentions, and of a possibility of having the said match effected, I
know not any thing wherein I would more willingly employ my endeavors; but as
the case now stood, I was certain, that if I should but make any such motion in
England, should but draw imputation of much weakness upon me there, and no whit
advance the cause, for that your Majesty and your Ministers would make no other
construction of the motion, but as construed to divert the Match of France;
which was treated of, for that your Majesty who but the year before had
received so unpleasing and unequal an answer, should now be persuaded that
there was here so great a change, as that a match was really desired, there
would now need more then ordinary assurance. But the Duke of Lerma continuing
several times the same profession, and telling me besides that the greatest
Cases might be altered by circumstances, and that the Age of this Prince was
much more proper then that of his brother; I freely let the Duke know that in
case I might see that it was really desired here, and that I might be able to
propound unto my Master conditions of so much advantage and certainty as might
put him and his ministers out of doubt that this overture was not again revived
from hence either for diversion or winning of time, I would then willingly
intimate unto your Majesty the inclination and desire I found here of having a
proposition for this match once again set on foot. The Duke told me he would
have a further conference with me, and that he then no ways doubted to give
such satisfaction as might well assure your Majesty and your Ministers, that
they sincerly desired the match in general, and would omit nothing on their
side for the accomodating of particulars that might give furtherance unto it.
But the very night before the Duke had appointed a meeting with me, there came
a Post dispatched out of England from the Spanish Ambassador upon the arrival
of Sir Thomas Edmonds into England, who brought word that the match with France
was absolutely concluded, and that within few days it was to be published.
Whereupon the Duke at our meeting the next morning, told me that it would be
needless now to descend to any particulars in the business whereof we are to
treat, since that they had newly received advertisement that the match with
France was fully concluded. And thus for the present the matter rested until
some five or six weeks after; about which time my self was to go into England,
and so taking leave of the Duke, he asked me whether I had not received
advertisement that the match with France was published. I told him no, but I
had certainly heard that it was not as yet fully concluded: Whreupon he
entreated me, that in case I found not the French match in such forwardness as
it could not be stayed, I would let him know of it; and that if I should see
any kind of possibility that the business we had spoken of might be set on
foot, I would advertise him, and that thereupon he would proceed to those
particulars which he formerly intended for my satisfaction.

Herewith I acquainted your Majesty, and finding the Spanish Ambassador in
England had notice from the Duke of our former proceedings, and order to
further them by all possible means he could, especially if he should understand
that your Majesty were not fully resolved of the French match, I thought it fit
by this means to let the Duke understand in what estate I found those
businesses in England; and thereupon with your Majesty's permission, I wrote a
letter unto him to this effect.

That although it were true that the Match with France had been treated of with
much earnestness on both sides, and with great likelihood of being concluded;
yet there daily arose so many difficulties, and new cases of delay, that I
judged it far from any perfect conclusion, neither did I see cause absolutely
to despair of the businesses which our selves pretended, unless the difficulty
of the Conditions should make it desperate. But if those things should be
expected by Spain, which in the Treaty for the late Princess were demanded, it
were better by much not to renew the business, then by impossible, or unfitting
propositions on either side to give distaste, or lessen the friendship which
now was betwixt your Majesty's. And therefore except that in Spain they would
be contented with such conditions as your Majesty most fittingly and
conveniently might yield unto, and all other Catholic Princes were willing to
content themselves with, I neither saw cause to hope for good success, or
reason to set the treaty on foot. But in case I might know that the conditions
in point of Religion might be such as I should see a possibility of your
Majesty's condescending unto them, I should be far from despairing of some good
effect; for that I knew that diverse not of the meanest nor least power with
your Majesty were hereunto well inclined, and would give their helping hands.

Hereupon the Spanish Ambassador dispatched his Secretary into Spain, and
received answer from the Duke, that he should give me all assurance that there
was a great desire and inclination to the making of the Match, and that at my
return into Spain they no way doubted but that I should receive such
satisfaction, as should make it appear on their part there should be nothing
wanting for the effecting of it.

It now remains what has passed herein since my last coming to this Court. I
arrived here in Madrid only a day or two before Christmas; and having some six
days after my audience appointed by the King, whilst I was in a withdrawing
chamber expecting the Kings coming forth, the Duke of Lerma came thither to
bear me company; and after many respectfull demands of your Majesty, and the
Queens and the Princes health, and some few complements unto my self concerning
my welcome again unto this Court, he fell to speak of the false Alarms we had in
England concerning a Spanish Armado, seeming much to be displeased that any
credit should be given to any thing to his Majesty's dishonor and want of
fidelity (as he termed it.) But your Majesty (he said) did never believe it:
And it seems he heard of some pleasant answer your Majesty should make to some
one of your Ministers, that in great haste came unto your Majesty when you were
a hunting, and told you that the Spanish Fleet was in the Channel. From this he
entered into great protestations of the sincerity of this Kings affection and
intention toward your Majesty, telling me that I should now see how much they
desired to work a greater neerness and uniting between your Majesty's: And that
of the principal business of which we had in former time spoken, meaning the
Marriage, he desired to speak with me, but it must be at more leisure. I
answered, that I would not fail shortly to wait upon him, and that he should
find me answerable to the professions I had made, which was, that being induced
thereunto by such sufficient and good grounds as might satisfy my Master both
for the convenience and fittingness of having such a Treaty set on foot, and
likewise might take away all objections of their intents of entertaining and
diverting your Majesty hereby, I would be as ready to do all good offices and
give furtherance to the business, as any Minister the King of Spain had. And
this was all that at our first meeting passed in this business.

About some eight days after, I having not in all this time stirred out of my
house under color of being ill disposed, though the truth was indeed to inform
my self of some particulars which concerned your Majesty's service, before I
would speak with the Duke: He being (as I have since understood) something
troubled that in all this time I made no means to come unto him, one morning by
nine of the clock very privately came to my house, without advertising of his
coming (as the custom is here) until the Coach stayed at my gate, and then he
sent in a Gentleman to me, telling me that the Duke was there to speak with me.
When I had conducted the Duke into a room where we were private, he fell into
th'aforesaid matter, and in the manner as I shall here set down unto your
Majesty, without making any other pretense or intent of his coming, or without
using in the space of an hour any speech touching any other business.

After some few questions of your Majesty and the Queen, he began to ask many
things of the Prince, as of his age, his stature, his health, his inclination,
to what sports he was chiefly given? And then suddenly, as it were with a
passionate expression of affection, he desired God to bless him, and to make
him the means by which your Majesty's might be conjoined in a nearer alliance,
and your Kingdoms in a perpetual amity: saying unto me, that he was out of
doubt of my good inclination to this business, both by what had formerly passed
between our selves, as likewise by my proceedings in England, whereof he had
been fully informed by the Spanish Ambassador. And therefore he would in few
words deal with me with much cleerness and freeness, assuring himself he should
receive the like measure from me; and thereupon entered into a solemn
protestation, how much this King desired the Match, and for himself he solemnly
swore, there was no one thing in the world he more desired to see before he
dyed, then the effecting thereof. But my Lord Ambassador (said he) you must
deal as justly with me to let me understand whether you conceive the like
desire to be in the King of England and his Ministers, and then I shall proceed
to speak further unto you.

I answered the Duke, That I ever esteemed more the reputation of a man of
truth and integrity, then of skill and subtilty: which I did hope he did well
perceive by what I was to say, for that I was much more desirous fairly to go
off from this business, then easily to go into it. And therefore if he would
have me speak my conscience, I neither conceived that either in your Majesty or
any of your Ministers there was any kind of inclination thereunto; for that
they having formerly given so resolute and distastefull an answer, your Majesty
had just cause never again to cast so much as your thoughts this way: And
though it might be alleged, that the fitness of the Prince his years, and
other civil regards might cause new resolutions, yet the difference of Religion
were still the same, and the same were the truths, and opinions of Divines in
matter of conscience; and therefore it would not but be a thing of great
difficulty to persuade your Majesty and your Ministers that a Match should be
hearkened unto, much less desired from hence, but upon the same terms the very
thought and remembrance whereof is yet unpleasing in England. So that to deal
plainly with him, I neither found in your Majesty or in the Council any kind of
thought or imagination of any possibility of having any such motion again
revived. But this I found not to grow from any particular dislike or want of
affection in your Majesty to Spain, or that many of the greatest or the
principallest person in England judged not the neerness and alliance of Spain
equally valuable with any other of Christendom; but that out of a
distastefulness of the former answer given from hence, all expectation of any
business of this nature was absolutely extinguished, and therefore again to
revive it there would need more then ordinary endeavors or ordinary
assurances: But in case that they might be given, I know that this Match would
neither want well-willers nor assistants; and for my own part I would freely
make profession that no man more desired it then my self, nor would more
willingly employ his endeavors for the furthering thereof, when by the
descending to particulars I should see both in regard of the conditions and the
assurances of sincere proceeding, the motion worthy and fit by a discreet and
good servant to be offered to his Master; neither then should I be wholly out
of hope of good success, though I would not but esteem it a business of
infinite difficulty.

The Duke replied, That any discourse that I thought fit herein should be
condescended unto, for that all time was lost that was spent in generalities:
And therefore if I so liked, he would move this King, that one or two besides
himself might be appointed to have conference with me; for that if he should
only retain it in his hands, by reason of his many occupations it would have a
slower progress then he wished; but if I would by way of conference digest the
difficulties into heads and particulars, he would as often as he might be
present at our meeting: But for his own part, he said he apprehended few but
what would arise out of the difference of Religion.

I told the Duke, that I very well approved of the descending into particulars,
neither should I refuse conference with any herein whom the King would appoint
to speak with me: But if his meaning were, that these persons should be
nominated or joined by way of Commission, I thought fit to let him understand
that I neither had any time, nor did at present speak of this business either
by order or direction, no nor so much as by your Majesty's privity, but as a
Minister that desired to lay hold of all occasions for the increasing of
further love and neerness betwixt his Master and the Prince to whom he is
employed, I should be glad to the uttermost of my power to advance and further
this cause, as that which I apprehended to be the greatest which the world now
affords for the firm uniting of your Majesty's and your estates.

The Duke told me, that the King would make no scruple to declare his good
inclination and desire to have this Match proceeded in; and that for the
accommodating of the difficulties, he had already used diverse diligences with
the Pope, as likewise with the greatest Divines of this Kingdom, whereof he
named some unto me, whom he said he found very well inclined to the Match: he
told me also he would be glad they might speak with me, to the end I might
truly understand of them all kind of scruples that could be alleged. I
answered, I desired nothing more; and that I could not but approve of those
courses he prescribed, as the most probable to produce a good effect, and that
I hoped God would give happy success unto the business: But I should be bold in
one thing to deliver my opinion, which was, No ways to interess our Masters
herein, unless by the understanding and clearing the difficulties on both
sides, there should be great appearances and probabilities that the business
would take effect: For if their names should be herein used, and after their
Treaty should not be successful, it would but exasperate and breed a greater
distaste betwixt your Majesty's. The Duke told me, he himself misliked not my
opinion; though he said that howsoever that business succeeded, yet your
Majesty should have reason to accept kindly this Kings good intention, for that
if it miscarried, it should appear not to be their default, but that they had
stretched as far as honor and conscience would give them leave. And thus much
he said I might write unto your Majesty if I thought fit, or to my confident
friends in England upon his word and assurance: and so telling me that he would
presently appoint those that should confer with me in this business, we then
parted.

Within two days after I went to the Duke, and after that I had spoken with him
about the business of Cleves according to my instruction, whereof I gave an
account unto Mr. Secretary in a dispatch directed unto him, we fell again into
the speech of the match.

The Duke told me had well considered of that which I had said unto him, and
much approved it, not to interest our Matters in the business, until we should
see some likelihood of good success.

And for that he supposed the difference of Religion like to prove the only
difficulty of consideration, he thought it fit that it should be first cleared;
and therefore he would break the matter with the Cardinal of Toledo, and the
Kings Confessor, and with them he joined another learned man, one Father
Frederick, who since I understand is a Jesuit, but truly has the report of a
moderate man. These the Duke said should have order to confer with me as far as
might be, reserving safe the grounds and sincerity of their Religion. I
answered the Duke, that I was well satisfied herewith, and that if their
demands were such as might content any other Catholic Prince, I should have
hope of good success; if otherwise, I should judge it a happiness to be put out
of doubt and suspense, and so we passed from this subject.

I presume to set down to your Majesty all the passages of this business with
so much length and fullness for that I no way dare adventure to offer unto your
Majesty any opinion or belief of my own, either for the fitness of the match,
or the sincerity of their intention, or the possibility of accommodating
differences of Religion. But your Majesty seeing undisguised all that has
hitherto passed, with every circumstance, may be pleased out of the
consideration and knowledge of those particulars to frame unto your self both
such a belief of their direct meaning, and such a resolution of the further
proceeding herein, as shall be most suitable to your Majesty's wisdom: only I
think it fit to set down further unto your Majesty the particular ends which
may be conceived they aim at by setting this business afoot at this present, in
case they should not intend really to perform it: The first may be to stagger
and divert your Majesty's Treaty with France: The second for entertaining your
Majesty with fair hopes and promises, thereby to keep you from declaring your
self opposite unto them in the present business of Juliers and Cleves which
remains still uncompounded. But this being so, your Majesty may be pleased to
understand that they serve themselves with this occasion, not that there could
be any such thing primarily in their intention, for that the expression of
their desire to the match was the last year long before these differences
happened.

Further, the Duke of Lerma should be the most falls and dishonorable man
living, without Christianity or soul, if he should voluntarily damn himself
with oaths and protestations of a thing that he sincerely meant not; and truly
he should deal contrarily to the wisdom of his other proceedings, wherein he
lays all occasions of distaste or discourtesie upon other inferior Ministers,
laboring still to clear himself of the imputation of them, if in this he
should make himself the author and instrument of so unjust and indirect
proceeding between Princes. But the course of most security and caution is,
that your Majesty suffer none of your other resolutions to be interrupted by
this overture; only if your Majesty be pleased for a while to entertain and
suspend the conclusion of the match with France, I conceive it can be little to
your Majesty's disadvantage.

It lastly now remains, that I become an humble suitor unto your Majesty for
your clear and full directions in this business, desiring if your Majesty will
have it further entertained, that I may have ample instructions from your
Majesty, both that I may intimate what may be expected in point of Dowry, and
in all other things to be required by your Majesty, as likewise how far I may
proceed in satisfying in point or Religion. For it is not to be supposed that
they will proceed with that freeness and directness which is to be wished,
unless in a fitting measure they shall see me likewise able and willing to
declare my self in such. points wherein they may expect satisfaction. I intend
not hereby to move for a formal Commission to treat, but only a private
instruction for my direction and warrant how to behave my self as may be most
advantageous to the cause, and your Majesty's ends. So humbly desiring your
Majesty to command this Bearer to be dispatched back with all convenient speed,
I commend your Majesty to the holy protection of God.

Your Majesty's faithful subject and servant, BRISTOL.

Abignoto to Conde Gondomar, concerning the death of Philip the third.
Upon the last day of February, being Sunday, 1620. his Catholic Majesty,
after he had heard Mass and the Sermon in the Chapel, was taken with a Fever,
which continued with him eight days with a ruddiness and pimples which
appeared plainly in his face, which afterward began to diminish: but he was
suddenly taken with a vomiting and a great fever, which continued with him
till the 21. day; and the Physicians were of opinion to have him rise out of
his bed, which was accordingly done both that day and the next: but about
dinnertime happened unto him a great swouning, which much astonished him; and
the 23. day, in the night, his fever did redouble upon him with a vomiting and
a flux in the belly, and a great melancholy and an opinion that he should die:
which fever continued with diverse reduplications, the Physicians having an ill
opinion of him till on Saturday night the 27. when his reduplications were more
violent, his water bad; and the King persevered in saying how he saw well that
he should die, he commanded that the Image of our Lady of Antiochia should be
carried about, which was performed on Sunday the 28. in a solemn Procession,
wherein the Councilors of Spain assisted.

In the evening commandment was given to the Churches, that the blessed
Sacrament should be set upon the Altar, and the body of S. Isidore should be
placed in the Court. On Monday the 29. about four of the clock in the evening,
his disease then grew violent, and some ulcers appeared on his belly, on his
reins, and on his thighs; and the King still assuring himself that he should
die, the Physicians then feeling his pulse affirmed that undoubtedly they
assented unto the King in the opinion he conceived of his infirmity. At the
same time the President of Castile was sent for, and the Confessor, who having
had some speech with the King and the Duke of Ossuna, they went and fetched the
Counselors, before whom and the Grandees of Spain who were present, the King
sealed his Testament, which John de Serita Secretary of State had set down in
writing in his presence. Afterward they caused him to eat somewhat; and being
advised how it would be good for him to sleep, he made this answer in Spanish,
En jornada tan longa y tiempe tan breve ne convieus reposar; Upon so long a
journey, and so short a time to perform it, I must not rest. Then he sent for
the Prince, and the young Child Don Carlo, to whom having spoken for a good
while, at length in particular to the Prince he said aloud how he recommended
unto him the Child, and that he grieved that he should have been unprovided,
but he hoped he left him in the hands of a good and loving brother. Then said
he to the Prince, that he requested him that he would not do as he did at his
coming to the Crown, in removing his Fathers old Officers and Servants, but
that he would employ those who were experienced in affairs of the Commonwealth:
he then commended unto him particularly John de Luenza Secretary of the
Memorials, and his Confessor, and afterward the Duke of Ossuna. Then was
presently brought in the Infanta Maria, and the Infante-Cardinal. He cried out
when he saw the Infanta and said, Maria, I am full sorry that I must die before
I have married thee; but this thy brother shall have care of. He then turned
toward her brother, and said unto him, Prince, do not forsake her till you
have made her an Empress. Then he spoke unto the Cardinal Infant, whom he
appointed to be a Priest so soon as he should come to be of fit age, and said
that he should be much grieved if he thought he would not undertake this
profession. He had sent for Madam the Princess, but she swouned upon her entry
at the chamber door, which was the cause that she was conducted back again unto
her own chamber, fearing lest it might be prejudicial unto her being great with
child. Which being reported to the King, he showed great compassion thereat,
and said that he ever constantly believed that Madam the Princess loved him as
well as any of his own children. After that he began to speak of the Queen,
saying how she should lose a good Husband, and that he had always loved her
dearly. Afterward he distributed between the Prince and the Infanta the
Relics and other memorials he had, except one Crucifix which hung at the
testern of the bed, and said unto the Prince that he could not give it him
then, because was the same with which his Grandfather and Father had dyed; but
he commended it to him to be held with great reverence after his death, and
that the Popes had given unto it special Indulgences. Afterward giving them
all his blessing, he caused them to go forth; and so calling for the blessed
Sacrament, which was administered unto him about midnight, he received the
Extreme unction at two of the clock in the morning, and so commended himself
unto God. Yet did he not for all this forbear to seal to a great number of
papers which were brought him: And complaining very much, he refused such meat
as they would have had him take. About noon the Body of St. Isidore was placed
near unto his bed, his Confessor and Father Florence persuading him to make a
vow for his health, and that he would build a Chapel to the same Saint, which
he did, but withal said, Pero ya es tade, But now it is very late. He
continued all the rest of the day speaking continually to the Father Confessor,
Father Florence, and Rochas. Many processions of penance were solemnized in the
Town, and the Council assembled twice. About the evening his infirmity renewed
with violence, and having languished the whole night, in the morning his
departure was published, though indeed it was not till about nine of the clock
in the morning, the last of March, the self same day of our return. Which will
inform you of all things passed, at least of such as came any ways to our
knowledge. The Queen stirred not out of her bed all that day, for fear lest
either trouble or grief of mind (whereof she gave plentiful testimony by her
tears) might prejudice her health, or the fruit of her body, which she has
passed over (thanks be to God) whereof we send you word, that the good news may
shut up the discourse of an accident so lamentable and unlooked for.

King James to the Earl of Bristoll Ambassador in Spain, October. 3. 1622.
Right trusty and right well beloved Cousin and Councellor, we greet you well.
THere is none knows better then your self how we have labored ever since the
beginning of these unfortunate troubles of the Empire, notwithstanding all
opposition to the contrary, to merit well of our good brother the King of
Spain, and the whole House of Austria, by a long and lingering patience grounded
still upon his friendship and promises, That care should be had of our honor,
and of our Childrens patrimony and inheritance. We have acquainted you also
from time to time since the beginning of the Treaty at Bruxels how crossly
things have there proceeded, notwithstanding the fair professions made unto us
both by the King of Spain, the Infanta and all his Ministers, and the Letters
written by him unto the Emperor, and them effectually (at the least as they
endeavored to make us believe) but what fruits have we of all these, other
then dishonor andd scorn? Whilst we are treating, the Town and Castle of
Heidilbergh taken by force, our Garrison put to the sword, Manheim besieged,
and all the hostility used that is within the power of an Enemy, as you will
see by the relation which we have commanded our Secretary to send you.

Our pleasure therefore is, That you shall immediately as soon as you can get
audience, let the King understand how sensible we are of those proceedings of
the Emperor toward us; and withal are not a little troubled to see that the
Infanta having an absolute commission to conclude a suspension and cessation of
Arms, should now at last when all objections were answered, and the former
(solely pretended) obstacles removed, not only delay the conclusion of the
Treaty, but refuse to lay her command upon the Emperors Generals for
abstaining from the siege of our Garrisons during the Treaty upon pretext of
want of authority. So as for avoiding of further dishonor, we have been
enforced to recall both our Ambassadors, as well the Chancellor of the
Exchequer (who is already returned to our presence) as also the Lord
Chichester, whom we intended to have sent unto the Emperor to the Diet at
Ratisbone. Seeing therefore that out of our extraordinary respect merely to the
King of Spain, and the firm confidence we ever put in the hopes and promises
which he did give us, desiring nothing more then for his cause principally to
avoid all occasions that might put us into ill understanding with any of the
House of Austria, We have hitherto proceeded with a steadfast patience trusting
to the treaties, and neglecting all other means which might probably have
secured the remainder of our childrens inheritance. Those Garrisons which we
maintained in the Palatinate, being rather for honor sake to keep a footing
until the general accommodation, then that we did rely so much upon their
strength as upon his frienpship, and by the confidence and security of ours are
thus exposed to dishonor and reproach: you shall tell that King, that seeing all
those endeavors and good offices which he has used toward the Emperor in
this business, on the behalf of our son-in-law, upon confidence whereof that
our security depended, which he continually by his Letters and Ministers here
labored to beget and confirm in us, have not sorted to any other issue then to
a plain abuse both of his trust and ours; whereby we are both of us highly
injured in our honor, though in a different degree we hope, and desire that
out of a true sense of this wrong offered unto us, he will as our deer and
loving brother faithfully promise and undertake upon his honor, confirming the
same also under his hand and seal, either that the Castle and Town of
Heidelbergh shall within threescore and ten days after this your audience, and
demand made, be rendered into our hands, with all things therein belonging, to
our son-in-law, or our daughter, as near as may be, in the state wheirn they
were taken; and the like for Manheim and Frankindale, if both or eithe of them
shall be taken by the enemy whilst these things are in treating; as also that
there shall be within the said term of threescore and ten days, a cessation or
suspension of Arms in the Palatinate for the future upon the several Articles
and Conditions last propounded by our Ambassador Sir Richard Weston, and that
the general treaty shall be set on foot again upon such honorable terms and
conditions as were propounded unto the Emperor in a letter written unto him in
November last, and with which the King of Spain then (as we understand) seemed
satisfied, or else in case all these particulars be not yielded unto, and
performed by the Emperor, as is here propounded, but be refused or delayed
beyond the time before mentioned, that then the King of Spain do join his forces
with ours, for the recovery of our childrens honors and patrimony, which upon
this trust has been thus lost. Or if so be his forces at this present be
otherwise so employed, as that they cannot give us that assistance which we
here desire, and as we think we have deserved, yet at the least he will permit
us a free and friendly passage through his Territories and Dominions for such
forces as we shall send and employ into Germany for this service: of all which
disjunctively, if you receive not of the King of Spain within ten days at the
furthest, after your audience and proposition made, a direct assurance under
his hand and seal, without delay or putting us off to further Treaties and
Conferences, that is to say, of such restitution, cessation of Arms, and
proceeding to a general treaty, as is before mentioned, or else of assistance
and joining his forces with ours against the Emperor, or at least permission
of passage for our forces through his said Dominions, that then you take your
leave and return unto our Presence without further stay; otherwise to proceed
in the negotiation of the marriage of our Son, according to the instruction we
have given you.

Given, etc. at Hampton Court, October. 3. 1622.
Earl of Bristol to King James, October. 21. 1622.
MAy it please your most excellent Majesty,
I received your Majesty's Letter of the 9. of September the 23. of the same
month, and by them understand that your Majesty has received much
satisfaction by what I had formerly written unto your Majesty both concerning
the restitution of the conclusion of the Match: but that your Majesty finds
the effects very unsuitable, both by the proceeding at Bruxels, and in the
Palatinate, as also by what you understand from Rome by Mr. Gage of the Popes
demands. I hope by the arrival of Mr. Cottington your Majesty will have
received satisfaction in some measure, at least that there has been no
diligence or time omitted either for the redressing of any thing that has been
amiss, or for the advancing of your Majesty's affairs.

The very day I received your Letters, I sent a Gentleman post unto the King
who was gone into the Escurial, to demand audience, which he presently granted
me, and I repaired thither unto him upon the third of October, the Conde de
Gondomar being likewise commanded to wait upon the King, I was there well
received; and presently upon my arrival the Conde de Olivarez came to me to the
lodgings which were appointed for me to rest in. To him I delivered fully in
the presence of Sir Walter Ashton and the Conde de Gondomar, what I had to
negotiate with the King, both in the business of the Match, and of the
Palatinate. In the Match I represented how much it imported your Majesty that a
speedy resolution might be taken therein, both in regard of the Prince being
your Majesty's only son, now arrived to the age of 22 years, and for the
settling of your affairs in England. I repeated unto him all the passages in
this Treaty, how many years had been already spent in it; that after so long an
expectation, the diligences used in Rome for the obtaining of the Dispensation
had wrought but small effect, since the Pope had lately made such demands as
were altogether impossible for your Majesty to condescend unto; and therefore
your Majesty seeing the business still delayed, held it fit that some such
course might be taken that both your Majesty's might speedily know what you
were to trust unto; and therefore had commanded me to signify unto this King
your uttermost resolution how far you would condescend in point of Religion
toward what the Pope had demanded; and if herewith this King could be
satisfied, your Maj. desire that we might proceed to a final and speedy
conclusion; otherwise that this King would likewise clearly declare himself*
that your Majesty might lose no more time in the disposing of the Prince your
son. Hereunto the Conde de Olivarez answered with some length, the substance I
shall only presume to set down briefly to your Majesty. He proposed a sincere
intention and resolution in the King to make the Match, and that there should
not be one day lost; for the speedy dispatch thereof imported them as much as*
your Majesty; and to the end that no time may be lost, this King had* the next
day after for Don Balthazar de Zuniga appointed Don Ferdinando de Giron in his
place in the Commission: That for the going of Mr. Gage from Rome, and the
Popes demands, they were absolutely ignorant of them; That the King had done
all that I my self desired for the redress of this error: That I might assure
your Majesty that you shall find all sincerity and clear proceeding, without
any hours delay more then of necessity the nature of the business required.

As for the business of the Palatinate, I presented at large the merits of your
Majesty's proceeding, the many promises made from hence; yet notwithstanding
the whilst your Majesty was treating at Bruxels, Heidelberg one of the three
places which were only left, and where your Majesty had Garrisons, was besieged
by the Archduke Leopold and Monsieur Tilly; that this King had withdrawn his
Forces, and so exposed the Palatinate absolutely to the Emperor and the Duke of
Bavaria. The Conde de Olivarez answered me, by acknowledging how much your
Majesty's proceedings had deserved at the Emperor and this Kings hands: That
whatsoever your Majesty could expect, or had been at any time promised, should
by this King be really performed: That the Prince Palatines own courses
hitherto had been the only hinderance of the effecting of it: That he referred
it unto your Majesty's own just judgment, whether the calling of this Kings
forces out of the Palatinate were with any ill intention, or merely for the
defense of Flanders, which otherwise had been put in great hazard by Count
Mansfield, as your Majesty saw by what had really passed: That the siege of
Heidelbergh was no way by the consent or knowledge of this King or any of his
Ministers but was generally disapproved by them all.

I told them, I conceived that was not enough; for that your Majesty had
engaged your self to this King, that in case your Son-in-law would not conform
himself, you would not only forsake him, but would declare your self against
him, and give the Emperor assistance for the reducing of him to reason, and
that your Majesty could not but expect a like reciprocal proceeding from the
King. He answered, your Majesty should see the Kings sincerity by the effects;
and that if Heidelbergh should be taken, and the Emperor refuse to restore it,
or to condescend to such accommodation as should be held reasonable, this King
would infallibly assist your Majesty with his Forces. And this he spoke with
great assurance, and wished me to desire your Majesty to be confident you would
find nothing but real and sinc ere proceedings from hence.

I was then presently called for to the King, to whom I spoke first in the
business of the Match, and delivered him the contents thereof in writing, which
I have sent to Mr. Secretary. I received from him the same answer in effect as
from the Conde de Olivarez, That he desired the Match no less then your
Majesty; That on his part there should be no time lost for the bringing of it
to a speedy conclusion. In the business of the Palatinate I spoke unto the King
with some length, repeating many particulars of your Majesty's proceedings, and
how much your honor was like to suffer, that now whilst you were treating,
Heidelborgh defended by your Garrisons, was like to be taken. The King answered
me, He would effectually labor that your Majesty should have entire
satisfaction; and rather then your Majesty should fail thereof, he would employ
his Arms to effect it for you. My Lord Ambassador Sir Walter Ashton accompanied
me at my audience, and was a witness of all that passed as well with the King,
as with the Conde de Olivarez.

Within few days after the news of the taking of Heidelbergh came hither:
whereupon I dispatched again to the King in such sort as I have at large
advertised Mr. Secretary Calvert. The effect of my Negotiation was, that they
on the 13. of October dispatched Letters away of the Emperors and Duke of
Bavaria's proceedings. But pressing them further in regard their former Letters
have wrought so little effect, they have given me at present a second Dispatch,
which I have sent unto the Infanta, and whereof Mr. Secretary will give your
Majesty an account, which I conceive will procure your Majesty's better
satisfaction then hitherto you have received from the Emperor and his party.

For the business of the match, I have written to Mr. Secretary what is to be
said at present; and will only add, that as I should not willingly give your
Majesty hope upon uncertain grounds, so I will not conceal what they profess,
which is, That they will give your Majesty real and speedy satisfaction
therein. And if they intended it not, they are falser then all the Devils in
hell; for deeper oaths and protestations of sincerity cannot be made.

It will only remain, that I humbly cast my self at your Majesty's feet for
that addition of Title wherewith it has pleased you to honor me and my
posterity. My gratitude and thankfulness wants expression, and shall only say
unto your Majesty, That as all I have either of fortunes or honor, I hold it
merely of your bounty and goodness; so shall I ever cheerfully lay them down
with my life into the bargain, for the service of your Majesty and yours.

So with my humble prayers for the health and prosperity of your Majesty, I
humbly commend your Majesty to Gods holy protection, and rest,

Your Majesty's most humble servant and subject, BRISTOL.
Madrid, October. 21. 1622.
King Philip the third of Spain to the Conde of Olivarez.
THe King my Father declared at his death that his intention never was to marry
my sister the Infanta Donna Maria with the Prince of Wales, which your Uncle
Don Baltezer well understood, and so treated this match ever with an intention
to delay it, notwithstanding it is now so far advanced, that considering
withal the aversness unto it of the Infanta, as it is high time to seek some
means to divert the treaty, which I would have you find out, and I will make it
good whatsoever it be; but in all other things procure the satisfaction of the
King of Great Britain, who has deserved very much, and it shall content me, so
that it be not the match.

Conde Olivarez his Answer to the King.
Sir, COnsidering in what estate we find the Treaty of marriage between Spain
and Emgland, and knowing certainly how the Ministers did understanding this
business, that treated it in the time of Philip the third, who is now in
heaven, that their meaning was never to effect it; but by enlarging the
treaties and points of the said marriage, to make use of the friendship of the
King of Great Britain, as well in the matter of Germany as those of Flanders;
and suspecting likewise that your Majesty is of the same opinion (although the
demonstrations do not show so) joining to those suspicions that it is certain
that the Infanta Donna Maria is resolved to put her self into the Monastery the
same day that your Majesty shall press her to make the marriage, I have thought
fit to present to your Majesty that which my good zeal has afforded me in this
occasion, thinking it a good time to acquaint your Majesty withal, to the end
you may resolve of that which you shall find most convenient with the advice of
those Ministers that you shall think fit.

The King of Great Britain does find himself at this time equally in the two
businesses, the one is the marriage to the which he is moved by the
conveniences which he finds in your Majesty's friendship with making an
agreement with those Catholics that he thinks are secretly in his Kingdom,
and by this to assure himself of them, as likewise to marry his son to one of
the house of Austria, knowing that the Infanta Donna Maria is the best born
Lady in the world. The Other business is, the restitution of the Palatinate, in
which he is yet more engaged. For (besides that his reputation is at stake
there is added) the love and interest of his Grandchildren, sons of his only
daughter. So that both by the law of Nature, and reason of State, he ought to
put them before whatsoever conveniences might follow by dissembling what they
suffer. I do not dispute whether the King of Great Britainy be governed in this
business of the Palatinate by Art or friendship, I think a man may say he has
used both; but as a thing not precisely necessary to this discourse, I omit it.
I hold it for a maxim, that these two Engagements in which he finds himself,
are unseparable: for although the marriage be made, we must fail in that which
in any way of understanding is most necessary, which is the restitution of the
Palatinate. This being supposed, having made the marriage in the form as it is
treated, your Majesty may find your self, together with the King of Great
Brirain, engaged in a war against the Emperor, and the Catholic league, so
that your Majesty shall be forced to delare your self with your Arms against
the Emperor and the Catholic league, a thing which to hear will offend your
Majesty's godly ears: or declaring your self for the Emperor and the
Catholic league as certainly you will, your Majesty will find your self
engaged in a war against the King of England, and your sister married with his
son, with the which all whatsoever conveniences that was thought upon with this
marriage do cease if your Majesty shall show your self Newtrall as it may be
some will expound --

The first will cause very great scandal, and with just reason, since in
matters of less opposition then of Catholics against Heretics, the Arms
of this Crown has taken the godly against the contrary part. And at this time
the French men have taken part with the Hollanders against your Majesty, your
piety has been such, that you have sent your Arms against the Rebels of that
Crown, leaving all the great considerations of State, only because those men
are enemies of the faith and the Church. It will oblige your Majesty, and good
occasion to those of the League, to make use of the King of France, and other
Catholic Princes ill affected to this Crown, for it will be a thing necessary
for them to do so, and those even against their own Religion will foment and
assist the Heret^ques for hatred to us, without doubt they will follow the
contrary part only to leave your Majesty with that blemish that never has
befaln any King of these Dominions.

By the second the King of England will remain offended and disobliged, seeing
that neither interesses nor hopes do follow the Alliance with this Crown, as
likewise the pretext of particular resentment: for having suffered his daughter
and grandchildren to be ruined for respect of the said Alliance. The Emperor,
though he be well-affected, and obliged to us in making the translation at this
time as businesses now stand (the Duke of Bavaria being now possessed of all
the Dominions) although he would dispose all according to our conveniences, yet
it will not be in his power to do it, as you and every body may see: And the
memorial that the Emperors Ambassador gave your Majesty yesterday, makes it
certain, since in the List of the Soldiers, that every on of the League is to
pay, he shows your Majesty, that Bavier for himself alone will pay more then
all the rest joined together; the which does show his power and his intention,
which is not to accommodate matters, but to keep to himself the superiority of
all in this broken time. The Emperor is now in the Diet, and the translation
is to be made in it. The opposition in this estate is, by conserving the means
for conference, which your Majesty's Ministers will do with their capacities,
zeal and wisdom, and it is certain they will all have enough to do; for the
difficulty consists to find a way to make the present estate of affairs
straight again, which with lingering, as it is said, both the power and time
will be lost. I suppose that the Emperor, as your Majesty knows by his
Ambassador, desires to marry his daughter with the King of Englands son, I
doubt not but he will be likewise glad to marry his second daughter with the
Palatines son.

Then I propound, that these two marriages be made, and that they be set on
foot presently, giving the King of England full satisfaction in all his
propositions for the more strict union and correspondency that he may agree to
it: I hold for certain, that all the conveniences that would have followed the
alliance with us, will be as full in this, it does accommodate the matter of the
Palatinate, and the succession of his grandchildren with his honor, and without
drawing a sword, or wasting treasure.

After I would reduce the Prince Elector, that was an enemy, to the obedience
of the Church, by breeding his sons in the Emperors Court, with Catholic
Doctrine.

The business is great, the difficulty greater then perchance have been in any
other case, I have found my self obliged to represent to your Majesty, and to
show (if you please to command me) what I think fit for the disposing of the
things, and of the great Ministers that your Majesty has; I hope with the
particular notice of these things, (and all being helped with the good zeal of
the Conde de Gondemer) it may be that God will open a way to it, a thing so much
for his and your Majesty's service.

King James to the Earl of Bristol, October. 8.1623.
WE have received yours brought us by Gresly, and the Copy of how well we
esteem your dutiful, discreet and judicious relation and humble advise to our
self and our Son: whereupon having ripely deliberated with our self, and
communicated with our dear Son, we have resolved with the great liking of our
Son to rest upon that security (in point of doubt of the Infanta's taking a
Religious house) which you in your judgment shall think meet. We have further
thought meet to give you knowledge, that it is our special desire that the
betrothing of the Infanta with words de praesenti, should be upon one of the
days in Christmas new style, that holy and joyful time best fitting so
notable and blessed an action.

But first we will that you repair presently to that King, and give him
knowledge of the safe arrival of our dear Son to our Court, so satisfied and
taken with the great entertainments, personal kindness, favor and respect he
has received from that King and Court, as he seems not able to magnify it
sufficiently, which makes us not know how sufficiently to give thanks; but we
will that by all means you endeavor to express our thankfulness to that King,
and the rest to whom it belongs, in the best and most ample manner you can. And
hereupon you may take occasion to let that King know, that according to our
constant affection to make a firm and indissoluble amity between our Families,
Nations and Crowns, and not seem to abandon our honor, nor at the same time we
give joy to our only Son, to give our only Daughter her portion in tears: By
the advice of that Kings Ambassadors, we have entered a Treaty concerning the
restitution of the Palatinate, as will more particularly appear to you by the
copies herewith sent. Now we must remember you, that we ever understood and
expected, that upon the marriage of our son with the Infanta, should have a
clear restitution of the Palatinate and Electoral dignity to our son-in-law, to
be really procured by that King, according to the obligation of our honor, as
you have well expressed in your reasons why the person of our Son-in-law should
not be left out of the Treaty, but that the Emperor should findout a great
title, or by increasing the number of Electorate styles wherewith to satisfy
the Duke of Bavaria. We now therefore require you, that presently in your first
audience you procure from that King a punctual answer what course that King
will take for the restitution of the Palatinate and Electorate to our
Son-in-law; and in case that either the Emperor or the Duke of Bavaria oppose
any part of the expected restitution, what course that King will take to give
us assurance for our content in that point, whereof we require your present
answer; and that you so press expedition herein, that we may all together
receive the full joy of both in Christmas, resting our self upon that
faithful diligence of yours we have approved in all your service. Though
almost with the latest we must remember to you as a good ground for you to work
on, that our Son did write us out of Spain, That that King would give us a
Blank in which we might form our own Conditions concerning the Palatinate; and
the same our Son confirms to us now. What observation and performance that King
will make, we require you to express, and give us a speedy account, etc.

Given, etc.
Earl of Bristol in answer to King James, October. 29. 1623.
MAy it please your most excellent Majesty,
I have received your Majesty's Letters of the 8. of October on the 21. of the
same month, some hours within night; and have thought fit to dispatch back
unto your Majesty with all possible speed, referring the answer to what your
Majesty has by these Letters commanded me, to a Post that I shall purposely
dispatch when I shall have negotiated the particulars with this King and his
Ministers, wherein God willing all possible diligence shall be used.

But forasmuch as I find both by your Majesty's Letter, as likewise by Letters
which I have received from the Prince his Highness, that you continue your
desires of having the Match proceeded in, I held it my duty that your Majesty
should be informed that although I am set free in as much as concerns the
doubt of the Infanta's entering into Religion, new direction I now received from
your Majesty, that the Deposories should be deferred till Christmas, the said
powers are made altogether useless and invalid, it being a clause in the bodies
of the said powers, that they shall only remain in force till Christmas and no
longer, as your Majesty may see by the copy I send herewith enclosed.

Your Majesty, I conceive, will be of opinion, that the suspending of the
execution of the powers until the force and validity of them be expired, is a
direct and effeftuall revoking of them; which not to do, how far his Highness
is in his Honor engaged, your Majesty will be best able to judge by viewing the
powers themselves. Further, if the date of these powers do expire, besides the
breach of the Capitulations, although the match it self jealousies and
mistrusts be hazarded, yet the Princes coming at the Spring, will be almost
impossible: For by that time new Commissions and Powers shall be after
Christmas granted by the Prince, which must be to the satisfaction of both
parties, I conceive so much of the year will be spent, that it will be
impossible tor the Fleets and other preparations to be in a readiness against
the Spring; for it is not to be imagined that they will here proceed
effectually with their preparations, until they shall be sure of the
Desposorios, especially when they shall have seen them several times deferred
on the Prince his part, and that upon pretexts that are not new, or grown since
the granting of the Powers, but were before in being, and often under debate,
and yet were never insisted upon to make stay of the business; so that it will
seem that they might better have hindered the granting of them then the
execution of them. Now, if there were not staggering in former resolutions, the
which although really there is not, yet can it not but be suspected; and the
clearing of it between Spain and England, will cost much time. I most humbly
crave your Majesty's pardon if I write unto you with the plainness of a
true-hearted and faithful servant, who ever has cooperated honestly unto your
Majesty's ends. I knew them, I know your Majesty has been long time of
opinion, that the greatest assurance you could get, that the King of Spain
would effectually labor the entire restitution of the Palatinate, was that he
really proceeded to the effecting of the match, and my instructions under your
Majesty's hands, were to insist upon the restoring the Prince Palatine; but not
to annex it to the treaty of the match, as that thereby the match should be
hazarded; for that your Majesty seemed confident that here it would never grow
to a perfect conclusion without a settled resolution to give your Majesty
satisfaction in the business of the Palatinate. The same course I observed in
the carriage of the business by his Highness and my Lord Duke at their being
here, who though they insisted on the business of the Palatinate, yet they held
it fit to treat of them distinctly, and that the marriage should proceed as a
good pawn for the other.

Since their departure my Lord Ambassador Sir Walter Ashton and my self have
been pressed to have this Kings resolution in writing concerning the
Palatinate, and the dispatches which your Majesty will receive herewith
concerning that business, were writ before the receipt of your Majesty's
Letters; and doubtless it is now a great part of their care that that business
may be well entered before the Infanta's coming into England: And his Highness
will well often remember, that the Conde de Olivarez often protested a
necessity of having this business compounded and settled before the marriage,
saying, otherwise they might give a Daughter, and a War within three months
after, if this ground and subject of quarrel should still be left on foot. The
same language he has ever held with Sir Walter Ashton and my self, and that it
was a firm peace and amity as much as an alliance which they sought with his
Majesty. So that it is not to be doubted, but that this King concluding the
match, resolves to employ his uttermost power for your satisfaction in the
restitution of the Prince Palatine.

The question now will be, whether the business of the Prince Palatine having
relation to many great Princes that are interessed therein, living at distance,
and being (indeed) for the condition and nature of the business it self,
impossible to be ended but by a formal treaty, which of necessity will require
great length, whether the conclusion of the match shall any way depend upon the
issue of this business, which I conceive to be far from your Majesty's
intention; for so the Prince might be long kept unbestowed by any aversness of
those which might have particular interest in the Princes remaining unmarried,
or dislike with his matching with Spain. But that which I understand to be your
Majesty's aim, is only to have the conclusion of this match accompanied with a
strong engagement as can be procured from this King for the joining with your
Majesty not only in all good Offices for the entire restitution of the
Palatinate, but otherwise if need require of his Majesty's assistance herein.

These days past I have labored with all earnestness, and procured this Kings
public answer which I am told is resolved of, and I shall within these few
days have it to send to your Majesty, as also a private Proposition which will
be put into your hands; and shall not fail further to pursue your Majesty's
present directions of procuring this Kings Declaration, in what sort your
Majesty may rely upon this Kings assistance, in case the Emperor or the Duke
of Bavaria hinder the entire restitution of the Prince Palatine. Bu I conceive
(if it be your intention) that I should first here procure this Kings
peremptory answer in the whole business, and how he will be assistant unto your
Majesty in case of the Emperors or the Duke of Bavaria's aversness. And that I
should send it to your Majesty, and receive again your answer before I deliver
the Powers for the Deposorios, the match would thereby if not be hazarded, yet
I conceive the Infanta's going at Spring would be rendered altogether
impossible. For if upon the arrival of the Approbation I cannot refuse them,
but upon some grounds; if I allege your Majesty's desire of having the
Deposories deferred until Christmas, they know as well as my self that his
Highness Proxy is then out of date, besides the infringing of the
Capitulations; and they will judge it is a great scorn put upon this King, who
ever since the Princes granting of the powers has called himself the Infanta's
Desposado, and to that effect the Prince has writ unto him in some of his
Letters. Besides, it will be held here a point of great dishonor unto the
Infanta, if the powers called for by her friends should be detained by the
Prince his part: and whosover else may have deserved it, she certainly has not
deserved disrespect nor discomfort. Further, upon my refusal to deliver the
powers, all preparations which now go on cheerfully and apace will be stayed,
and there will enter in so much distrust, and so many troubles and jealousies,
that if the main business run not hazard by them, at least much time will be
spent to clear them.

I must therefore in discharge of my duty tell your Majesty, that all your
Majesty's businesses here are in a fair way; the Match and all that is
capitulated therein, they profess punctually to perform.

In the business of the Palatinate, I continue my earnest and faithful
endeavors, and they protest they infinitely desire, and will to the utmost of
their powers endeavor to procure your Majesty's satisfaction.

The Prince is like to have a most worthy and virtuous Lady, and who much
loves him, and all things else depending upon this match are in good and
hopeful way.

This is now the present estate of your Majesty's affairs, as it appears unto
me and to Sir Walter Ashton, with whom I have communicated this Dispatch, as I
do all things else concerning your Majesty's service. And I must clearly let
your Majesty understand, that I conceive by the retaining of the powers when
this King shall call for them, and offering to defer the Deposories until
Christmas, that your Majesty's business will run a hazard, what by the
distaste and disgust that will be raised here, and what by the art and industry
of those which are enemies to the match, whereof every Court has plenty in
Christendom.

That therefore which I presume with all humility, is, That you would he
pleased to give me order with all possible speed, that when the business shall
come cleared from Rome, and that the powers of the marriage shall be demanded
of me in the behalf of this King, that I may deliver them, and no ways seek to
interrupt or suspend the Deposorios, but assist and help to a perfect
conclusion of the match

And for the business of the Palatinate, I continue my earnest and faithful
endeavors to engage this King as far as shall be possible, both for the doing
of all good offices for the Palatines entire restitution, herein I will not
fail (as likewise fo this Kings declaration of assisance in case the Emperor or
Duke of Bavaria shall oppose the said restitution) to use all possible means;
and I conceive the dispatch of the Match will be a good pawn in the business,
and the help and assistance which the Princes being once betrothed would be
able to give in this Court to all your Majesty's businesses would be of good
consideration.

So fearing I have already presumed too far upon your Majesies patience, I
humbly crave your Majesty's pardon, and recommend you to the holy protection of
God, resting

Your Majesty's most humble and faithful subject and servant, BRISTOL.
Madrid, October. 29. 1623.
Earl of Bristol to King James, November. 1. 1623.
MAy it please your most excellent Majesty,
I find that upon the news that is now come from the Duke of Pastrava, that the
Pope has clearly passed the Dispensation, which is now hourly expected here.
There is an intention to call presently upon me for the Princes powers for the
marriage left in my hands, the which I know not upon what ground or reason to
detain, the Prince having engaged (in the said powers) the faith and word of a
Prince no way to revoke and retract from them, but that they should remain in
full force till Christmas, and delivered unto me a politic declaration o his
pleasure, that upon the coming of the Dispensation I should deliver them unto
this King, that they might be put in execution; and hereof likewise was there
by Secretary Serita as a public Notary an Instrument drawn, attested by all
the witnesses present. If I shall allege your Majesty's pleasure of having
the marriage deferred until one of the Holidays, although they should
condescend thereunto, that impossible, for the powers will be then expired. If
I shall insist upon the restitution of the Palatinate, this King has therein
declared his answer; and it would be much wondered why that should be now added
fo a condition of the marriage, having ever hitherto been treated of as a
business apart, and was in being at the granting of the said powers, and has
been often under debate, but never specified, nor the powers delivered upon any
condition of having any such point first cleared; and I must confess unto your
Majesty I understand not how with honor, and that exact dealing which has
ever been observed in all your Majesty's actions, the powers can be detained,
unless there should appear some new and emergent cause since the granting of
them, whereof as yet I hear none specified: Therefore being loath to be the
instrument by whose hands any thing should pass, that might have the least
reflection upon your Majesty's or the Princes honor (which I shall ever value
more then my life or safety) and judging it likewise to conduce more to your
service, and assuring my self that your Majesty's late direction to have the
marriage upon one of the holidays in Christmas, was for want of due
information that the powers will be then expired, I have thought it fit (with
the advice of Sir Walter Ashton) to raise no scruple in the delivery of the
said powers, but do intend when they shall be required to pass on to the
nominating of a prefixed day for the Deposorio's; but I shall endeavor to
defer the time, until I may be advertised of your Majesty's pleasure, if it
may be within the space of 24 days, and will labor to find some handsome and
fair occasion for the deferring of them, without alleging any directions in
that kind from your Majesty or the Prince.

The reasons why I have thought it fit to take this resolution, are, First I
find by your Majesty's letters and the Princes, that your intent is to proceed
in the marriage, and to that purpose your Majesty and the Prince have set me
free to deliver the powers according to the first intentions, by removing that
scruple of the Infanta's entering into Religion, whereupon they were only
suspended.

Secondly, your Majesty's Letter only intimates a desire, not a direction of
having the marriage upon one of the holidays of Christmas: which I conceive is
to be understood, if it may well and fittingly be so, not if there shall be
impossibility therein by reason of the expiring of the powers before, and that
the intention of having it then should be overthrown thereby, when I am
confident that what your Majesty writes is for want of due information of the
clause of expiration of the powers.

Thirdly, if your Majesty upon these reasons and such as I have formerly
alleged unto your Majesty, should (as I no way doubt but your Majesty will)
give me order for the present proceeding to the marriage, yet by my refusing of
the powers, and alleging your Majesty's or the Princes directions, although
afterward all things should be cleared, yet would it cast some kind of
aspersion and jealousy upon the sincerity of your Majesty's and the Princes
proceedings. On the contrary side, if your Majesty's intention be not to
proceed in the match, whereof I see no ground, the intimation of that may be as
well a month hence as now: And I judge it duty in a servant, especially in a
business of so high a consequence, and wherein your Majesty has spent so much
time, to give his master leisure to repair to his second cogitations before he
do any act that may disorder or overthrow.

This I offer with all humility unto your Majesty's wise and just
consideration, and beseech you to make interpretation of my proceedings herein
according to my dutiful and zealous care of your honor and service. I have of
purpose dispatched this Post with this Letter, to the end I may receive your
Majesty's directions in this particular with all possible speed, which I hope
shall be to proceed directly to the marriage according to the Capitulations,
and so to order all things for the Princess he journey in the Spring. And for
the Palatinate, your Majesty may be confident there shall be diligence used in
procuring a speedy and good resolution. So, etc.

King James to the Palsgrave.
My most dear Son,
WE have been careful, and are at this present, to perform the promise which
we made unto you, to employ all our power to reestablish you into your estates
and dignities; and having by the patience and industry which we have used,
reduced matters within a more near circle and of a less extent then the
generality m which they were heretofore: We have thought good to give you
knowledge of such things whereof hope is given to us that we shall in all
apearance obtain them, to the end you may have recourse to your wisdom, and
after a mature deliberation make choice agreeable to the providence, honor, and
safety of your estates; duly weighing and examining all circumstances: and
therefore we present unto you these Propositions, to wit, In the first place a
due submission to the Emperor, under convenient limitations, which first shall
be granted and agreed in conformity to that which is Noble, with a safe conduct
and assurance requisite and sufficient for the free and safe going and return
of your Person and Train. This being done, we make you offer of a present and
full restitution of all the Palatinate unto the person of your son, and that
you shall be his Administrato during your life. And that after the death of the
Duke of Bavaria, your son shall be re-established in the Electorall dignity;
And for the better confirming the sound Amity, and assuring your Possessions,
and enjoying of all according to the contract, which is presently to be made,
and also to serve for a preparation for the bettering of the said conditions to
your person, which will be in all likelihood when the marriage will be resolved
and concluded to be made betwixt your eldest son our Grandchild, and one of
the Emperors daughters. In contemplation whereof they have approached a degree
nearer, to wit, that the Electorall dignity shall come again to your person
after the Duke of Bavaria's death. In which Treaty of marriage, to clear the
principal difficulty which consisted with the education of your son with the
Emperor, we have taken from them all hope therein (wherein we assure our
selves you will be content) and are purposed that he shall have his education
with our son, and with and in the presence of the Infanta, when she shall be in
our Court. We have exactly showed you the state of this Negotiation, which
chiefly concerns you and yours, to the end you may fix your eyes upon your
necessity and bare condition and manner of living, which depends on the
courtesy and assistance of others, and that you may judge advisedly whether
your ready entrance into the possession of your own, and with a kind of present
liberty of living (with insurance in time to recover the possession of it)
shall not be more convenient for you then a hazardous long expectation upon
othet uncertain means: The former whereof I prefer before the later. We pray
you to consider what probable and feasible means we may undertake to reduce
your condition to that state as you promise your self; wherein we doubt not,
but you will weigh our forces, and those of our Allies, and such other whereof
we may hope to be assured, to the end that if it should happen that we cannot
obtain to the entire of that we desire by way of treaty, or that we should take
another course, you may be partaker of Councels as well as the issues and
uncertain events. And forasmuch as we are desirous to consider with you for
your personal estate, and as we are obliged to have regard to the right of our
only daughter, and to the inheritance of your children, with the hope of their
posterity, by what way it may be most easily established, and by what fit means
provision may be made best to that effect. And herein we remain your most
affectionate Father,

From White Hall, November. 20. Jacobus Rex.

The Palsgraves Answer to King James.
SIR,
I Take as a great honor and favor your Majesty's Letter of the 2^. of
November, delivered unto me by the hands of your Ambassador Sir Dudley
Carleton, who has further explained your Majesty's intention touching that
which concerns my restitution unto my honors and patrimonial estate, that you
continue firm and constant (in conformity to your promises) to labor and
effect by one way or other, so that the said restitution may be entire and
total, as well in that which concerns the Electorall dignity as the
Palatinates; and that the Propositions which your Majesty makes by your Letter
(to content my self to be Administrator to my son, and he to be invested with
the said dignity, and put into present possession of the Palatinate) is but in
all events if so be your Majesty could not attain to the total restitution
(the desired effect of your intentions) leaving me nevertheless to be at
liberty to choose the lesser of the two evils (if I may be permitted to term
them so) the one by the total restitution of my Estates, but with diminution,
or rather annihilation (for so in effect it will be) in respect of my person of
the Electorall dignity; the other of the recovery of both by war, the events
whereof are uncertain. First, I most humbly thank your Majesty for the
paternall care which you continue and show in this occasion; and which does
more comfort me, and my dear wife in our afflictions, then the fear of humane
events can grieve or incline us to be willing to recover the loss of goods with
the loss of honors. I will therefore use the liberty which your Majesty is
pleased to give me in answering every particular point of your Letter. In the
first whereof I observe the proceeding of my enemies, who require a personal
submission (intended to precede all other things) under the safe conduct of the
Emperor; whereas by natural order used in these occasions, the restitution
which is material and substantial, ought by reason to precede the other,
being but a point of ceremony, at the least it is necessary that all things be
resolved and concluded under such assurances as shall be held convenient; and
then if the intentions on the Emperors part be real and sincere, and without
any aim to take advantage upon my person (as the Emperor Charles 5. did upon
the Lantgrave of Hessen under the subtilty of a distinction of a syllable in
safe conduct Ewis for Einis) the said submission may as well be made by a
Deputy as otherwise, whereby I shall be freed from the apprehensions which the
execution at Prague, and other cruelties exercised by the Imperialists, may
easily impress in the mind of him who is unwilling to lose himself by a quiet
de Coeur. Besides, a simple consent to such a submission under the specified
condition, to yield the Electorate to the Duke of Bavaria, will be sufficient
to prejudice my cause for ever. For the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburgh who
have always protested against the translation of the Electorate; and the other
Princes of Germany who have like feeling, will disavow their protestations in
regard of him who shall abandon his own pretentions, and in stead of favoring
me upon some breach of the Treaty, or otherwise, may be my opposites. Moreover,
the experience of things past teach us what issue we may hereafter expect of
the like condition contented to on our part. The Emperor having manifestly
abused us in two already, First in the instrument which I signed for the
conditional resignation of the Crown of Bohemia in the year 1621. Then in my
ratification of the suspension of Arms this last Summer. The first having
served the Emperor to accelerate his Treaty then on foot with Bethlem Gabor:
The second to intimidate the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburgh, that they
might not undertake any thing against the Emperor, both the one and the other
being divulged to the same effect, according to the knowledge which the
Emperor had of these designs before any thing was therein resolved and
concluded: And so will the Emperor in all appearance make his profit of this
present proposition, and strike with one stone two blows, by hindering the
progress of Gabor on the one side, and by continuing on the other the
intimidation of the Princes of Germany, who may with reason excuse themselves
if they move not for him, who has bound himself hand and foot, and consented
to a submission, which being yielded to, it will be always in the Emperors
power to break or go on, as he shall hold it expedient for himself. I do also
promise my self that your Majesty will have regard that by such submission and
entreaty, my undue proscription and banishment (which being done in prejudice
of the constitutions of the Empire, are therefore held by the Electors of
Saxony and Brandenburgh of no validity) be not approved, and thereby a mark of
infamy set upon me and my posterity. Touching the second point, your Majesty
may be pleased to remember, that on the part of Spain hope has always been
given me from the beginning, of a total and entire restitution to my own
person; yea the Earl of Bristol has assured me by his Letters from Madrid in
November 1622. when the marriage was not so much advanced at this time. That
the King of Spain (in case of refusal of the total restitution,) would join
his forces with. those of your Majesty against the Emperor to constrain him
thereunto: And yet in stead of the said restitution, the translation of my
Electorate to the Duke of Bavaria was since at Ratisbone agreed, and
congratulated unto him from Bruxels; the inferior Palatinate dismembered by the
grant of the Bergstreat one of the best pieces thereof to the Elector of Mentz;
the superior with the Bailywicks granted to the Duke of Nuburgh, thereby to
engage them further in the quarrel by the particular defense of that which
generally the Imperialists have usurped upon me; they confiscate and seize the
goods of my subjects, and those that follow my party, sparing neither widow nor
orphans.

It seems therefore necessary above all things to have sufficient assurance for
the total restitution of my Electorate and Palatinates, before any new treaty
of marriage be proposed: Of the which treaties, as they are ordinarily handled
and managed by the house of Austria, and drawn to length and delays, with the
only aim to the augmentation of their greatness, without respect to civil
honesty, word or promise, I have a doleful experience in my own house in the
person of one of my predecessors Frederick the second, who contributed more to
the first foundation which was laid for the greatness of the said house of
Austria then any other German Prince, and for recompense was allured and drawn
by the space of many years with treaties and promises of marriage, without any
real intention (as was seen by the effect) ever to bring them to execution.
Seeing therefore that he who had so well deserved of the house of Austria,
(which in all external appearance held him in greater estimation then any other
German Prince) was nevertheless so unworthily used by them in a treaty of
marriage I who have been unduly put into the Ban of the Empire, and spoiled of
all my honors and goods, by the eagerness, hatred and usurpation of the
Emperor himself (whose daughter is propounded for the marriage in question)
know not what to hope but the same effect of fraud and deceit which my
forenamed predecessor found, with a sorrowful repentance of the evil when it
was pad remedy. And the Emperor wants but two or three years of leisure,
which he shall easily gain by a treaty of a marriage, to establish in Germany
the translation of my Electoral dignity and Patrimonial estate, without any
hope ever hereafter to recover the like opportunity as at this time, that my
pretensions are not prejudiced by a long interposition of time, and that the
memory, of undue proceeding in the publication of the Ban against my person,
and the said translation of my Electoral dignity, and se^sure of my patrimonial
inheritance are yet fresh in the affections and minds of the Princes of Germany
who are by the consideration of their own interests moved with the greater
companion to see the wounds of my miseries yet fresh and bleeding, and with
passion and earnest desire to see them remedied. And in this place I will say
something in answer to the last point of your Majesty's Letter, wherein you
commanded me to consider the means probable and feasible whereby my condition
may be reduced to the former state, and to weigh your Majesty's forces with
those of your Allies, and others whereof your Majesty may hope and be assured.

If your Majesty hops for my restitution in Germany as an effect of the
marriage with Spain, nothing else is to be done but attend the event with
patience: And if you continue to distinguish between the Spaniards and the
Imperialists, there is no more to be said on this subject, but as they have
with joint consent conspired my ruin with the same forces, the same councels,
and the same designs, your Majesty will find (if you please to unmask the fair,
seeming, and hidden malice of the Spaniard, the same effect, as in the end you
found the open and declared violence and hostility of the Imperialists, who
besieged your Majesty's garrisons in my Towns taken into your protection. I
will use the liberty you have given me to discourse of your Majesty's forces
and those of your Allies, and what may further with good probability be hoped
from other friends and well-willers.

In the last rank I place what may be hoped from the Princes, of Germany, who,
to wit the two Electors of Saxony and Brandenburgh, and in effect all the rest
except those of the Catholic league, have sufficiently declared the
disavowing of the Emperors proceeding against me, and their opinions that the
peace of Germany depends upon my restitution; besides the Levies which they
made in the beginning of the last summer, though by the unlucky accident of the
Duke Christian of Brunswick they were soon after dismissed. And certainly no
want of any other thing to be converted to my aid, but the countenance of a
great Prince to support them against the power of the house of Austria, the
same affections remaining still in them, and the same resolution to embrace the
first good occasion that shall be presented for the liberty of Germany. Will
there want hands for the accomplishing of such a work, when it shall be
undertaken openly and earnestly? seeing that the number of those that have
their interest conjoined with mine, is great and mighty: For the greater part
of the people both horse and foot which marched under the Catholic banner,
were of a contrary Religion to the Catholic, and of affection (as it is
notorious to all the world) more inclined to the ruin of those Leagues then to
their preservation. But the conduct of some powerful Prince is necessary as
well to the men of war, us we have seen by experience the last year. The King
of Denmark. is he upon whom all have set their eyes: but he being a Prince full
of circumspection, and unwilling to enter into play alone, answers unto all
instances which are made unto him to that end, That as the other Princes have
their eyes upon him, so has he his upon your Majesty.

It is not for me to judge; but since you have commanded me, I will weigh them
by the balance of common judgment. That the felicity wherewith God has
blessed the person of your Majesty, having conjoined the three Crowns of
England, Scotland and Ireland upon one head; the power of the one of the three
alone having done great matters in the affairs of Europe on this side the sea,
yea when it was counterballanced by the other, gives demonstration what your
Majesty may do with the joint forces of the three together, when you shall be
pleased to take a resolution therein, chiefly the question being for the
interest of your own Children; and by the voluntary contribution which we have
already had in our support from your Majesty, we may easily comprehend what may
be promised of them when the public authority of your Majesty shall be
conjoined with their particular affections; there being no Prince in the world
more loved and reverenced of his subjects, nor more sovereign over their
affections and means for the service of your person and Royal house. Touching
the Allies, it is to my great grief that the unhappiness of this time has
separated a great part of them, the united Provinces of Germany, who make
profession of the same Religion whereof they acknowledge your Majesty for
Defendor and Protector. But the same affection remains still in them entire
and firm, though they have been constrained to yield to the present necessity
of their affairs; and the occasion presenting it self, your Majesty may account
of them.

The rest, the Estates of the united Provinces to whom we have recourse in our
afflictions, who support themselves by the help of God, and the situation of
their Country and Forces of their people alone until this time against the
puissance of Spain, seconded by the Imperialists. And in stead of fainting
under such a burden, or of giving ear unto the overtures and submissions which
from day to day are presented unto them, they now put themselves to the
offensive, by a good Fleet prepared and ready to set sail to the West Indies,
to the end they may at least interrupt the peaceable and annual return of the
gold and silver of those parts, by which the house of Austria does continually
advance their greatness. This is commended by all good men and lovers of the
public liberty as the sole and only means to cast to the ground the fearful
power of Spain, even as a great tree of large extent cut up by the root; but is
held too great for such a little extent of Country as this is, and yet
practically, and to be done by forces answerable to the importance of such an
enterprise: And if your Majesty would be pleased to use the Forces of this
estate by sea and land, to the opposition of their enemies, and by consequence
of mine, their profession of a loyal and sincere affection with the hazard of
their lives and goods for the service of your Majesty, grounded upon the
experience of things past, their present interest, and the judgment which may
be made of the future, makes me assured that your Majesty may absolutely
dispose of them; and by their means being firmly conjoined with your Majesty,
give the Law to Europe.

It is in obedience to your Majesty's commandment that I have enlarged my self
so far into this discourse, which I will send with my most humble thanks for
the continuance of your most gracious and paternall bounty, particularly showed
in the care you have of the education of my eldest son in your Court, who with
all the rest are at your Majesty's disposing, and we hope to live
notwithstanding our hard and doleful condition, to yield unto your Majesty the
fruits of a devout and filial gratitude, and I will remain until the last day
of my life,

From the Hague, December. 30. 1623 new style. Your Majesty's most, etc.
FREDERICK.

Postscript.
I am advertised from a good part, that the Elector of Mentz and the other
Princes of the Popish league are very instant with the Elector of Saxony and
Brandenburgh to persuade them to acknowledge the Duke of Bavaria as an Elector
of the Empire: which if they obtain, it were easy to judge how much it would
prejudice my affairs, and the common cause of the Empire. I therefore most
humbly beseech your Majesty, that you will be pleased to prevent and hinder
such an evil, by the interposition of good offices, and exhortations to the
said secular Electors, be it by some Ambassador, by serious Letters, or such
other way as you shall hold meet and suitable to the importance of the matter,
which above all requires singular celerity.

Your Majesty shall increase more and more my obligations, and that of the
public of Germany, etc.



Abignoto from Madrid.
THe Spaniard begins now to be sensible of the great disobligation and gross
oversight he committed in suffering the Prince to go away without his Infanta:
For it has given occasion of advantage to the English (who now seem
indifferent whether they match with him or no) to proceed more stoutly, and to
add to the former Articles which the Prince had sworn at his being here,
certain new Propositions about the Palatinate, which was thought to be unfit to
motion at his being here, by reason of the engagement of his person. And there
is a Commission sent to the Earl Bristol to treat of these two businesses
jointly; and if the King of Spain give not a satisfactory answer therein, then
he is to return home. Buckingham has little obligation no Spain, therefore for
his own particular he has good reason it he cannot prop himhimfelf this way,
to find other means for his support: unkindnesses passed between him and
Olivarez, and a hot heart-burning between him and Bristol, who told him here
before the Prince, that being so far his superior inhonor and might, he might
happily contemn him, but he could never hate him. Ever since his departure he
has attempted to crush Bristol to pieces, who is out of purse two thousand
pound of his own since his coming hither, and he is so crossed that he cannot
get a penny from England. If he cannot get a surrender of the Palatinate to the
Kings mind, he is in a poor case; for he must hence presently: he is much
favored of the King here and Olivarez, therefore they will do much for him
before Buckingham work his revenge upon him: he has received lately more
comfortable dispatches from England, and in the last the King sent him he
requires his advice in certain things. The Proxy the King of Spain had to
marry the Infanta in the Princes name, is proroged till March. There is great
resentment of the delays in the Court here; and the Infanta has given over
studing of English. The two Ambassadors here ever since the Princes departure,
have visited the Infanta as vassals; but now they carry themselves like
Ambassadors again. We are all here in suspense, and a kind of maze to see the
event of things, and how matters will be pieced together again, we know not.

A Memorial to the King of Spain, by Sir Walter Ashton, Ambassader in Spain.
Aug. 29, 1624.
SIr Walter Ashton, Ambassador to the King of Great Britain, says, That the
King his Master has commanded him to represent to your Majesty, that having
declared to your Majesty the reasons why he could receive no satisfaction by
your Majesty's answer of the first of January, and that thereby according to
the unanimous consent of his Parliament he came to dissolve both the Treaties
of the Match and Palatinate, he received another answer from your Majesty,
wherein he finds less ground to build upon; and having understood that either
by the Padre de Maestro, or your Majesty's Ambassadors which have assisted
these days past in this Court, there was something to be propounded and
declared touching the business of the Palatinate, whereby he might have
received satisfaction, the said Ambassadors until now have not said anything
at all to purpose which comparing with other circumstances of their ill
carriage, he gathers and doubts, that according to the ill affection, and
depraved intentions wherewith they have proceeded in all things, but especially
in particular they have labored to hinder the good correspondency and so
necessary and desired intelligence which should be conserved with your Majesty.
Furthermore he says, That the King his Master has commanded him to give
account to your Majesty, that in an Audience which he gave to the Marquess de
Injiosa and Don Carlo Colomma, they under Cloak and pretext of zeal and
particular care of his person, pretended to discover unto him a very great
conjuration against his person and Royal Dignity, and it was,

That at the beginning of the Parliament, the Duke of Buckingham had consulted
with certain Lords, of the arguments and means which were to be taken touching
the breaking and dissolving of the Treaties of the Palatinate and Match; and
the consultations passed thus far, That if his Majesty would not accommodate
himself to their councels, they would give him a house of pleasure whither he
might retire himself to his sports, in regard that the Prince had now years
sufficient to, and parts answerable for the government of the Kingdom.

The Information was of that quality, that it was sufficient to put impression
in him of perpetual jealousies, in regard that through the ribs of the Duke he
gave wounds to the Prince his son, and the Nobility; and it is not probable
that they could bring to effect such designs without departing totally from the
obligation of faith and loyalty which they owed to his Person and Crown,
because the Lords made themselves culpable as concealers: And it is not likely
that the Duke would hurl himself into such an enter prize, without
communicating it first with the Prince, and knowing his pleasure.

And because this information might be made more clear, he did make many
instances unto the said Ambassadors, that they would give him the Authors of
the said Conjuration, this being the sole means whereby their own honor might
be preserved, etc. whereby their great zeal and care they had pretended to have
of his person, might appear. But instead of confirming the great zeal they had
pretended to bear him; all the answer they made him, consisted of Arguments
against the discovery of the Conspirators: So that for the confirmation of the
said report, there remained no other means then the examination of some of his
Council of State, and principal subjects, which he put in execution, and made
them take oath every one particularly in his own presence, and commanded that
such interrogatories and questions should be propounded unto them that were
most pertinent to the accusation; so that neither part, particle, or
circumstance remained, which was not exactly examined and winnowed, and he
found in the Duke and the rest that were accused, a sincere Innocence touching
the accusations and imputation wherewith they were charged.

This being so, he turned to make new instances unto the said Ambassadors, that
they should not prefer the discovery of the names of the Conspirators to the
security of his Royal person, and truth and honor of thmeselves, and the
hazard of an opinion to be held, and judged the Traitors of a plot of such
malice, sed^tion and danger. But the Ambassadors remaining in a knotty kind of
obstinacy, resolved to conceal the Authors. Nevertheless afterterwards he gave
them an audience, wherein the Marquess of Injiosa took his leave.

Few days after they demanded new audience, pretending that they had something
to say that concerned the public good, and conduced to the entire restitution
of the Palatinate, with desire to lose no opportunity that might conduce
thereunto, and therewith the confirmation and conservation of the friendship
with your Majesty having suspended some few days to give them audience,
thinking that being thereby better advised, they would resolve upon a wiser
course, and declare the Authors of so pernicious an action, and having since
made many instances, and attended the success of so long patience, he sent his
Secretary, and Sir Francis Cottington Secretary to the Prince, commanding them
that they should signify unto the Ambassadors, that he desired nothing more
then the continuance of the friendship 'twixt both the Crowns; and if so they
had any thing to say, they would communicate it to the said Secretaries, as
persons of so great trust, which he sent to that end: And if they made
difficulty of this, that they would choose amongst his Council of State, those
which they liked best, and he would command that they should presently repair
unto them; and if this did not likewise seem best unto them, that they would
send what they had to say in a Letter sealed up, by whom should seem best unto
them, and he would receive it with his own hands. But the Ambassadors
misbehaving themselves in all that was propounded, the said Secretaries
according to the order which they brought, told them, that they being the
Authors of an information so dangerous and seditious, had made themselves
incapable to treat further with the King their Matter; and were it not for the
respect to the King his dear and beloved brother and their Master, and in
contemplation of their condition as Ambassadors of such a Majesty, he would and
could by the Law of Nations, and the right of his own Royal Justice, proceed
against them with such severity us their offense deserved, but for the reasons
aforesaid he would leave the reparation hereof to the justice of their King, of
whom he would demand and require it.

In conformity whereof the said Ambassador of the King of Great Britain, says,
that the King his Master has commanded him to demand reparation and
satisfaction of your Majesty against the said Marquis de Injiosa and Don Carlos
Colomma, making your Majesty Judge of the great scandal and enormous offense
which they have committed against them and the public right, and expect
justice from your Majesty in the demonstrations and chastisements which your
Majesty shall inflict upon them. which for his proceeding sake with your
Majesty, and out of your Majesty's own uprightness and goodness ought to be
expected.

Furthermore he says, that the King his Master has commanded him to assure
your Majesty, that till now he has not mingled the correspondence and
friendship he held with your Majesty, with the faults and offenses of your
Ministers, but leaves and restrains them to their own persons; and that he
remains with your Majesty in the true and ancient friendship and brotherhood,
as heretofore; and that he is ready to give hearing to anything that shall be
reason, and to answer thereunto: and when your Majesty is pleased to send your
Ambassadors thither, he will make them all good treaty, and receive them with
that good love that is due.

For conclusion, the said Ambassador humbly beseeches your Majesty will be
pleased to observe and weigh the care and tenderness wherewith the King his
Master proceeded with your Majesty's Ambassadors, not obliging to precipitate
resolutions, but giving them much time to prove and give light of that which
they had spoken; and besides opening unto them many ways that they might comply
with their orders, if they had any such. Which course if they had taken, they
might well have given satisfaction to the King his Master, and moderated the so
grounded opinion of their ill proceedings against the peace, and so good
intelligence and correspondence betwixt both the Crowns.

Madrid, Aug. 5. 1624.
The Petition of Francis Philips to King James for the release of Sir Robert
Philips Prisoner tn the Tower.
Most dread Sovereign,
IF the Thrones of Heaven and Earth were to be solicited one and the same way,
I should have learned by my often praying to God for your Majesty, how to pray
to your Majesty to other. But the Liturgies of the Church and Court are
different as in many other points, to especially in this, That in the one there
is not so poor a friend but may offer his vows immediately to the Almighty;
whereas in the other a right loyal subject may pour out his soul in vain,
without an Ora pro nobis. Now such is the obscure condition of your humble
Suppliant, as I know no Saint about your sacred Majesty to whom I can address
my orisons, or in whose mediation I dare repose the least assurance. Let it be
therefore lawful for me in this extraordinary occasion to pass the ordinary
forms; and raising my spirits above uncertainties, to fix my entire faith upon
your Majesty's supreme goodness, which is an ever ought to be esteemed both the
best Tribunal, and the best Sanctuary for a good cause. But how good soever my
cause be, it would be high presumption in me to stand upon it. I have therefore
chosen rather to cast my self at your Majesty's feet, from whence I would not
willingly rise, but remain a monument of sorrow and humility till I have
obtained some gracious answer to my Petition: For though your Majesty's
thoughts cannot discern so low, as to conceive how much it imports a poor
distressed Suppliant to be reviled, neglected, yet you may be pleased to
believe that we are as highly affected, and as much anguished with the
extremities that press our little fortunes, as Princes are with theirs. Which I
speak not out of any pride I take in comparing small things with great, but
only to dispose your Majesty to a favorable construction of my words, if they
seem to be overcharged with zeal and affection, or to express more earnestness
then perhaps your Majesty may think the business merits as my self values it.
The suit I am to make to your Majesty is no slight one, it may be easily
granted without references: For I dare assure your Majesty upon my life, it is
neither against the Laws of the Kingdom, nor will diminish any of your
treasure, either that of your coffers, or that of your peoples hearts; it being
an act of clemency, or rather a word, for even that will satisfy to create in
your poor dejected Suppliant a new heart, and send him away as full of content
as he is now of grief and despair. Nor is it for my self I thus implore your
Majesty's grace, but for one that is far more worthy, and in whom all that I am
consists, my dear Brother, who I know not by what misfortune has fallen, or
rather been pushed into your Majesty's displeasure; not in dark and crooked
ways, as corrupt and ill-affected subjects use to walk, and near to break their
necks in, but even in the great road, which both himself and all good
Englishmen that know not the paths of the Court, would have sworn would have
led most safely and most directly to your Majesty's service from your Majesty's
displeasure; there needs no other invention to crucify a generous and
honest-minded suppliant, upon whom has issued and been derived a whole torrent
of exemplary punishment, wher^in his reputation, his person, and his estate
grievously suffered.

For having (upon the last process of Parliament) retired himself to his poor
house in the Country, with hope a while to breathe after these trouble some
affairs, and still breathing nothing but your Majesty's service; he was sent
for ere he had finished his Christmas, by a Sergeant at Arms, who arrested him
in his own house with as much terror as belongs to the apprehending of treason
it self. But (thanks be to God) his conscience never started; and for his
obedience herein showed, it was not in the power of any authority to surprise
it: For at the instant without asking one minutes time of resolution, he
rendered himself to the officers discretion, who (according to his directions)
brought him up captive, and presented him at the Council Table as a
Delinquent, from whence he was as soon committed to Tower, where he ever since
has been kept close prisoner, and that with so strict a hand, as his own
beloved wife and my self having sometime since urgent and unffaigned ^^^casion
to speak with him about some private business of his Family; and here upon
making humble petition to the Lords of your Majesty's most honorable Privy
Council for the favor of access, we were to our great discomforts denied it,
by reason as their Lordships were pleased to declare unto us, that he had not
satisfied, your Majesty fully in some points, which being so far from being his
fault, as I dare say it is the greatest part of his affliction, that he sees
himself debarred from means of doing it. The Lords Commissioners that were
appointed by your Majesty to examine his offense, since the first week of his
imprisonment, have not done him the honor to be with him; by which means not
only his body, but (the most part of his mind) his humble intentions to your
Majesty are kept in restraint. May it please therefore your most excellent
Majesty now at length after five months imprisonment and extreme durance, to
ordain such expedition in this cause, as may stand with your justice, and yet
not avert your mercy, either of them will serve our turns; but that which is
most agreeable to your Royal and gracious inclination, will best accomplish
our desire. To live still in close prison is all one to be buried alive; and
for a man that has any hope of salvation, it were better to pray for the day
of judgment, then to lie languishing in such waking misery; yet not ours but
your Majesty's will be done. For if in your princely wisdom you shall not think
it a fit season to restore him to his former condition, or to accept the fruit
of his correction, an humble and penitent submission for his unhappiness in
offending your Majesty, which I assure my self is long since ripe and grown to
full perfection in so forward affection, and so proper for all duties as his
has ever been: If (I say) it be not yet time to have mercy, but that he must
still remain within the walls of bondage to expiate that which he did in these
privileged ones, my hope is, that he will die at any time for your Majesty's
service, and will find patience to live any where for your Majesty's pleasure;
only thus much let me beseech your Majesty's grace again and again, not to deny
your humble and most obedient suppliant, that you will at least be pleased to
mitigate the rigor of his sufferings so far as to grant him the liberty of the
Tower, that he may no longer groan under the burden of those incomodities
which daily prejudice his health and fortune, in a higher degree (I believe)
then either your Majesty knows or intends; I am the more bold to importune your
Majesty in the point of favor, because it concerns my own good and
preservation: For your Maj. shall deign understand that I your suppliant have
no means to live but what proceeds from his brotherly love and bounty; so as if
I may not be suffered to go to him and receive order for my maintenance, I know
none but Our Father, which art in heaven to beg my daily bread on; he that was
my father on earth is long since departed (if I have not been misinformed) who
was then beyond sea, your Majesty's anger was to him little better then the
messenger of death, though I persuade my self it was rather sent in your
Majesty's Name then in your Warrant.

For what use could your Majesty have of his not being, who neither was, nor
could be ever but your faithful and affectionate servant, who in his soul
adored your Royal Majesty as much as ever mortal man did any mortal God;
lastly, whose heart was so bent to please your Majesty, as the very sound of
your displeasure was enough to break it. And more perfect obedience then this
can no subject show, to make his Sovereigns favor equal to life and death.

Pardon me, dread Sovereign, if in this occasion I cannot hinder my Fathers
ghost from appearing: For how can it possibly be at rest, as long as your fatal
displeasure reigns still in his family, and makes it the house of continual
mourning? Remove then (if it be your blessed will) the clouds that have been so
long hanging over our heads; and let not the present storm that wants matter to
produce, extort a thunderbolt: For what is Philips, or the son of Philips, that
your Majesty should so destroy them? We are unworthy of Caesar's anger, as well
in regard of our means as of our innocence?

To conclude my prayers, I most humbly beseech your Majesty to forgive them;
and let not the ignorance of the style, or ceremonies used in the Court, be
imputed to your humble and well-meaning Suppliant, as a willing want of
reverence; in whose breast these two legal qualities, Love and Fear, do more
vigorously meet, or who could more willingly part with his essence, to add the
least acquisition to the greatness and majesty of his Sovereign. True it is,
that the subject that employed the faculties of my soul at this present, is of
such a nature, as I could not deny it the uttermost of my affection; and he
that thinks he can never speak enough, may easily speak too much. That neither
my self nor my brother have failed in any thing but words, that your Majesty
will pardon, without that all crimes are equal, and as much danger lies in an
humble Petition as in a plot of high Treason.

Be pleased then (most gracious Sovereign) to give us back one gracious word,
and keep our undoubted hearts, at least show us so much mercy as to judge us
according to your own goodness: For if we had not liberty to appeal thither, we
should be in danger of losing the best part of our birthright, and instead of
your Majesty's subjects become other men's slaves. From your Majesty therefore,
and from no other, your faithful suppliant craves and expect the joyful word
of grace: which if I may be so happy as to carry my poor brother before he
grows any elder in misery, I shall fill an honest heart with prayers and
thanksgiving: And for my particular, your Majesty's greatest favor and
liberality shall not more oblige or better affect others, then your Royal
clemency shall me. In memory whereof I shall daily pray, that your Majesty may
obtain all your desires of heaven, and so be obeyed in all your commandments on
earth, that we may live to see your holy intentions to take effect for the good
of Christendom, and so you may honor the age you live in with the miracles of
your wisdom. Finally, that your felicity in this world may overtake that in the
highest to make you wear a perpetual Crown to Gods glory and your own.

Your Majesty's most humble, loyal, and true-hearted English subjects, FRANCIS
PHILIPS.

Oliver St. John's to the Major of Marlborough against the Benevolence.
AS I think, this kind of Benevolence is against Law, Reason, and Religion.

First, the Law is in the Statute called Magna Charta, 9. H. 3. cap. 29. That
no Freeman be any way destroyed but by the Laws of this Land.

Secondly, besides that the said Statute of Magna Charta is by all Princes
since established and confirmed, it is in the special case of voluntary or
free grants enacted and decreed 25. E. 1. cap. 5. That no such be drawn into
custom, and cap. 6. That henceforth be taken no such Aids, Tasks, free Grants,
or Prizes, but by assent of all the Realm, and for the good of the same. And in
primo R. 3. cap. 2. That the Subjects and Commons in this Realm from henceforth
shall in no wise be charged by any charge or imposition called a Benevolence,
or any such like charge, and that such exactions called a Benevolence, shall be
damned and annulled for ever.

First, it is not only without, but against reason, that the Commous in their
several and particulars, should be made relievers or suppliers of his
Majesty's wants, who neither know his wants, nor the sums that may be this way
raised to supply the same.

Secondly, it is against reason that the particular and several Commons
distracted, should oppose their judgment and discretion to the judgment and
discretion of the wisdom of their Land assembled in Parliament, who have there
denied any such aid.

It argues in us want of love and due respect of our Sovereign Lord and King,
which ought to be in every of us toward each other, which is to stay every one
which we see falling, and reduce the current. What prosperity can there be
expected to befall either our King or Nation, when the King shall happily of
ignorance, or ('it is I hope) out of forgetfulness or headiness, commit so
great a sin against his God, as is the violating of his great and solemn oath
taken at his coronation for the maintaining of his Laws, Liberties and
Customs of this Noble Realm, and his Subjects, some for fear, some in pride,
some to please others, shall join hands to forward so unhappy an* achievement,
can he any way more highly offend the Divine Majesty (whom he then invocated)
as also can he then give unto another. Hen. 4. If such an one should rise up
(which God forbid) a greater advantage, let these Articles put up against R. 2.
be looked on, it will appear that the breach of the Laws, infringing the
Liberties, and failing in this his oath, were the main blemishes wherewith he
could distain and spot the honor of that good and gentle Prince, who indeed was
rather by others abused, then of himself mischievously any way disposed.

Secondly, as very irreligiously and uncharitably we help forward the Kings
Majesty in that grievous sin of perjury; so into what an hellish danger we
plunge our selves even so many of us as contribute, is to be learned out of the
several curses and sentences of excommunination given out against all such
givers, and namely the two following, viz. the great curse given out the 36. H.
3. against all breakers of the Liberties and customs of the Realm of England,
with their Abettors, Counselors, and Executioners, wherein by the sentence of
Boniface, Archbishop of Canterbury, and the chief part of all the Bishops of
this Land, are ipso facto excommunicated. And that of 24. Ed. I. denounced
immediately upon the Acts made against such Benevolence, free Grants and
Impositions had and taken without common assent; which because it is not so
large as that former, I will set down as our Books deliver the same.

IN the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, Amen. Whereas our Sovereign
Lord the King, to the honor of God, and of the Holy Church, and for the common
profit of the Realm, has granted for him and his heirs forever these Articles
above written: Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England,
admonished all his Province once, twice, and thrice, because that shortness
will not suffer so much delay, as to give knowledge to all the people of
England of these presents in writing. We therefore enjoin all persons of what
estate soever they be, that they and every of them as much as in them is, shall
uphold and maintain those Articles granted by our Sovereign Lord the King in
all points; and all those that in any point do resist or break those
Ordinances, or in any manner hereafter procure, counsel, or in any ways assent
to, resist or break those Ordinances, or go about it by word or deed openly or
privately by any manner of pretense or color: We therefore the said Archbishop
by our authority in this Writing expressed, do excommunicate and accurse, and
from the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, and from all the company of Heaven, and
from all the Sacraments of the holy Church do sequester and exclude.

Sir, hearing that to morrow the Justices will be here about this busy work of
Benevolence, wherein you have both sent unto, and talked with me, and thinking
that it may be you would deliver up the names of the not-givers. Forasmuch as I
think I shall scarcely be at home to make my further answer, if I should be
called for, I pray yon both hereby to understand my mind your self, and if
cause so require to let the Justices perceive as much. So leaving others to
their own consciences, whereby in that last and dreadful day they shall stand
or fall before him who will reward every man according to his deeds, I commend
you to the grace of the Almighty, and rest,

Your loving Neighbor and Friend, OLIVER St. JOHN.

The Justices of Peace in the County of Devon to the Lords of the Council.
THe Letters from his sacred Majesty unto the Justices of Peace in this County,
together with your Lordships, have been opened and read according to the
directions in your Lordships Letter to our high Sheriff expressed, and the
weighty business therein contained, has been maturely and speedily debated,
according to our most bounden duties to his excellent Majesty, and the many
concurring necessities which press the expedition of such a service: and in
those respects we can do no less then give your Lordships a timely knowledge of
the vote and opinion of us all, which was this day almost in the same words
delivered by every of us.

That the sum enjoined to be levied by the first of March, is not to be so
suddenly raised out of this County by any means, much less by way of
persuasion; and hereof we had lately a certain experience in the business of
the loans, which notwithstanding the fear apprehended by the presence of the
Pursivant, has come at least 6000. l. short of the expected sum, and without
him we suppose would have been much less, and we are confident that nothing but
extremities, which had need also be backed by Law, will raise his Majesty a
sufficient quantity of treasure for his occasions. For our selves, at the time
of the proposition of the forementioned Loans, we did according to his
Majesty's proclamation and instruction then sent us, engage our faithful
promise to our Countrymen, that if they willingly yielded to his Majesty's
necessities at this time, we would never more be Instruments in the levy of
aids of that kind, his Majesty's intentions so clearly manifested not to make
that a president, was the cause of that engagement, and we conceive it cannot
be for his honor or service for us to be the means of such a breach. That his
Majesty's affairs and of his Allies, do all want an instant supply of Royal
provisions; his provident and Princely Letter has fully taught us; but we have
much more cause to wish then hope that these parts so lately and so many ways
impoverished, can yield it.

Your Lordships may vouchsafe to remember how much this County has been
charged since the beginning of the war, though sometimes refreshed with
payment, which we acknowledge with humble thanks. By our own late loan of 3
5000. l. and 6000. l. more sent by Sir Thomas Wise and Mr. Stroad, and yet
there remains due to it for the Coat and Conduct of their own impressed Soldiers,
for diverse voyages for the Recruits intended for the Isle of Ree for the
conduct of the whole Army hence, besides three Companies stand yet here for
Silly, and no small number of scattered sick, whose mortal infection has more
discouraged the people then the charge.

That many and almost unaccountable are our ways of expense, few or none have
we of in-come for the want of Trade, how then can there be any quantity of
money to disburse; their bodies and goods are left which (we are assured) will
be ever ready for this Majesty's defense, and to be employed in his Majesty's
service as far forth as ever our forefathers have yielded them to his Majesty's
Royal Progenitors.

Particular proofs we would have made of the peoples disability to have
satisfied his Majesty's demands, but we had rather adventure our selves, and
this humble advertisement upon your Lordships private and favorable
instructions, then to expose his Majesty's honor to public denial, and
misspend his precious time, which applied to more certain courses may attain
his Princely and religious ends, wherein to be his Majesty's Instruments will
be our earthly happiness, and singular comfort to be your Lordships obedient
servants.

The Archbishop of Canterbury to the Bishops concerning King James his
Directions for Preachers, with the Directions, Ang. 14. 1622.
RIght Reverend Father in God, and my very good Lord and Brother,
I have received from the Kings most excellent Majesty, a Letter, the tenor
whereof here ensues.

Most revered Father in God, right trusty and right entirely beloved
Councellor, we greet you well.
Forasmuch as the abuses and extravagancies of Preachers in the Pulpit, have
been in all times repressed in this Realm by some Act of Council or State,
with the advice or resolution of grave and learned Prelates, insomuch as the
very licencing of Preachers had beginning by an Order of Star Chamber the 8.
day of July in the 19. year of King Henry 8. our Noble Predecessor: and whereas
at this present diverse young Students by reading of late Writers and ungrounded
Divines, do broach many times unprofitable, unsound, seditious and dangerous
Doctrine, to the scandal of the Church, and disquieting of the State and
present Government; We upon humble representation to us of these inconveniences
by your self and sundry other grave and reverend Prelates of this Church, as
also of our Princely care and zeal for the extirpation of schism and
dissension growing from these seeds, and for the settling of a religious and
peaceable government both of the Church and State, do by these our special
Letters straightly charge and command you to use all possible care and diligence
that these limitations and cautions herewith sent unto you concerning
Preachers, be duly and straightly henceforth observed and put in practice by the
several Bishops in their several Diocesses within your jurisdictions. And to
this end our pleasure is, that you send them forthwith several Copies of these
Directions, to be by them speedily sent and communicated to every Parson, Vicar
and Curate, Lecturer and Minister in every Cathedral and Parish Church within
their several Diocesses; and that you earnestly require them to employ their
uttermost endeavor in the performance of this so important a business, letting
them know that we have a special eye to their proceedings, and expect a strict
account thereof both of you and them, and every of them. And these our Letters
shall be your sufficient Warrant and Discharge in that behalf.

Given under our Signet at our Castle of Windsor the fourteenth day of August,
in the twentieth year of our reign of England, France, and Ireland, and of
Scotland the fifty sixth.

Directions concerning Preachers.
THat no Preacher under the degree of a Bishop, or a Dean of a Cathedral or
Collegiat Church, and that upon the Kings days, and set Festivals, do take
occasion by the expounding of any Text of Scripture whatsoever, to fall to any
let Discourse or Commonplace, otherwise then by opening the coherence and
division of his Text, which be not comprehended and warranted in essence,
substance, effect, or natural inference within some one of the Articles of
Religion set forth by authority in the Church of England, and the two Books of
Homilies set forth by the same authority in the year 1562. or in some of the
Homilies set forth by authority of the Church of England, not only for the
help of non-preaching, but withal for a Pattern or a Boundary as it were for
the preaching Ministers; and for their further instruction for the performance
^e^eof, that they for^hwith read over and peruse diligently the said Book of
Articles, and the ^^o Books of Homilies. 2. That no Parson, Vicar, Curat, or
Lecturer, shall preach any Sermon or Collation hereafter upon Sundays or
Holidays in the afternoon in any Cathedral or Parish Church throughout the
Kingdom, but upon some part of the Catechism, or some Text taken out of the
Creed, the ten Commandments, or the Lords prayer, (Funeral-sermons only
excepted) And that those Preachers be most encouraged and approved of who spend
their afternoons exercises in the examination of Children in their Catechism,
which is the most ancient and laudable, custom of teaching in the Church of
England. 3. That no Preacher of what title or denomination soever under the
degree of a Bishop, or Dean at the least, do from henceforth presume to preach
in any popular Auditory the deep points of Predestination, Election,
Reprobation, or the universality, efficacy, resistibility or irresistibility
of Gods grace; but leave these Theams to be handled by learned men, and that
moderately and modestly by way of use and application, rather then by way of
positive doctrine, as being fitter for Schools and Universities then for simple
Auditories. 4. That no Preacher of what title or denomination soever shall
presume from henceforth in any Auditory within this Kingdom to declare, limit,
or bound out by way of positive doctrine in any Sermon or Lecture the power,
prerogative, jurisdiction, authority, right or duty of sovereign Princes; or
otherwise meddle with these matters of State, and the differences betwixt
Princes and people, then as they are instructed and presidented in the Homilies
of Obedience, and in the rest of the Homilies and Articles of Religion set
forth as before is mentioned by public Authority, but rather confine
themselves wholly to these two heads, Faith and good life, which are all the
subject of ancient Homilies and Sermons. 5. That no Preacher of what title or
denomination soever shall causelessly or without invitation of the Text fall
into bitter invectives, or undecent railing speeches against the persons of
either Papists or Puritans; but modestly and gravely when they are occasioned
thereunto by the text of Scripture, clear both the doctrine and discipline of
the Church of England from the aspersions of either adversary, especially when
the Auditory is suspected with the one or the other infection. 6. Lastly, That
the Archbishop and Bishops of this Kingdom (whom his Majesty has good cause to
blame for their form^ ^^^^^^ss) he more wary and choice in the licensing of
Preachers and (...) gr^^^ made to any Chancellor, Official or Commissary, to
pass Licenses in this kind. And that all the Lecturers throughout the Kingdom,
a new body, and severed from the ancient Clergy of England, as being neither
Parsons, Vicars, nor Curates, be licensed henceforward in the Court of
Faculties only upon recommendations of the party from the Bishop of the Diocese
under his hand and seal, with a Fiat from the Archbishop of Canterbury, and a
confirmation under the great seal of England; and that such as transgress any
of these Directions, be suspended by the Lord Bishop of that Diocese, or in his
default by the Lord Archbishop of that Province (ab officio and beneficio) for
a year and a day, until his Majesty by the advice of the next Convocation
shall prescribe some further punishment.
By this you see his Majesty's Princely care that men should preach Christ
crucified, obedience to the higher powers, and honest and Christian
conversation of life, but in a regular form, and not that every young man
should take unto himself an exorbitant liberty to teach what he lists to the
offense of his Majesty, and to the disturbance and disquiet of the Church and
Commonwealth. I can give unto your Lordship no better directions for the
performance hereof then are prescribed to you in his Majesty's Letter, and the
Schedule hereunto annexed. Wherefore I pray you be very careful, since it is
the Princely pleasure of his Majesty to require an exact account both of you
and of me for the same. Thus not doubting but by your Register or otherwise you
will cause these Instructions to be communicated to your Clergy, I leave you to
the Almighty, and remain

your Lordships loving brother, George Cant.
Croydon, Aug. 15. 1622.
King James Instructions to the Archbishop of Canterbury concerning Orders to
be observed by Bishops in their Diocesses. 1622.
1. THat the Lords the Bishops be commanded to their several Sees, excepting
those that are in necessary attendance at Court. 2. That none of them reside
upon his land or lease that he has purchased, nor on his Commendum if he hold
any; but in one of his Episcopal Houses if he have any, and that he waste not
the woods where any are left. 3. That they give their charge in their
Trienniall Visitations, and at other convenient times both by themselves and
the Archdeacons, and that the Declaration for settling all questions in
difference, be strictly observed by all parties. 4. That there be a special
care taken by them all, that the Ordinations be solemn, and not of unworthy
persons. 5. That they take great care concerning the Lecturers in their
several Diocese, for whom we give these special Directions following. First,
That in all Parishes the afternoon Sermons may be turned into Catechizing by
Question and Answer, when and wheresoever there is no great cause apparent to
break this ancient and profitable order. Secondly, that every Bishop ordain in
his Diocese, that every Lecturer do read Divine Service according to the
Liturgy printed by authority, in his Surplice and Hood, before the Lecture.
Thirdly, That where a Lecture is set up in a Market Town, it may be read by a
company of grave and Orthodox Divines near adjoining, and in the same Diocese,
and that they preach in Gowns, not in Cloaks, as too many use to do. Fourthly,
That if a Corporation do maintain a single Lecturer, he be not suffered to
preach till he profess his willingness to take upon him a living with cure of
souls within that Incorporation, and that he actually take such Benefice or
Cure, so soon as it shall be fairly procured for him. Fifthly, That the Bishops
do countenance and encourage the grave and Orthodox Divines of their Clergy,
and that they use means by some of the Clergy, or others, that they may have
knowledge how both Lecturers and Preachers within their Diocese, do behave
themselves in their Sermons, that so they may take order for any abuse
accordingly. Sixthly, That the Bishops suffer none under Noblemen, or men
qualified by Law, to have any private Chaplain in his house. Seventhly, That
they take special care that Divine Service be diligently frequented, as well
for Prayers and Catechismes as for Sermons, and take particular note of all
such as absent themselves as Recusants, or others. Eighthly, That every Bishop
that by our grace and favor, and good opinion of his service, shall be
nominated by us to another Bishopric, shall from that day of nomination not
presume to make any Lease for three lives or one and twenty years, or
concurrent Lease, or any way renew any estate, or cut any Wood or Timber, but
merely receive his Rents due and to quit the place. For we think it an hateful
thing that any man leaving the Bishopric should almost undo his Successor. And
if any man shall presume to break this Order, We will refuse him Our Royal
assent, and keep him at the place he has so abused. Ninthly and lastly, We
command you to give us an account every year the second of January of the
performance of these our commands.

Subscribed at Dorchester. I. R.

Bishop of Winchester to his Archdeacon to the same effect.
SAlutem in Christo.
I have received Letters from the most Reverend Father in God the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, the tenor whereof follows.

Right reverend Father in God, my very good Lord and brother,
I have received from the Kings most excellent Majesty a Letter, the tenor
whereof here ensues.

Most reverend Father in God, right trusty and right entirely beloved
Councellor, we greet you well.
For as much as the abuses and extravagancies of Preachers in the Pulpit, have
been, etc.



According to the tenor of these Letters you are to see that these limitations
and cautions herewith sent unto you be duly and strictly from henceforth
observed, and put in practice, and that several Copies of those Directions be
speedily communicated to every one of those whom they shall concern, and that
you may employ your uttermost endeavors in the performance of so important a
business, considering that his Majesty will have a special eye over you and me,
and expect a strict account at both our hands, whereof praying you to have all
possible care, I commend your endeavors therein to the blessing of God.

From Farnham, Aug. 15. 1622. Your very loving friend, Lan. Winton.

The Bishop of Lincoln L. Keeper, to the Bishop of London, concerning Preaching
and Catechizing.
My very good Lord,
I Doubt not before this time you have received from me the directions of his
most excellent Majesty concerning Preaching and Preachers, which are so
graciously set down, that no godly or discreet man can otherwise then
acknowledge that they do much tend to edification, if he take them not up upon
report, but do punctually consider the tenor of the words as they lie, and does
not give an ill construction to that which may receive a fair interpretation.
Notwithstanding because some few Churchmen and many of the people have
sinisterly conceived, as we here find, that those Instructions do tend to the
restraint of the exercise of Preaching, and do in some sort abate the number of
Sermons, and so consequently by degrees do make a breach to ignorance and
superstition, his Majesty in his Princely wisdom has thought fit that I should
advertise your Lordship of the grave and weighty reasons which induced his
Highness to prescribe that which was done.

You are therefore to know, that his Majesty being much troubled and grieved at
the heart to hear every day of so many defections from our Religion both to
Popery and Anabaptism, or other points of Separation in some parts of this
Kingdom; and considering with much admiration what might be the cause thereof,
especially in the reign of such a King who does so constantly profess himself
an open adversary to the superstition of the one, and madness of the other, his
Princely wisdom could fall upon no one greater probability then the lightness,
affectedness, and unprofitableness of that kind of Preaching which has been of
late years too much taken up in Court, University, City and Country.

The usual scope of very many Preachers is noted to be soaring up in points of
Divinity too deep for the capacity of the people, or mustering up of so much
reading, or a displaying of their own wit, or an ignorant meddling with Civil
matters, as well in the private several Parishes and Corporations, as in the
public of the Kingdom, or a venting of their own distastes, or a smoothing up
those idle fancies (which when the Text shall occasion the same, is not only
approved but much commended by his Royal Majesty) both against the persons of
Papists and Puritans.

Now the people bred up with this kind of teaching, and never instructed in the
Catechism, and fundamental grounds of Religion, are for all this airy
nourishment, no better then a brass Tabret, new Table-books to be filled up
either with Manuals and Catechismes of the Popish Priests, or the papers and
pamphlets of Anabaptists, Brownists and Puritans.

His Majesty therefore calling to mind the saying of Tertullian, Id verum quod
primum; and remembering with what doctrine the Church of England in her first
and most happy Reformation did drive out the one, and keep out the other from
poisoning and infecting the people of this Kingdom, does find that the whole
scope of this doctrine is contained in the Articles of Religion, the two books
of Homilies, the lesser and the greater Catechism, which his Majesty does
therefore recommend again in these Directions as the theams and proper subjects
of all sound and edifying preaching.

And so far are these Directions from abridging, that his Majesty does expect
at our hands that it should increase the number of Sermons, by renewing every
Sunday in the afternoon in all Parish-Churches throughout the Kingdom that
primitive and most profitable exposition of the Catechism, wherewith the
people, yea very children may be timely seasoned and instructed in all the
heads of Christian Religion. The which kind of exposition (to our amendment be
it spoken) is more diligently observed in all the Reformed Churches of Europe,
then of late it has been here in England. I find his Majesty much moved with
this neglect, and resolved (if we that are Bishops do not see a reformation
thereof, which I trust we shall) to recommend to the care of the Civil
Magistrate: so far is his Highness from giving the least discouragement to
solid preaching, or discreet and religious Preachers.

To all these I am to add, That it is his Majesty's Princely pleasure that both
the former Directions and those reasons of the same be fairly written in every
Registers Office, to the end that every Preacher of what denomination soever
may, if he be so pleased, take out Copies of either of them with his own hand
gratis, passing nothing in the name of fee or expedition: But if he do use the
pains of the Register or the Clerk, then to pay some moderate Fee to be
pronounced in open Court by the Chancellor and Commissaries of the place,
taking the direction and approbation of my Lords the Bishops.

Lastly, That from henceforward a course may be taken that every Parson, Vicar,
Curate, or Lecturer do make and exhibit an account for the performance of these
his Majesty's directions, and the reasons for the same, at the ensuing
Visitation of the Bishops and Archdeacons, paying to the Register 6d. for the
exhibiting. And so wishing, but withal in his Majesty's name requiring your
Lordship to have a special and extraordinary care of the premises, I leave you
to the Almighty.

Your very loving friend, J. Lincoln, C. S.
September. 3. 1622.
Instructions for the Ministers, and Church-Warde us of London. Jan. 28. 1622.
1. THat his Majesty's declaration, published Anno Dom. 1628. be fore the
Articles of Religion, for settling all questions in difference, be strictly
observed. 2. That special care be had concerning Lectures in every Parish. 3.
That the Minister and Churchwardens in every parish, or one of them, do by
writing under his or their own hands, certify unto the Archdeacon of London,
or his official, at, or before the 28 of this present January: and afterward
at, or before every visitation, the Christian and Sirnames of every Lecturer in
their parishes, and the place where he preaches, whether exempt, or not
exempt; together with his quality or degree. 4. That they do in like manner
certify the names of such men, as being not qualified by Law, do keep
Chaplains in their houses. 5. That they do further certify the names of all
such as absent themselves from, or are negligent in coming to divine service,
as well Prayers, as Catechizing and Sermons. 6. That the Minister and
Churchwardens of every Parish, successively, do keep a several Copy of those
Instructions by them, whereby they may be the better informed of their duty;
and that the said Copies be showed at every visitation, when they shall present
all such persons as have disobeyed these instructions; that according to his
Majesty's pleasure, such as do conform, may be encouraged, and such as are
refractory, may be punished.
Subscribed Tho. Paske, Archdeacon of London.

Monsieur Bevayr, Chancellor of France, discharged to the French King.
LO Sir, I willingly resign into your hands, the charge with which you were
pleased to honor me, and with the same Countenance that I received it, without
seeking for it, I leave it without grieving for it; the Law had sufficiently
taught me to obey your Majesty, so that I needed not to have been sent for by a
Captain of the Guard, and twenty Archers; violence should only be used against
those that resist, and not against me that know how to obey; and that have ever
esteemed this honor a heavy burden, rather then a dignity, which yet I had
accepted for the good of your service, because every able man ow^s h^s ^ares
and his years to the public good; and because ^t had been a shame for me to
refuse to die with the stern in my hand, being able to ^^nder, or at the least
delay the shipwreck that th^eatens us. God grant Sir, that I be the greatest
loser ^n this disfavour, and that you and your state be the least touched in
it. This accident has not taken me o^ the suddain^, having ever well foreseen,
that as I followed as much as I could, the integrity and virtues of M^ns^eur de
Villeroy, and the President Janin; so I ought to expect the like fortune to
theirs: your commandment in this, agrees with ^he choice my self had made ^f I
had been at full liberty; for I love a great deal better to be companion in
their disgraces, (if I ought so to style the being disbu^^^ened of affairs)
then to be employed in the managing the State (...) them that there remain;
since I might n time have taken an ^ll day by (...) ^ompany of such people, to
whom I no whit envy the increase of authority, which is given them at my cost;
for I have not used to give account of my actions every morning by stealth,
neither will I be prescribed what I ought to do, if the States good, and
reason do not counsel me unto it. This is much more honorable for me, then
to have betrayed your Majesty, in sealing a discharge to an accomptant of 80000
pound, in the great poverty of the Treasury, and that to further the good of a
man that b^ushes not (besides this) to demand the Duchy of Alanson by way of
mortgage, which is the portion of the Kings Sons, and to pretend to the office
of Constable, which the late Kings will expressly was, should be suppressed
after the death of the late Lord Monmorency. Think not Sir, that in not giving
my consent to this. I desired to oppose my self against your Authority; I know
well that that has no bounds, but those of your will; but yet are you bound to
rule your self according to reason, and to follow the Counsel of those which
have entered into the managing of the State by the choice which the late King
had made of them, as being more able to give it you, then certain new comers
drawn out of the dregs of business and of the people. This exchange which is
made of us for them, is the trick of the Wolves to the Sheep, when they took
their dogs from them; does not your Majesty perceive it, or dare you not
redress it for fear of disobedience? Sir, you owe obedience by nature to those
that preach it to you but they themselves owe it you both by divine and humane
right; and though you should yield them less they have given you but too many
examples so to do. Remember if it please you, that you are past fifteen years
old, and Kings are of age at fourteen. Isaac followed Abraham his Father to be
sacrificed, because he was not old enough to fear any thing: I believe if he
had been a man grown, and had foreseen the danger, he would not himself have
carried the sticks upon his shoulders; he was but the appearance of a
sacrifice, I pray God in these occasions keep you from the effect: for when I
see that men move the Authority of the Court when they will, that men set to
sale and dispose of the offices of the Crown, without being once hindered by
any; the Princes of the blood having been some imprisoned, and other Princes
having retired themselves for the security of their persons; when I see that
among the great ones, they that are made see some shadow of better fortunes,
are feign to lend their hands to bring themselves into bondage; that they which
have attained some settlednesse in this alteration, maintain it only for fear
of returning to the former misery of their former condition -- Besides, it
seems also that the people, and the Provinces partake of this change after the
example of the great ones, seeing the help of the law is unprofitable; every
thing being out of order by canvasing, by violences, and by corruptions; the
Louvre it self has put on a new face, as well as the affairs of the Kingdom;
there remains nothing of the old Court but the walls, and even of them the use
has been changed; for they were wont to serve for the safeguard of Princes,
and now they serve for their prison, and for yours it may be, (if it be lawful
to say so:) for it is not without some end, that when you go abroad, you have a
company of light horse to attend you, chosen by a suspected hand; this is your
Guard after the fashion of the Bastile, this distrust counsels you enough, what
you ought to do, and you need no other advice. I am hist at, I am scoft at,
and my discourse; so was Cassardra used, when she foretold the destruction of
Troy. Sir, I have nothing left but my tongue to serve you with; If I were so
happy to draw you out of the error in which you are fed* I would bless a
thousand times my disgrace; for having emboldned me to speak freely in a time,
wherein even words are punished The falseness of the Alcharan, is only
authorized, by that it is forbidden under pain of death to speak of it. The
incroachment which is made upon your Authority, takes footing only by the
danger that is in telling it you freely; consider (if it please you) that those
which usurp power over you, are of a Country where every body would reign;
thence it that there is not a City on the other side the Alps, that has not
her republic or her petty King; and if your Majesty had but a little tasted
the History of your own Kingdom, you would have found that the most learned
Tragedies that were ever seen in France, have come from that side: the last --
upon occasion of a lit-book which I published, touching Constancy and Comfort
in public calamities, I fear much that (contrary to my design) this is a Work
for your Reign, if the goodness of God take not pity on us. Think not Sir,
that the grief to see my self removed from the State Affairs, breeds so bold a
discourse; if I had felt any grief for that, it is but as new married Wives weep
to leave the subjection of their Fathers, to enter into the equality of
Marriage: Yet it is true, that owing you my service, I should with more
contentment have employed it in your Counsels of State, then in your
Parlaments, where the matters are of less importance. For I suppose, that if
the Carpenter which made the frame of the Admiral wherein Don John de Austria
commanded at the Battle of Lepanto, had known that she should have served in
so important an occasion, wherein depended the safety of the rest of Europe,
he would have taken more pleasure in the making her, then if he had made a
vessel destined only for Traffic. Notwithstanding, since your Majesty
commands me to retire my self, in a good hour be it, the lesser stars bear a
part in the perfection of the Universe, though they contribute less to it then
the Sun or Moon In what condition soever I live, I will ever bring all I shall
be able to the good of your service: and if there be any of those which are
near you, that lament mine absence, for my own sake, I would willingly say to
them, Weep for your selves, children of Jerusalem, that for want of courage
suffer your Majesty to be betrayed; and not for me, that have no other fault,
then that I am an honest man. I take leave therefore of you, Sir, praying God
to take pity of your Estate, and care of your Breeding.

Monr Richer forced, recants his opinions against the Papal Supremacy over
Kings.
EGo Librum quem composui Ecclesiasticae potestatis, and me ipsum measque omnes
Propositiones subjicio Eccles. Cathol. Apost. and Roman. and sanctae sedi
Apostolica, quam matrem om^ium Ecclesiarum esse agnosco; and in qua semper
viguit infallibile Judicium veritatis in ^ebus fidei decernendis. Vehementerque
doleo in praedicto me^ Libro quasdam esse Propositiones quae scandalum
genuerint, and quae sint veritati Catholicae ut sonant contrariae.

Cardinal Richlieu to the Roman Catholics of great Britain, Aug. 25. 1624.
VIri praeclari, longius differo ad vos scribere, quia res vestrae facta non
verba desiderant, vota vestra nostra sunt studia, and utraque propitio Deo,
aliqua ex part saltem optatos speramus exitus inventura; spondet hoc nobis Rex
Christianissimus, qui aut nullas, aut ^erte honorificias Religioni, pro
Regiasua indole conditiones foederis unquam admissurus est, Ita a nobis
formatus, ita animo praeparatus est, ut se rei divinae augendae non minus quam
finibus propagandis natum vocatumque esse meminerit: serenissima Regina ejus
Matter, sedula opera, intenta cura cavebit, non modo ne quid detrementi Religio
capia^, sed etiam ut qua possit promoveri, promoveatur, and adjuvetur. Equidem
ita me rerum vestrarum miseret, ut si non dico consilio, non fide, non
authoritate (quae sentio quam sint exigua:) sed si vita ipsa and sanguine vos
eripere vel levare etiam malis possem, libentissime facerem. Ex animo dico,
testis est conscientia, qua me vestrum omnium, libertatisque vestrae semper et
omni loco fore studiosissimum polliceor.

Vobis ^x animo addictissimus, Amandus, Cardinali^ Richlieu.
Apud Sanctum German. 25 August. 1624.
Monsr. Balsac to the Cardinal dela Valette.
MY LORD, I am retired here into Criceroes house, where I take the fresh air,
and the shade or every hour of the day and laugh at those that bro^e
themselves at Rome. But although I be come hither as well to untire my Spirit,
as to recreate my body, notwithstanding it is impossible that the first can
rest, but must do business where it finds none; It cross the Sea, and
passes over the Alps without my consent, and because there is nothing to do
at France, it goes to seek some at Constantinople, at Madrid, at London, and
at Montauban. Now, to the end you may not think me a liar* and that under an
honest pretext, I would palliate a reproveable idleness; I am going to write
you the adventures of my yesterdaies walk, and speak to you in the same style,
and the same sort as I rave. While the King is busied to make war, the King
of Spain passes his time with Ladies, and into places that may not honestly
be named; I will give no judgment upon the different inclination of these two
Princes, but I very well know, that so long as they live in that fashion, the
King of Spain shall take no Towns, nor the King or France the Pox. You have
surely heard ^t reported, that the P^l^nders have defeated the Turks Army,
which was composed of two hundred thousand Combatants, the half whereof, lay
dead upon the place. It must necessar ly be granted, that but he only after
such a loss, could make such a second, and that he has a source of men that
cannot be drawn dry, either by wars, by plagues, or by any other (...)
disposition of the air, seeing that in the abundance of all things, that his
Empire produces, there is nothing at so low a price, as the lives of soldiers
When I dream that the Duke of Boui^lon i^ shut up in Sedan, from whence he
cannot come forth to go and make h^s party, I imagine to my self, a poo^e
mother standing upon the brink of a River, seeing her son sla^ne on the other
side, neither being able to help him or bid him farewell: never was man so
assaulted with such diversity of thoughts, nor oppressed with unprofitable cares;
one while it vexes him that sufficient resistance was not made at St. Jehan de
Angeli; and again I find that they made not use of the advantage which they
might have taken At one and the same time I would have been at Montauban to
defend, and in England to get succor for it. But why dwells so great a spirit
in a body that has no more heat in it then a fever gives it, and which is
never removed but by Ambergris and Physic? Its known that the better part
of it dwells in the history of troubles, and that in this world ^t holds but the
place of another. In the mean time, the affairs of the Rebels grow to ruin;
and if they make any small attempts* it is not that their hopes increase, nor
their courage strengthens, but ^t is Gods will that they shall not have either
victory or peace.

The Duke of Bouilon sees all this, not being able to remedy, and if sometimes
to divert his spir^t from so vexing an object, he thinks to seek some comfort
out of the kingdom, and amongst strangers affairs, of one side he discovers a
pu^ssant Army under the conduct of Spi^^a, which threa^ens all Germany; and of
the other side he ^e^ his Nephew, whom from having been Count Palatine, and
King of Bohemia, is become pensioner to the Hollanders, and a Gentleman of the
Prince of Orange his train; as the beasts in time past, were wont to be
crowned, which ought to be sacrificed; so for une presented a Kingdom to this
poor man, to the end he should lose his life; but not to lie, he has showed
himself craftier then she and fled so we he could never be overtaken.
Notwithstanding to speak home, the game which he got by not dying at the
battle of Prague, is not so great as the rep oach which shall be cast upon
him for living by his own fault, and for having witnessed to all the people of
the world, that the end of his desires, was only to attain to be old; and
without doubt, as it is a great advantage to be the Grandchild of an usurper
so there is not a more miserable condition, then to have been a King, and now
to be no more but the subject, or tragedy to plays. Let men then as much as
they please, praise the designs of this man, and his good intention. I for my
part, find nothing so easy as to fly and lose; and posterity shall put him
rather in the number of thieves that have been punished, then of conquerours
which have triumphed upon the earth. Since it is true, that the persecution
ceases in England, and that the King wearieth himself with giving us Martyrs,
it may be, that within a short time, he will altogether set souls at liberty,
that st^l makes one step to his mother Church. As for my part, I despair not
of this great conversion, that all honest men will with salt tears, desire this
from heaven, knowing to the contrary, that he has a reasonable spirit, and may
be persuaded upon a thing that he determined on. I assure my self that he
studies every day the truth of the instructions the great Cardinal Peron left
him, See King James his Remonstrance against Cardi Peron
and that that w ll be the strongest in his Kingdoms as soon as his Conscience
-- authority better reestablished then his. His predecessors knew not ^ow to
reign in regard of him, no not she that played with so many heads, and who was
more happy then needful for the Christian Commonwealth. It is certain, that
heretofore England believed in God, but this day it only believes in its
Prince, and Religion makes but a part of the obedience yielded unto him; in so
much, that if he would but set in the place of all the points of Faith, all the
fables of Poesy, he should find in his subjects complying enough to bring them
to his will, and persuade himself, that he may make all things just that he
does, and all things culpaple that he condemns; his Authority came not so far
at the first stroke; and there must be time to make men lose The way for
Romish Conversion.
reason, but at this time when all sp rits are vanquished, and that the great
belief that he has given of his judgment takes away the liberty of theirs;
they can imagine nothing above the wisdom of the King* and without meddling
with any thing that passes between God and him, they believe that if he command
them to tread under foot all the Holy things, and to violate all the Laws, all
that was but for the safety of their Consciences. But it is to be believed,
that this Divine providence, which conducts things to their ends, by means
which in appearance are contrary, will use the blood^nesse of this people to
procure their salvation, and cause them to come again into the Church, by the
same door they went out of it. And since the hearts of Kings are in the hands
of God, there wants nothing but a good motion sent unto him, to build again
the Altars which he has beaten down, and at one clap to turn to the true
Religion the souls of three Kingdoms. A while ago he sent a Gentleman
expressly to this Court, that it might not be contrary with the Marriage which
he treated with Spain, and to endeavor to make the Romans think well of it;
and that one of these days, it may be, he will call his Holiness, and the
sacred College of Cardinals; but hitherto these are terms of a tongue unknown
to him. Furthermore, in this Country we imagine, that there will be no lack of
wars till Rochel be reduced to extremity: It is very true, that the forces
which the King has left before it, are not great; but for how many men think
you, they count the Captain into whose bands he has put them! It is not
permitted to judge of that which he will do by the ordinary course of the
things of this world, his actions cannot be drawn into example; and though he
be infinitely wise, notwithstanding it is certain, that in what he undertakes,
it always appears somewhat greater then man's wisdom; Yet truly my Lord, after
having considered the motion of the Stars which are so just; the order of the
seasons, which are so governed; the beauties of nature, which are so diverse; I
find in the end, that there is nothing in the world, where God shows himself
so admirable, as in the guiding of the life of my Lord your Father. But to the
purpose, behold this that I added yesterday to the great discourse (which I
made by your Commandment and which you much praised the first time.)

Monsr. Balsac to the King Louis.
SIR,
The late King your father has not done more, and nevertheless not to speak
of the Actions of his life; your Majesty knows that his last thoughts made all
the Kings of the earth to tremble, and his memory until this day is
reverenced to the uttermost ends of the world. Notwithstanding, Sir, be it that
you are come in a better time then he, be it that God has destinated your
Majesty for higher things, the glory which you have gotten at the going out of
your infancy is not less then that which that great Prince deserved when he
was was grown old in Arms: and in affairs as he, so you make your self
redoubted without tyranny; as he, so you govern your people. But I am
constrained to avow that your Majesty must needs yield to him in one thing,
which is, that you have not yet begot a Son that resembles you. But certainly
Sir, we cannot any longer time have this advantage over you. All Europe
requires Princes and princesses of you, and it is certain, that the world
ought not to end, but when your race shall fail: if you will then that the
beauty of the things we see, passeto another age; If you will that the public
tranquillity have an assured foundation, and that your victories may be
eternal, you must talk no more of working powerfully, nor of doing great Acts
of State* but with the Queen.

Monr Toyrax to the Duke of Buckingham.
MY Lord,
your curtesie^ are sufficiently known to all the world; and you place them
with so much judgment, that those only may hope after them that make themselves
worthy by their actions. Now I know no action so worthy of that merit, as for a
man to employ himself, -- if in the defense of this place he vanquish not all
difficulties -- so that no despair of succor nor fear of rigor, in case of
extremity, can ever make me quit a design so generous; as also I shall esteem
my self unworthy of any your favors, if in this action I omit the least point
of my duty; the issue whereof cannot be but honorable: and by how much you
add to this glory by your valor and carriage, by so much I am more bound to
remain during my life, your Lordships humble and most obedient servant, Toirax.

Abignoto, concerning the estate of Rochel after the surrender.
SIR,
I presume you have long since heard the particulars of Rochel; and that by
far better relations then mine; notwithstanding you may be pleased to know
what I observed and learned there my self eight days after the Kings
entrance, whither curiosity and some other causes drew me. For the siege and
Dike, they prae caeter is excellens, were in all parts most royal and far
more perfect and uniforme, then relation could make me conceive: The misery of
the siege almost incredible, but to such only as have seen it, or some part
thereof: Corn was worth after the rate of 800 Franks the bushel; an Ox or Cow,
sold after the rate of 2000 Franks. The host where I lay, sold a Jade horse,
worth it may be four or five pounds, for 800 Franks, and for five and twenty
weeks, tasted no bread: of twelve persons in his family, only he and his wife
are living; who also within two days had dyed, if the Town had not been
rendered. He and his wife made a Collation the day before the Town was rendered,
which cost him about six or seven pound sterling; their cheer was a pound of
bread, made of Straw, Sugar, and other Spices; half a pound of horse flesh,
three or four ounces of Comfits, and a pint of Wine, which they imagined, was
the last good cheer they should make together; and in like case, were all the
rest of the Town, only two or three families of the better sort excepted; by
which you may conjecture what rates such kind of provision were at. There were
eaten between 3000 or 4000 Cow-hides, all the dogs, cats, mice and rats they
could get, not a horse left alive, which was food for the better sort, only
Madam Rohan, after having eaten her Coach horse, and her servants the Leather
of her Coach; removed, though full sore against her will, her lodging from
Rochel to the Castle of Mooke or Ni^eul, where she is under guard, and since
(it is said) to the Bastile in Paris: God send her and hers to heaven. There
died for want of food in Rochel 15000 and rested living when the King entered
between three and four thousand, of which there are since very many dead; they
daily discover new miseries, which when I was there, were not spoken of; the
mother and the child at the breast both dead, the child having eaten most part
of the mothers breast; a soldier was found dead with a piece of his fellows
flesh in his mouth; a Burger having a servant killed, powdered her, which fed
him and his wife a long time, and dainty meat too: many languishing and finding
themselves draw near their ends, caused their coffins to be carried into the
Churches, said them down in them and so dyed; these were of the better sort.
The common sort laid themselves down in Coffins in the Church yards and there
dyed; others in the streets, others not able to go out of their houses dyed and
remained there, their friends being not able to remove them thence. So that
when the first Forces of the King entered, there were in the Town, of Corpse
unburied, some in the Churchyards, others in the streets, some in their
houses, some on the floor, others in their beds, besides them that died
without the Gates under hedges, and in ditches round about the Town, which I
saw my self when I was there; half devoured with Ravens and other beasts, and
fowls of the air; In fine, the like misery has not been seen nor heard of.

The King on All Saints day, which was the day of his entry, with a wax Candle
in his hand, together with the Cardinal and all the Nobility, in like manner,
went all over the Town in procession with the B. Sacrament. The chief Temple
of the Hugonots shall be converted into a Church Cathedral, and Rochel to be a
Bishopric. All the fortifications and walls to Landwards to be razed, and the
Fosses filled so that a plough may pass, as in arable Land. The Mayor, with
some of the chiefest, are banished for ever, others for a certain time
limited, though quietly to possess their goods, moveable and immovable, and a
general remission of all crimes past: and all others that were in the Town
before the descent of the English into Rhee, and when the Town was rendered,
shall likewise enjoy the same privilege, though no child or heir absent, is,
or shall be capable to inherit the goods or lands of his parents or friends
deceased, but all is at the Kings disposing. The King has granted them free
liberty of their Religion in the Town of Rochel, which in short time will all
be rooted out; for no Forrainer (though naturalized) shall be admitted to
repair and inhabit in Rochel, nor French but Roman Catholics. The King has
added to the revenues of his Crown 20000 Franks per annum, which was a rent
belonging to the Townhouse, for the maintenance of the fortifications and
State of Rochel. The Townhouse is to be razed, and a pillar or pyramids with
an ample inscription of the particulars of the siege and rebellion, there to be
erected. The forts of the Isle of Rhee and Oleron, to be razed, and (as it is
said) most of all the chief forts of France, except on the frontiers. Four
Regiments are yet in Rochel, the rest of the Army (at least the most part) are
gone to winter in those parts of France, toward the coasts of Italy, to be
ready on all occasions to succor the Duke of Mantua, as it is thought. The
Fathers of the society have very fair buildings given them for their
establishing there, and 1000 Franks to begin to build; to which is added a
revenue which I know not, the place is said to be where the Heretics kept
their schools of Divinity, and Council of war, or rebellion. And where the
English had their Church, the Oratorians are likewise established with large
augmentations; The Capuchins are where was the chiefest Fort, called Le Bastion
de Levangile; The Minors are where the Dike was, and diverse other elsewhere.
There are at least 8000 houses in Rochel, which are feign to fall to the King
to dispose of for want of heirs. The Parisians are preparing a most sumptuous
and magnificent receipt for the King, which is the cause he has not been at
Paris since his return from Rochel, but is at St. Germins, and thereabouts,
till all things are ready for his entry, which is thought will exceed in
bravery and magnificence all the presidents of many years. The Jesuits are by
the body of Paris employed to make the speeches and inscriptions for that
purpose, which the body of the Sorbon take ill; The Prince of Conde does daily
get ground of Rohan, and has lately taken prisoners (as it is said) thirty
Captains and eight hundred soldiers. Those of Montauban boast (as it is said)
that they have provision for three or four years, and will stand out til the
last: though some of the best esteem, think it is only to draw the King to the
best composition they can.

The Protestants of France, to Charles King of Great Britain.
SIR,
the knowledge and resentment which it has pleased your Majesty to take of the
misery of the afflicted Churches of France, has given us the boldness to
awaken your Compassion in such measure, as our calamities are aggravated by the
unmercifull rigor of our persecutors, and as the present storm does threaten
near at hand the total ruin, and lamentable destruction of that which the
mercy of God had yet kept entire unto us since the desolation of Rochel: and as
we have adored with humility the judgment of God in this bad success (which we
impute only to his wrath justly kindled against us for our sins) so our silence
could be thought no less then ingratitude, if we had not at the beginning of
our Assembly resolved the most humble and most affectionate acknowledgment
which we now render to your Majesty, for the great succor which you have sent
us, interessing your self so far in the grief of our oppression, and in the
means of our deliverance. The most humble supplication which we do offer to
your Majesty next after this our thansgiving, is, that your Majesty (according
to the sweet inclination of your goodness) would permit us still to present our
complaints, and discover our wounds before the eyes of your royal charity,
protesting unto your Majesty, that we see none other hand under heaven by which
we may be healed, but your Majesty's, in case your Majesty will still vouchsafe
to lift it up on the behalf of oppressed innocents, and of the Church of our
Lord outragiously persecuted by the most envenomed passion that our age, or any
age preceedent has seen; we most humbly beseech your Majesty, to read this
letter which is written with our tears and with our blood; and (according to
your exquisite judgment, your incomparable wisdom, and the devotion of your
zeal, to the glory of God) to consider our estate, which is such, that our
persecutors upon the loss of Rochel, supposing we had been put to utter
discomfiture, and into a weakness without recovery or resistance, and boasting
themselves, that now there remained no more any eyes unto us, but to bewail
our selves, nor any sense, but to feel the smart thereof, without further
employing our hands or our arms for our defense, have made use of this
advantage, with so much fierceness, insultation and cruelty, that they have
not only sacked the houses, and with an unheard of rudeness and barbarisme^,
rifled the goods of our poor brethren of this Province of Languedock, relying
themselves upon public faith, and the benefits of the edicts of pacification
(especially of the last which your Majesty had favorably procured and
confirmed unto us) dissipating whole families, and exiling them with perfidious
inhumanity, but also they have said wast and destroyed almost all the Churches
of the same, which are at their command and discretion under the liberty of
edicts; employing Monks (the Popes Emissaries) assisted with force of
soldiers, and of the tyrannical Authority of Governors, to ravish men's
souls, and to draw the most constant with violence to Mass, and to the feet
of the Idol, interdicting assembles, and all exercise of true Religion in the
same places, beating, imprisoning, ransoming, assasinating the faithful and
their pastors with an enraged fury, which has exceeded all the inhumanities of
the Inquisition, profaning and demolishing of Temples; their violence having
proceeded so far, as publicly to burn in pomp and triumph, the sacred books
of Gods Covenant in presence of the Governor of the Province, with damnable
sacrilege, which cries vengeance before God, and does elevate its voice to
the ears, (Sir) of a most puissant Monarch, professing the purity of the
Gospel, zealous of his glory, and capable to revenge so outrageous an injury.
But your Majesty shall understand, that all this has produced an effect much
contrary to the intention of our persecutors; for so far it is from us, that
their objects of pity and grief, whereof the very thought does make us repine,
should render us faint-hearted, and cause us to yield our selves in prey to
their rage, that on the contrary, seeing the Mask taken off, and the pretext
which they had alleged of the Army of rebellion whereof they accused us, quite
removed, and that without any more distimulation, their design goes on to the
ruinating of our Religion, and the extirpation of our Church, and that there
remained no more hope of safety and liberty, but general resolution to die in
the Arms of our just and vigorous defense, and that out persecutors possessing
the spirit of our King, and hindering the effects of his bounty, have obtained a
declaration of the fifteenth of December last, which alluring us to implore his
grace and mercy, yet leaves us not any hope of enjoying the benefits of any
edict, nor by consequence of any tolerable peace, and soliciting us to disarm
our selves, and to put our selves into the condition of sacrafices destined by
one and by one to the slaughter, to be all at one stroke offered up to the fury
of Antichrist, by one general Massacre throughout the whole Kingdom, whereof
we do not only hear the vaunts, but do almost see great armies upon our
backs for execution. This makes us (Sir) have recourse to your Royal and
redoubtable puissance, as to a place of refuge, which God has yet left open to
us, in your Ardent charity, to find within your assistance assured and
effectual means to avoid ruin, which is ready inevitably to fall upon our
heads. And to attain thereunto, (Sir) we have religiously renewed in this
assembly, the oath of union, which binds us with a sacred bond unto the Arms
of your Majesty; of the violating whereof your Majesty may be assured, that we
will never make our selves guilty, being encouraged to this resolution by the
reiterate confirmations, which my Lord the Duke of Rohan has lately given us,
that your Majesty continues to take to heart the assistance and deliverance of
our Churches according to your Royal promises, being debtors to his sage and
valorous conduct, and to his pious magnanimity, for all that strength and
liberty which we yet enjoy: and we will leave unto posterity memorable examples
of our Constancy which prefers death before reproachful cowardice and
shameful servitude, hoping that out of our ashes, God will draw matter for his
glory, and the propagation of his Church; being persuaded (Sir) that you are
the instrument of his election to give us comfort and deliverance from our
evils in time convenient. Be you assured also, that he will uphold us in that
extraordinary valor wherewith he has inspired us to endure all extremities
with a patience invincible, expecting the succor of his hands through yours.
Of all (Sir) which a great Monarch could ever do in the world, nothing can be
more just then this interprize, nor more glorious then this deliverance: the
Lord having exalted you to the most eminent degree of dignity and power to be
the nursing father of his Church, she has right, being thus mangled and
bloody, to stretch forth her arms unto you, even she that Spouse of Jesus
Christ, the common mother of Christians, and and your mother also, by the
respect of her bruised members, and of the searing of her innocent breast,
covered with wounds, she will move your pity; She assures her self (Sir) that
the glorious title which you bear of the Defender of the faith, shall
interceede for your accepting of her humble request: if you do extend unto us
your cares, your affections, and your formidable Arms, you shall nourish in
our hearts affections of honor and obedience which shall never die; you shall
daunt all powers that would raise themselves against your Crown; you shall
raise your glory to such a height, that all the earth shall admire it, all
Christendom shall celebrate it, and your name shall be of sweet odor unto
Angels and men; and in perpetual benediction unto all posterity of Saints, and
your reward shall be great and eternal in heaven. May it please your Majesty to
pardon us, if our necessities pressing us, we all do press your Majesty by our
instant supplications accompanied with a most humble respect to strengthen our
selves so soon as may be with the honor of your commandments, and the
declaration of your fav^ur, the wholesome effects of your assistance, according
to the sweetness of your compassion, and Charity, and we will redouble our
prayers to the divine clemency, for the length and safety of your life, and the
prosperity of your estate, being ready with a most holy and ardent affect on to
expose our goods and lives to render us worthy of the quality which we dare
take of your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful servants, the
Deputies of the reformed Churches of France, in their general Assembly held at
Nismes, and for all Jaques de Maresey adjunct la Reque.

The Duke of Rohan to his Majesty of great Britain, the 12 of March 1628.
SIR,
the deplorable accident of the loss of Rochel, which God has suffered to
humble us under his hand, has redoubled in the hearts of our enemies their
passionate fierceness to our utter ruin with an assured hope to attain
thereunto. But it has not taken away from the Churches of those Provinces,
either the heart or the affection to oppose their unjust plots by a just and
lively defense. This is it has made them take resolution to assemble
themselves to cojoyn in the midst of these commotions to assist me with their
good counsels, and with me to provide the means of their deliverance. And for
as much as the greatest support which God has raised unto them upon earth is
the succor our Churches have, and do look to receive from your Majesty, the
general Assembly has desired that my Letters, which alone hitherto have
represented unto your Majesty the interest of the public cause, might be
joined to their most humble supplications put up to your Majesty. I do it Sir,
with so much the more affection, because I am a witness that these poor
people, who with sighs and groans implore your assistance, having once laid
down their weapons which the oppression of their enemies made so necessary,
because they knew such was your desire to take them up again, so soon as they
heard that your Majesty did oblige them thereunto by your Counsel and Promises;
they have upon this only assurance, continued all dangers, surmounted all
oppositions, accounted their estates as nothing, and are still ready to spend
their blood till the very last drop; they esteem your love and favor more
precious then their own lives, and whatsoever promises or threatenings have been
used to shake their constant resolution, they could never be brought to make
any breach in that they had tied themselves to, never to hear of any Treaty
without your consent. This great zeal for the preservation of all the Churches
of this Kingdom, which is naturally knit to the preservation of these few we
have left, and that fidelity with our example, are worthy and glorious subjects
to exercise your Charity and Power. You are (Sir) Defender of that Faith
whereof they make profession, suffer it not to be so unjustly oppressed; you
have stirred up their affection in this defense by your royal promises, and
those Sacred words, that your Majesty would employ all the power in your
Dominions to warrant and protect all our Churches from the ruin that threatened
them, have been (after Gods favor) the only foundation of all their hope: so
the Churches should think no greater a Crime could be committed by them, then
doubt of your Royal performance thereof, if their miseries and Calamities have
at the beginning moved your Compassion. This woeful subject has increased with
such violence, that nothing but your succor can prevent their utter undoing:
for at this day the greatest offense our Enemies lay to our Charge, (and
proclaim nothing can expiate but our blood) is, to have implored your aid, and
hope for it: for this cause, our Lands and Possessions are taken away and
destroyed; our houses made desolate, and reduced to ashes; our heads exposed to
sale to murderers; our families banished; and wheresoever the cruelty of them
that hate us can extend, men and women are dragged and beaten to Mass with
Bastin^does. To be short, the horror of the persecution we suffer is so great,
that our words are too weak to express it. Moreover, we see great and mighty
Armies at our Gates, that wait their only fit time to fall with impetuosity
upon the places of retreat that remain; and after that, to expel and banish the
exercise of Religion, and massacre all the faithful ones throughout the whole
kingdoms. These things considered (Sir) I do beseech your Majesty not to
forsake us. I should fear by such words to offend so great, so potent, and so
faithful a king; But because of urgent necessity that presses us, I have
presumed importunately to entreat the hastening of your assistance, to keep us
from falling under the heavy burden of our Enemies endeavors. Your Majesty
need not to draw, but out of the source of your own profound wisdom, for the
fit means how to make your succor dreadful and powerful to those that
contemn it, and salutiferous to so many people that wait and long for it. Your
Majesty shall by this means acquire the greatest glory that can be desired,
pluck out from the fire and sword three hundred thousand families that
continually pray to God for your prosperity; preserve a people whom God has
purchased with his most precious blood, and which has (even in the midst of
most eminent dangers, and cruellest torments) kept entire a sound and an
upright faith, both toward God and man; you shall settle the fidelity of your
word, the reputation of your kingdoms and Arms, to a pitch worthy of your
grandeur; and in repressing of the audaciousness of those that go about every
day to blemish the same, through their vile and unworthy reproaches, you shall
add to your titles that of the Restorer of a people, the most innocent and most
barbarously persecuted that ever was. In that which concerns me, Sir, I will
not make mention to your Majesty of my own Interest, though I might do it,
having, as it seems, the honor be unto you what I am: but I have so long since
consecrated all things with my self to the public good, that I shall esteem
my self happy enough, so that the Church were not miserably distressed; and
that I may have this advantage, that through my actions (which your Majesty
will not disavow) I may make it known, that I am

Your Majesty's most humble and most obedient servant, Henry de Rohan.

Pope Gregory the 15 to the ^^quisitor General of Spain, April 19. 1623.
Venerable Brother,
THe protection of the Orthodox Religion in the most spacious Kingdoms of
Spain, we think to be happily committed to your Fraternity: for we know with
what watchful vigilancie, in this renowned station, you are careful that
Monsters of wicked doctrine steal not into the bounds of the Church and Vine.
But at this time occasion from heaven is offered you, by which you may extend
the benefits of your piety beyond the bounds of those Kingdoms, and extend them
also to foreign Countries. We understand that the Prince of Wales, the King of
Great Britains son, is lately arrived there, carried with a hope of Catholic
Marriage: Our desire is, that he should not stay in vain in the Courts of those
Kings, to whom the defense of the Popes authority, and care of advancing
Religion, has procured the renowned name of Catholic. Wherefore by
Apostolic Letters we exhort his Catholic Majesty, that he would gently
endeavor sweetly to reduce that Prince to the obedience of the Roman Church,
to which the ancient Kings of Great Britain have (with heavens approbation)
submitted their Crowns and Scepters. Now to the attaining of this victory,
which to the conquered promises triumphs, and principalities of heavenly
felicity, we need not exhaust the Kings treasure, nor levy Armies of furious
souldier^; but we must fetch from heaven the armor of Light, whose divine
solendor may allure that Princes eye, and gently expel all errors from his
mind. Now in the managing of these businesses, what power and art you have, we
have well known long ago: wherefore we wish you to go like a religious
Counselor to the Catholic King, and to try all ways which by this present
occasion may benefit the Kingdoms of Britain and the Church of Rome. The matter
is of great weight and moment, and therefore not to be amplified with words.
Whosoever shall inflame the mind of this Royal youth with the love of the
Catholic Religion, and breed a hate in him of Heretical impiety, shall begin
to open the Kingdom of heaven to the Prince of Britain, and to gain the
Kingdoms of Britain to the Apostolic See; into the possession of so great
glory, I make no doubt but that your Fraternity, armed with the sword of
Verity, will be desirous to come. About which matter, our venerable brother
Innocent Bishop of (...) the Apostolic Nuncio, shall discourse with you more
at large; whom you may trust. And we with most accurate prayers will endeavor
to procure the assistance of God for you, upon whom most lovingly we bestow our
Apostolical benediction.

Given at Rome in St. Peter's, under the Fishers Seal, April 19. 1623. of our
Popedom 30.
Pope Urban to Lewis the 13. Aug. 4. 1629.
To our dearest Son in Christ Jesus, Lewis the most Christian King of France;
Pope Urban sends greeting.
MOst dear Son in Christ, Health, and Apostolical benediction. The high
exploits of your Royal valor, which have drawn upon them all the eyes of
Christendom, bring a great deal of comfort to our fatherly care, as well in
regard of the glory of your Arms, as the hope of your triumphs. For
considering, as we do, with much grief, the impiety of Heretics, living in
some places without fear or danger, we now thank the Lord of hosts, that has
in so fit an opportunity made your Majesty to maintain with Arms the dignity
of the Catholic Religion. Oh fair Apprentiship of Royal Warfare, and worthy of
a most Christian King! What an admirable thing it is, that the age which other
Princes, out of a kind of softness and idleness, use to pass away in sports
and delights, your Majesty should employ so generously, so fortunately, in
appeasing differen^es, conducting Armies, and besieging the strongest places of
Heretics, and all not without the special counsel of God, by which Kings
reign! Is it almost credible, that the very first steps of your thoughts should
carry you in so high and troublesome an enterprise; and that the dangers and
difficulties which have stopped others in their course, should only serve for a
spur to the greatness of your courage? Enjoy (dear Son) the Renown your name
has got, and follow the God that fights for you; to the end that as you are
now held the Thunderbolt and Buckler of War, so you may hereafter be esteemed
the praise of Israel, and the glory of the world. From the height of our
Apostolic Dignity, whereto if has pleased God of his goodness to raise us,
unworthy of so great grace, we assist your Arms with heart and affection, and
by our frequent prayers prepare the divine remedies, And though we doubt not
but your own virtue will make you constant in the work you have begun,
nevertheless we have thought good to add Exhortations, that the world may see
the care we have of the advancement of true Religion, and how willing we are to
give way to your glory. You have been hitherto infinitely, bound to God for his
bounty toward you; and, as we hope and wish, you shall hereafter a great deal
more. For you having your mind endued with celestial doctrine, and not with
the bare precepts of humane wisdom, do well know, that Kingdoms have their
foundation upon the truth of Orthodox faith: and unless God keep the City, what
principality can subsist with any assurance? It may easily be judged with what
fidelity they are likely to defend your Royal Throne, that have cast the very
Saints themselves out of their Temples, and done as much as in them lay to put
them out of the number of the blessed, yea out of Paradise it self, that with
impious temerity condemn the Institutions of our Fathers, the Custom of Kings,
the Decrees of Popes, and the Ceremonies of the Church. These are the
disturbers of the Christian Commonwealth, and the reproaches of France, whom
the great God has reserved, to be exterminated, as it were, in the beginning
of your Reign. Know then, that all Europe (which the event of your Arms holds
all this time in suspense) hopes shortly it will hoyse sail upon the Ocean
under the conduct of your Greatness and Power, and go to the place which serves
now for Sanctuary and protection to the Heretics and Rebels, and it will
shortly serve for a Trophie of your Victories. We are confidently persuaded,
that neither fear nor inconstancy shall ever be able to divert you from the
pursuit of your so glorious enterprise, nor hinder you to subvert that
unsanctified people: Only, by the way, we would have you remember, that the
Saints in heaven assist that Prince who takes upon him the defense of Religion,
and fight on his side like fellow soldiers. The same God that hardened the
waters like dry land, and turned the waters of the Sea into walls, to give safe
passage to his childrens Army, will certainly in this most pious action be as
favorable to you: and then we shall have good cause to hope, that having
established your own Kingdom, and crushed the impiety that was and yet is there,
you may one day, by the progress of your victorious Arms, join the Orient to
the Occident; imitating the glories of your Ancestors, who have ever born as
much respect to the Exhortations of Popes, as to the commandment of God. St.
Lewis, whose name you bear, and whose steps you follow, invites you to it: so
did the first of your Race, who in defending the Apostolic authority, and
propagating Christian Religion, laid the best and surest foundation to your
Royal House. Follow (dear Son) which are the ornaments of the world, the
commandments of heaven: pour out your wrath and indignation upon those people
that have not, nor will not know God, and our Apostolic benignity; to the end
the divine treasure of heaven may belong unto you by a just acquisition. In the
mean time, we send you most affectionately our Apostolic benediction.

Given at Rome at great St. Mary's, under the Seal of the Fisher, the 4 day of
August 1629. being the seventh year of our Pontificate.
The Duke of Buckingham, Chancellor elect, to the University of Cambridge, June
5. 1626.
MR. Vice Chancellor, and Gentlemen of the University of Cambridge,
there is no one thing that concerns me more near, then the good opinion of
good and learned honest men; amongst which number as you have ever held the
first rank in the estimation of the Commonwealth, and fame of the Christian
world; so in conferring of this Honor of Chancellorship upon me, I must
confess you have satisfied a great ambition of mine own, which I hope will
never forsake me, and that is, To be thought well of, by men that deserve well,
and men of your profession. Yet I cannot attribute this Honor to any desert in
me, but to the respect you bear to the sacred memory of my Master deceased, the
King of Scholars, who loved you, and honored you often with his presence; and
to my gracious Master now living, who inherits with his blessed Fathers
virtues, the affection he bore your University. I beseech you, as you have now
made your choice with so many kind and noble circumstances, as the manner is
to me acceptable and grateful as the matter; so to assure your selves, that you
have cast your votes upon your servant, who is as apprehensive of the time you
have showed your affection in, as of the Honor you have given him. And I
earnestly request you all, that you would be pleased not to judge me
comparatively by the success and happiness you have had in your former choice
of Chancellors, who as they knew better, perhaps by advantage of education in
your University, how to value the deserts of men of your qualities and degrees;
so could they not be more willing to cherish you then my self, who will make
amends for want of Scholarship, in my love to the professors of it, and unto
the Source from whence it comes: having now most just cause more chiefly to
employ my uttermost endeavors, with what favor I enjoy from a Royal Master,
to the maintaining of the Charters, Privileges, and Immunities of your
University in general, and to the advancing of the particular merits of the
Students therein. And since I am so far engaged unto you, I will presume upon a
further courtesy, which is, That you will be pleased to supply me with your
advice, and suggest away unto me (as my self likewise shall not fail to think
on some means) how we may make Posterity remember you have a thankful
Chancellor, and one that both really loved you and your University. Which is a
resolution writ in an honest heart, by him that wants much to express his
affection to you; who will ever be

York-house, 5 Junii, 1626. Your faithful friend, and humble servant, Geor.
Buckingham.

King Charles to the University of Cambridge, in approbation of the Election.
June 6. 1626.
TRusty and Welbeloved, We greet you well.
Whereas upon Our Pleasure intimated unto you by the Bishop of Durham for the
choice of your Chancellor, you have with such duty as We expected highly
satisfied Us in your election, We cannot in Our Princely nature (who are much
possessed with this testimony of your ready and loyal affections) but for ever
to let you know, how much you are therein made partakers of Our Royal
approbation: and as We shall ever conceive, that an Honor done to a person We
favor, is out of a loyal respect had unto Our Self: and as we shall ever
justify Buckingham worthy of this your Election, so shall you find the fruits
of it: for We have found him a faithful servant to our dear Father of blessed
memory; and Our Self cannot but undertake that he will prove such a one unto
you; and will assist him with a gracious willingness, in any thing that may
concern the good of the University in general, or the particular merits of any
Students there.

Given under Our Signet at Our Palace of Westminter, the sixth of June, in the
second year of Our Reign.
The University of Cambridge Answer to the Duke, June 6. 1626.
Illustissime Princeps, atq: auspicatissime Cancellarie,
NEptunum perhibent gratum cum Minerva iniisse certamen, utere remagis
mortalium conferret donumtille potens maris Deus ill^^o effudit equum, Ill^
pacis and musarum numen, suppeditavit o^eam; utrumque certe Deo dignum munus.
Adeo nostrum non est tantam litem dirimere, quin facessat potius litis
importuna vox, ubi non alia quam Amoris propinantur pignora. Perinde tecum se
res habet, excellentissime Dux, quemjam olim potentissimus Oceani Britannici
Neptunus, non solum suprema Maris, Praefectura cohonestavit, sed and Praetorio
donavit Equo: adeo ut illius munere and propria virtute, unus audias, Terrae
Marique summus Dictator, ut sic dicamus Classis, and Magister Equitum. Post
tanta honorum vestigia, ecce, nostra Minerva tua jam Cantabrigia supplex suas
obtendit oleas, tanquam inter victri^es lauros lambentes hederas; oleas quidem
quibus and tuis rebus, and rebus tum publicis tum Literariis precatur simul and
auspicatur pacem. Nec ad usque sumus gens togata impotenter su^erbi, ut hoc
Cancellariatu arbitremur, Nos tantillos tibi in id Mer^torum and Gratiae culmen
evecto, quicquam vel testimonii ad aestimationem, vel tituli ad gloriam
contulisse. Quod autem ipse aliter opinaris vestra illa pietas est, haud
ambitio, major tua tum virtus tum decus est, quam ut eis aut nostra a quidpiam
suffragia addere, aut aliorum possit Invidia detrahere: stella in primo orb,
quas fixas vocant, altiores sunt, quam ut ad eas valea^ terrarum umbra
pertingere, quanquam foelicissimae memoriae Jacobo pientissimoque Carolo non
est, quod hoc quicquid est nominis te debere dicas, citra est, misellum munus
Academicum, citra est quam ut tantos auctores mereatur, quin vestram potius
celsitudinem, vestrum tutelare numen, Nos illis Principibus imputabimus, qui
inde ex illius potissimum voto te elegimus, unde non misi immortalia accipere
beneficia solebamus. Quod si nostrum hoc in vestram Excellentiam studium tibi
ipsa uti scribis commendat tempestivitas, nos illud saltem debituri sumus
temporibus caeterum non nimis foelicibus, quod tibi vel inde gratiores sumus;
quanquam suspicamur, ut hoc totum quod de oportunitate insinuas merum sit, nec
magnis ingeniis insolens been de suis cultoribus merendi artificium, quae eo
consilio singula suorum officia maxim tempestive autumant, quo uberius sibi
remunerandi argumentum au^upentur: nam faciles credimus honorificis quibus nos
dignaris promissis, J^mdiu est, ex quo to animo atque opera Cancellarium
sensimus, nihilque tibi hoc tempore nostra potuere suffragia quam nomen
adjicere. Nolis tamen ut cum illustrissmis heroibus praecessoribus tuis, te
committamus, in quo sane tua praedicanda modestia illorum honori and memoriae
consuluit, ne tanti fulgoris claritudine offuscentur, ut enim nulla re magis se
jactat Cantabrigia quam praeteritorum gloria ac splendore Patronorum; hodie
tamen, nescio quid solito augustius spirat, and tuis superba auspiciis quasi
Buckinghamiensis aucta tutelis, magnaque spe gravida intumescit. Ad extremum
nos ad concilium vocas, qua potissimum ratione quo digno monumento tuo, in nos
amoris memoriam posteritati cosecres, verum enim vero (Illustrissime Dux,
indulgentissimeque Cancellarie) major est ea provincia, quam ut nos eam
subeundo simus, quod tuo amori par sit monumentum, tuum potest solummodo
excogitare ingenium. Nos interea alia manebit cura quibus nimirum apud Deum
precibus quibus studiorum vigiliis officiorum obsequiis tantae Clientelae
foelicitatem nobis propriam and perpetuam despondeamus,

Datae frequentissimo Senatu nostro, sexto Idus Junii, 1626. Vestrae
Excellentiae humillimi devotissimique Clientes Servique, Procancellarius, and
reliquus Senatus Cantabrigiensis.

The University of Cambridge Answer to the King.
Serenissimo invictissimoque Principi ac Domino nostro, CAROLO Dei gratiae,
Magnae Britanniae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regi, Fidei Defens. etc.
SErenissime Domine noster invictissime Carole,
multum nos fortunae nostrae, sed tuae clementiae infinitum quantum debemus,
satis nempe erat judicio nostro satisfecisse cum illum nobis praeficeremus,
quem unum certissime praefici posse constabat. At tua admirabilis bonitas non
patitur nos gratis nobismetipsis benefacere, sed tibi imputari vis quod nobis
fecimus beneficium. Enimvero arduam aliquam sibi materiam obsequium nostrum
poscebat, and cujus tenuitas sublimitatem vestram assequi non posset,
difficultatem -- se, and molestia commendaret. Tu autem a te gratiam -- quod
tanti Patroni beneficio usi sumus, qui ita nos amat, ut plurimum velit, ita ate
amatur, ut plurimum nostra causa posset per quem vestra in nos transeat
benignitas, and difficultates nostras dis^utiat: si quae tamen in hac divina
bonitate tua existere possit difficultas superasti, nempe majorum titorum
Clementiam, qui and easdem nobis immunitates indulges, and id etiam prospicis,
ut iis rectissimo utamur. Et quod unum tantae foelicitati reliquum erat ut
esset perpetua, id ipsum precibus nostris superesse non finis; praecurris eram
vota nostra, and spem ipsam, qua nihil est importunius, exuperas: nam and ipsa
fines suos habet, quos tuae bonitati nullos esse experti sumus. Exhausisti
votorum nostrorum materiam, Serenissime Regum, nec quicquam nobis deinceps
optandu^ est quam ut tu regnes ut vincas, ut nos in perpetuum simus quod sumus,

Datae frequentissimo Senatu nostro, sexto Idus Junii, 1626. Excellentissime
Majestatis vestrae humillimi servi and subditi, Procancellarius, and reliquus
Senatus Academiae Cantabrigiensis.

A Privy Seal for transporting of Horse. June 3. 1624.
CHARLES by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To the Treasurer and under-Treasurer of our Exchequer for the time being,
greeting.
We do hereby will and command you, that out of our Treasure remaining in the
receipt of our said Treasury forthwith to pay, or cause to be paid unto Philip
Burlamack of Lond' Merchant, the sum of 30000 l. to be by him paid over to the
Low Countries by Bill of Exchange, and Germany, unto Our Trusty and Welbelove
Sir William Belfour Knight, and John Dabler Esquire or either of them, for levying
and providing a certain number of Horse, with Arms for Foot and Horse to be
brought over into this Kingdom for our Service; viz. for the levying and
transporting of 1000 Horse, 15000 l. for 5000 Muskets, 5000 Corslets, 5000
Pikes, 10500 l. for 1000 Curasiers complete, 200 Corslets and 200 Carbines,
4500 l. amounting in the whole to the said sum of 30000 l. And this Our Letter
shall be your sufficient warrant and discharge in this behalf.

Given under Our Privy Seal at Our Palace of Westm' the 30 of Januar' in the
third year of Our Reign, Anno Dom. 1627.
The University of Cambridge to the Duke.
Illustrissime Princeps,
QUam paterno cum affectu, quam divina cum charitate vestrae hujus Academiae
salu^em utilitatemque vestra Celsitudo semper procuraverit, nec nos effari
possumus, nec aetas ulla contacere.

Ingentia beneficia seculum praesens admiratione obruunt; nec alio queunt quam
perennis famae and immortalitatis praemio compensari. Vestrae Celsitudinis
singulari patrocini^, de Typographis Londinensibus triumphavimus. Hostium
undequaque ferociam persensimus imminutam, auctamque Academiae dignitatem:
Nihil nos votis expetiscere, nihil vestra Celsitudo confer potuit, quod a
vestra benignitate non acceperimu^. Et quid nos praeter hanc sterilem culius
nostri messem rependimus? At beneficia vestra, quam sancte posteritas alet,
quibus praeconiis, quam aeternis laudibus vestrae Celsitudinis memoriam nepotes
nostri celebrabunt, facile conjiciet is qui norit quantum Academia tranquille
administrata, vindicata privilegia, immunitates conservatae, otium, libertas,
ipsa vita Musis do^ata, promereantur! Quot hosts Reipublicae Literariae
infensos vestra Celsitudo profligavit, quot in nos munera contulerit, nec illi
sine gemitu agnoscere, nec nos sine stupore recitare valeamus. Dum te licet
conspicari, dum tua genua prehendere, flo^ci faciamus mortalium iras, and in
recessibus nostris abditi tuto literis indulgeamus.

Jam vestra Celsitudo novam parat Militiam (quam vestro nomini gloriosam,
Religioni Christianae faustam, nobis omnibus foelicem, omnipotens Deus faxit)
quibus nos periculis exponimur? Alii flumen nostrum siccare, eumque ablatum a
quo forsan ipsi aquas olim ingrati hauserunt: alii nobis Imprimendi faculatem
rursus adimere conabuntur. Illustrissime Princeps, pauca sunt nostra bona,
suppellex curta, angusta Athenarum pomoeria: nullae tamen opes Croesi vel Midae
perditorum hominum insidiis petuntur atrocius, quam inermis and nuda paupertas
nostra. Videt vestra Celsitudo quam in ipsa fiduciam collocamus, qui tempestas
priusquam ingruit, ad vestras aras confugimus. Et quamvis haud ignari sumus
quanta moles vestrae Celsitudinis humeros jam premat, audacter tamentot curaru^
montibus nostrum Parnassum superaddimus. Perficiat vestra Celsitudo hanc suam
Academiam, ut incipit: storentem orne^, trepidantem excitet, depressam
sustentet, periclitantem expediat; quae Deum perpetuo implorat, ut omnia tua
gloriosa molimina vestra Celsitudo consequatur, and illa ves^rae Celsitudinis
patrocinio fruatur in aeternum.

Dat' e frequenti Senatu nostro, Nonas Julii, 1628. Celsitudinis vestrae
devinctissimi, Procancellarius, reliquusque Senatus Academiae vestrae
Cantabrigiensis.

The Dukes Answer.
Gentlemen, SUch and so cordial have your respects been unto me, that no other
Pen then your own can express them, nor no other heart then mine can apprehend
them: and therefore I labor not any verbal satisfaction, but shall desire you
to believe, that what service soever you please to think I have hitherto done
for you, I cannot so much as call an expression of that I would willingly do
for you. And whereas in your Letters you seem to fear that my absence may be an
advantage of time to make your adversaries active and stirring against you, and
your affairs consequently meet with partiality and opposition; I have therefore
most humbly recommended them to the Justice of my Royal Master, and to the
bosoms of some friends, where they shall likewise meet with mediation and
protection, to what part of the world soever my Master or the States service
shall call me. I can carry but one Chancellor of your University along with me,
but I hope I shall leave you many behind me. And I shall presage likely of the
success of our actions, since they are all so followed by your wishes and
devotions; which I shall endeavor you may always continue unto Chelsey,

30 July, 1628. Your most affectionate friend, and humble servant, BUCKINGHAM.

Directed, To my very worthy and much-respected friends, The Vicechancellor and
Senate of the University of Cambridge.
The Vicechancellor of Cambridge to the King, upon the Dukes death.
Dread Sovereign, THe fatal blow given your most loyal servant, whom your
Majesty made our Patron and Chancellor, has so stounded our University, as
(like a Body without a Soul) she stirs not, till your Majesty's directions
breathe life again, in the choice of another. And although I am but one of
many, and therefore (having to do with a multitude) cannot absolutely assure
the effecting of your pleasure; yet I dare undertake for my self, with the rest
of the Heads, and many others, truly and faithfully to labor in your
Majesty's desires, and now presume to send fair and strong hopes to give them
full satisfaction: Humbly entreating the continuance of your Majesty's love and
care of your University; the only stay and comfort of this her sad and
mournful estate, occasioned by such an unexpressible disaster; cherishing her
self with that blessed word your Majesty used upon her last Election, That
howsoever your Majesty's appointment shadowed out another, yet your Self in
substance would be her Chancellor. This, as an indelible Character in her
memory, shall ever return, as all thankful observance, so to God prayers full
of cordial zeal, for your Majesty's long and happy Reign.

King Charles to the University of Cambridge, for a new Election.
RIght Trusty and Welbeloved, We greet you well.
As We took in gracious part your due respect in electing heretofore for your
Chancellor a man who for his parts and faithful service was most dear unto Us:
so now We are well pleased to understand, that you are sensible of your own and
the common loss, by the bloody assassinate of so eminent a person, and that you
desire and expect for your comfort an intimation from Us of a capable subject
to suc^eed in his room. This expression on your part, has begotten in Us a
Royal affection toward you, and more care for your good; out of which, We
commend unto free election of you the Vicechancellor and Heads, and of the
Masters Regents and Non-Regents (according to Our ancient Custom) Our Right
Trusty and Right Welbeloved Cousin and Counselor, Henry Earl of Holland,
lately a member of your own Body, and well known unto you all: whose hearty
affection to advance Religion and Learning generally in Our own Kingdoms, and
especially in the Fountains, cannot be doubted of. Not that We shall cease to
be your Chancellor in effect, according to Our promise; but the rather for your
advantage, We advise you to the choice, that you may have a person acceptable
unto Us, and daily attending on Our person, to be Our Remembrancer and
Solicitor for you upon all occasions. And your general concurring herein,
shall be to Us a pledge of Our affections, which We are willing to cherish.

Given at Our Court the 28 of August, in the fourth year of Our Reign. CAROLUS
Rex.

The Earl of Holland to the University.
Mr. Vicechancellor and Gentlemen, the Senate of the University of Cambridge,
THe condition of man is so frail, and his time so short here, that in the sum
of his account there are few accidents can deliver him worthy to posterity: yet
to prevent my destiny in this defect, you have made my name to live, by your
general and free election of me to be your Chancellor; the which will give me
so to the world, not my merit. I take but my beginning by this Creation, and
will endeavor to proceed with such strength, in my serious affection to serve
you all, as you shall see this Honor is not conferred upon an unthankful
person. It is my hap to succeed the most excellent example of the best
Chancellor, who had both will and power to oblige you: for the first, none can
exceed me, that am tied by my education to serve you: for my power, although it
be but short in all other things, yet in what concerns you, my Master, whose
word you have, and whose thanks you will receive in my behalf, will for his own
sake, if not for mine, accept of all humble requests for you, which may conduce
to the support of every particular good, that can any way advantage your whole
Body, or advance the several members of our University. For whose increase of
fame and honor I do wish, from an affectionate heart, as I profess my self
obliged, being

Your most thankful friend, and humble servant, Henry Holland.

The University of Cambridge to the King.
Serenissimo and Magnificentissimo Principi, CAROLO Dei gratiae, Britanniae;
Regi, etc.
Serenissime and Potentissime Monarcha, Carol^, Defensor Fide^, Pater Patriae:
DUm ad Majestatis tuae pedes discumbimus, veniam humillime deprecamur
temeritatis nostrae, Quod Majestati tuae in illud gloriae fastigium evectae, ad
quod nulli Principes a multis retro seculis provenere, Chartas has ineptas ausi
sumus, and querimonias obtrudere, sed nullum jam in terris effulget Majestate
tua aut illustrius, aut magis beneficum sidus, cujus coelesti aspectu mortales
afflicti ab adversis, ad salutis portum perduci possint. Sensimus nos persaepe,
laesi sensimus vivificam charitatis tuae auram, divinam clementiam amplectimur,
and benignitatem incredibilem sempiternae veneratione adoramu^. Quae enim per
te nobis pax data sit, quae privilegia indulta and confirmata, quae gratia,
candor, misericordia, beneficentia nobis impertita, nec nos effari possumus,
nec ulla fecula conticere. O nos foelicissimos sub tuo Sceptro, Carole! qui
certe miserrimi essemus, si Regio Majestatis tuae Patrocinio ac favore
destitueremur: irruunt in nos omne genus illiteratorum hominum longum haerent
in nostris mallis, and sine magno numine non amoventur. Centum olim annos cum
oppidanis nostris de summa privilegiorum decertavimus, quinquaginta cum
Typographis Londinensibus, adeo crudelis est, ac pertinax malitia, quae literis
bellum indicit; Typographis per tuam in nos pietatem nuper compositis oppidani,
veterem odii Camarinam incipiunt commovere. Ita ab Oppidanis ad Typographos, a
Typographis ad Oppidanos, nostra in gyrum calamitas circumacta volvitur, and
infinitis controversiarum nodis astringimur, and jugulamur. Deflexis genibus
Excellentissimam Majestatem tuam imploramus, ut qua serenitate suam Academiam
semper aspexerit, eadem dignetur huic causae ad dictum a se diem inter^sse. Et
Deum Optim. Max. precabimur, ut te nobis quam diutissime conservet
clementissimum Principem, and Patrem indulgentissimum: In cujus salute, totitus
Regni incolumitas, tranquillitas Literarum, publica seculi foelicitas, and
bonorum omnium vota abunde continontur.

Servi Majestati tuae devoti and fideles subditi, Procanc' and Senat'.

An Order made at Whitehall betwixt the University and Town of Cambridge,
December. 4. 1629.
Lord Keeper. Lo. Archb. of York. Lord Treasurer. Lord President. Lord Privy
Seal. Lord high Chamberlain. Earl Marshal. Lord Steward. Lord Chamberlain. Earl
of Suffolk. Earl of Dorset. Earl of Salisbury. Earl of Bridgewater. Earl of
Holland. Earl of Danby. Earl of Kelly. Lord Visc. Dorchester. Lord Visc.
Grandison. Lord Bish. of Winton. Master of the Wards. Master Chamberlain. Mr.
Secretary Cook.
THis day his Majesty sitting in Council, did hear at large the controversy
between the University of Cambridge and certain Burgers of the Town, concerning
the rating and setting the price of Victualia, and particularly of Candles and
other necessaries compri^ed under the terms of Focalia; and of the consequences
lately fallen out upon the controversy: which having been long debated by
Counsel learned on both sides, his Majesty finally ordered, by advice of the
Board, That as well the late Mayor and Bailiff, and William Bridge, as Edward
Almond, John Ball, Jonas Sco^t, and Thomas Oliver, shall acknowledge and submit
themselves (by setting their hands to this Order in the Councel-book) to the
Jurisdiction and Privileges of the University, as well for the rating and
setting the price of all manner of Victualia, and of Candles, and all other
necessaries under the term of Focalia, as for the correcting and punishing of
all such inhabitants of the Town as shall break and exceed the said rates and
prices so set by the Vicechancellor, or such Officers of the University as are
in that behalf authorized. And it is further ordered, That all the parties
fined by the Vicechancellor, shall pay the Fines, and such charges of the Court
as were set upon them by the Vicechancellor; and shall make public confession,
in the Vicechancellors Court, of their fault, in breaking the said rates and
prices so set, and refusing to pay the fines so assessed upon them, and
questioning the privileges of the University. And as touching the discommuning
of any of the said persons in this Order mentioned, It is ordered, That peace
and agreement shall be settled between the parties, according to the performance
of that respect and submission which is due from the inhabitants of the said
Town of Cambridge to the said University.

Ex. Will. Becher.

The University of Cambridge to the Archbishop of York.
Reverendissimo in Christo Pa^ri, and summo Archi-praesuli, Samueli, Dei
gratia, Archiepiscopo Ebora^ensi, Patrono nostro aeternum colendo.
Reverendissime in Christo Pater, Archi-praesul amplissime,
NIsi perspecta esset Paternitatis tuae in Academiam gratia and favor supra
quam meremur immensius, vereremur sine multis ambagibus, ad tam illustre in
Ecclesia caput accedere; verum ea semper fuit indulgentia tua, and stabil^
nobis patrocinium, ut in difficultatibus nostris ultro fueris magis ad
accurendum alacer, quam nos esse potuimus ad implorandum; temerarii incidimus
in veterem comroversiae lacunam cum nostris Oppidanis. Novit sat Paternitas tua
ab experientia multiplici, quas illi erga nos mentes gerant, quam atra
lolligine and invidiae succo a teneris unguiculis pasti fuerint, neque jam
incipiunt ferocire, nec unquam credimus, desinent homines insulsi, tam
dignitatis nostrae immemores, quam rationis suae, nonnullis eorum commercium
cum nostris interdiximus, dum procacius, quam parerat fasces nostros videbantur
con^emnere, sed grave est, and permolestum quicquid cadit in praecipites
animos, and ira impotentes. Illi tanquam fulmine perculsi ad publica judicium
subsellia, Lymphatice festinant, cum possent consultius forsan in domibus suis
-- Nos autem veriti ne Majestas Reipub. Literariae minueretur, si in fore
publico prostituta Academia de privilegiis, and summa rerum trepidaret, Senatus
Regis tribunali appellavimus. In quo cum jam auspica^ ssime consedisse tuam
Paternitatem, intelligeret Alma Matter, and de honor tua, and sua foelicitate
eximie triumphabat, nunquam oblita virtutis tuae, and magnanimitatis invictae,
qua sol^bas hic toties Vicecancellarius ad immortalem nominis tui laudem
istiusmodi perduelles contundere humillime rogamus Paternitatem tuam, pro suo
summo in nos affectu and pietate, ut quemadmodum semper Academ^am ornare
studuit, ita nunc dignetur eidem periclitanti succurrere.

Pat' tuae devotiss. Procanc' and Senate.

The University of Cambridg to the Earl of Manchester.
Illustrissimo, nobilissimo, nostroque amantissimo Domino, Commit Manchestriae
Privati Sigilli Custodi, Regiae Majestati a Sanctioribus Consiliis, Patrono
nostro plurimum colendo.
HOnoratissime nostrumque amantissime Domine Montacute,
Nescimus an ipsi nobis vana credulitate blandiamur, sed cum singula tua pro
nobis gesta perpendimus, fruimur hac opinione, vix quenquam vivere. qui nostram
salutem, literarum incrementum, tranquillitatem Academiae magis ex animo velit
quam nobilissimus Montacutus; tot indies apparent indubitata testimonia amoris
tui erga nos integrerrimi et profusissimae benevolentiae. Quid dicemus de
Typographis, quos tandem aliquando post varios casus et tot discrimina
subegimus, quamvis nodum controversiae Gordianum consuerant non nisi Alexandri
gladio explicabilem, et tanquam sepia piscis longa perplexae litis caligine
capita involverant ne caperentur. Ac haec ultima sententia vestra momento
beneficii favoris magnitudine, celeritate conficiendi trajecit, quicquid ulla
spes nobis dictare potuit, aut suggerere, sententia celebris, sancta
memorabilis ad opprimendam in perpetuam morosam oppidanorum insolentiam;
sententia quam quo penitus contemplamur, eo magis sub stupore bonitatis
vestrae, et admirationis onere laboramus.

Noli (nec enim fas est) metiri observantiae nostae rationem, ex nostro
scribendi modulo. Majora de te sentimus quam verba nostra expedire valent,
multo minus rependere. Illud nostrum erga te tantum est et tam firmum, ut nulla
novae opportunitatis accessione angere queat, aut temporum injuria diminui.

Honori tuo aeternum obligati Procanc' and Senatus reliquus Academiae.

The University of Cambridg to Sir Humphrey May.
Clarissimo and spectatissimo Domino Humphredo May Equiti Aurato, and Regiae
Majestatis Procamerario, amico and fautori nostro aeternum observando.
AETernas agimus tibi gratias, Clarissime Domine Procamerarie, quod favore tam
subito, tam propensa and inclinata benevolenta ad nostram causam ultro
accesseris: subiit forsan and pupugit (clarissime Domine) conditionis nostrae
pia commiseratio cum videret Musas litibus implicatas circa. Tribunalia
tremere, quas aequius ^rat inter lauros and virgulta pacifica in veritatis
disquisitione occupari. Verum est, and in hac atate improba sic vivimus, ut
frequenter deposita toga and calamo, pallia and Clientum soccos induere
cogamur: Maxim vero nos ad incommoda pellunt opidani nostri, qui hoc a natura
principium mordicus tenent, and nullo dimittunt fato, turbare semper pacem
literarum, et bonis Academiae quovis modo insidiari. O quam magna merces est
prudentia, et sobria men's, aequa in utriusque sortis importunitate! sunt quos
ipsum foelicitatis taedium fatigat ad mortem, and dira contentionis ambitio
fanatico quodam aestro impellit ad suam perniciem. Post triginta annos
simulatae pacis, and induciarum oppidulani nostri quietis impatientia, and
invidiae aculeis acti, nuper tentare voluerunt quantum possent calcibus contra
spinas, aut contra Solemn jaculis; at praeter poenitentiam ac suspiria nihil
domum reportarunt; Ita Musas in aeternum sibi devinxit Senatus ille tremendus
and gloriosus, in quo majores dii gentis nostrae sedent. Tu in illa scena
splendida Regae Majestati adstare maluisti, quam tuam inter divos reliquos
classem retinere, ut nostro momento inservires, and illud pectus sacrum
proprius attingeres, in quo omnes gratiae nidificant, and nostra beatitudo
reconditur. Magna sunt haec amoris tui testimonia, nolis vero messem sementi
parent a nobis expectare; Musae non sunt solvendo. Et tamen, si preces, vota,
lauds, encomia pro nobis sufficere possint, Nihil nos tuis meritis debituros
confidenter promittimus.

Dignitati tuae devinctiss. Procanc' and Senat' vel Academ. Cantabrigiens.

Instructions by King Charles, to the Vice Chancellor and Heads of Cambridge
for Government, etc. March 4. 1629.
CHARLES REX.

FIrst, that all those directions and orders of our Father of ^blessed memory,
which at any time were sent to our said University, be duly observed and put in
execution.

2. Whereas we have been informed that of late years many Students of that our
University, not regarding their own birth, degree, and quality, have made
diverse contracts of marriage with women of mean estate, and of no good fame in
that Town, to their great disparagement, the discontent of their parents and
friends, and the dishonor of the Government of that our University; we will,
and command you, that at all times hereafter, if any Taverner, Inholder, or
Victualer, or any other inhabitant of the Town, or within the Jurisdiction of
the University, shall keep any daughter or other woman in his house to whom
there shall resort any Scholars of that University, of what condition so ever,
to mispend their time, or otherwise to misbehave themselves in marriage without
the consent of those that have the Gardiance and tuition of them, that upon
notice thereof, you do presently convent the said Scholars or Scholar, and the
said woman or women thus suspected, before you, and upon due examination, if
you find cause therefore, that you command the said woman or women, according
to the form of your Charter against women, de malo suspectas, to remove out of
the University, and four miles of the same: And if any refuse presently to
obey your commands, and to be ordered by you herein, that you then bind them
over with sureties to appear before the Lords of our Privy Counsel, to answer
their contempt, and such matters as shall be objected against them. And if any
refuse presently to obey, to imprison them til they either remove or put in
such bonds with sureties.

3. That you be careful that all the statutes of our University be duly
executed, especially those de vestitu Scholarium, et de modestia et morum
urbanitate. And whereas we are informed, that Batchelors of Law. Physic, and
Matters of Arts, and others of higher degree, pretend they are not subject to
your censure, if they resort to such houses and places as are mentioned in the
said statutes, to eat, drink, play, or take Tobacco, to the mispending of their
time, and corrupting of others by their ill example, and to the scandalizing of
the government of our said University: Our will and pleasure is by these
presents, that you do also command them and every of them, to forbear coming
to any such houses, otherwise, or at other times, then by the said statute
others of inferior order and degree* are allowed to do, any statute or
concession whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding. And if any refuse to
obey you herein, that you proceed against them as contumacious; and if there be
cause, that you also signify their names to us, or the Lords of our privy
Counsel.

4. That you do severely punish all such of your body, of what degree or
condition soever, as shall contemn their superiors, or misbehave themselves
either in word or deed toward the Vice Chancellor or Proctors, or any other
officers of our University, especially in the executing of their office.

5. Lastly we will and command that a Copy of these our directions be delivered
to the Master of every College, and that he cause the same to be published to
those of his College, and then to be Registered in the Registers of their
Colleges, and duly observed and kept by all persons whom they concern.

Examinatur, et concordat cum Originali. Ita attestor Jacobus Fabor
Registrarius.

The University of Cambridg to the Lord Chief Justice Richardson.
Honoratissimo Domino Thomae Richardson Commmunium Placitorum Proto
Justiciario, and Proedro amico Academiae, and Patrono singulari.
AMplissime et honoratissime Domine, superiori et Termino et Ann^ te nostris
literis and negotiis graviter defatigavimus, and nunc novas afferre molestias
neutiquam dubitamus; sed tu pro candore quo polles maximo hanc nostram
morositatem benign interpretare, and da veniam in^patienti nostrae occasioni
ad Sacerdotium Hallingburii, quod de cujusdam papicolae* lapsu in manus nostras
ex diplomate serenissimi Regis Jacobi nobis iudulto, et per Senatum Regni
solennem confirmato venit. Hunc Magistrum Love Collegii divi Petri promovimus,
virum fide, doctrina, integritate, sanctimonia praeclarum, qui Procuratoris
Officium, magistratum apud nos amplissimum, insigniter administravit, et non
sine magna laud fasces ante biennium deposuit, unde liquido constet
dominationi tuae, quibus opulentiis abundat Alma matter, cum virum consularem,
et de republica nostra tam been meritum, tali sacerdotiolo auctum and
remuneratum dimittimus. Vtinam tamen vel tantillum hoc quod est beneficii
homini nestro placide concederent mortales Dii, et se precibus ad
aequanimitatem flicli paterentur. Enim vero nescimus quomalo fato nostro id
comparatum sit, et inter sacrum and sacrum semper haereamus, quemadmodum in
proverbio est, Inter sacrum quod ambimus, et hominum praecordia saxo duri^ra,
nihil nos sine controversia impetrare possumus; sed cogimur virtute nostra nos
involvere, and probam pauperiem sine dote quaerere, cum Poeta Horatio; nam in
tanta dominorum et captatorum turba, difficile est ad omnes articulos sic
excubare, ut qui modeste prensat in lutum non detrudatur; et certe usque adeo
praeclusus est industriae nostrae ad eadem honoris et emolumenti aditus, at
multi repudia literis in aeternum renunciare mallent, quam post tot laboribus,
consumptam juventutem et senectam studiis immature acceleratam, vanae spei
cassa nuce ludificari; cum non solum sua nobis negare beneficia, sed et nostra
abripere terrarum Domini slagitiose contendant. Quid ad te haec verba spectant,
facile conjicias: Nos te Patronum appellamus, quem adversarii nostri Judicem;
et per omnia patrocinia tua nobis ante hac gnaviter concessa, ut huic Alumno
nostro jus suum et Academiae dignitatem, sarctam tectam, authoritate tua
conservare velis: et cum tua merita non alia re consequi valeamu^, quam debiti
agnitione cui sumus impares, memorisque animi grata t^stificatione, utramque
tibi sempiternam religiose pollicemur.

Dat' e frequenti Senatu nostro, pridie Galend. Maii, 1630. Honoris tui
Clientes assidui Procancel' et Senatus integer Academ' Cantabrig.

Bishop of Excester to the lower House of Parliament.
Gentlemen,
FOR Gods sake be wise in your well meant zeal: why do we argue away precious
time, that can never be revoked, or repaired? Woe is me, whilst we dispute, our
friends perish, and we must follow them. Where are we if we break? (and I
tremble to think it) we cannot but break if we hold too stiff. Our Liberties
and properties are sufficiently declared to be sure and legal; our remedies are
clear and irrefragable; what do we fear? Every subject now sees the way
chalked out before him for future Justice, and who dares henceforth tread
besides it? certainly whilst Parliaments live we need not misdoubt the like
violation of our freedoms and rights; may we be but where the loanes found
us, we shall sufficiently enjoy our selves, and ours; It is now no season to
reach for more. O let us not whilst we over rigidly plead for a higher strain
of safety, put our selves into a necessity of ruin, and utter despair of
redress; let us not in a suspicion of evil that may be, cast our selves into a
present confusion: if you love your selves, and your Country, remit something
of your own Terms; and since the substance is yielded by your noble
compatriots, stand not too curiously upon points of circumstance: fear not to
trust a good King, who after the strictest Law made must be trusted with the
execution: think that your Country, yea Christendom lies in the mercy of your
present resolution, relent or farewell. Farewell from him whose faithful heart
bleeds in a vowed sacrifice for his King and Country.

King Charles to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal.
WE being desirous of nothing more then the advancing of the good peace and
prosperity of our people, have given leave to free debates of higest point of
our prerogative Royal, which in the times of our Predecessors, Kings and Queens
of this Realm, were ever restrained as matter they would not have disputed; and
in other things we have been willing so far to descend to the desires of our
good subjects, as might fully satisfy all moderate minds, and free them from
all just fears and jealousies, which those messages we have sent unto the
Commons House will well demonstrate to the world; and yet we find it still
insisted on, That in no case whatsoever, should it never so nearly concern
matters of State and Government, we or our privy Counsel have power to commit
any man without the cause be showed. The service it self would be thereby
destroyed and deseated; and the cause it self must be such as may be
determined by our Judges of our causes at Westminster, in a legal and ordinary
way of Justice; whereas the cause may be such, as these Judges have not
capacity of Judicature, nor rules of Law, to direct and guide their Judgments
in cases of transcedent nature, which happening so often, the very intermitting
of the constant rules of Government for so many ages within this Kingdom
practiced, would soon dissolve the very frame and foundation of our Monarchy;
wherefore as to our Commons we made fair proposition, which might equally
preserve the just liberties of the subject: So my Lords, we have thought good
to let you know, that without the overthrow of our sovereignty, we cannot
suffer this power to be impeached; yet notwithstanding, to clear our conscience
and intentions, this we publish, that it is not in our heart or will, ever to
extend our Royal power (sent unto us from God) beyond the just rule of
moderationin, any thing which shall be contrary to our Laws and Customs,
wherein the safety of our people shall be our only aim. And we do hereby
declare our Royal pleasure and resolution to be, which (God willing) we will
ever constantly continue and mantaine, that neither we nor our Privy Counsel
shall, or will at any time hereafter commit or command to prison, or otherwise
restrain the person of any for not lending money unto us, or for any other
cause which in our conscience, does concern the public good, and safety of us
and our people; we will not be drawn to pretend any cause which in our
conscience is not, or is not expressed, which base thought we hope no man can
imagine, can fall into our Royal breast: and that in all causes of this nature
which shall hereafter happen, we shall upon the humble Petition of the party,
or address of our Judges unto us, readily and really express the true cause
of their Commitment or restraint, so soon as with convenience or safety the
same is fit to be disclosed and expressed; and that in all causes Criminal of
ordinary Jurisdiction, our Judges shall proceed to the deliverance and
bailment of the Prisoner, according to the known and ordinary rules of the
Laws of this Land; and according to the Statute of Magna charta, and those
other six statutes insisted on, which we do take knowledge stand in full force,
and which we intend not to weaken, or abrogate against the true intent thereof.

This we have thought fit to signify unto you, the rather for the shortning of
any long debate upon this question, the season of the year being so far
advanced; and our great occasions of State, not lending as many days of long
continuance of this Session of Parliament.

Given under our signet, at our Palace at Westminster, the twelfth day of May
in the Fourth Year of our Reign. CAROLUS REX.

A Counsel Table Order against hearing Mass at Ambassadors houses. March 10.
1629
At White Hall the tenth of March. 1619.
PRESENT.
Lord Keeper. Lord Treasurer. Lord President. Lord Privy Seal. Lord Steward.
Lord Chamberlain. Earl of Suffolk. Earl of Dorset. Earl of Salisbury. Lord
Wimbleton. Lord Viscount Dorchester. Lord Viscount Wentworth. Lord Viscount
Grandison. Lord Viscount Fraulkland. Lord Savile. Lord Newbergh. Mr. Vice
Chamberlain. Mr. Secretary Cook.
AT this Sitting the Lord Viscount Dorchester declared, that his Majesty being
informed of the bold and open repair made to several places, and specially to
the houses of foreign Ambassadors, for the hearing of Mass, which the Laws
and Statutes of this Kingdom do expressly forbid his Subjects to frequent: and
considering in his Princely wisdom, both the public Scandals, and dangerous
consequence thereof, is resolved to take present order for the stopping of this
evil before it spread it self any further, and for this purpose had commanded
him to acquaint the Board with his pleasure in that behalf, and what course he
thinks fit to be held therein; and withal to demand the opinion and advice of
their Lordships concerning the same, his Majesty being desirous to use the best
and most effectual expedient that can be found. Hereupon his Lordship
proceeding, did further declare, that his Majesty (to show the clearness and
earnestness of his intention herein) has begun at his own house, viz.
Wheresoever the Queens Majesty has any Chapel being intended for the only
service of her, and for those French who attend her; for which the Earl of
Dorset, Lord Chamberlain to her Majesty, has been commanded to take special
care; according to such directions as he has received from his Majesty. That
for so much as concerns the repair to the houses of Foreign Ambassadors at
the time of Mass, his Majesty thinks fit that some messengers of the Chamber,
or other officers or persons fit for that service, shall be appointed to watch
all the several passages to their houses, and without entering into the said
houses, or infringing the freedoms and privileges belonging unto them, observe
such persons as go thither, but at their coming from thence, they are to
apprehend them and bring them to the Board; and such as they cannot apprehend,
to bring their names. But to the end that the said Foreign Ambassadors may
have no cause to complain of this proceeding; as if there were any intention
to wrong or disrespect them, his Majesty does likewise think fit, that for the
preventing of any such mistaking and sinister Interpretation, the said
Ambassadors shall be acquainted with the truth of this business; and likewise
assured in his Majesty's name, that he is, and will be as careful to conserve
all privileges and rights belonging to the quality of their places, as any of
his Progenitors have been, and in the same manner as himself expects that
their Princes shall use to wards his Ambassadors.

Lastly, That it is his Majesty's express pleasure that the like diligence be
used for the apprehending of all such as repair to Mass in prisons or other
places.

The Board having heard this declaration, did unanimously conclude, that there
could sot be taken a more effectual course for the preventing of these evils,
then this which his Majesty in his wisdom has set down, and therefore did
order that the same be immediately put in strict and careful execution. And it
was likewise thought fit, that the Lord Viscount Dorchester, and Mr. Secretary
Cook, should be sent to the foreign Ambassadors severally, to acquaint them
with his Majesty's intention, as is before mentioned; and that the messengers
of the Chamber to be employed in the service before specified shall be
appointed and receive their charge from the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Lord Bishop of London, and the Secretaries, who are to take a special care to
see this put in execution.

King of Spain to Pope Urban. Sept. 21. 1619.
MOst Holy Father,
I condescended that my forces should be employed in the execution of
Mountferrat, to divert the introduction of strangers into Italy, with so
evident danger of Religion: I suffered the siege of Cassal to run on so slowly,
to give time that by way of negotiation those differences might be composed
with the reciprocal satisfaction of the parties interessed; and to show in
effect, what little reason all Italy had to be jealous of the Arms of my Crown,
for having possessed many places of importance; some I have freely given away,
and others after I had defended them in a time the owners had need, I presently
restored with much liberality. Upon this moderation the Duke of Nivers, being
hardened against the Emperor my Uncle, and he perhaps and other Princes calling
thither the most Christian King, who not contenting himself to have attained
that which he publicly professed to desire, and having left Garrison in
Mountferrat, and in Suza, and as (I am told) having fortified some places, has
thereby given occasion to the Emperor my Uncle, to give order his Army should
pass into Italy, to maintain the Authority, Jurisdiction and preheminency of
the Empire, with whom I can do no less then concur, and give him
assistance, in respect of the great and strict obligation of Blood, of Honor,
and of Convenience which I hold with his imperial Majesty, and for the -- which
I do acknowledge from the sacred Empire; declaring now, as I have done
heretofore, and as my Ambassadors have told your Holiness; that in this
business, I do neither directly nor indirectly aim at any other end of mine
own particular interest. But beholding the numerous Armies of the Emperor in
Italy, and with extreme grief foreseeing the harms, inconveniences and
dangers that Italy must thereby suffer in matter of Religion, being that which
most imports; I do not only resent it, in respect of that portion which God
has given me in Christendom, but especially as a King and Prince of Italy,
the peace of those Provinces being disturbed, which my Progenitors with so much
Judgment and providence, and with so much Authority and benefit of the Natives
had so many years preserved. Wherefore I thought it my duty to present unto
your beatitude that experience has demonstrated that to oppose and straighten
the Jurisdiction of the Emperor, and to resist his commandments, has brought
matters to these difficult terms, and this way being still persisted in, there
must needs follow those mischief^ which we desire to shun. Now the most
convenient manner how to compose these businesses, is that your Holiness do
effectually persuade the Duke of Nivers to accomodate himself to the Justice
and obedience of the Emperor, and the King of France to recall his Armies out
of Italy, and the Princes that do aid Nivers, no more to interest themselves
in the business, even as from the beginning my Ministers have propounded to
your Beatitude; because this difference being ended juridically, all the
persons interessed shall come off with honor and reputation, and so all of
them shall have a ground to beseech the Emperor, that out of his wonted
clemency, he will take off that impression, which he justly might have conceived
against the Duke of Nivers; whereupon things inclining to this issue, I shall
with a very good will employ my best offices to the end that speedy and exact
justice may be administered, and also that his Caesarian Majesty may give
experimental effects of his magnanimity and stability, desiring with a most
sincere affection, that so much Christian blood may be spared, as would be
spilt in this war, and that those forces might be employed to the service, and
not to the prejudice of Christendom. Thus have I clearly and sincerely
delivered my meaning unto your Holiness, to the end that knowing my intention,
you may do those offices which your manifold wisdom shall find proper for the
place whereto God has advanced you; and if God for our sins have decreed to
chastise Christendom, by continuing the war; let this dispatch be a testimony
of my good will, and real intention toward peace; for the prosecuting whereof,
I on my part, will always embrace any reasonable and proportionable means.
Oar Lord God preserve your Beatitude a thousand years.

The Council of Ireland to King Charles in defense of the Lord Deputy
Faulkland. April 28. 1619
MAy it please your most excellent Majesty,
we stand so bounden to your royal Self, and your most blessed Father our late
deceased Sovereign Lord and Master, as we are urged in duty to prostrate this
act of our faith at your Majesty's feet, as an assay to clear some things
wherein misinformation may seem to have approached your high Wisdom. We
understand that it is collected out of some late Dispatches from hence, that
there are such disorders in the Government here, as by the present Governors
are remediless; all which is ascribed to the differences between persons of
chief place; We do in all humility testify and declare that we have not seen
or known any inconvenience to the public service by the difference between
your Majesty's Deputy and Chancellor, neither have of late seen or heard any
act or speech of contention between them. Other difference between persons of
any eminent Action we understand none, neither are any disorders here yet so
overgrown, as co surpass the redress of the present Governor, especially so
long as he has such a standing English Army, as your Majesty now allows; if
only we may receive some supply of Arms and munition, which we have often
written for, do daily expect, and which shall be no loss to your Majesty. It
is true, most gracious Sovereign, that in some late dispatches we mentioned
three grievances in this government, which in extent may threaten much, if we
be not timely directed from thence concerning them, viz. the insolence and
excrescence of the Popish pretended Clergy, the disorder and offense of the
Irish Regiment, and the late outrageous presumption of the unsettled Irish, in
some parts; toward all which (being parties perhaps otherwise conceived of
there, then understood here) your Deputy and Council have of late used
particular abstinence, holding themselves somewhat limited concerning them, by
late Instructions, Letters and directions from thence. And therefore lest
countenance of that course, might turn to greater damage, we make choice
seasonably to crave expression of the good pleasure of your Highness, and the
most Honorable Lords of your Council, lest our actions and zeal therein might
vary from the purposes on that side, and so want of unanimity in both States,
break the progress of the Reformation; not that we any way make doubt to give
your Majestly a good account of our selves therein, and of the full eviction of
those evils in due time, so we might be assured of your Majestys and their
Lordships good allowance of our endeavors, being confident in all humility, to
declare and affirm to your Sacred Majesty, that the rest of this great body,
(as to the civil part thereof) is in far better order at this time, then ever
it was in the memory of man; as well in the current and general execution of
Justice according to the Laws, in the freedom of men's persons and estates,
(the present charge of the Army excepted) and in the Universal outward
subjection of all sorts of settled inhabitants to the Crown and Laws of
England, and also in the advancement of the Crown Revenues; and lastly, in the
competent number of Bishops, and other able and Learned Ministers of the Church
of England of all sorts, which we especially attribute to the blessedness of
your time, and to the Industryes, Zeal, Judgment and moderation of your
Deputy, as well in your Majesty service, as toward this people^, having now
well learned this great office; and to the good beginnings of the two last
precedent Deputies under direction of your most Renowned Father.

Secondly, we understand that your Deputy and Council are blamed for the
present surcharge of your Revenues here, far beyond the support thereof.

Herein your Royal Majesty may be pleased to cause a review of our dispatch
from hence, in August 1627. wherein it will appear; that their part in that
offense has been only obedience to extraordinary warrants from thence, and
that if those warrants had not been fully performed out of your Revenues, you
had had about 40000 pound Irish to pay pensioners, in your Coffers, and answer
other necessities which have since increased.

So as we humbly crave pardon freely to affirm, that the fault has not been
here; and further also to say for your Majesty's honor and our comfort, that
during 200 years last past, England has never been so free of the charge of
Ireland, as now it is.

Thirdly, we understand that your Deputy is accused for miscarriage in the
legal prosecution of Phelim Match Fr^gh, and others adhering to him in certain
treasonable Acts and Practices. Herein we most humbly beseech your Majesty,
that a review may be of a declaration sent from hence about the beginning of
your Deputies government, signed hy him and all the Counsel then here, whereby
will appear how the parts of Lemster, at least, have been from age to age
infested by him and his predecessors, and the inhabitants of the territory of
Ranelagh, wherein he took upon him a Chiefery; and therein will also appear,
that it was the special affection and endeavor of several worthy Deputies here
to have cleared that offensive plot, which no wise State could suffer so near
the seat thereof, and that they also severally attempted it by force, the said
Phelims Father being slain by actual Rebellion by Sir William Russels
prosecution; but the general Rebellion of the Kingdom always interrupted the
settlement thereof. This being at that time the declaration of the State; moved
your Deputy, being a stranger, to have a wary aspect upon the people, for the
Common peace, which he has carefully performed. Afterward at the time when
the general voice was amongst the Irish, that the Spaniards would be here, your
Deputy had cause to examine several persons and causes concerning that Rumor
whereby fell out to be discovered to him among others, that this Phelim had
confederated for raising a Commotion in Lemster, and murdering a Scottish
Minister, and Justice of peace (a ready instrument in Crown Causes) inhabiting
about the border of the said territory. Before which time, we never heard of
any displeasure or hard measure born by your said Deputy to him, or offense
taken by him, at any particular done to him, unless he were offended that your
Deputy refused his money offered to blanch your Majesty's title to the Lands in
Ranlagh, now granted to undertakers, discovered and prosecuted at first by his
brother Redmond and his Council Peter de la Hoyd, We do also herein in all
humility testify, and declare that he acquainted several Privy Counselors
here, and others of Judgment with the same. And also in every Act and passage
thereof used the labor and presence, either of your Majesty's Privy
Concellours, Judges, or learned Council, always professing publicly and
privately (which we also in our consciences do believe) that he had no
particular envy or displeasure to Phelims's person, or any of his, neither had
any end in what might fall out upon that discovery or pains, or any act done
concerning that Country, other then the reducement thereof, to the conformity
of other civil parts; the common peace of your Majesty's good Subjects
adjacent, and the legal and plenary effecting of that which by so many good
governors in times of disturbance could not be done, there being no power in
him to make any particular benefit of the Escheate, either in lands or goods;
and before any thing was to be done for the trial of him and the rest for their
lives, he made a speedy and immediate address to your Majesty, dated 27. August
1628 upon the indictment found, to inform you of the then present estate of
that business, which we have seen, not doing it before (as he affirms) for
that he had formerly received gracious approbations of his proceedings in the
like discoveries.

We also in all humbleness and duty do declare and protest, that if upon their
evil demerits, and the due proceedings of Law, those now questioned may be
taken away, and the Territory settled in legal Government and English order,
(toward which a strong Fort is already almost built in the midst of it by your
Majesty's Undertakers lately planted there: It will be a service of the
greatest importment to bridle the Irish, assure the inhabitants of other Parts,
and strengthen the general peace of the Kingdom (next to the great Plantation
of Vlster) that has been done in this age. If otherwise they shall by fair
trial acquit the course of your Majesty's free and indifferent justice, it
will make them wary in point of duty and loyalty hereafter. And we do further
in all submission declare, That in these discoveries, (the persons and Causes
considered) it was of necessity that the personal pains of your Highness Deputy
should be bestowed; the rather, for that the Evidences being to be given for
the most part by persons involved in the same confederacyes, and who were to
become actors, they would not be drawn to confess truths to any inferior
Ministers, being of stubborn and malign spirits; besides the disswasions of
Priests, and of the Dependants and manifold Allies of the said Phelim, if they
had not been warily looked after.

Lastly, We in all humbleness of heart and freedom of faithful servants, do
beseech your most sacred Majesty to consider how much the sufferings of your
zealous servants may prove to your disservice, especially in this place, where
discouragement of your most dextrous service is most aimed at by multitudes of
several qualities, and cannot but soon perplex the present happy state of your
affairs. We beseech the eternal God to guide and prosper your Majesty's
advices and designs.

28. April 1629. Your most humble and obedient Subjects and Servants. Signed by
L. Primate V. Valentia V. Kilmallock V. Ranelagh. L. Dillon. L. Cauffeild, L.
Aungier L. Pr. of Munster L. Chief Justice St Adam Loftus Mr of the Wards L.
Chief Baron. Sr Charles Coote.


Ab Ignoto, Of the Affairs of Spain, France and Italy, 5 Jan. 1629.
SIR,
THough it be now full three months since I received any line from you, yet I
dare not, nor will I for that respect discontinue my writing to you; and
because no private business occurreth, I will be bold to advise a line or two
concerning the public affairs of Italy: Cassal is still made good against the
Spanyard, not by the Duke of Mantua, for he poor Prince was long since
bankrupt, but by the succors of France and this Seignory, the former
contributing monthly 40000 Dollers, the latter 20000, not only to maintain the
Cassaleschi, but also to enable the Duke to stand fast against all other the
Spaniards attempts; mean while we hear say boldly, that a league offensive and
defensive against the Spaniards in Italy is concluded between the French and
the Venetians; and that the French King has already sent out two Armies, one
under the Duke of Guise by sea, who they say is landed at Nizza; the other
under the Marquess de Coeure, who is marching hitherward through the Valtoline;
and though I doubt something these proceedings of the French, yet I am sure the
Seignior does daily give out new Commissions for the levying of Soldiers in
that number, that now every one demands what strange enterprise this State has
in hand, and all jump in this, that it is against the Spanyard. The Pope is
still adverse to the Spanyard, and inclines strongly to the good of Italy,
animating this State to meet the French with a declaration, and the French to
conclude a peace on any honorable terms with us, that they may the more safely
follow their present designs, which is to suppress the Spaniards in Italy. his
Catholic Majesty has lost a great deal of credit in these parts, by the
loss of his Silver Fleet; and that he is in extreme want of money, is
collected here from the present state of some of his public Ministers. Ognat
his ordinary Ambassador at Rome, being lately recalled, in stead of going home
into Spain, has retired himself privately to Monte Pincio, being in such
praemunire that he is not able to accommodate himself with necessaries for his
journey. And Mounterei who is to succeed him is arrived as far Sienna, but being
foundred in his purse, is able to get no farther, mean while, living there in
an Inn. Moreover the Merchants in Rome, are advised by their correspondents in
Spain, to be wary in letting either of them have moneys; this is from a good
hand in Rome. Sir Kenelm Digby has lately been at Delos, where he has laden
great store of Marble, he is said to be in very good plight and Condition. I
trouble you no more.

Venice 5. January 1629. Stilo novo. Your faithful servant, C. H.

The Lords of the Council of England, to the Lords of the Council in Ireland,
31 Jan. 1629.
BY your Letter dated the ninth of January we understand how the seditious riot
moved by the Friars and their adherents at Dublin, has by your good order and
resolution been happly suppressed, and we doubt not but by this occasion, you
will consider how much it concerns the good Government of that Kingdom, to
present in time the first growing of such evils; for where such people be
permitted to swarm, they will soon grow licentious, and endure no government but
their own, which cannot otherwise be restored then by a due and seasonable
execution of the Law, and of such directions as from time to time have been
sent from his Majesty and this Board. Now it redoundeth much to the honor of
his Majesty, that the world shall take notice of the ability and good service
of his Ministers there, which in person he has been pleased openly in Council,
and in most gracious manner to approve and commend; whereby you may be
sufficiently encouraged to go on with like resolution and moderation, til the
work be solely done, as well in City as in other places of your Kingdom, the
carriage whereof we must leave to your good discretions, whose particular
knowledge of the present state of things can guide you better, when and where
to carry a soft or harder hand; only this we hold necessary to put you in mind,
that you continue in that good agreement amongst your selves, for this and
other services which your Letters do express; and for which we commend you
much, that the good servants of the King and state may find encouragement
equally from you all; and the ill affected may find no support or countenance
from any; nor any other connivances used but by general advice, for avoiding of
further evils, shall be allowed; and such Magistrates and Officers, if any shall
be discovered that openly or underhand favor such disorders, or do not their
duties in suppressing them, and committing the offenders, you shall do well to
take all fit and safe advantages, by the punishment or displacing of a few, to
make the rest more cautious. This we write, not as misliking the fair course
you have taken; but to express the concurrency of our Judgments with yours,
and to assure you of our assistance in all such occasions wherein for your
further proceedings, we have advised. And his Majesty requires you accordingly
to take order, first that the house wherein Seminary Friars appeared in their
habits, and wherein the Reverend Archbishop, and the Mayor of Dublin received
the first affront, be spedily demolished, and be the mark of terror to the
resisters of Authority, and that the rest of the houses erected or employed
there, or elsewhere to the use of suspicious societies, be converted to houses
of correction, and to set the people on work, or to other public uses, for the
advancement of Justice, good Arts or Trades; and further, that you use all fit
means to discover the Founders, Benefactors and Maintainers of such Societies
and Colleges, and certify their names, and that you find out the Lands,
Leases, or Revenues applied to their uses, and dispose thereof according to the
Law and that you certify also the places and institutions of all such
Monasteries, Priories, Nunneries, and other Religious houses, and the names of
all such persons as have put themselves to be brothers and sisters therein,
especially such as are of note, to the end such evil plants be not permitted to
take root any where in that Kingdom which we require you take care of. For the
supply of Munition which you have reason to desire, we have taken effectual
order that you shall receive it with all convenient speed. And so etc.

Lord Keeper. Lord Treasurer. Lord President. Lord Privy Seal. L. high
Chamberlain. Earl of Suffolk. Earl of Dorset. Earl of Salisbury. Earl of Kelly.
Lord Viscount Dorchester. Lord Newbergh. Mr. Vice Chamberlain. Mr. Secretary
Cook. Sir William Alexander.


The Lord Faulkland's Petition to the King.
MOst humbly showing, that I had a Son, until I lost him in your Highness
displeasure, where I cannot seek him because I have not will to find him
there. Men say, there is a wild young man now prisoner in the Fleet, for
measuring his actions by his own private sense. But now that for the same your
Majesty's hand has appeared in his punishment, he bows and humbles himself
before and to it: whether he be mine or not, I can discern by no light, but
that of your Royal Clemency; for only in your forgiveness can I own him for
mine. Forgivennesse is the glory of the supremest powers, and this the
operation, that when it is extended in the greatest measure, it converts the
greatest offenders into the greatest lovers, and so makes purchase of the
heart, an especial privilege peculiar and due to Sovereign Princes.

If now your Majesty will vouchsafe out of your own benignity, to become a
second nature, and restore that unto me which the first gave me, and vanity
deprived me of, I shall keep my reckoning of the full number of my sons with
comfort, and render the tribute of my most humble thankfulness, else my weak
old memory must for get one.

The Duke of Modena to the Duke of Savoy. July 30. 1629.
WHen I was deprived of my Mistress the Infanta Izabella, so intimately beloved
of me, I was suddenly possessed with a most ardent desire of finding the means
how to follow her into Paradise; and distrusting in regard of my weakness and
life past, that I was not able to stand in those dangers wherein that holy
soul knew how to find security and tranquillity, I resolved to retire my
self out of the tempestuous sea of Government, and to shelter my self in the
harbor of Religion, rejoicing to sacrifice that unto God, which uses to be so
highly esteemed in the world; and knowing that truly to reign, is to serve
his Divine Majesty, hitherto I deferred the execution of my purpose, because
being bound in this, to depend upon the Counsel of him that governed my soul,
it seemed not expedient to him, that I should retire my self while there was
need of my assistance, both in respect of the age of the Duke my father (which
was Caesar d'Este, who dyed 1628) and of the nonage of the Prince my son (which
is Don Francisco, who now governs.) Now that these impediments are removed, I
go most contentedly whither the Lord does call me, namely, to take upon me the
Capuchin Religion out of Italy; and I do promise to find for my self in one
little Cel, that repose which all the greatness of the world cannot give me.
True it is, if I should look back upon my life past, I should find motives
rather of terror, then of comfort: But the mercy of God does make me
confident, and my having (for his love, and to perform his will) renounced all
that I could or had, I departed also most comforted, because I leave the Prince
my son so well qualified, that I may confidently expect an excellent issue of
his Government, especially if your Highness shall vouchsafe to direct him with
your most prudent Counsels, and to shroud him under your benign protection,
whereunto with reverent affection I do recommend him together with the rest of
my sons, especially Carlo Alexandro (who is now living in your Highness his
Court) since that (as a man may say) they have no other Father then your
Highness, and are branches of your Princely house.

Unto your Highness was in all respects due from me the account which I have
given you of my vocation; I beseech you to accept it, and to believe that I
will always be answerable to my duty, and will pray for the spiritual and
temporal increase of your Highness, whose hands I reverently kiss.

Your Highness most humble and most obliged servant, Alfons d'Este.
From Salsuolo the 30th of July, 1629.
Sir Kenhelm Digby to Sir Edward Stradling.
To my Honorable Friend Sir Edward Esterling, alias Stradling, aboard his ship.
MY much honored friend, I am too well acquainted with the weakness of my
abilities (that are far unfit to undergoes such a task as I have in hand) to
flatter my self with the hope that I may either inform your understanding, or
do my self honor by what I am to write. But I am so desirous that you should
be possessed with the true knowledge of what a bent will I have upon all
occasions to do you service, that obedience to your Command weighs much more
with me then the lawfulness of my excuse can, to preserve me from giving you
in writing such a testimony of my ignorance and erring fantasy, as I fear this
will prove. Therefore without any more circumstances, I will as near as I can,
deliver to you in this paper, what the other day I discoursed to you, upon the
22d Staff of the ninth Canto in the second book of that matchless Poem, The
Fairy Queen, written by our English Virgil, whose words are these.

The Frame thereof seemed partly Circuler,
And part Trianguler: O work Divine!
These two the first and last proportions are,
The One imperfect, mortal, faeminine;
The Other immortal, perfect, masculine:
And twixt them both a quadrat was the base,
Proportioned equally, by seven, and nine;
Nine was the Circle set in heavens place,
All which compacted, made a goodly Diapase.
In this Staff the Author seems to me to proceed in a differing manner from
what he does elsewhere generally through his whole book; for in other places,
although the beginning of this Allegory or mistical sense may be obscure, yet
in the process of it he does himself declare his own conceptions in such
sort, that they are obvious to any ordinary capacity: But in this, he seems
only to glance at the profoundest notions that any science can deliver to us;
and then of a sudden, as it were recalling himself out of an Enthusiasme, he
returns to the gentle relation of the Allegorical history that he had begun,
leaving his readers to wander up and down in much obscurity, and to rove with
much danger of erring at his intention in these lines; which I conceive to be
dictated by such a learned spirit, and so generally a knowing soul, that were
there nothing else extant of Spencers writings, yet these few words would make
me esteem him no whit inferior to the most famous men that ever have been in
any age, as giving an evident testimony herein, that he was thoroughly versed in
the Mathemeticall sciences, in Philosophy and Divinity, unto all which this
might serve for an ample Theme to make large Commentaries upon; In my praises
upon this subject I am confident, that the worth of the Author will preserve me
from this censure, that my ignorance only begets this admiration, since he
has written nothing that is not admirable. But that it may appear, I am
guided somewhat by my own Judgment, (although it be a very mean one) and not
by implicit faith, and that I may in the best manner I can comply with what you
may expect from me, I will not longer hold you in suspense, but begin
immediately (though abruptly) with the declaration of what I conceive to be the
true sense of this place; which I shall not go about to adorn with any
plausible discourses, or with authorities and examples drawn from others
writings; (since my want both of convenience and learning would make me fall
very short herein) but it shall be enough for me to intimate my conceptions,
and to offer them up unto you in their own simple and naked form, leaving to
your better Judgment, the examination of the weight of them; and after perusal
of them, beseeching you to reduce me, if you perceive me to err. It is
evident, that the Authors intention in this Canto, is to describe the body of
man informed with a rational soul; and in prosecution of that design, he
sets down particularly the several parts of the one, and the faculties of
the other. But in this Stanza he comprehended the general description of them
both, as (being joined together to frame a complete man) they make one perfect
compound, which will appear bettter by taking a survey of every several Clause
thereof by it self.

The frame thereof seemed partly circuler,
And part trianguler. --
By these figures, I conceive that he means the Mind and the Body of man, the
first being by him compared to a Circle, and the latter to a Triangle; for as
the Circle of all figures is the most perfect, and includes the greatest
space, and is every way full, and without angles, made by the continuation of
one only line; so man's soul is the noblest and most beautiful creature that
God has created, and by it we are capable of the greatest gifts which God can
bestow, which are Grace, Glory, and Hypostatical union of the humane Nature to
the divine: and she enjoys perfect freedom and liberty in all other actions,
and is made without composition, (which no figures are that have angles; for
they are caused by the coincidence of several lines) but of one pure substance,
which was by God breathed into a body made of such compounded earth, as in the
preceding Stanza the Author describes; and this is the exact image of him that
breached it, representing him as fully as it is possible for any creature,
which is infinitely distant from the Creator. For as God has neither beginning
nor ending, so neither of these can be found in a Circle; although that being
made of the successive motion of a line, it must be supposed to have a
beginning somewhere. God is compared to a circle whose center is every where,
but whose Circumference no where; but man's soul is a circle whose circumference
is limited by the true center of it, which is only God. For as a circumference
does in all parts alike respect that indivisible point, and as all lines drawn
from the inner side of it, do make right angles with it when they meet therein;
so all the interior actions of man's soul ought to have no other respective
point to direct themselves unto but God: and as long as they make right angles,
which is, that they keep the exact middle of virtue, and decline not to either
of the sides where the contrary vices dwell, they cannot fail but meet in their
Center.

By the Trianguler figure he very aptly designeth the Body: For as the Circle
is of all other figures the most perfect, and most capacious; so the Triangle
is the most imperfect, and includes the least space: It is the first and
lowest of all figures; for fewer then three right lines cannot comprehend and
enclose a superficies; having but three angles, they are all acutes (if it be
equilateral) and but equal to two right ones; in which respect all other
regular figures consisting of more then three lines, do exceed it: May not
these be resembled to the three great and compounded Elements in man's body, to
wit, Sale, Sulphur, and Mercury? which mingled together, do make the natural
heat, and radical moisture, the two qualities whereby man lives: for the more
lines that do go to comprehend a figure, the more and greater the angles are,
and the nearer it comes to the perfection of a Circle.

A Triangle is composed of several lines, and they of points which yet do not
make a quantity by being contiguous one to another, but rather the motion of
them does describe the lines. In like manner the Body of man is compounded of
the four Elements, which are made by the four primary qualities, not compounded
of them (for they are but accidents;) but by their operation upon the first
matter.

And as a Triangle has three lines, so a solid body has three dimensions, to
wit, Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity: but of all bodies man's is of the
lowest rank (as the Triangle is among figures) being composed of the Elements,
which make it liable to alteration and corruption. In which consideration of
the dignity of bodies, I divide them by a general division, into sublunary,
which are the elementated ones; and into the ethereal (which are supposed to be
of their own nature incorruptible:) and peradventure there are some other
species of corporeal substances, which is not in this place to dispute.

-- O work Divine! Certainly of all Gods works the noblest and the perfectest
is man; and for whom indeed all others were done; for if we consider his soul,
it is the very Image of God; if his body, it is adorned with the greatest
beauty and excellent symmetry of parts of any created thing, whereby it
witnesses the perfection of the Architect, that of so drossie mould is able to
make so excellent a Fabric: if his operations, they are free; if his end, it
is eternal glory; and if you take him altogether, man is a little world, an
exact type of the great world, and of God himself.

But in all this me thinks that the admirable work is the joining together
of the two different, and indeed opposite substances in man to make one perfect
compound; the soul and the body, which are of so contrary a nature, that their
uniting seems to be a miracle: for how can one inform and work in the other,
since there is no mean of operation (that we know) between a spiritual
substance and a Corporal? yet we see that it does. As hard it is to find the
true proportion between a Circle and a Triangle, yet that there is a just
proportion; and that they may be equal, Archimides has left us an ingenious
demonstration: but in reducing it to a Problem, it fails in this, That
because the proportion between a crooked line and a straight one is not known,
one must make use of a mechanical way of measuring the Peripherie of the one,
to convert it into the side of the other.

These two the first and last proportions are. What I have already said
concerning a Circle and a Triangle, does sufficiently unfold what is meant in
this verse; yet it will not be amiss to speak one word more hereof in this
place, All things that have existence may be divided into three Classes; which
are, either what is pure and simple in it self, or what has a nature
compounded of what is simple, or what has a nature compounded of what is
compounded. In continued quantity this may be exemplified by a point, a line,
and a superficies, or body; and in numbers by an Unity, a Denary, and a
Centenary. The first, which is only pure and single, like an indivisible
point, or an Unity, has relation only to the Divine Nature; that point then
moving in a sphericall manner (which serves to express the perfections of Gods
actions) describes the circle of our souls, and of Angels, and of intellectual
substances, which are of a pure and simple nature; but receives that from what
is so in a perfecter manner, and that has his from none else: like lines that
are made from the flowing of points, or denaries that are composed of unities,
beyond both which there is nothing.

In the last place bodies are to be ranked, which are composed of the Elements,
and they likewise suffer composition, and may very well be compared to the
lowest of figures which are composed of lines, that owe their being to points
(and such are Triangles); or to Centenaries, that are composed of Denaries, and
they of Unites: but if we will compare these together by proportion, God must
be left out, since there is an infinite distance between the simplicity and
perfection of his nature, and the composition and imperfection of all created
substances, as there is between an indivisible point and a continuate quantity;
or between a simple unity, and compounded number: so that only the other two
kinds of substances do enter into this consideration, and of them I have
already proved, that man's soul is of the one the noblest, being dignified by
Hypostaticall union above all other intellectual substances, and his
elementated body of the other, the most low and corruptible; whereby it is
evident, that these two are the first and last proportions both in respect of
their own figure, and of what they express.

The one imperfect, mortal, faeminine,
The Other immortal, perfect, masculine.
Man's body has all the properties of imperfect matter, it is but the patient,
of it self alone it can do nothing, it is liable to corruption and dissolution
if it once be deprived of the form, which actuateth it self, and is
incorruptible and immortal.

And as the feminine sex is imperfect, and receives perfection from the
masculine, so does the body from the soul, which to it is in lieu of a Male;
and as in corporal generations the Female does afford but gross and passive
matter, unto which the Male gives active heat and prolificall virtue; so in
spiritual generations, (which are the operations of the Mind) the body
administreth only the Organs, which if they were not employed by the Soul,
would of themselves serve to nothing. And as there is a mutual appetence
between the male and the female; between matter and form, so there is between
the body and soul of a man; but what ligament they have, that our Author
defines not; (and peradventure Reason is not able to attain unto it) yet he
tells us what is the Foundation that this Machine rests upon, and what
keeps the Parts together, in these words:

And 'twixt them both a Quadrat was the base. By which Quadrat, I conceive,
that he means the four principal humors in man's body, to wit, Choler, Blood
Phlegm and Melancholy; which if they be distempered and unfitly mingled the
dissolution of the whole does ensue; like to a building, which falls to ruin
if the Foundation or Base of it be unsound or disordered: and in some of these
the vital spirits are contained and preserved which the other do keep in a
convenient temper; and as long as they do so the soul and body dwell together
like good friends: So that these four are the Base of the conjunction of the
other two; both which he says, are

Proportioned equally by Seven and Nine. In which words, I understand, that he
means the influences of the superior substances, which govern the inferior
into these two differing parts of man, to wit, of the Stars (the most powerful
of which are the seven Planets) into his body; and of the Angels (which are
divided into nine Hierarchies or Orders) into the soul, which in his Astrophel
he says, is

By Sovereign choice from the Heavenly Quires select,
And lineally derived from Angels race.
And as much as the one do govern the body, so much the other do the mind:
wherein it is to be considered, that some are of opinion, how at the instant of
the conception of a child, or rather, more effectually at the instant of his
birth, the conceived Sperme, or the tender body does receive such influence of
the heavens as then reigns over that place where the conception or birth is
made; and all the Stars and virtuall places of the Celestial Orbs
participating of the qualities of the seven planets; according to the which
they are distributed into so many Classes, or the compounds of them, it comes
to pass that according to the variety of the several aspects of the one and of
the other, there are various inclinations and qualities in men's bodies, but all
reduced to seven general heads, and the Compounds of them; which being to be
varied innumerable ways, causes as many different effects, yet the influence
of some one planet continually predominating: but when the matter in the woman's
womb is capable of a soul to inform it, then God sends one from heaven into
it.

-- Eternal God.
In Paradise whilome did plant this flower,
Whence he it setcht out of her native place,
And did in stock of earthly flesh enrace.
And this opinion the Author expresses himself more plainly to be of, in
another work, where he says,

There She beholds with high aspiring thought,
The Cradle of her own Creation.
Amongst the seats of Angels, heavenly wrought.
Which whether it has been created ever since the beginning of the world, and
reserved in some fit place until due time, or be created upon the Emergent,
occasion no man can tell; but certain it is, that it is immortal, according to
that I said when I spoke of the Circle, which has no ending, and an uncertain
beginning.

The messengers to convey which soul into the body, are the Intelligences that
move the Orbs of heaven, who according to their several natures do communicate
unto it several proprieties, and they who are governors of those Stars that
have at that instant, the superiority in the Planetary aspects; whereby it
comes to pass that in all inclinations, there is much affinity between the
soul and the body, being that the like is between the Intelligences and the
Stars, both which communicate their virtues to each of them. And these Angels
being, as I said before, of nine several Hierarchies, there are so many
principal differences in humane souls, which do participate most of their
proprieties with whom in their descent they make longest stay, and that had
most active power to work upon them, and accompanied them with a peculiar
Genius; which is according to their several governments like the same kind of
water that running through various conduits, wherein several aromatical and
odoriferous things are laid, does acquire several kinds of taste and smells;
for it is supposed, that in their first Creation all souls are alike, and that
their differing proprieteis arrive unto them afterward, when they pass
through the spheers of the governing Intelligences; so that by such their
influence it may truly be said,

Nine was the Circle set in heavens place. Which verse by assigning his office
to the nine, and the proper place of the Circle, does give much light to what
is said before.

And for further confirmation that this is he Authors opinion, read attentively
the sixth Canto of the third book, where most learnedly and at large, he
delivers the Tenets of this Philosophy; and of that, I recommend to you to
take particular notice of the second, and thirty second Stanzaes, and also of
the last staff of his Epithalamium; and surveying his works, you shall find
him a constant disciple of Plato's School.

All which compacted, made a goodly Diapase, In nature there is not to be found
a more complete and more excellent concordance of all parts, then that which is
between the compaction and uniting together of the body and soul of man, both
which although they consist of many and most differing faculties and parts, yet
when they keep due time with one another, do altogether make the most perfect
harmony that can be imagined; and as the nature of sounds, (that consist of
friendly consonants and accords) is to mingle with one another, and to slide
into the care with much sweetness, where by their unity they last a long time,
and delight it; whereas on the contrary side, discords do continually jar, and
fight together, and will not mingle with one another, but all of them striving
to have the victory, their reluctation and disorder gives a soon end to
their sounds, which strike the ear in a harsh and offensive manner, and they
die in the very beginning of their conflict. In like sort, when a man's actions
are regular, and that being directed toward God, they become like the lines of
a Circle which all meet in the Center, then his music is excellent and
complete, and all together are the Authors of that blessed harmony which makes
him hapyy in the glorious vision of Gods perfections, wherein the mind is
filled with high knowledges and most pleasing contemplations, and the senses
are as it were drowned with eternal delight; and nothing can interrupt this
joy, this happiness which is an everlasting Diapase: whereas on the contrary
part, if a man's actions be disorderly and consisting; of discord, which is when
the sensitive part rebelleth and wrastleth with the rational, and striveth to
oppress it, then this Music is spoiled and instead of eternal life, pleasure,
and joy, it causes perpetual death, horror, pain, and misery, which
unfortunate estate the Poet describes elsewhere, as in the conclusion of this
staff he intimates. The other happy one, which is the never failing reward of
such an obedient body, and etherial and virtuous mind, as he makes to be the
seat of the bright Virgin Alma, man's worthyest inhabitant, Reason; her I feel
to speak within me, and to chide me for my bold attempt, warning me to stray no
further: for what I have said, (considering how weakly it is said) your
Commandment is all that I can pretend in excuse; but since my desire to obey
may as well be seen in a few lines, as in a large discourse, it were
indiscretion in me to trouble you with more words, and to discover unto you
more of my ignorance. I will only beg pardon of you for this blotted and
interlyned paper, whose contents are so mean, that it cannot deserve the pains
of a transcription, which if you make difficulty to grant unto it for my sake,
let it obtain it for having been yours, and now returning again to you, as
also does the book that contains my text which yesterday you sent me, to fit
this part of it with a Comment: which peradventure I might have performed
better, if either I had afforded my self more time, or had had the convenience
of some other books apt to quicken my invention, to whom I might have been
beholding, for enlarging my understanding in some things that are treated here,
although the application should still have been my own; with these two helps,
peradventure I might have dived farther into the Authors intention, the depth
of which cannot be sounded by any that is less learned then he was. But I
persuade my self very strongly, that in what I have said, there is nothing
contradictorie to it; and that an intelligent and well read man, proceeding
upon my grounds, might compose a worthy and true Commentary upon this Theme;
upon which, I wonder how I stumbled, considering how many learned men have
failed in the interpreting of it, and have all approved my opinion at the first
hearing it: but it was fortune that made me to light upon it, when first this
Stanza was read unto me for an undissoluble riddle: and the same discourse that
I made upon it, the first half quarter of an hour that I saw it, I send it
you here, without having reduced it to any better form, or added any thing at
all unto it; which I beseech you receive benignely, as coming from

Your Most affectionate Friend and humble Servant, Kenhelm Digby.

Master Gargrave to the Lord Davers.
MY very good Lord, I have heretofore many times both sent and written to you
touching the insupportable burden of wrong which has many years lain upon my
shoulders, but you were not pleased to return me any answer for my
satisfaction therein: my opinion at the first, was, that it was merely the
respect of some, whom you would not, or might not offend, that you suffered
your name to be used by others to wound and afflict me in my estate: to which
so fair an opinion, I was induced partly by ancient Judgment of your honorable
disposition, partly and much rather by the privity of my heart, which ever
constantly affected a good correspondency with you every way. But since now
this oppression which I suffer, has had its continuance so many years without
relaxation, in which I smart beyond all example, and the admiration of the
world has concurred with my sense of so great a bitterness from so near
Allies; I cannot but to my grief and wonder observe your too much either
consent or connivency to these my harms, which before I have not easily
suffered my thoughts to admit; wherein if I have not mistaken your Lordships
interest, I have yet conceived hope, that although you had in the beginning a
just ground to make the feel the weight of your displeasure and alienation
from me, yet that the sufferance of so many years, and such a sufferance under
pretense of Justice, as can hardly be paralleled, might yet at the last, have
satiated a very deeply intended revenge, much more satisfied a moderate mind
possessed with Honor or Religion, as I conceive your Lordships to be. Herein,
after a various agitation in my self, I am enforced to honor the wonderful
providence of God, who has pleased to convert the affinity which I affected
with your Noble house, for my comfort and assistance, to my ruin; and that in
the bosom of our nearest and dearest friendship, should breed so intestine a
hatred, as should tend to the overthrow of my credit, wealth, lands, liberty,
house, wife, and children, and all those comforts which should either support
or sweeten the life of man.

Wherefore I have adventure after so long silence, to mind your Lordship of
this my unfortunate estate, wherein I rather die then live, whereunto I have
been so long since precipitated by your Lordships countenance, as I hope,
pretended only by the instruments of my mischief to proceed from you; that if
now your Lordship shall think i^ enough that I have so many years, so many
ways endured the crosses of so high a nature, and can be induced to affect a
reparation, or at least a determination of those injuries which undeservedly
have been heaped upon me, I may yet at length conclude this Tragedy of my life
past with some comfortable fruit of that love and kindness which at the first
I aimed at in seek^ng your Lordships Alliance, and which I endeavored to
deserve for the continuance, and which after so long intermission, I shall
think my self happy to enjoy, if so be your Lordship shall out of your
charitable consideration think my motion to concur with my desire* that I may
not be enforced to advance my complaint further, which I wish may be prevented
by this my Expostulation, springing from the sense of so great and intolerable
a misery wherein I languish every day.

A Declaration of Ferdinand Infanta of Spain. 5 July, 1636.
Unto all those to whom this present Writing shall come, greeting.
FRance having contrary to reason and justice moved and maintained War in the
States of the Emperor, and of my Lord the King, given extraordinary Succou^s
both of men and money, to their rebellious subjects; procured the Swedes to
invade the Empire* received and bought of them the Towns of Alsatia, a d other
hereditary Countries of our most Royal House, not sparing the Catholic League
it self, which had taken Arms for no other end but for the good of Religion.
And it being notorious, that the same France, (after all these public and
manifest contraventions to the Treaties of Peace) has finally proceeded to a
breach thereof: whereas we rather had cause to denounce the War, in that she
has sent her Armies to overrun the Low Countries, the Duchy of Millain, and
other Feoffs of the Empire in Italy, and now lately the Country of Burgundy;
contrary to the Laws of Neutrality, contrary to the Public Faith, and
contrary to the express promises of the Prince of Conde: Disguising in the
mean time, these attempts and breaches of Faith before all Christendom, with
certain weak pretexts and false surmises, contained in diverse Declarations,
approved in the Parliament of France; and accompanying all these unjust
proceedings with sundry Insolences, Calumnies and Contempts of sacred persons.
And having also observed, that this so long continence of ours at so manifold
injuries has served to no other purpose, but to make our enemies more
audacious and insolent, and that the compassion we have had of France has
drawn on the ruin of those whom God had put under the obedience of their
Majesty's: For these considerations, according to the power which we have
received from his Imperial Majesty, we have commanded our Armies to enter
into France, with no other purpose then to oblige the King of France to come to
a good and secure Peace, for removing those impediments, which may hinder this
so great a good. And for as much as it principally concerns France to give
end to these disorders, we are willing to believe that all the Estates of that
Kingdom will contribute not only their remonstrances, but also if need be,
their forces to dispose their King to Chastise those who have been the Authors
of all these Wars, which these seven or eight years past have been in
Christendom; and who after they have provoked and assailed all their
neighbors, have brought upon France all those evils which she does now suffer,
and draw on her those other which do now threaten her. And although we are well
informed of the weakness and devisions, into which these great disorders and
evil counsels have cast her; yet we declare, that the intentions of their
Mastjesties, are not to serve themselves of this occasion to ruin her, or to
draw from thence any other profit, then by that means to work a Peace in
Christendom, which may be stable and permanent.

For these reasons, and withal to show what Estimation their Majesty's do make
of the prayers of the Queen Mother of the most Christian King, we do give to
understand, that we will protect and treat as friends all those of the French
Nation, who either jointly or severally shall second these our good designs;
and have given Order that Neutrality shall be held with those of the Nobility,
and with the Towns which shall desire it, and which shall refuse to assist those
who shall oppose the good of Christendom, and their own safety; against whom
shall be used all manner of hostility, without giving quarter to their persons,
or sparing either their houses or goods. And our further will is, that all men
take notice that it is the resolution of their Majesty's not to lay down Arms,
til the Queen Mother of the most Christian King be satisfied and contented,
til the Princes, unjustly driven out of their estates, be restored; and til
they see the assurances of peace more certain then to be disturbed by him who
has violated the treaties of Ratisbone, and others made before, and sithence
he has had the managing of the affairs of France. Neither do we pretend to
draw any other advantage from the good success, which it shall please God to
give unto our just prosecutions, then to preserve and augment the Catholic
Religion, to pacify Europe, to relieve the oppressed, and to restore to every
one that which of right belongs unto him.

Given at Ments, the fifth of July. 1636.
FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Table of the most Remarkable Things.
A
AGnus Dei 38 Alchimie 75 Alchoran false, because not to be disputed 194
Alfons. d'Este turns Capuchin. 243. Ancre Marquess would get the Duchy of
Alanson and Constables Office into his hands, in arere to the Crown of France
for 80000 pounds 195 Anderson Edmund 73 Anne of Bullen Queen of England sues to
King Henry, that her enemies may not be her accusers and Judges, protests her
innocence, declares the causes of the Kings change, begs the lives of her
brother, and the other Gentlemen, 9, 10 Archbishop of Dublin affronted by the
Friars 241 Ashton Sir Walter 130, 132, 138, 139 Austria House 114
B.
Bacon Sir Nicholas, Lord Keeper, 69. Antony and Francis friends to the Earl of
Essex, 32. Francis after Lord Verulam, and Viscount St. Alban, his discourses
to the Earl concerning Ireland, 42, 43, etc. concerning Tyrone, 44. his huge
opinions of the Earl of Essex 45 46 47. against the Subsidy in Parliament; how
54 68. makes ways to get into King James his favor, 56 58. expostulates with,
and advises Sir Edward Cook 60 61. expostulates with Sir Vincent Skinner 66.
would be Solicitor 68 69 71. his good services to the Crown 72 See Bodley Sir
Thomas. Balsac impudently abuses King James and Qu. Elizabeth, 198, 199.
flatters the French King grossly 200 201 Barbarians of old placed justice and
felicity in the sharpness of their swords 47 Bavaria Duke linked with the
House of Austria 135. designed Elector of Rhine 113. seiseth part of the
Palatinate 131 Bevayr Chancellor of France discharged, complains to the King
to the Government, 193 194 195 196. Commanded to discharge an account for 80000
li. 195. ha^ no other fauls, but that he is an honest man 196 Bishops, in what
manner parts of the Commonwealth 5. submitted to Kings 6. chief against the
Mass 233. too remiss 185 Bodeley Sir Thomas against Sir Francis Bacons new
Philosophy 74 75 76. For settled opinions and Theoremes 76 77 78 Bouillon Duke
37 198 Bristol Earl. See Digby Lord. Brograve Attorney of the Duchy, 69 Broke
George 79 80 Brunswic Christian Duke 148 Buckingham Duke chosen Chancellor of
Cambridg 213. unkindness between him and Bristol. 151. and Olivarez, ibid.
murdered 220. See Charles King. Burleigh Lord for Kings, and against
usurpation 136
C
Caecil Sir Robert after Earl of Salisbury, in France 36. a friend to Sir
Francis Bacon 69 70 Caesar d' Este Du. of Modena 243 Calvinists dangerous 112
Cambridg, differences betwixt the Town and University 223 Car Earl of Somerset
86 Carlo Don Infant of Spain 126 Carlo Alessandro of Modena 243 Carlton Sir
Dudley Ambassador in the Low Countries 145 Caron Sir Noel Ambassador in
England from the Low Countries 92 93 Cassal S. Va^ beleaguered by the Spaniard
239 Causes of conscience growing to be faction 38 Charles King of great
Britain, engagement of his person in Spain, cause why things were not carried
on to the height 15^ See Gregory Pope His piety and care toward the Hugonots of
France 206. acknowledged by them after the loss of Rochel 208 209. his opinion
of the Duke of Buckingham 214 215. A great lover of the University of Cambridg,
220 223. Will rule according to the Laws, will give the Judges leave to deliver
and bail prisoners according to Magna Charta and the Statutes, 231. forbids
hearing of Mass 232. careful to root out Papistry in Ireland 242. commands the
house in Dublin to be pulled down where the Friars appeared in their habits 241
Charles the Fifth 145 Church Orders by K. James, 193 of England, its service
damnable by the Popes decree 40 Clergy where punished 6 Cleves and Juliers
pretended to, 123 124 Clifford Sir Coniers 42 Coeur Marquess 240 Coke Sir
Edward disgraces Sir Francis Bacon 60. described 62 63 College of Dublin 52
Colomma Don Carlo 152 Commission for the Deputies place of Ireland 13. for
delivery of Vlushing Bril, etc. 92 93. of union of the Kingdoms 72 Conde Prince
204 254 Conscience not to be forced 51 Considerations touching the service in
Ireland 49 50 Constable of France, the Office intended to be taken away by
Henry the Great 195 Cornwallis Sir Charles Ambassador in Spain 95 Cottington
Sir Francis, after Lord 130 Critory Secretary of France 38 Custom of Spain to
give notice of visits 120
D
Danish King 94 148 149 Davers Lord 253 Davison Secretary in disgrace 22 See
Essex Earl. Defiance to the Emperor Maximilian from the Grand Seignieur 12
Deputy of Ireland his power 13 14 Desmond Earl dissembles dutifulness 18. his
Rebellion 45 Digby Lord after Earl of Bristol, in Spain, treats concerning the
Match, 117 118 119 120 121, etc. zealous for it, 138 139 140 142 Sir Kenhelm
240 244. See Fairy Queen. Directions for preaching 184, etc. Discipline, See
Presbytery. Disloyalty, the doom of it seldom adjourned to the next world, 46
E
Egerton Sir Thomas Lord Ellesmere and Lord Chancellor, a friend to the Earl
of Essex 27 87 to Sir Francis Bacon 71 sues to be discharged 87 88 89 Elizabeth
Queen of England comforts the Lady Norris 10 11 her care for Ireland 5 16 50.
cast not off her creatures slightly, 32. Questions the Earl of Essex in the
Star Chamber unwillingly and forced 32 33. Her Government in things
Ecclesiastical, she will not force men's consciences, 38 39 40. her dealing with
Papists 39. See Walsingham Sir Francis. Gives stipends to preachers 52 Essex
Earl, a lover of Secretary Davison 20 21, etc. would bring him again into
favor, 22 25. writes to King James in his defense 23. to the Queen, being
less graced and discontented, 25 26. will not approve the Chancellors advice,
29. suddenly before his Rebellion, Religious 35
F
Fairy Queen, the 22d Staff of the ninth Canto of the second Book discoursed
of by Sir Kenhelm Digby 244 etc. Faulkland Viscount Lord Deputy of Ireland 235
236. Petitions the King for his son imprisoned in the Fleet 242 Ferdinand the
second will not restore the Palatine 112 113 etc. ai^s to settle the Empire
perpetually in the house of Austria, 113. abuses K. James, 113 115 116 146 his
Armies in Italy 234 235 Ferdinand Infanta of Spain 254 Feria Duke 102
Fitzwilliams Sir William 42 Frederic father 123 Frederic the 2d Palatine 146
147 Frederic the fifth, driven out of his estates 112 113 116. will not quit
the electorate nor submit 145. see 198 French, the estate of things in the
minority of Lewis the thirteenth 195. authority of the French King ibid. French
Kings reverence the exhortations of Popes as much as the Commands of God 213
G
Gabor Bethlem Prince of Transylvania 113 l46 Gage employed at Rome 129 130
Giron Don Hernando 130 Gondomar Conde 130 Gregory the 15 puts the Inquisitor
General of Spain upon it to gain the Prince of Wales to the Church of Rome,
fearful of his stay in the Spanish Court 210 unreasonable in the business of
the dispensation 130 Groillart Claude President of the Parliament of Rhoan 36
Guise Duke 240
H
Heretics abuse Scripture 2 Hall Bishop of Exceter 229 Harrington Sir Henry 18
Heidelberg taken by the Spaniards 127 Henry the 8 writes to the Clergy of York
in defense of his title, Caput Ecclesiae 1 2 3 4 5 etc. Henry the 4 of France
36 Hessen Landgrave Philip 145 Homily books 184 Hoskins Sir Thomas 59 Hugonots
of France acknowledge many obligations to Charles King of great Britain 204 205
Persecuted 205 206
I
Jacynthus father 109 112 Jagerndorf, Brandenburg, Marquess John Georg 116
James King of great Britain described 59. will take care of London 81 yields up
Vlushing etc. 94 95 his fairness to the Spanish King 100 101. will not make
Cambridge a City, his care of the University 105. Endeavors to appease the
Bohemian tumults 113 Offers Conditions to the Emperor on the behalf of the
Palatine 114. his Propositions to the Palatine 143 144. acknowledged Protector
of the Germane Protestants 149. his directions concerning Preachers 183. makes
Romano Martyrs 199 Janin President of the Parliament of Paris 195 Infantasque
Duke 98 Inquisition of Spain 97 Instructions to Sir John Perot Deputy of
Ireland 15 16 By King Charles for the University of Cambridg 227 Ireland in
what condition in Sir John Perots time 16 17 18 In the beginning of King
Charles 235 236 237 238 239 Irish delight in change 17. barbarous 46. murder,
theft etc. legal with them 51. renegadoes in Spain 100 101 Isabella Clara
Eugenia Infanta of Spain 127 128 Isabella Infanta of Savoy 243 Isidore Spanish
Saint 125 126 Italians dangerous to France 195 196 Justinian made Laws
concerning the Clergy 5
K
Kings, no man above them 6. like the Sun 36. of France and Spain 198
L
Lady of Antiochia 125 Laws of England most jealous for the safety of her
Kings 85 Leicester Earl out of favor, turns religious 31 Lecturers dangerous
186 Lerma Duke in the life of Phil. the third moves the Spanish Match 117 etc.
121 Lincoln Bishop Lord Keeper 190 Lisle Viscount after Earl of Leicester,
governor of Vlushing etc. 93 Loanes denied the King 182 London sometime the
chamber of her Kings 81 Louis the thirteenth in his minority 123 etc. enters
Rochel 203. see Urbane Pope Louvre of France the prison of her King 194 Low
Countries 149 Luenza Don John 126
M
Mac Frogh Phelim 237 Magic 75 Magog a renegado Irishman guilty of thirteen
murders 101 Manchester Earl 225 Manheim besieged 127 Mansfield Count 116 131
Married men seven years older the first day 71 Mantua Duke 204 234. defended by
the French and Venetians 239 Maria Donna Infanta of Spain 126 133 134.
deserved well of the Prince of Wales 140 Gives over learning English 151 Match
with France 117 118. with Spain 117 118 119 120 121 122 123. never intended by
the Spaniards 133 Mathews Sir Toby 67 May Sir Humphrey 226 Merchants in Spain,
see Spaniards Merit is worthier them fame 47 Monmorencie Duke 195 Monpensier
Duke 36 Montauban in rebellion 204 Monteri Spanish Ambassador 210 Mountjoye
Lord, after Earl of Devon 35 36 Munster in Ireland marked for the Spanish
invasions 17
N
Nevers Duke, see Mantua Duke. Newburgh Duke 147 Norfolk Duke sues to the Queen
for his life. 11 Norris Sir Thomas, 17. Sir John 42. Sir Francis 89
Northumberland Earl 58, 59 Nottingham Countess 95
O
Oath of Supremacy, why urged 39 Odonnel 44 Ognate Spanish Ambassador at Rome
240 Oleron Island 203 Olivarez Conde 130 131 139 Contrives to compose the
Palatine differences without the Match. 135 Order submitting the Town of
Cambridge to the University 223 See Charles King. Ordination of Priests, etc.
how to be 187 Ormond Earl 42 44 45 Ossuna Duke 125 126
P
Palatinate a motive of the Spanish match 129 134. Without which the Kings of
England will do nothing 136 138 141 143 151. Dismembered 147 Parliaments
tumultuous 229 230 Pastrana Duke 142 Patent for the Admiralty of Ireland 90
Perez Don Antonio Secretary to Philip the Second of Spain 100 Perrot Sir John
Deputy of Ireland 13. His care of that Kingdom 17 Philip the Second of Spain
transplants whole Families of the Portugese 51 Philip the Third of Spain upon
his deathbed 125, etc. Philips Sir Robert 155. Francis his brother ibid.
Physic modern 75 Pius Quintus his Excommunication of the Queen because of the
Rebellion in the North 39 Polander defeats the Turks 198 Pope not more holy
then S. Peter, 8 Tyranny of Popes 29 Powder plot 67 Pretense of conscience 38
Preachers, Licenses to preach 183 Directions for preaching 184 Presbytery as
mischievous to private men as to Princes, 41. See Puritans. Priesthood how to
be honored 4 5 Princes to be obeyed, and by whom, ibid. by Christ's Law 7.
Supreme Heads 5. Driven out, must not give their Usurpers too long time to
establish themselves 147 Privy Seal for transporting of Horse 217 Puritans in
the time of Queen Elizabeth 40. Would bring Democracie into the Church, promise
impossible wonders of the Discipline 41. Fiery, Rebellious, contemn the
Magistrate, ibid. Feared, not without cause, by King James 193
Q
Quadrivials 75
R
Ranelagh in Ireland 237 Rawleigh Sir Walter 85, 86 Ree Island 203 Rich
Baronness sister to Essex, writes to the dishonor of the Queen and advantage
of the Earl 32 Richardson Chief Justice of the Bench 228 Richer forced by
Richlieu, recants his opinions against the Papal Supremacy over Kings 196
Richlieu Cardinal greatly solicitous for the English Roman Catholics 197
Rochel 200. in what condition at the surrender 202 203. Fifteen thousand dye of
the famine ibid. Rohan Duchess in Rochel during the siege 202. Duke 204 206
208 210 Romish Priests seduce the subjects from their obidience, their
practices against the Queens sacred person 39 40 Roman Catholick^^ sue to King
James at his entrance for toleration 82 83. great lovers of him the only good
subjects (witness the Mine then plotted) 82 their Religion upon their own words
83 84 Russel Sir William 237 Ruthuen, after Lord Ruthuen unhandsomely used by
the Earl of Northumberland 106 107
S
St. John Oliver against Taxes contrary to Magna Charta, etc. would not have
Oaths violated in which the divine Majesty is invocated, fearful of the
Archbishops Excommunication 160 Saxony Elector 114 Scandal what 97 Scriptures
how to be expounded 2 3 Seminaries blossom 39 in Ireland seditious, appear in
their habits 240 241 Serita Don John 125 Sin immortal to respect any of the
English Church 101 Southampton Earl 58 Spaniards design upon Ireland 17 spoil
base Bologne, 37. lose their Apostles, 47. wrong and oppress the English
Merchants, 97 98 99 102 103. suits in Spain immortal, ibid. give pensions to
the Irish renegadoes, 100 101. unreasonable in the business of the Match, 127
137 146. swear and damn themselves, yet never intended it 132 etc. their
unworthy sleights to make K James jealous of the Prince and others, 152 153.
oppose the rights and succession of the Duke of Nevers to Mantua and
Montferrat, 234 lose their silver Fleet, poor, 240 Spencer Edmund, see Fairy
Queen his worth and Learning, 45 252 Spinola Marquess 198 199 Spiritualia how
to be taken 5 6 Stanley Sir William 18 Superstition worse then Atheism, 160
Supreme Head the Kings Title, 1: 2, etc. 39
T
Tilly Count 131 Toirax Governor of the Fort in the I Will of Ree 201 Toledo
Cardinal 123 Toleration of Religion in Ireland necessary 52 Treason of the
Papists in the clouds 40 cannot beget f^ir passions 86 Treaty with Tyrone 43
44. of Bruxels 127 128 Trimouille Duke 37 Turks against the Pander 198 Tyrone
43 44 101
V
Valette Cardinal 197 Venetians side with the Mantouan 239 240 Villeroye
Secretary of France 195 Urban the Eight encourages Louis the Thirteenth to fall
upon the Hugonots, 211 212. against the Spaniards 240 Usurpers exhalations 37
W
Wallop Sir Henry has ill Offices done him to the Queen 19 Walsingham Sir
Francis his reasons why the Queen sometimes restrains and punishes the
Puritans 38 Warham Archbishop of Canterbury 98 Warrants of the Queen to the
Lords of Ireland, at the going over of Sir John Perot 14 15 Weston Sir Ridhard
Chancellor of the Exchequer, after L. Treasurer, and Earl of Portland. 128
Wilks Sir Thomas 36 37 Willoughby Lord, 90 Winchester Bishop 189 Words are to
be construed to make truth 8
Y
Yelverton Sir Henry censured in the Starchamber, 107 108 109 Ynoiosa
Marquess, 152. his base carriage to King James 153
Z.
Zunige Don Balthazar 109 112, etc. 130
FINIS.

