A SERMON Preached before The Religious Societies In the City of Dublin, On the
29th of September. 1695. Together with the method to be observed by them at their
Meetings, and the Laws of their Society, with the 39 Articles of the Church of
Ireland,

By B. Scroggs, D. D.

Dublin, Printed for Jacob Milner and are to be Sold at his Shop over against
the End of Essex-Bridge in Essex-street. 1695

To the several Religious Societies in the Kingdom of Ireland.
Brethren,
I Have Published this short Discourse according to your Request, and if you
are profited by it, and encouraged to prosecute the Good Work you are engaged
in, I am not much concerned what Censure the world may pass upon it. I have
also added the Laws and Method to be observed by all your Societies through the
whole Kingdom, and have made a few alterations, and such additions as you
desired in the devotion used at your Meetings; and if in any thing else I can
serve you, I shall neither spare my pains nor my prayers for you, nor any
charges as far as my abilities extend.

And now I must beg leave to put you in mind of a Duty which I have so
Frequently and Earnestly urged and repeated heretofore, that above all things
you avoid all dissentions and divisions, the fatal Rock upon which the noblest
designs do so often split and miscarry, and which has almost ruined
Christianity it self, against which no persecution nor malice of the Enemy
could ever prevail. And therefore beware lest you receive any into your
Societies that come for this end, to disturb and distract you, not out of
ill will to Religion in general, but to the Established Church, which by your
examples is likely to be increased as well as edified. Avoid all disputes, and
then you cannot fall into any violence of passion: and if you should be angry,
you must stifle it in the beginning, and never suffer it to proceed to a
division or separation, or a settled grudge or animosity between parties. And
to this end let every single man resolve to reconcile his Brethren when they
are at difference; and let all in general agree to put strictly in Execution
that Law which you have for this purpose. And may the Favorer and Protector of
all good designs continue and increase the success of your Endeavors, and give
you courage, and prudence, and perseverance, and all the Graces that are
necessary to carry on this great and blessed Undertaking. This shall always be
the Prayer of

Your most Affectionate Brother and Humble Servant. B. Scroggs.

Acts of the Apost. 2 Chap. 42 Verse. And they continued steadfastly in the
Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, and in Breaking of Bread, and in Prayers.


THo I mention only this Verse for my Text, yet my design is to take for my
Subject all the manners and customs of the first and best of all Christians
described in this and the following Chapters by the Evangelist St. Luke: and
because my discourse is intended only for those societies of young men that
have lately assembled themselves with design to imitate that primitive Zeal and
Piety; I shall take leave to speak only what is proper to them, and that also in
a more plain and familiar way than is usal in this place.

All good men must be Transported with joy, to see any thing in this wicked age
like that Fervor and Life of Religion that ran through the whole body of the
Primitive Church. It should be as pleasant and surprising as to find Life
returning into the eyes and limbs of a dead friend: and certainly, if ever
Christianity be recovered, it must be by such means as are now beginning to be
used; it must be by religious societies and combinations against the Enemy of
our souls, by which we warm, and excite, and encourage, and direct one another,
and to think to do this by the zeal, or prudence, or the labors of single men,
is as great a folly as to expect the conquest of our temporal enemies by
sending one man at a time to wage war with their whole armies. I might insist
long upon this subject, in showing the use and necessity of societies for the
reducing of piety to its primitive vigor; but at present twill be sufficient
to justify and recommend to all good men these particular societies from the
practice of those Christians mentioned in my Text; for tho they cannot equal
'em in that extraordinary degree of Piety, nor imitate 'em in the miraculous
power of the spirit* yet it is plain that they resemble 'em in most other
respects, as I shall now prove by several instances.

1st. The Christians mentioned in my Text did often meet and converse together,
to improve one another in Piety, and onflame each others Zeal: and this I take
to be the meaning of the word, Fellowship, in my Text; not only the fellowship
of the Apostles (tho this must also be understood) but fellowship with one
another in their houses, and in the absence of the Apostles. For the number of
the new Converts being then so great, that at one Sermon no fewer than
threethousand were converted, it was impossible that the Apostles should every
day be present at every Congregation or Assembly in their houses, And besides,
we have examples of such Meetings in the Scriptures, where the people in the
absence of the Clergy have met together in a private way for devotion and other
holy ends: as we find in the 12th Chapt. of the Acts, where, upon the
disporsion and flight of the Apostles, Peter came to the house of Mary, and
found there many Disciples gathered together for Prayer. Now tho these
Assemblles of Christians were in this unlike our Societies, that the people in
them were of all ages and sexes and conditions, but here only men under certain
qualifications are admitted; yet their example will warrant and justise our
practice; and if one be lawful, the other is at least as warrantable, since the
design and consequence of their meeting is the same, as I shall show it to be
hereafter. In the mean while we shall suppose 'em thus far to be like, in their
meeting together in houses for private Religious exercises. And,

2dly, They are also like in respect of the time of their meeting, which was
chiefly upon the Lord's Day. This day was Consecrated at first by the Apostles
and Primitive Christians assembling upon it for several religious ends: and tho
these Assemblies met daily, and kept holy every day of the week and every day
of their lives, yet the day they kept most holy was the Lord's Day, as we read
in the 20th of the Acts and the 7th verse. Upon the first day of the week when
the Disciples came together to break bread; that is, to receive the Sacrament:
In which place we may observe that the whole day was kept holy and spent in
Religious exercises; for St. Paul continued his preaching till it was midnight;
and tho this was more than ordinary, because the Apostle was to leave 'em next
morning, yet the Primitive Writers do all speak as if the day were wholly and
entirely dedicated to Religious uses. And this I mention, because there are
some that pretend to observe the Lord's Day, and yet spend the greatest part of
it in any indifferent employment or recreation no way serviceable to the ends
of Religion. Now this being one of the principal ends of your meeting together,
this must needs be a great encouragment to you, that in this you resemble the
blessed Saints of the pure and primitive Church.

3dly, We find in my Text, that they continned steadfastly in the Apostles
Doctrine: They were all of one Faith and one Church, and had no controversies
nor difference of opinion; for their business was not to dispute about notions
and empty speculations, but those few fundamental truths which the Apostles
taught 'em, they all unanimously agreed in, and proceeded upon this foundation
to build the superstructure of a holy and devout Life. And this being one of
your Laws, and the chief foundation of your Societies, that your members shall
all be of one Church, and one Religion, and shall continue steadfastly, in the
Apostles Doctrine, in the Doctrine of the Apostolical Church Established in
this Kingdom; and that they shall not meddle with disputes and controversies,
but wholly apply themselves to works of Piety I need not insist longer upon
your agreement with them in this particular; but only exhort and entreat you to
keep up to this principle, and as you tender the preservation of your
Societies, never to admit of controversies in Religion, nor of such men as are
addicted to 'em, but to exclude all that are not peaceably inclined. And tho
you are to love your enemies, yet you must deny 'em this kindness, of making
'em members of your Societies before they are members of your Church: For if
they tear the Church asunder when they have so many commands in the Scripture
for the contrary, how can you expect they should preserve an inviolable union
with you? but if you do in a kind and amicable way refuse to join with 'em, you
will both secure your selves, and in time gain Proselytes to the Church.

4thly, They continued also in breaking of bread, that in receiving the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper: But whether this was daily or weekly, it does
not certainly appear in the Scriptures. For by the 46th verse of this Chapter
it seems to have been daily. And they continued daily in the Temple, and
breaking of bread from house to house: as if he had said, that they went every
day to the Temple to pray, as the custom was among the devout Jews, and from
thence they went to their houses, and broke bread, or received the Communion
together from the Apostles hands, which at that time they were forced to do
privately in their houses. But in the 20th Chapter we find that the first day
of the week was particularly set apart for Celebrating this Solemnity; and by
that time it is likely they found it inconvenient to receive every day, and
therefore appointed one day in the week to be for ever kept holy on this
account chiefly, and to serve instead of the Jewish Sabbath. This practice of
theirs you do in some measure imitate by your monthly Communion, to which you
oblige all your members, unless in cases of necessity and exraordinary
casualties: and I don't question but in time you may come up to the perfection
of Communitating weekly, and by your examples incite so many others, that all
the Clergy may be encouraged to administer the Sacrament every week in their
Churches; for this was done by the whole Primitive Church for many hundred
years; and this our Liturgy supposes to be done by us, where a Communion is
implied as often as the Communion-Service is ^read; and this would be truly and
properly observing the Lord's Day, which was first appointed for this purpose,
and consecrated chiefly by this Selemnity.

5thly, You find in my Text that they continued also in prayers; and so in the
12th Chapter, that they used to meet together for prayer, tho the Apostles were
not with them. Not only each family had its own family devotion, as we read of
Cornelius in the 10th Chapt. but several people met at one house to (...) up
and increase each other Devotion* For tho among^^ (...) Devotion is most cool
in public (...) Society does (...) it* as fuel added (...) and indeed all
(...) thrive and (...) example, and in (...). Now the word, (...) be taken in a
large sense, as (...) very often in the Scriptures, not only for petitions and
addresses immediately directed to God, but for reading the Scriptures, and for
pious Discourses, and any holy Exercise proper for such Societies. And in this
particular you also agree with these Primitive converts: Tho as to Prayer
strictly so taken, you are forced to be brief in that respect at your Meetings,
and those few Collects, you use to take 'em chiefly out of the Churches
Liturgy, lest you should be thought to despise the Churches Service, as too
many do in these licentious times.

6thly, Another Virtue which abounded in the first Christians, was that of
Charity or Almsgiving, For we are told in the verses following my Text, that
they had all things in common, and sold their possessions and goods, and parted
them to all men, as every man had need. And so in the 4th Chapter and 32th
Verse. -- That none of them said that ought of the things he possessed was his
own, but they had all things common. But this extraordinary degree, or rather
this way of Charity by selling and dividing their possessions, was proper to
that time, and that particular number of Christians, and not afterward
imitated, even by the Primitive Church. For then there was no danger nor
possibility of wanting, tho they sold their possessions, because the Divine
Providence had an extraordinary and particular care over those men, as appears
by that passage in the 11th Chap. of the Acts, where Agabus prophesied of a
Famine that was approaching, and gave warning to make provision for the Saints
that dwelt at Jerusalem, which were the people mentioned in my Text. And
besides, this Society of men being a sort of Nursery to the Catholic Church of
the whole World, and the members of it continually chosen out to be sent
abroad, they had reason to fell their Lands, and do many other things which are
not so necessary in a settled condition of the Church. The right imitation
therefore of these Christians consists in this, in being extraordinary
charitable to the utmost of our abilities; and if we have but little, in giving
gladly of that little: and yet if we have nothing, out charity may be like
theirs, as we find in the next Chapter, where St. Peter and St. John the chief
of all the Church had neither Gold nor Silver, and could give no Alms to the
poor Beggar. And thus you imitate the first Christians at your meetings, by
giving Alms according to your abilities, and making this one part of your
employment at that time, to consider what objects of charity are in greatest
want of your relief, and contribute your mite to 'em, which our Savior says,
is as great as all the treasures of rich men: and surely when others that are
more able to give Alms, are stirred up by your example, they will be ashamed to
give so sparingly as the custom is now among the wealthier sort of people.

Under this head of Charity I must add something concerning Justice to our
Neighbor, a Virtue most strictly observed by all the Primitive Christians, in
their contracts and dealings with other men. For tho it is not expressly
mentioned in this place, yet it is plainly intimated, and follows of necessity
from the other Virtue. For if they were so charitable as to give all their
Riches and Estates to the poor, they could not be supposed to do any act of
injustice, tho they might gain the whole World by it. And this I mention to
you, because by your professions you are always employed in those actions that
are the subject of Justice: and therefore as you have already gained a great
reputation for honesty and fair dealing, so I must beg and entreat you to take
a particular care hereafter of all your actions in reference to this duty; that
you may not be like the hypocrites of these times, that pretend piety, and
design advantage; but like the Christians in my Text, that thought of nothing
but the necessaries of Life, and despised riches and all other blessings when
they came in competition with the duties of Justice and Charity.

7thly. Another Virtue, and the last I shall mention, in which you agree with
them, is a servent zeal and concern for the conversion and salvation of other
men: the noblest of all the Graces, and the perfection and fullness, or rather
the overflowing of Religion and Piety; than which nothing can be more
acceptable to God, more serviceable to the Church, and more advantageous to
your own souls. For they that bring many to righteousness, shall shine like the
stars for ever and ever; and not only shall be like the Angels, but like the
Son of God, whose only business upon earth, was to reform and save Sinners from
destruction. Now, the Christians mentioned in my Text, were above all others
remarkable for this Virtue: they met together, as an heathen Author said of
'em, not to conspire against the Government, but against Injustice, and
Adultery, and other Sins: and all their ambition, and their whole employment
was, to root out Errors and Irreligion from the hearts of men. And tho it was
the peculiar office of the Apostles* and Ministers of the Gospel, to Preach
publicly to others, yet to admonish and instruct privately they thought their
duty, and never rested from performing it. Thus in the 18th Chap. of the Acts,
Aquila and Priscilla took Apollos to them, and in private expounded the way of
God to him more perfectly. And such expressions as these are common in St.
Paul's Epistles: Greet Aquila and Priscilla my helpers in Christ; Salute
Tryphena and Tryphosa, who labor in the Lord. For if the people had not been
zealous in promoting the common work of Piety, and true Religion, by
admonishing and instructing in a private way every man his own Friends and
Acquaintances, it is impossible that the few Apostles and Clergy of those times
should have gained the tith of those innumerable proselytes to Goodness and
Christianity: And the same thing may be affirmed of this present age, that if
others do not help the Clergy, and contribute what assistance is proper for
them toward the work of Reformation, we must expect that Virtue will still
decay, and the World grow worse, and more irreligious every day.

I know few or none, excepting your selves, that are sensible of this duty; but
you have endeavored to imitate the pattern set before you in my Text; and have
made your selves like the first Christians, a nursery and seminary of Virtue,
and good Morality, and true Religion; and God has showed his approbation of
your design, as he did in the first planting of Christianity, by the great
success of your labors, and the extraordinary increase of your number in so
short a time as it has been since you begun this work: so great an increase,
that if it should continue in the same proportion but a few years longer,
Virtue would become the fashion, and Vice grow scandalous for want of number to
encourage and defend it. I might here use a multitude of arguments, to show how
it is your duty, and your interest; your eternal interest, and the interest of
the Church and Kingdom, that you should continue steadfast and immovable in this
Virtue; and how increase and multiply, is not only the first and most necessary
command of the Creation, but in a spiritual sense of the Gospel also, and the
Christian Religion. But my design was to press upon you this and the other
duties only by the motive of conforming your selves to the first and best of
all Christians, which I thought was most likely to prevail upon all that have
the right and genuine temper of Christianity.

And thus far I have made the comparison between you and them in 7 Particulars.
1 In meeting together to carry on the public work 2 In meeting upon the
Lord's Day to keep that holy. 3 In continuing steadfastly in one Apostolical
Faith. 4 In breaking of bread, or receiving the Communion frequently. 5 In
continuing also in Prayer both public and private. 6 In Charity or
Almsgiving. 7 In Zeal and Fervor, for the Conversion and Salvation of other
men. Which Rules of your Society may you always observe, and never sail to have
the same success with which God has hitherto blessed your endeavors.

But as you are like the first Christians in all these particulars, so you must
remember that there is one thing which I intimated at first, in which you
cannot resemble them; and that is the miraculous power of the Holy Ghost, which
for many years upheld and encouraged their endeavors. You must not expect, I
say, that God will work such wonders, as he did then, for your assistance and
encouragement; for the time of miracles is over, and therefore

In the 1st place, since you cannot depend upon miracles, be so much the more
careful and diligent in your work, and make up the want of them by resolution
and constancy. You will meet with the same obstacles and the same dangers,
excepting Martyrdom, but be not discouraged or frightened by it; some will laugh
at you, and others will censure and affront you, and perhaps your numbers may
not increase as you expect; but let not all this dishearten you, for your
design is noble and heroic, and your labor will be rewarded as much as if you
had converted the whole world to a sense of Piety and Religion.

2dly. Since you have no miracles to preserve you, nor any extraordinary
inspiration, such as the first Christians had, to direct you; therefore beware
of your selves and your own infirmities, lest they betray you into Error, and
ruin the glorious design you are engaged in. You must therefore resolve
strictly to observe all the Laws you have agreed to: you must not depend wholly
upon your own knowledge, but ask counsel of those that are wiser, and
especially your own Pastors: you must work out the salvation of other men, as
you do your own, with fear and trembling: you must rebuke without
censoriousness, and triumph over Sin without pride or insolence; and since you
are not infallibly guided by the Spirit, you must take a particular care of
avoiding all disputes and differences among your selves, for which there can be
no better way, than to resolve never to meddle with any controversy, no, not
concerning morality it self, so far as to fall into any heats and animosities
about it.

These Cautions, if you observe, and continue in your good resolutions, the
blessings of God will undoubtedly attend your endeavors, and the whole Nation
may in time feel the good effects of your labors. At least your own reward
will be extraordinary in proportion to the good you design, whether you succeed
or no. The Psalmist when he desired a blessing from God, to gain his favor,
made a vow to give him what he thought above all things would please him; which
thing if thou will grant me, then shall the righteous resort unto my company.
To live in the Society of good men, is the most acceptable offering we can make
to the Almighty, especially when good men meet together to increase the number
of the righteous, by instructing the ignorant, and reforming the wicked: this
is not only pleasing to God, but an occasion of joy to all the Angels in
Heaven, and he that increases now the joy of that place, may expect to partake
of it abundantly hereafter.

THE Method to be observed By The Several Religious Societies When they meet
together.
1st. AT their first meeting they may discourse of what Sermons they have
heard, what good Books they have seen and read, or upon any other pious
Subject, till a competent number be come together.

2. Then the Prelector (who is the same with the Steward) must begin the
Prayers with one or more of these Sentences.

Behold how good and joyful a thing it is, for Brethren to dwell together in
unity, Ps. 133. ver. 1.

Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come
not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them,
Eccles. 12 Chapter ver. 1.

Exhort one another while it is called to day, least any of you be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin; knowing, that he that converteth a Sinner
from the error of his ways, shall save a soul from death, and shall cover a
multitude of sins, James 5 Chapter ver. 20.

Then let every man kneel.

Prel. Let us Pray,

Lord have mercy upon us.

Ans. Christ have mercy upon

Prel. Lord have mercy upon us.

Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name; Thy Kingdom come, thy
Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven: Give us this day our daily bread, and
forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us; and lead
us not into Temptation, but deliver us from evil, for thine is the Kingdom, the
Power and the Glory, for ever and ever, Amen,

Prel. O Lord save thy Servants,

Ans. Who put their trust in thee.

Prel. Send us help from above,

Ans. And evermore mightily defend us.

Prel. Help us, O God, our Savior,

Ans. And for the glory of thy Name deliver us; be merciful to us Sinners, for
thy Names sake.

Prel. O Lord, save thy Servant, King William.

Ans. And give him the victory over all his Enemies.

Prel. O Lord, hear our Prayer,

Ans. And let our Cry come unto thee.

Prel. Let us Pray,

O God the strength of all them that put their trust in thee, mercifully accept
our Prayers: and because through the weakness of our mortal natures we can do
no good thing without thee, grant us the help of thy grace, that in keeping thy
Commandments we may please thee both in will and deed, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

Almighty God, who see that we have no power of our selves to help our
selves, keep us both outwardly in our bodies, and inwardly in our souls, that
we may be defended from all adversities that may happen to the body, and from
all evil thoughts which may assault and hurt the soul, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

O Almighty God who alone can order the unruly wills and affections of sinful
men, grant (...) to thy people, that they may love the thing which thou
command, and desire that which thou do promise that so among the sundry
and manifold changes of the World our hearts may surely there be fixed where
true joys are to be found, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

O Lord we beseech thee mercifully to hear us, and grant that we to whom thou
have given a hearty desire to Pray, may by thy mighty aid be defended and
comforted in all dangers and adversities, and devoutly given to serve thee in
all good works, to the glory of thy name, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Blessed Lord, who have caused all holy Scriptures to be written for our
learning, grant that we may in such wise hear them, read, mark, learn, and
inwardly digest them, that by patience and comfort of thy holy word, we may
embrace and ever hold fast that blessed hope of everlasting Life, which thou
have given us in our Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

Here all standing the Praelector shall say,

Prel. O praise the Lord with me.

Ans. Let us magnify his name together.

Prel. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

Ans. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, World without end,
Amen.

Then shall all say after the Prelector.

It is meet* right, and our bounden duty, that we should at all times, and in
all places, give thanks unto thee, O Lord, holy Father, Almighty, everlasting
God. Therefore with Angels and Archangels, and with all the company of Heaven,
we laud and magnify thy glorious name, evermore praising thee, and saying,
Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Hosts, Heaven and Earth are full of thy glory;
Glory be to thee, O Lord most high, Amen.

After this the Prelector shall name a Psalm, or part of a Psalm, which they
shall all sing.

3. Then the Prelecter shall read distinctly a Chapter or more out of the New
Testament, where it relates most to practice, together with Dr. Hammond's
paraphrase, or any other good comment, to be approved of by the Bishop, or some
Orthodox Minister of the Established Church.

4. Afterward he shall read a portion of some Exposition on the Church
Catechism, or some other practical good Book, to be approved of as above; and
this may be shorter or longer, according as the time will permit.

5. Then shall every man that is able, give his Alms for the Poor; and whilst
this is doing, the Prelector shall read as many of these following Sentences as
he thinks convenient.

Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in ^eaven, Mat. 5. 18.

Lay not up for your selves treasures upon Earth, where the rust and moth does
corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal; but lay up for your selves
treasures in Heaven, where neither rust nor moth does corrupt, and where
thieves do not break through and steal, Mat. 6. 19, 20.

While we have time, let us do good unto all men, and especially unto the^^ who
are of the household of (...) l. 6. 10.

God is not unri^^^eous, that he will forget your ^orks and labor, ^^at
proceeds of love, which love ye have showed for his names (...), who have
ministered to (...) Saints, and yet do minister, Heb. 6. 10.

To do good, and to distribute, forget not; for with such sacrifices God is
well pleased, He. 13. 16

Be merciful after thy power; if thou have much, give plenteously; if thou have
little, do thy diligence gladly to give of that little, for so gatherest thou
thy self a good reward in the day of necessity, Tob* 4. 8, 9.

He that has pity on the poor, lends unto the Lord; and look what (...)
^ayeth out, it shall be paid (...) again, Prove. 19. 17.

Blessed (...) that provideth (...) needy: the Lord shall deliver him in the
time of trouble, (...) 1. 1.

When they have given their alms, they shall (...) while, if they have time,
and discourse upon any pious subject that offers, viz. what objects of Charity
they know, particularly such as have lived well hcretofore: and what young men
of their acquaintance may be gained over to a virtuous conversation; and if
there be any difficulty, or case of Conscience necessary to be resolved, or any
religious affair to be settled, let it be then propounded, and calmly
discoursed of.

After which, let a Psalm be sung, and after that, let them all repeat the
Apostles Creed standing; and then let the Prelector conclude with these
Collects, every man kneeling.

C* Assist us mercifully, O Lord, in these our supplications and Prayers, and
dispose the way of thy servants toward the attainment of everlasting
salvation: that among all the changes and chances of this mortal life, they may
ever be defended by thy most gracious and ready help, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

O Almighty Lord, and everlasting God; vouchsafe, we beseech thee, to direct,
sanctify and govern both our hearts and bodies in the ways of thy laws, and in
the works of thy Commandments, that through thy most mighty protection both
here and ever, we may be preserved both in body and soul, through our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

Blessed Lord, who have taught us, that all our doings without Charity are
nothing worth; send thy Holy Ghost, and pour into our hearts that most
excellent gift of Charity; that we may love thee above all things, and
sincerely love our neighbor for thy sake, and endeavor the benefit of his
precious soul. Make us ever more fearful of his danger, than of his
displeasure, and more desirous of his good than of his favor. Give us
therefore Christian courage to reprove, wisdom to advise, council to direct,
and prudence to know how, and when, and what to speak, as we ought to do: and
O, let a spirit of reformation be in us, to put a stop to that profaness and
irreligion that reigns among us: and do thou magnify thy power in the weakness
of the instruments thou make use of. Give us clean and pure hearts, and so
strengthen our good resolutions with thy holy Spirit, that we may never faint,
nor grow weary of the work we have undertaken. And that it may be successful,
give us the spirit of Love, and Peace, and Unity, that no differences may ever
disturb us, or hinder our design of teaching Sinners thy ways, and drawing
others to thy love; that so when thou shall come to gather thy Saints together,
we may be found an acceptable people in thy sight: to whom, with the Father,
and the holy Spirit, be all praise and glory now and for ever, Awen.

O most holy and gracious Lord, who in the holy Scriptures have told us, that
tho we should perform all that thou have commanded, we are still unprofitable
Servants: we prostrate our selves before thee, with the lowest humility of soul
and body, acknowledging that we are but sinful dust and ashes, and not only
unprofitable, but disobedient, and ungrateful to thee: and we beseech thee to
inspire into our hearts such a sense of our own unworthiness, that no success
may make us high-minded, no perfections of our own make us proud and conceited,
nor the sins of other men make us uncharitable and consorious: that whilst we
endeavor to bring others into the way of Piety and Religion, we our selves may
not be cast away. O, let us not boast with the Pharisee, of our labors and
services, whatever they shall be, but rather with the Publican, smite our
breasts, and say, Lord be merciful to us sinners, through the merits of Jesus
Christ our Savior, Amen.

O GOD, our Refuge and Strength, who art the Author of all Godliness; hear, we
beseech thee, the devout Prayers of thy Servants; and grant that those things
which we have asked faithfully, we may obtain effectually, through Jesus Christ
our Lord, Amen.

The Lord bless us, and keep us; the Lord lift up his countenance upon us, and
give us Peace now and for evermore. Amen.

A Prayer to be used before the last Collect, by the Societies of Married men.
Taken out of the 91 Psalm.
O Almighty Lord, under whose defense and shadow, we and our Families do dwell
in security! We bless thy Name for all thy former mercies, and we beseech thee
to continue thy care and protection of us, and all our concerns. Thou art our
hope, and our strong hold, and our God, in whom we will trust; O defend us
under thy wings, and let us be safe under thy feathers, and let thy
faithfulness and truth be our shield and buckler. Let us not be afraid of any
terror by night, nor of the arrow that slieth by day; nor the pestilence that
walks in darkness, nor the sickness that destroys at noonday. Let no evil
happen unto us, nor any plague come nigh our dwellings; and give thy Angels
charge over us (and our Families) to keep us in all thy ways; that after thou
have blessed us with a good life in this world, thou may show us thy salvation
in the world to come. For the sake and merits of our Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

Rules to be consented to, and subscribed by such as desire to be Members of
the Religious Societics in the Kingdom of Ireland.
1. THE sole design of these Societies being to promote holiness of life, it is
necessary that all such as desire to be admitted into any one of the said
Societies, should in the first place firmly resolve to lead a regular life in
all soberness, righteousness, and godliness: and endeavor to keep their souls
in an habitual preparation for the worship of God, by the consideration of his
omnipresence, and pious reflections upon the daily occurrences of Providence.

2. None shall be of this Society, but such as own and manifest themselves to
be members of the Established Church of Ireland, and frequent as often as
conveniently they can, the Liturgy and holy Offices of the said Church, and
such as do not frequent, nor join with any other Church dissenting from it.

3. Every member of this Society shall come every Lord's Day to the place
appointed for the meeting of the Society, as soon as Evening Prayer and Sermon
is over; and if it can be done conveniently, about eight a Clock also in the
morning: and there must behave himself according to the method prescribed in
this case. But if any man absent himself, he must give his reason for it at the
next meeting; and if he absent himself habitually, he must be proceeded against
according to the 5th Rule.

4. All the power of every Society consists in the votes of the majority or
greater number. But because it is not couvenient upon every trifling matter to
proceed to votes, and also that confusion may be avoided, it will be necessary
to choose a Steward or Moderator once every quarter of a year, out of those
members that are of longest standing in the Society: and to leave to him the
ordering, and managing, and propounding, and executing of business. But if he
does any thing which others of the Society do not approve of, they may proceed
to votes, and order it according to the desire of the majority. The Steward is
to be the Prelector at their devotion, and he may name his successor, as the
custom has been: but if any one objects against him, he must be chosen by votes.

5. In the case of scandalous conversation, or any crime whatsoever, the person
offending is to be privately advised and admonished by his friends in the
Society to reform, and show his penitence by his future behavior. But if they
cannot prevail, the Steward, with the consent of the Society, is to pass a
public censure upon him, and warn him against a certain time, to assure the
Society of his sincere repentance and reformation: And if he shall continue
impenitent, he shall be ordered to withdraw, and not be admitted again till he
be fit for it, and earnestly desire it.

6. No man is to be admitted into the Society before a quarter of a years
trial, in which time he must be present at their meeting, but has no power nor
vote in any affair: and at his admission he may be desired by the Steward, to
tell the Society the reasons why he would be admitted a member of it.

7. Every member of this Society must endeavor to make other persons of his
acquaintance virtuous, and religious, and wise to salvation. But he must not
bring any such man to the place of meeting, without leave first obtained from
the Society.

8. He must solemnly offer up his private devotions to God Almighty, at least
every morning, and every night: and in his Prayers crave a blessing upon the
Societies.

9. It Is convenient that every man keep a Fast privately once a month, if at
his own disposal; and for this, to choose a time which the Church has appointed
for Fasting.

10. Every member is required to receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, if
possible, once a month, in his own Parish Church; and should endeavor to use
himself in time to a more frequent observation of that holy solemnity.

11. The members of this Society must visit and assist their Brethren when they
are sick, or under any other affliction; and as often as they have opportunity,
they must show the like Charity to all other men according to their abilities.

12. They must carefully shun all wicked company: but if it cannot be avoided,
they must take care not to show any sinful compliance; but to express their
dislike or abhorrence, if any sin be committed in word or deed by any one in
their company: They must altogether abstain from Gaming houses and other sinful
places, and as seldom as possible be at any public Houses, such as Alehouses
and Taverns; and when they are there, to avoid carefully all intemperance.

13. When any of 'em meet together, they shall take all occasions to promote
religious discourses, and not meddle with matters of Government, or any
unnecessary disputes and controversies.

14. There are some particular Vices which they must take a special care to
avoid; such as spiritual pride, and the effects of it; as railing, anger,
peevishness, and impatience of contradiction; and such also is the sin of
injustice in their dealings and contracts; which if it be not carefully
avoided, will make all religious Societies scandalous, and more hurtful than
advantageous to Religion.

15. The members of these Societies must take great care of giving others an
occasion of censuring them, by any affected gesture, carriage, or discourse in
their ordinary conversation.

16. If any dispute happens between two members, the rest shall endeavor to
reconcile 'em. But if any great and dangerous difference should happen which
cannot well be decided and ended among themselves, they shall all be obliged to
stand to the judgment of their Parish Minister, and if he cannot end the
Controversy, they must finally appeal to the Bishop of the Diocese.

17. The Societies have power to make such Rules among themselves, as shall
appear hereafter to be necessary or convenient, with the approbation of the
Bishop.

FINIS.

