A TREATISE AGAINST Drunkenness: Described In its NATURE, KINDS EFFECTS and
CAUSES, Especially that of Drinking of HEALTHS.

To which are added, two short SERMONS Of S. Augustine's, De Tempore.

Faithfully Translated, By MATTHEW SCRIVENER.

-- Crimen placuisse putavit. LONDON: Printed for Charles Brown, Bookseller in
Cambridge. 1685.

AN ADVERTISEMENT.
SUpposing that some casting their Eye on this ensuing Treatise, may be
impatient before they peruse it, to understand what I mean, so daringly to
appear in public upon this Subject, I hold my self obliged to offer this short
Defense of my self; viz. That it is the undoubted Right, as well as Duty, of
every good Subject to Arm, when the King takes the Field against the Common
Enemy. Almighty God therefore having, amongst many other Divine Resolutions and
Heroical Motions, pu^ into the heart of our Dread Sovereign, to make War
against the Beast, (as the Scripture speaks, Revel. 19. 19.) or rather Beasts
of Luxury and Drunkenness, so far in vading and wasting this Nation; as I
accounted it saf^ under so great Protection so likewise seasonable under so
wise a Conduct, to shoot this my Bolt (as the Saying is) at them also; and that
foreseeing how apt many will be to make that Saying complete, by calling it A
Fools, and soon shot. For as the World was never more witty to Madness, in
despising all Checks contradicting its humor, than now; so, on the other side,
it was never more wise in studying Self-security, and keeping out of harms way,
by offending no Man or Party, any ways able to retaliate. And who indeed is so
low and weak, who may not meet with an opportuuity so to do, in some degree?
But if all Men were so wise, this Land would have a great many more
Philosophers (such as they may be) than good Christians, good Subjects, o^ good
Men: no private security or felicity being durable, where the Public is shaken
or corrupted by such Vices, which the practicers of, themselves, in their lucid
Intervals and most retired Thoughts do condemn in themselves. And therefore
this undertaking of mine being fenced so well with the best Authority in Heaven
and on Earth, and justified by so powerful a Witness in those very Breasts
which otherwise may dislike this Design, why should I distrust God, or call in
question the Ingenuity and Candor of my Reader so far, as to despond or
despair of ^ desired event? to induce the better to which end, I have endeavored
to fortify my weak Interest in Men's Consciences by the accession o^ the weight
and worth of tha^ Holy and Learned Father St. Augustine, in his two Se^mons De
Tempore on the lik^ occasion, punctually Tran^lated, and joined hereunt^ Which
if any man sha^ endeavor to weaken, b^ calling in question the G^nuinesse of
those Sermon^ I shall not here enter into dispute about them, an^ further than
by affirming that many of them are undoubtedly his; and nothing appears
disproving these to be truly St. Augustines: And if they were not, yet must be
of some grave and zealous Father, more to be valued and listened to, than any
Authority can possibly be brought to the contrary: which having advised my
Reader of, I refer him for a further account of my present Undertaking, to what
immediately follows: beseeching God Almighty to give that success to it, which
rather the Merits o^ the Cause, than the mann^^ of the Plea, may reasonabl^
claim.

The CONTENTS.
Section I. THe General Occasions and Design of this ensuing Treatise. Page 1.
^^ct. II. Of the Nature and Kinds of Drunkenness. p. 10. ^ect. III. The
common Excuses used by Drunkards, considered. p. 29. ^ect. IV. The Word of God
expressly declaring against Drunkenness. p. 52, ^ect. V. Of the several evil
Enormities and Ominousnesses, and Absurdities of Drunkenness in any Nation.
page 64. ^ect. VI. The several Inconveniences and Mischiefs public and private
of Intemperate Drinking, touched. p. 79. Sect. VII. Some general Causes of t^^
prevailing Sin of Drunkenness r^cited. p. 10 Sect. VIII. An eighth reason of
the (...) crease of Drunkenness, Drinking Healths. p. 11 The Two hundred and
one and thirti^^^ Sermon of St. Augustine, De Te^pore, Of shunning Drunkennes^
p. 15 The Second Sermon of St. Augustin^ of avoiding Drunkenness. p. 17
A TREATISE AGAINST Drunkenness.
SECTION I. The General occasions and design of this ensuing Treatise.
I Am not ignorant or unsensible of the great and many prejudices I, and this
naked Discourse may be subject unto, encountering grand an Enemy and overgrown
Monster as the vice of Drunkenness in this present Age, if not in this Nation:
and therefore could as politickly and contentedly, as wiser and greater, and
learneder Heads, have rested quietly in safe silence, under the protection of
privacy and inoffensive nesse to all men; or venturing abroad at least
concealed my name, as o^ some other occasions I have, thereby avoiding the
sharp and severe Censure of diverse, who of no base extraction fortune, order,
Civil or Ecclesiastical have either directly or obliquely give^ too much
countenance and credit to this prevailing Vice; especially by the use of
Healths, not always, but to^ frequently tending to, and ending i^ a very evil
Event, against which I d^rect my feeble Forces. For as it is observed of Tully
too vehemently accusing Clodius, a very lewd Fellow indeed, but having many and
gre^^ Friends in Rome, these took his fervo^^ so ill, that they combining
togeth^^ procured his Banishment; so might I fear, by this my plainness and
freedom of Speech, to fall under the heavy revenge of such, who, though they
cannot deny Drunkenness is a notorious Sin, and now prevails, have such a
kindness for it in a ^orner, that they may take an occasion therefrom to
condemn the severe Adversary to it, as their pleasure prompts them. And I am
not so daring as bold as I am) to bid defiance (as ^ome Writers in a good cause
have ^one) to any man, professing my self ^o fear and value the displeasure and
^nmity of any man; yet not so far ^s to divert me wholly from this seaonable
design, as I judge, or to be a^ham'd to set to my name, or show my face, lest I
might seem also to disrust the wisdom at least, if not the ^^stness of my
undertaking: From which I aim not at any thing so much as the Glory of God, the
good of Religion, and the Nation even in its Civ^^ Capacity, and the stopping
the mout^ of the Enemies to all these who cl^mour too loudly, though not
altog^ther unjustly against the commonnes^ of this Sin, strengthening
themselv^^ by such weakness or wickedness others.

And I fear I may make bold here use the words of the Apostle, Not many wise
after the flesh, not many noble, (...) many mighty, have escaped the
Animadversions in this kind: G^^ grant they may, at least hereafter, all
convicted of slander that so judg^ And that they may so, I have und taken this
short and simple Labou^ having in truth not only a general testation and
lamentation of the Vi^^ but some singular provocations know ^o such as
understand my Circumstan^es, not hidden to many. However, (...) declare
uprightly, there is nothing of revenge at all in the case, but purest and
greatest Charity, of be^aking my self to this more public course, to reclaim
some at least, who cannot have the benefit of that vulgar saying to mitigate
their offense, He is to bodies Foe but his own: For in truth, no man is
Virtuous or Vicious to himself alone, but influences others by ^ettering or
tainting them; so that to ^ndeavour to obviate this evil warring against all
capacities: And to profess enmity to it, is (rightly understood) to declare
himself a Friend to all sorts of persons: unless that may be said now ^o be
fulfilled, which I am unwilling so much as to think, which Apothegm. Patrem.
cap. 17.
Antony the Great (as he is called) Father of soli^ary and sequestered living
from the World, is said to Prophecy, viz. T^^^ the world should one day come
to that pa^^ and men should be so wild, that when to behold a sober man, they
will say, Th^^ art mad, because thou art not like th^^ And it is said, That
frequenters of T^verns, and fermenters of their Bra^, by Drinking, are come to
that deg^^ of Confidence already, as to term s^ as avoid such Irrational
Exercises the accustom themselves to, Melanch^^^ men, as scarce themselves,
because transported beyond themselves. If a^^ therefore shall so tax me of
morose ^^gularity and audacity, I will answe^ downright terms, as did St. Paul
to ^^stus, so accusing him, I am not mad, ^^^^ noble, most witty, most, etc.
but sp^^ forth the words of truth and sobern^^^^ for I am persuaded none of
these th^^^^ I now write, are hidden from themselves, or can well be gainsaid
by Ingenuous Person possessed of his ^eason.

For let them tell me: Is it not a ^rievous Sin, this Drunkenness against which
we speak, let the Princes of ^^rope, especially lying more Northern^^, look
into their Dominions: Let ^^e Nobles look into their Families: ^et the privater
and inferior Persons ^iew the havoc that is made in their ^^cient Houses and
Estates: Let every man of ability to consider, and at dares enter into a
recognition of ^s Estate, and the very figure and ^^rm outward, and
constitution of his ^ody inward, tell us, what greater de^^stations,
confusions, ruins and mi^^ries are wrought by any Sin than this: (...) which I
shall have occasion to ^^eak more plainly and fully here^^ier.

But I in so just and necessary a cause do not content my self to escape the
rigorous usage of many, unless I ca^ no small blame, and perhaps shan^^ upon
others of great Worth, Learnin^ Piety, and Zeal for Religion and t^^ Weal
Public, that have indulged much to prudence and civility of d^ meaner, that
they have more pa^ently suffered this Vice to domin^^ and harrasse sound Piety,
without bending some part of their prospe^ous Labors against this Sin, whi^^
has made more Fanatics against o^ Church, than the boldest or most
pe^tinacious Doctor of Disobedien^^ and Schism. For hereby God is Bl^sphemed
in his Faith and Worship very day: though I am not of the Persuasion, which the
Enemies of o^ Church would gladly work into me^ Heads, That only Conformists
a^ obnoxious to the Sin of Drunkenness^ f^r frequent instances there are to the
^ontrary, which if there were not, I should think the better of that vulgar
^^gument against the Church, That ^^e Friends and Defenders of it are ge^erally
scandalous in their Lives; which indeed is but of small force, ^^lesse with
injudicious Persons, as not ^^ing true; and if it were true, not ^onclusive,
unless it could be proved at the Church does any where al^ow such Practices, as
its Adversaries generally do those Errors in Doctrine and Practice which they
stand convicted of. It is now forty years or more, since I cast mine eye on a
Foreign Author, who, to show his Eloquence and Wit, has published an oration
in the praise of Drunkenness, Subject becoming the Wit and Geni^us of a
Netherlander: wherein I ^now not that any of our Nation has imitated him,
though the Pre^ here has of late days been too frank of scandalous Pamphlets,
but, I hop^ shall never be suffered to produce su^ a Monster. And I hope in
God, tr^^ Christian Hearts and Ingenious Mind will rather condemn themselves s^
their silence against this crying Sin, tha^ me now at length crying out against
(...) in this manner.

SECT. II. Of the Nature and Kinds of Drunkenness.
THat in this my Discourse I m^ not altogether stagger like Drunken man, but
avoid confu^^on, I shall make my entrance into (...) considering first, what
Drunken^sse is, and the several kinds: Next, ^all proceed to show the
grievousnesse (...) the Sin before God, and the dread^^ll effects upon the
Weal-publick, well as the immediate Actours or ^actisers; and finally, offer to
the ^w of my Reader a summary of (...) Causes and Cures thereof.

In pursuit of this my Design, I in^nd not to play the Philosopher, in ^^udying
an accurate definition of it. (...) could wish that it were not so suffi^^ently
known to the meanest Under^^anding, but that it required an Artifi^^al
description for the instructing the ^gnorant.

What then may we call Drunken^ess, but intemperate Drinking? But that is
intemperate Drinking? will ^^e Friend of that Vice demand of ^e. Shall I say,
To Drink too much? to Drink to excess? This also will b^ as much questioned by
the drought^ Sceptick, unwilling to understand h^^ Error: And yet the same
person, it be inquired of him: What is Glu^tony, and what it is to eat
Excessiv^ly, is no more to seek for an answe^ than another. He knows very wel^
to eat too much in quantity, to affe^^ too dainty and costly Fare; and to e^^
unseasonably, is to eat unreasonably and to eat unreasonably, is to be
I^temperate and Gluttonous: But we a^ know, and grant what the drinkin^ Soul
alleges for it self oftentime That it is not always the quantity a man takes,
but the condition of the Person that drinks. If a man's accustom^ to the Trade
of Drinking, and the^ by having attained an ability to be more then other men,
shall exceed (...) known mean of Drinking, he m^^ called a Drunkard, though he
can ^eep his legs, and rule his tongue indifferent well, and remains master of
his reason; because, first it may be well supposed, that before he arrived to
that strength, he offered violence more than once to his natural Inclination,
Reason, and Senses too; so that one main evil effect of Drunkard, is, he
constantly carries about him a violated nature in Habit, and unnatural
dilatation of his Capacity. For as we say of slight Stuffs or Clothes, they
will shrink in the wetting; so may we say of the Faculties of man's Body, they
will stretch with the wetting; so that a man, by constant violence offered to
the powers of his Soul, does wickedly enable them to sustain more drink than
Nature of it self: would endure. To which pass many having brought themselves,
flatter themselves as free from Drunkenness, but in vai^ because Drunkenness
no more tha^ Gluttony, does consist in the Quantity which men take, but the
dispr^portion to the natural state and constitution, and uses of their Bodie^
For a man to pour into a Vessel (...) pottle, when it will contain but thre^
pints without running over, is certai^ly excess; and so to endeavor to p^^
into a pottle Pot, six pints, or but five whereas to pour a gallon into a
Ve^sel of proper capaciousnesse, is no e^cesse. It is therefore excess in
Chi^dren to take half a pint of that which Men may take a pint. As Men are no^
all of the same strength or stature (...) Body, so not of the like Capacity,
(...) Ability inward to receive or be^^ Drink: And therefore, for any to a^gue
themselves temperate, from the quantity which some temperate person may without
offense use, is to make a ^^se judgment of the thing it self, and elude
themselves with a fond Opini^n, God in the mean time, and wise ^^d indifferent
men judging other^^se. For as the Philosopher, disput^^g in his Ethics of the
nature of the ^ean, wherein he made all Virtue to ^nsist; and considering the
variety of Men's Conditions, and other Circum^^ances of Actions, could not fix
the ^rue notion of Mediocrity any where ^o well as in the estimation (...).
^f Wise men: So in truth, (...) will appear to be one of the wildest Chases,
to enquire into any one ^ommon scantling of Eating and Drinking laudably; but
what is con^enient or inconvenient, must be de^ermined by the current notion
which ^ober and unprejudiced persons have of ^ntemperance.

And one principal rule of rig^^ judging is taken from the person himself. We
do not therefore allow^ Day-labourer, who has nothing live upon but what he
dearly ea^^ with his hands, to eat of the be^^ though he eats not of the most;
n^^ to take but his half Pint of Sack (...) Claret daily, but he must be
accou^^ed excessive in his Diet, because he ^^ceeds the ability of his Purse,
as oth^^ do of their Brain, otherwise able (...) maintain it. For neither do
the Ta^ler nor Shoo-maker bring the Body (...) the Cloth, or Foot to his
Leather, b^^ cut them out answerable to the e^ they are for. So should not the
Drin^ bring his Body and Brain to his Cu^^ but his Cups to them, if he inten^
to be accounted either a wise or a ^^ber Man: so absurd and ridiculous ^^ they,
who are ambitious to be estee^ Men from their imitating Men, ^^d those none of
the wisest or wor^^iest, in their carouzing. But such the usual saying now
adays ( Let them ^^t are influenced by it, look how civil ^^ey are to the
Nobility) and ostentati^^, To drink like a Lord; making it a ^ce of Greatness,
to be really base. any may not they say rather, and en^eavour ambitiously, To
drink like an ^^peror: and especially that Usurper Maximinus, of whom Julius
Julius Capitolinus in Vita.
^^pitolinus writes, That he ^as wont every day to ^rink an Amphora of the
Capitol, which amounted to nine Gallons of ^ur measure, and this of Wine; and
^t was more sober, as to his senses, ^^an many that drink but their Quart,
(...) less: yea, and more innocent, if ^^s were not so much an habit con^acted
(as generally excessive Drinking is) as a natural inclination unsat^^fied with
less; as the case of some great Eaters of late years have been among us; and
that huge fat Fello^ of whom Roverus speaks in his fi^^ Book of Memorable
Things, who f^^ his monstrous Appetite and Capacit^^ was brought before
Maximilian t^^ Emperor to give proof of his suf^^ciency in that kind, by
eating up ^ Calf or raw Sheep presently, and y^^ rising with an Appetite.

And yet much more blame-worth^ are they, who being regularly set i^ to the
World; and perhaps with a^ aversion and abhorrence of what (...) more then
sufficient, by their freque^tation of intemperate acts, dilate bot^ their
Stomach, and harden their Brain^ to a dishonorable power of Drin^ing, and
thereby may truly be rep^ Drunkards, though they retain ^^eir common reason.

And, as I touched before, for Men ^f any ingenuous Birth, Reason, or
^ducation, not to content themselves ^ith true and wholesome Liquor, of that
kind soever ordained, and suf-^^ing abundantly to the use of Man, ^ut apply
their Wits to prepare strange ^nnatural Drinks, to the enchanting ^f their
easily deluded Palates, is another sort of Drunkenness consisting (...) the
extremity of the quality, if not ^f the quantity. For here the mind and fond
heart is carried away Captive after the ignoble Senses, and the ^cepter of the
Soul put into the hands ^f brutish Sensations. This, it should seem, was in
fashion of old amongst the people of God, as may be gathered from the Prophet
of God, that noble Isaiah, who from God gives such inordinate fellows their
own, ^nouncing a Curse against them (...) this manner: Woe to them that rise
early in the morning, that they may s^ low strong drink, that continue until
ni^ till wine inflame them, Isa. 5. 11. B^ this Drinking seems to be moder^ to
that of our Age and Count^ where many drink so that they c^ not rise in a
Morning, and some r^ at Noon; and are not wont to dri^ until Night, but till
Morning: the as the Psalmist speaks of the Bea^ When the morning comes, they
lay the selves down in their dens.

But if they chance to escape t^ shock of the Battle, and be able (...) make a
tolerable Retreat, without b^ing wholly Routed in their Reas^^ and Senses, the
same Prophet has (...) sharp reserve of another Curse agai^^^ them: Woe unto
them that are mig^^ drink wine, and men of strength to (...) strong drink, ver.
22. Where he ^^th not threaten those who are dead ^runk, or are worsted by
Wine, but ^onquerours, who can overcome more ^ine than a civil Man can: And who
(...) able to bear compounded Liquors ^f the newest and worst Invention. ^^or
as the Virtues of Self-denial and ^^verer Abstinence shall not lose their
^eward, when a Man by constant di^^iplining his Senses and Appetites, has
(...) custom brought himself into an ^^rsnesse and utter dislike, and a ^inde
of inability to receive more Meat and Drink than is sufficient; so (...)
doubtly shall not that hunger or ^^rst go unpunished at the hands of ^od, which
becomes necessary unto ^^em who have corrupted both their ^alates and
Appetites, and extended ^^em above Nature so far, that they cannot be satisfied
with that which or at least once was, just and reas^^able, and would have
formerly a^^^gether answered their desires. (...) that a Man having thus
wilfully (...) wickedly brought his Body to be s^^ject to, and tyrannized over
by t^ Excesses, cannot reasonably def^ himself from the imputation of
Int^^perance, his Body, by his own fa^ requiring the same. And besides* (...)
is reasonable for him who m^ would be accounted a Man of (...) and Reason, and
Religion, w^^^ he discerns into what an unhap^^ state of Body (which some bo^^
glory in) he has brought hims^^^ requiring customary Excesses; to ^^duce
himself by the same methods became exorbitant, to the orgi^^^ Mediocrity from
whence he departe^ and that is by retrogradations, gradual disuses of such
things as are ^^^erfluous, as St. Austin after advises. ^^ough the rule of the
more morti^ be this, That they who have of^^ded in Superfluities, should by way
(...) Christian revenge upon themselves, ^y themselves sometimes such things
^re necessary, that is, requisite. But the cure of this Evil, I may speak
^^reafter.

I now proceed to another sort of (...) Drunkards, which diverse may ^^ok upon
as civil and temperate Per^ns, but God does not: And such (...) they who
perhaps are indifferently ^se to Drunkenness in themselves, ^t will be Drunk
by a Proxy: They (...) unwilling to be seen to reel to ^^d fro, or to endure
the Vertigo in ^^eir own Heads, or to faulter and (...) in their Tongues; and
to make ^^^t themselves, for such as have a better command of themselves (...)
they have, or to be loathed for sh^ful spewings: but all this while ^^tle
considering how God is disho^ed by such a sin in another, as w^ in themselves,
and the Body (...) Brain of their Neighbor confo^^ed, can make themselves
merry, (...) be well pleased at the fall of ot^^^ little considering the severe
Sen^^^ denounced by God by his Pro^^^ saying, Woe be to thee that gives^
neighbor drink: that put thy (...) to him, and make him drunken also,
thou may look on his nakedness, (...) 2. 16. Which nakedness may be
^^derstood as well of their Moral as ^^tural nakedness, whereby Men (...)
^^cover their concealed follies and ^^thered malice, and private vain-gl^^^^
and all the naughty secrets of (...) heart, whereby he acquires the s^^^ and
perhaps detestation of others, (...) returning to his wonted reason, grievously
dejected at the recogni^^ of his Exorbitancies; or, if ill ^^^^cipled, hardened
to outface all ^^scarriages, hoping to defend one ^^ing with another, and a
third of ^^rse nature, until that comes to be ^^ified which Solomon advertises
us (...) Prove. 14. 19. Fools make a mock (...) sin.

But all this while it is not duly ^^nsider'd by the prime Author of this
^^agicomedy, that as the sport, so the (...) will be owing to him before the
^^ghteous Judge of Heaven and ^^rth. If a man has a curious I^^ge, or but a
precious Glass, or o^^^r Vessel valued by him, which ^^ing in suddenly he
finds defaced, broken to pieces, does he not en^^re with rigor, who did that,
or broke this, and finding it to be (...) of his own servants, makes him (...)
well for it? So doubtless, God, (...) Master of this his Family of this w^^
(especially of the Household of F^^ beholding how his Image in M^^ defaced by
immoderate Drink, (...) demand an account, Who did it? AS^ Who battered his
Vessel of Ho^^ meet for the Masters use? 2 Timothy And if it be found that one of
(...) own servants did it, he shall be (...) to smart for it; and that as guilt
(...) the same Sin, though not in the same manner, with him who lab^^ in that
distemper.

But add we another sore and ^^^quent evil effect, of urging, on^ snaring, or
tempting another (...) Drunkenness, and you shall find (...) a double guilt,
often stains the ^^tended innocence of plotters of ^^ief to others. And the
Prophet malediction of the Psalmist has ^e a most proper and just event; ^^z.
His mischief shall return upon his ^^v head, and his violent (or cunning)
^^^ing, shall come upon his own pate, ^^al. 7. 16. He is caught in his own
^^are: His own head turns round, ^^s brain aches, and his pate is quite (...)
order, intending nothing more ^^an to bring another into those un^^ppy and
sinful Circumstances. Not ^nlike the ill luck often befalling the ^^bassines in
their Wars, as Godignus Hist^r. Abess.
^odignus relates: who in ^^ch cases were wont to ^^rry about with them Lions
in ^ens, which when they were to en^^ge with their Enemies, they used (...) let
loose, and put them on a^^inst them; but the wild Beasts ^ot rightly
disciplined, oftentimes, besides intention, returned upon the Masters and
destroyed them, so t^^^ they were forced to leave off t^^^ stratagem. Strong
drink is a moc^^^ and wine is raging: and whosoeve^ ^^ deceived thereby, is not
wise, says S^^mon, Prove. 20. 1. And if so, W^^ does it differ from a wild
Bea^^ And how are they shamefully mo^^ed, who letting it loose, and sett^^^ it
on others, find themselves sei^^on and spoiled thereby.

SECT. III. The commmon Excuses used by Drunkards, considered.
BUt for the better clearing the point of Drunkenness, and (...) kinds,
theref^^^, before I directly ^arge it with the notorious evil of (...) against
God, and plagues upon Man for the same, I shall prepare ^^e way, yet farther,
by taking no^^ce of some fine and smooth defen-^^s Men are wont to make against
^^at severity they will asperse this ^^^^ine undertaking with, as the ef^^cts
of a sower nature, and morose^^sse in excess on the other hand. ^he sum of the
most principal ex^ses, is this:

Wine and strong Drinks (say they) are Gods Blessings and Creatur^^ and
therefore must needs be good.

Wine (says the Scripture) is that wh^^^ cheereth God and man; and had No^^
that righteous Person, for its Invent^^^ And Janus, whom Learned M^^ make the
same with Noah, with o^^ Face looking to the World past, a^ with another
toward the World (...) come after him, had his name fr^^ Wine, and was reputed
a God. A^ Ale, say some English Critics, h^^ its name, Ab Alendo, from
nour^^^ing.

Besides, God and the wisest a^^ gravest men in all Ages and Natio^^ have not
only allowed, but institu^^^^ days of rejoicing and hilarity, (...) common
recreation, which cannon without Wine or the best of Drin^ as well as of Meats,
to heighten ^^ Spirits, and tune them for mirth. Again, They will tell you of
ma^y good Men, and some eminent ^^es in Holy Scripture, who have ^^en overtaken
with Wine some^^mes, and yet have not lost the e^^^em or reputation for Great
and ^^ghteous Men in their Generation. (...) that to exceed sometimes, and
(...) somewhat overcome, does not ar^^e a Man to be a Drunkard, or vi^^^us in
that kind.

Lastly, there wants not Scripture (...) an Apology in this case; and that, ^^r
ought I know, as validly and ^roperly used, as Sectaries use it a^^inst all
discrimination of Meats: ^ll the Creatures of God are good, ^^ing used with
thanksgiving: and, Not that which goes into the man, de^^leth the man, but
that which proceeds ^ut of the mouth, that defiles the man. Whereby it may
be they mean, that Drinking does not defile the man, but Vomiting it up again
does. I^ does so.

These are some of the Allegations used by those who are rather good Fellows
than good Men; to which we shall not strictly and Scholastically, but more
largely, and as occasion^ is given make answer, intending no^ a Disputation,
especially with a man that is not himself, but a Direction and Exhortation.

And first, I must ingeniously acknowledge, that Wine is the gift of God, and
so is that Sicera or strong Drink, mentioned in the Scripture distinctly from
Wine: which as Chrysostom tells us, upon the fifth Chapter of Isaiah, v. 12.
was a Drink invented by the Phenicians, which they made by bruising a certain
Fruit they had into the likeness o^ Wine, which was (...) stupifying, and
causing Drunkenness: perhaps not much unlike that we make of Apples: and the
Biscaians, Valerius Sac. Phil. 215.
as Valerius de Sacra Philosophia, tells us, gave the name of Sydra unto. And
Diodorus Siculus, Bibl. lib. 3. tells us, That Bacchus, the Father of good
Fellows, was the Inventor of the Drink made of Barley, which we call Beer or
Ale, as well as of Wine. But Aventine in his Annals adscribes the use of it
amongst the Germans, from whom (as Drunkenness in great part, it might descend
to us) to Marsus an ancient Hero amongst them. And how many sorts of Liquors
the poor Indians (who had no Wine) had invented before the Christians came
amongst them, I leave to him that pleases to read in Josephus Acostae, in his
third Book and twentieth Chapter, of his History of the East Indies. All I
huddle up here together as such, as men may equally offend in, though they be
all Gods gifts, and in some sense, his Creatures, not made immediately by him,
but in the simples. For to the honor of Water it may be said, God created
directly no Drink but that: which notwithstanding, I hold it altogether as
lawful for man, by reason to prepare Drinks out of it, or other things more
agreeable to the Body of Man in some Regions of the Earth; as it is for him by
Art and Labor to make other Clothes to his back to keep him warm, than the raw
Skin^ of wild and tame Beasts, or unwrought Fleeces of Sheep: though we hear of
several Nations that content themselves only with what simple Natures offer for
Meat, Drink, and Clothing. And as for those instances of renowned Persons
suffering by Wine, the common answer may be first, which the Fathers give for
some other Enormities they have been liable to; viz. That they are Recorded for
our instruction and advertisement negatively; not by imitating them in such
Facts which eclipsed their glory otherwise egregious: but to look upon them as
Buoys left by our wise Pilote God himself, near Flats, Shelves or Rocks, for us
to shun that Course, lest we suffer the like Shipwreck. And besides, those
Examples were either occasioned by surprise, or some imposture: as Lots
Daughters may be well thought to have used, to draw in their Father to their
purpose.

And as to what follows, I must acknowledge my self to be an enemy to the
pretended rigor of some who would have all days of Public relaxation and
recreation suppressed, upon account of abuses incident thereunto. It is the
consent of Nations (which is commonly called, The Law of Nations) upon which
such days stand. Seneca (who was a Puritan in his Religion, giving very severe
Rules for others to observe, which he grossly neglected himself, and especially
in the Sin of Covetousness, whereof he was notoriously guilty) tells us in his
Treatise of the Tranquillity of the Mind, That all ancient Lawmakers, and
wisest Men in framing Civil Societies, did constantly otdain Festival-days, for
men to meet together, and put some ease to their hard labor, by rejoicing
together. And the Prophetic speech of Lamech, Genesis 5. v. 29. saying of his Son
Noah, This same shall comfort as concerning our work, and toil of our hands,
because of the ground which the Lord has cursed, may be understood concerning
the Inventions of Husbandry, such as Spades, Ploughs, Harrows, and ascribed to
him; which made the Tillage of the Earth much more easy to men than it was
before: or of the Invention of Wine, which was a great comfort to the Spirits
of Men, above the simple and natural Drink of Water: adding perhaps reasonable
Intermissions, for the refreshment of constant Laborers; but above all, setting
up and restoring to the New World, Religion defended by the seven Precepts, it
is said he delivered to be observed by all his Posterity. But in such ancient
Intermissions and Recreations we do not read were used any suc^ Exercise, as
now adays is, to frequen^ in Taverns and Gentlemen's Houses but in Manly Feasts
and Exploits which gained them applause and glory, and wonderfully recreated
the minds of the Spectators, inflamin^ them not with Drink, but with desire and
endeavor of acts of Honor and true Glory. We do no^ read that any one of the
Olympiack Games consisted in trying of Men^ strength in Drinking: or that ther^
was any Crown or Reward for him that did drink off his Cups best, o^ bear most
rounds of Healths offered him. But Plutarch, in a Tractat^ he has, showing how
a man can not live happily according to the Notions taught in Epicurus hi^
School, on the contrary tells us, Tha^ it is not the abundance of Wine and
Roast-meat which makes Men cheerful at Feasts, but a fair hope and persuasion
that God is propitiously present with them, and graciously accepts what is
there and then performed. I would to God such Doctrines as this were more
frequent in the mouths of Christians, and their mirth more exactly regulated by
such Crnsiderations. But may we not say, as Christ of the Centurion, I have not
found so great faith, nor so good order, no not in Israel? The more is the pity.

Yet, notwithstanding the two extreme abuses of public Joy and Thanksgiving,
one denying the use of all such (their turns not served by it) and the other
admitting them for no cause so truly, as for the opportunity of giving Scandal
at such times: God Almighty did not only permit the Israelites, but enjoin them
to appear and rejoice before the Lord, at certain Seasons of the Year as the
Scripture witnesses, Levit. 23 40. Deuter. 12. 12. 27. 7. The nam^ and fear of
the Lord duly at such times considered, diluting the spirit of the Wine against
sinful Intemperance, yet with hilarity in some goo^ degree also. But if any man
shall hereupon demand, What degree tha^ is? I must be forced to reply, Tha^ it
is past my skill to declare, and perhaps other men's of acuter Wits an^ greater
Reason than I; because, (as ^^ premised) men are not to drink, no^ is
Drunkenness to be judged by Arithmetical proportion, when ever man drinks
alike as to number o^ Glasses and measure, some at the same time faultering,
and some standing immovable; but according t^ Geometrical proportion, that is,
ac^ording to their Age, Sex, or ability ^f Body: so that what is excess in
^ne, is not in another.

It was anciently a high Crime amongst the Romans, for Women to ^rink Wine at
all; and a little so taken, denominated them intempe^ate: Which abstemiousnesse
has ^f later years been observed by some noble and virtuous Women. An ^minent
example whereof, Aeneas Sylvius gives us in his Comment upon ^he Sayings and
Deeds of Alphonsus King of Castile, in Leonora, whom some call Heleonora,
Daughter to the King of Portugal, Wife to Frederick ^he Emperor of Germany, who
being advised by her Physicians, com^ng out of a warmer Country into a ^older,
and being Barren, to drink Wine as conducing to Fruitfulness: Her Husband the
Emperor sent he^ word, That he could by no mean^ yield to it, choosing rather
to have a Wife that was Barren, than one tha^ should drink Wine: to which she
a^^ well replied, saying, I prefer Obedience to the Emperor before min^ own
Life; but if he should command me to dye or drink Wine, I should choose rather
to dye than to drink Wine. And it were to be wished, that Wine were not so much
i^ request amongst Women now adays and in the Northern Countries especially;
but that they kept as strictly to the prescription of abstemious^nesse, as they
do in Spain unto this day: where the more noble the person is, the more
abstemious is she i^ this kind.

It was of late years but a vain piece of an Argument mentioned before, taken
from the inspiring qua^ity of Wine or strong Drinks. For though we should
account it true, as we do, we cannot count it good what is said: For whatever
effect extraordinary it may have upon the fancy, it constantly has an evil
effect upon the Reason and Judgment, which are the main Faculties making a Man,
and rendering him profitable to God, his Country, or himself. He that is so
transported in his mind as to be a loser in these, though he be gainer in the
other, shall have no cause to boast of the exchange, or admire the author of
it, Wine: For what are the common effects but clamor, and Poetry, and this
upon the praise of Wine or Women? and not as St. Chrysostom once observed of
those divinely inspired and inflamed in Scripture, who (says he) as men in
love are wont to break forth into Poetry, commending excessively whom they so
affect: in like manner David, and the rest of the Authors of Divine Songs or
Psalms, we have in the Scriptures, being possessed with a fervent love of God
and Heavenly things, vented themselves in Songs tending only to the honor and
praise of God, and things Heavenly. But alas! if we observe now adays the
Poetry in use (how accomplished soever it is said to be otherwise) or the
Music either (that Divine and Noble gift of God to mankind) we shall find
that nine parts of ten are employed upon the praise of Women, and exorbitant
caresses of such Creatures, whose lives are scarce tolerable: all which are
commonly the exuberances of too much Drink, with which they are Inspired. If
such Inspiration or Inflammations be allowable in any body, surely there only
are they, where a defect is made, and a loss sustained of the Natural Spirits:
as fainting by some accidental oppression of Spirit, or decay of them in Age.
And yet as Valerius in his forementioned Treatise tells us, Wine is not good
for old men, as is vulgarly believed; but, as he says, pernicious: His reason
whereof is, because of the want of Natural heat whereby it may be mastered. And
one may observe in this case, the same reason as when Princes distressed by
intestine or domestic Enemies, are wont to call Foreign aid to their
assistance, which generally (as in the case of Britains and Saxons) increasing
and growing strong, prove greater mischiefs to them that call for the^ than
that from which they desire^ them; so strong Drink, called f^^ to drive away
sorrows, and to s^ men on the merry Pin, who are d^jected, getting the mastery
of them brings them under a worse subjectio^ than before they suffered.

But, the Examples of emine^^ Persons in Scripture over-taken wit^ this sin,
needs no other answer tha^ other Instances of great Failings an^ Falls, to
which they have been su^ject. May they not as well arg^^ for Adultery and
Incest, for Murd^^ and Slaughter; for persecuting the Church with Paul, and
denyin^ Christ with Peter? For though the circumstances of Noah's and Lo^^
Drunkenness were singular, so as t^ make their offenses lighter, and s^ in
other sins of other persons; yet shall not stand upon them, but rather advise
such who have any fear ^f God before their eyes, or honor ^or deceased Saints,
not to rake in ^he ashes of them, to bring them to patronize such notorious
Crimes. For as it is also objected, and that ^ruly, That one act of
Drunkenness does not absolutely Characterize a man a Drunkard, no, nor perhaps
^wo; so cannot we say, they were such whose Errors are recorded upon surprise,
as Noah's; or supplanting, ^s Lots: who made no practice of such Excesses, and
wilfully that we know, ran not into such sins. But whoever he may be that
presumptuously shall commit such Sins, he is certainly obnoxious to severer
Censures and Punishments: they especially, who offer themselves willing^y to
Temptations, and yield not unwillingly unto them. They a^^ Drunkards, who more
than once o^ twice fall into Excess, and excus^ and comfort themselves with
this Apology: A man not vicious may be over taken sometimes: So that as long a^
they see any worse, they flatte^ themselves that they are not bad But the Fact
is not always to be considered in the heinousness of offenc^ either against
God or man, but the condition of the Person, and other circumstances. For it is
as odious for a Woman to be Drunk once a year, a^^ for a Man once a week; and
for a Youth once a quarter, as for a Man once a day. But how monstrous i^ their
Condition, and abominable to God and man, who shall make their shame their
glory, imagining (according to their shallowness) that it i^ masculine in
Women, and manly in Children or Striplings, and nothing ^ut Gallantry in
obscure Persons, to ^ranscend in such cases due propor^ion? May not these same
persons as well argue also a certain Divine^esse in being Drunk, because that
^he Learned Ancients numbered Bac^hus, a notorious Drunkard, amongst their
gods? For it is as true, that Bac^hus was a god, as that Drunkenness ^s any
piece of Gallantry, true Nobleness, or that in it consists any thing of
Manhood.

Lastly, as to them who lie and ^abour under this Guilt and Infamy, and yet
hope to relieve themselves, by alleging, They have regard to ^he main; they do
not waste their Estates with it, as others: What is all this but to declare to
the World, their ignorance of, and carelessness of that which is the main of
all mains? What says our Blessed Savior in the Gospel? What if a man should
g^^^ the whole world, and lose his own sou^ A gainer, is much more than a
sav^or preserver of what he has. A^^ to gain the whole World especially, ^^
infinitely more than any man's Inh^ritance. Whence comes it therefo^^ to pass,
that amongst Christians th^^ is not believed and thoroughly weig^ed? Why do men
blindly study (...) secure the Mite, and suffer the Mou^tain of invaluable
Treasure to m^^^ away every day, and their immort^^ Souls to perish in the
Floods of i^ temperate Drinking? But, methin^^ if such Knowledge be too
wond^^ful for them, and they cannot a^tain unto it, as the Psalmist speak^ The
eyes of their body might suffice to (...) form them better, while they show
th^^ the daily ruins of that, and the m^^^ sore evils preying upon their
carcass before its time. And besides, it is well ^o be observed, what is but
too cu^tomary, That many men labor under a double Distemper in diverse
^espects, by sparing basely, and spend^ng basely with great artifice, as they
may suppose, but weakly, making ^ne Sin support another: which is ^rue so far
only, as in an Ague, the ^old Fit the greater it is, the more vio^ent is the
hot Virtue therefore, if it be ^ot loved and embraced for its own ^ake, and not
for vices sake (which ^ften happens) ceases to be what it is ^alled. But that
men may better un^erstand this, I shall now proceed to ^xpose briefly the
heinousness of this ^^n, leaving some other Palliations ^^d Excuses thereof, to
be consider^d toward the Conclusion.

SECT. IV. The Word of God expressly declaring against Drunkenness.
IT seems to be a very reasonabl^ demand of me, arguing against this Sin, that
a man should be Sober when he is not Drunk: but Soberness I restrain not to
outwar^ acts only of the Tongue and Hand but extend it (as is usual) to the
act^ of the Mind, and soundness of Judg^ment: which notwithstanding (...) wont
to suffer very much, oftentime^ from errors in practice and evil Lis^vitious
acts constantly and vehemen^ly importuning Reason to justify the Offender, and
to make that goo^ which common sense judges to b^ evil. And so, agreeable to
the monstrousness of men's Actions, are the paradoxes of their Understand^ng;
until it comes to that sometimes (as too often it does) that the first
principle of Religion, the assurance of a Deity; and the next to that, the
Omniscience of God, or the Justice of God in duly and infallibly rewarding good
and evil, are doubted of, opposed, contemned and derided: As Solomon says,
Fools make a mock of sin: And as the Psalmist, Tush! God ^^areth not for it: Is
there knowledge in ^he most High? Such rude and bold Expostulations as these,
are but a ^onsequence of that commoner Vice, ^iz. of Atheism. For if there be
no ^uch thing as Sin, there is no such thing as a God; and if there be no God,
there is no such thing in the World as Justice and Injustice, of which God
alone is the Original Rule; and so, no such thing as Vi^^ or Virtue. And as
some boldly a^cuse the Holy Scriptures, as the cau^^ of all quarrels and
divisions among^^ Christians, yea and of men of d^vers Religions. So likewise
man they say of the severe notions of Vi^tue and Vice, that they are the cau^^
that so many Offenses are taken a^^ given; which removed, and m^^ left to their
supposed Liberty and I^genuity, the World would be qui^er. Which two Positions
are ali^^ true, but indeed both so notorious^^ false, as deserve not our
refu^^tion.

We must therefore here suppo^^ men to be Christians, and to receiv^ without
doubtful disputation, t^^ fundamental points of Faith conce^^ing the Being,
Nature, Truth, Justi^^ Goodness of God, and such Omniscience, that as he
suffers no ^in unpunished, either by our selves (...) true repentance, or by
himself in (...) proper reward destinated to it; so he ^^scerns all the little
as well as great ^^rours of our Lives: and that, if ^ossibly sinners in any
kind may ^scape the just reward in this Life, he ^^serveth vengeance for his
Adversa^^es; as the Prophet Nahum speaks, Nahum 1, 2. which wrath is inevita^^y
to be executed upon the separa^^on of the Soul by death from the ^ody; and more
fully, upon the ^^storing of the Body to the Soul (...) the Resurrection of the
dead, ^^d the last just and fearful Judg^ent. These things being steadfastly
^elieved, and frequently and serious^^ reflected on, can scarce want their ^^e
effect upon ingenuous and wise ^^uls, in possessing them with a dread of Sin
which exposes them to suc^ evils.

It therefore remains at present t^ be showed, under what various form^^ and
obligations to punishment, a^ well as dishonor and displeasure t^^ Almighty
God, the Sin of Drunkenness lies: And one Capital O^fence accompanying it
rather tha^ others, is, that commonly there (...) more open and bold
profanation o^ Gods holy Name, and his Word more contempt of serious and god^^
advice in this Sin, than any other For Whoremongers, Adulterers Thieves, Liars,
and Oppressors (...) the Poor, generally retain some m^^desty in their sinning,
and can bett^^ endure admonitions and reproofs, b^ing convicted of their
Error: b^^ I know not what peculiar daring spirit is infused with Wine, and
stron^ Drinks into the mind of the Drunkard, that he answers all such at^empts
of reducing him to Sobriety, with jests, scoffs, threatenings, ragings, and
worse a great deal many times. Let any of the former Sinners be surprised in
the Act, he cannot choose but blush, shrink, and be ashamed; but take a man in
his Fit of Drunkenness, and tell him of his fault, when it is most apparent
and undeniable, he storms and rages most of all, stands his ground (as well as
he ^an) resists all opposition stoutly, and derides Religion it self molest^ng
him, breaking out in Blasphemous Language diverse times. Abigail, Nabals Wife,
knew this very well, and so do all other prudent Wives, and Friends to the
Intemperate in this kind) when she deferred to tell her Husband in what
condition he was, and how, by his provocative Language in his Drunken fit, he
had brought himself into extreme danger, and the brink of Perdition.

I therefore in like manner, supposing my Patient to have his Interval of
Reason, and out of his Fit, apply my self to him, offering to hi^ serious
consideration the Voice o^ God himself against this Vice, d^nouncing his heavy
Judgment against it; a certain indication an^ proof of the heinousness of the
Sin For the two great Witnesses of the Old and New Testament, yea third, viz.
The Law and Light (...) Nature testify expressly against th^^ Sin.

The Prophet Isaiah in the name ^^ God, cries out against this Sin, cha^ 5. 11.
Woe unto them that rise up ear^^ to follow drunkenness, and to them th^^
continue till night, till wine inflame them. And again, chap. 28. 1. Woe to the
^rown of pride, the drunkards of Ephra^^. And because an evasion and ^xcuse is
too often heard from some, ^^ying in their defense, That they do ^ot make a
common practice of it, ^ut sometimes only, and therefore ^ll not under the
severity of such Curses: Hear they what God speaks ^y Moses, in Deuteronomy,
chap. 29. 19, ^0. And it shall come to pass, when (...) hears the words of
this curse, that (...) bless himself in his heart, saying, I all have peace,
though I walk in the ^^agination of my heart, to add drunken^sse unto thirst.
The Lord will not spare (...), but the anger of the Lord shall ^^oke against
that man, and all the ^^rses that are written in this book shall (...) upon
him: and the Lord shall blot out (...) name from under heaven, and shall
separate him to evil. So that we see, there can be nothing more pernicious to a
man, than those customary defenses men are prone to make of such their Sins. Of
which sort is that we read of, Matthew. 24. v. 48, 49, 50. where Christ says of
the evil servant, If he shall say in his heart, My Lord delayeth his coming,
and shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and to eat and to drink with the
drunken, The Lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looks not for
him; and in an hour that he is not aware of. And shall cut him asunder, and
appoint him his portion with hypocrites: there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth. What is this portion? Mark we, and tremble to offend God in this manner,
and see how God proportions the form of his punishment suitable to the sin* The
sin is taking up their cups too freely. To such therefore God shall give his
cup also; called Psalm 11. 6. The portian of their cup. Upon the wicked (says
David) he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible pit: this
shall be the portion of their cup. So Psalm 75. 8. In the hand of the Lord
there is a cup, and the wine is red (Clarret, if you please, so much in fashion
now adays) it is full of mixture, and he pours out of the same: but the dregs
thereof all the wicked shall wring them out, and drink them. And who so fit to
take up this Cup at Gods hands, as they who are perfect in that sinful Art of
taking off their Cups in this World? And if we look into the Revelations of St.
John, we shall easily understand what God means by the Cup of his wrath so
often threatened against the Whore of Babylon, for the Cup of abomination she
reaches out to such as she deceives and destroys; resembling much the practice
of urgers of glasses upon others, which in very deed is no better than a gentle
Poison to both Body and Soul of him that gives it, as well as of him that so
takes it: As that was a strong violent Poison given in Cups unto such as were
condemned to death by public Justice for their faults, upon which Custom the
Metaphorical expressions now named were undoubtedly founded.

But let us proceed, hearing what St. Paul says to the Corinthians, chap. 6.
ver. 9, 10. 1 Epist. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
kingdom. This some modern sinners feigning (I suppose) rather than being really
ignorant St. Paul informs them of in particular, adding: Be not deceived,
neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor abusers
of themselves with Mankind: nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor
Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God. In which crew of
abominable Malefactors, you see Drunkards (as well as they think of themselves)
are numbered, both to their dishonor and terror: Which again he rangeth
together in like manner, in his Epistle to the Galations, chap. 5, ver. 20, 21.
with the rabble of sinners, which the Drunkard himself seems sometimes to
detest. Thus therefore shall it infallibly come to pass one day, what Nahum
threatens: While they be folden together, and while they are drunken as
drunkards, they shall be devoured as stubble fully dry, Nah. 1. 10.

SECT. V. Of the several evil Enormities and Ominousnesses, and Absurdities of
Drunkenness in any Nation.
BUt let us descend lower, and judge a little from Reason, and the Wisdom and
Authority of unchristian Sages of the World, yea others of an inferior Order,
wha^ an account is to be had of this Sin Surely, with all the wise part of the
World, Temperance is reckoned amongst the Moral Virtues, and no^ only so, but
the Cardinal too; tha^ is, of such honorable and prime Nature, as have
influence upon all humane Actions public or private an enemy to all which, is
the contrary Vice, Intemperance, a branch of which is this Drunkenness we ^ow
speak of. So that what Law, Order, Beauty, and benefit Tempe^ance gives unto a
State and Person, by reining in the exorbitant ^usts and affections of Venery,
Glut^ony, Drinking, and the irascible part of man's Soul, as Philosophers call
all revengeful Appetites; Intemperance, especially of Drink, lets ^oose, cuts
the chords of Discipline erected in the Soul, asunder, and throws open the
doors for all Lusts to sally out at pleasure. Whereupon, Clemens Alexandrinus
in his Paedagogy, or Institution of Novices, much approves the wisdom of the
Ancienter Greeks, who gave the name of (...) to the Intemperate man, intimating
thereby, that he was in very deed (...) by the easy change of one letter; i.
e. one past saving or cure: And if I would translate the wor^ (...) into
English for my life, could do it no better than by setting the first Letter by
it self, and rendering it, A Sot: And what may we term a Sot? or whom? but him,
tha^ indulging to his senses, degenerate^ from that stately Original and
Posture God has to man given, boweth down his Reason to his Senses, and hangs
down his Head to the Earth, after the manner of Beasts* Wherefore the Stoic in
Tully fitly derides Epicurus the Father Dum Palato quid sit optimum judicat,
coeli Palatum, ut ait Ennius, non suspexit. De Natura Deor. lib. 2.
of Sensualists, telling him, That while he was so good a Critic of things
affecting the Palate, he could by no means look up to the Palate of Heaven, as
the Ancient called the Roof or Arched part of it. It is said of Swine, That of
all Creatures they can least look ^pwards; and if by accident they ^ast their
eye upon the Heavens, they ^o it with horror, and shreeks at the strangeness
of the sight; probably with like passion, as men from an high place beholding a
very low and deep Precipice of darkness and ruin. In ^ike manner is the very
lifting up of the Eye at any time toward Heaven, of the sensual man,
especially Swinish Drunkard, an horror to him, and not to be viewed without a
tacit dread of the glory denied him, and the punishment impending on him and
expecting him.

This must needs be his humor, unless he relieves himself with an Article of
Mahomets Creed, promising him all Rarities and Delicacies in Heaven, answerable
to his Earthly senses. As that man in the Gospel of St. Luke, chap. 14. 15. who
sat a^ the Table with Christ himself, an^ was so affected with his
entertainment, that he cried out, Blessed (...) he that shall eat bread in the
Kingdom of God. Or as those French Stomachs, of which Sulpitius Severu^ speaks
in his first Dialogue, chap. 1. 1. one of whom he brings in thus speaking,
Studio manducandi etiam Angelos manducare credam: So am I given to eat my self,
that I am apt to believe that Angels also eat. And a little after, he speaks
of the whole Nation thus, Edacitas in Graecis, gula in Gallis natura: Ravenous
eating is Gluttony in the Greeks; but in the French, Nature. Which Vice, I
would to God they, who are so simple to imitate that People in other things,
had not exceeded them in this, and worn their old shoes which they have left
off.

Plutarch tells us of the Plutarch. in O siris.
Egyptians, that in an Inscription they made upon a Pillar in a Temple at
Thebes, they cursed their King Memis, who first drew them from their ancient
simple and plain Diet, to more delicate and costly. And Herodotus in Melpomene,
tells us, How the Scythians, as barbarous as they were esteemed, showed
themselves both better Philosophers and Divines, than the Graecians, who were
given much to Wine, and made Bacchus the Inventer of it, a god; it being
incredible with them, that God should have any hand in that which was the
occasion of so much Madness. Thus are we apt to set our Wits on work to make
that Divine, which, upon due examination, proves Inhumane.

For surely, had Wine been so Divine a thing, or so necessary for man's use, as
Masters of the Drin^ing Art would have us believe, it ha^ been as proper for
Women to use (...) Men, being both equally humane^^ nay Men would have more
earl^ given it entertainment, when once i^ was invented. But the contrary to
both these, we find in Histories o^ People most Heroical in their actions, and
arising to greatness in their Civil Societies. For Pliny tells us i^ his
Natural History, lib. 14. Tha^ Rome was six hundred years old before Wine came
into request, or wa^ allowed amongst the Romans: And that was the time in which
they strugled with, and overcame so many difficulties, and became Renowned. And
when Wine was received into their City, it was little less than death for
Women to drink of it. S^ that the same Pliny tells us, chap. 13. That Egnatius
Messennius bastinado'd ^is Wife to death, because he perceived she had drunk
Wine: Romuus absolving him for so doing. He writes also, chap. 5. how
Androcydes, famous in his days for Wisdom, dissuaded Alexander the Great from
^t, in this manner: Vinum potaturus Rex, memento, etc. When you drink Wine, O
King, consider that you drink the blood of the Earth: As the juice of Hemlock
is poison to Man, so is Wine the poison of Hemlock. But more correctedly we are
to understand that Author, thus: As poison is the wine of Hemlock, so is wine
Hemlock to Man. And so far was Druukennesse with the wise Lawgiver Pittacus,
from excusing the evil consequents thereof, that he would have such punished
double to others falling into the like offense. And i^ any desire to know more
particularly, how the very Heathens condemned and punished the Sin of
Drunkenness, I shall choose rather to refer the Learneder, to the Observations
and Collections of Alexander (...) Alexandro, in his third Book and eleventh
Chapter of his Genial Days than to engage in that common subject.

But this we may observe to our terror, That when Drunkenness^^ has taken
sure footing in any Nation, it becomes almost immovable and that by reason of
the great credit given it by such as dishonou^ themselves thereby, and the
fashionablenesse, through the multitude o^ Practisers of that Vice: So that as
al^ Nations rose at first to power an^ glory from obscurity and simplicity of
Diet, and Industry; so, when they are arrived to some such height of strength
and flourishing, that they resign themselves over to Ease and Luxury, their
ruin and decay at least, is not far off. Even the simple Indians of the
Western World, are instances hereof; who, about the time of the Invasion made
by the Europeans, laid aside, as much as they could, their natural Drink of
Water, and devised artificial Drinks intoxicating them: as Mr. Purchase
relates of them of Guiana and Cunana; amongst whom, he was in repute for the
best Man, and greatest Gallant, who could drink most: which Gallantry, whether
it was not brought from thence to us with To^acco, I will not say: But it is too
^rue, that such kind of Heathenish nobleness has, from about the tim^ those
Countries were discovered, b^ too much prevailed over our N^tion.

And in like manner the Indian ripe for ruin and devastations by t^^ Tyrannous
Spaniard, as Gage tells u^ had got a custom of brewing a^ compounding a sort of
nasty filt^^ strong Liquor, wherewith th^^ would tipple themselves with as
gre^^ jovialnesse, and more innocence, the men pretending greater civility,
w^^^ their Sack and Clarret. The sa^^ does Josephus Acosta rel^^^ Josephus
Acosta, De Procur. Indorum salute. lib. 3. e. 10.
of those Western parts which he conversed; t^^^ it was next to a Mira^^^ how
so many Nations in so great part of the World, altogether ig^^rant of Wine, and
of the least use ^^ it, should be so addicted to Dr^^kennenesse, and that it
should be such a general Vice of those People, that ^t was next to a Miracle if
any were found amongst them who hated not Sobriety, and despised and disparaged
it not: which also (says the same Author) we have been informed of concerning
the Turcomans, etc.

And this I thought good to mention here, that the Wits of this Age may judge
for themselves what laudable Precedents they have for the like Excesses, and
what a comfortable event and issue is like to be of such general Corruption as
now adays has, Gan-grene-like, overspread and tainted the Body of our Nation.
And to these, I may add one more Instance now occurring to me, which Johannes
Lerius, in his History of Navigations in Brasile, chap. 9. gives of the
Brasilians, who (he says) were wont to meet whole Villages of them together,
and drink two or three days, till all of them were Drunk, and all their Caovin
(as they call it) was spent.

And yet have I not done commending the Trade of Drinking to the Good-fellows,
from other Authorities and Precedents, in doing which I might instance in
Swine: but I will be a little more civil, and instance in that high-spirited
Beast the Panther, as I find him described in a merry Meeting with his
Fellows, by that excellent Poet Oppian, De Venat. lib. 4. (...), etc.
Oppian, after this manner;

To the enraging Fountain they approach,
Lapping brown Juice of Bacchus, and then each,
First like to them who in set Dances lead
Do skip; but soon hang down their heavy head.
Their Bodies softly rucking to the ground,
By force of Wine, are on each other found.
As when like aged Lads, upon whose chin,
The tender hairs like down to shoot begin;
Dare one another, Feasting, Cups to take,
Glass passing after Glass great mirth do make.
Till all is hush: and falling on each other
Their eyes grow dim; and they their wits do smother:
Thus these fierce Beasts lying all on an heap,
Do to the hunter fall a prey most cheap.
Where it may be observed, that the Poet does not compare Drunken men to
beasts: but drunken beasts to drunken men; implying, that these are worse than
they. And if that be true which Chrysostom says (as I think it is) that for a
Man to be compared to a Beast, is to be worse than a Beast, because he was
ordained to be much better) what may we think of those Men to whom Beasts are
compared, but not equallizing them in Beastliness? In all cases we say
Comparisons are odious; but in this case, abominable, and confounding. Let this
be well considered, while we haste from the nature of this Sin, to the direful
effects of it.

SECT. VI.
TO be dissuaded and alienated from sin for its own sake, and the intrinsic
evil of it, as that which is rather the work of the Devil than God, and in
which the Devil has commonly as great an hand as the sinner himself, can be
expected only from contemplative and spiritualized persons, who have the eyes
of their understanding open to discern good and evil, and their hearts thereby
disposed to choose the one, and refuse the other. But because so many there are
in the World, who have not their senses exercised (as the Scripture speaks) to
this good degree; it will be here necessary to draw ou^ arrows against
Drunkenness out of another Quiver, and that is, the consideration of the many
and sore mischiefs it brings to all capacities, public and private, and
personal; tha^ is, to the Church of God, to the Nation given to it, to
Families, and the persons themselves so accustomed.

In holy Scripture we find frequen^ mention made of sons of Belial, by which
notorious and odious Sinners are characterized, as the very worst of men,
prepared and prone to do any mischief, shall be for their ungodly turn; or they
shall be set about by others, stirring them up or hiring them. And would we
know who these men were, and what was the wickedness they excelled in? St.
Hierome tells us plainly, they were no other than drunken Fellows, speaking
thus in his Questions upon Genesis: Belial enim interpretatur, Hieron. Quaest.
in Genes.
Absque Jugo: and notandum quod omnes, qui ebrietatem sectantur, filii Belial
vocentur, i. e. Belial signifies as much as, without yoke, or governlesse: And
it is to be noted, That all they who follow Drinking, may be called sons of
Belial.

And what manner of persons such sons of Belial are, the same Father, in his
Comment on Titus thus tells us, Id. in cap. 1. Tit. It would be too long to
pass through all, and declare the madness which Drunkenness puts men on.
Some convert their cups and drinking Bouts into Weapons, and throw the Glass
at the face of their Companions; others, with rent clothes, rush forward to
wound others; some bawl; others sleep; and he that drinks mos^ is counted the
ablest man. And i^ becomes matter of guilt, being adjured for the Kings sake
not to drink, and so drink till they spew and they spew that they may drink The
digestion of the Belly and the Throat do the same office. It man suffice at
present, what the Apost^^ says, In Wine is luxury. And where Fullness and
Luxury is, there Lus^ Lordeth it. Consider the Belly and Genitals. Such is the
orde^ of Parts as of Vices. I will never believe a Drunkard can be chast^ who
laid asleep by Wine, may s^^ by Wine. Do we wonder that the Apostle condemns
vinolency in Bi^shops and Priests, when, in the Ol^ Testament, it is ordered,
that Priest^ going into the Temple to minist^^ before God, should drink no Wine
And the Nazarite, etc. Thus far St. Hierom. Amongst other things, condemning
the use of Wine in them who minister in Gods House; and surely he would have
been more offended, had he lived in our late days, in which (I take it)
Sectaries brought up an absurd Custom, under color of the great pains they
were to take, or had taken in Preaching, to drink Wine, and take Tobacco too
(such Sots were some of those sober Men I could name, to their Palates) in the
Vestry, part of the Church. But what should we trouble our selves with such
persons, who fancy themselves the more Spiritual, the less they regard kinds
of meat, times, seasons, and places of eating and drinking.

But I return. It is much to be lamented to see what mischief is brought to our
Religion by the scandal of Drunkards; who sometimes appear much concerned for
the good of the Church, and against Phanaticks, but in very deed and effect,
are great promoters of them by their scandalous demeanours, hardening the
hearts of simple, as well as perverse persons: For what is more common in the
mouths of such men, who are upon another account enemies to our established
Religion (which they are often afraid and ashamed to discover freely) than to
allege for their opposition to the Church, that there are so many Drunkards
and Swearers on that side, that they would have it believed, that God, who
hates such notorious sins, cannot be a Friend to such a Society. I will not
dispute the Hypocrisy (as many do) of this Argument; but take that for granted
which is out of dispute; viz. That the accusation is too just and reasonable:
For I do really believe, there are more Drunkards professing Conformity to the
Church, than enmity to it. But I do not believe there are so few of other
Factions, as is boldly affirmed, guilty of that Sin. But I cannot without some
blushing acknowledge, that somewhat is the matter, that Sectaries so
presumptuously charge us with Drunkenness, and we so faintly accuse them. For
why should not we allege that as a cause of disowning them, as they do of
separating from us, that Sobriety is in so little esteem amongst them? Do we
think to clear and justify our selves by recriminations of another nature,
upbraiding them with such and such sins, which indeed have thi^ singular
aggravation adherent, tha^ they are sins of their Party as combining against
the Church; and no^ only of some single Persons disowned, detested, and
lamented by the faithful of the Church? This is indeed very disadvantagious to
Separatists, but of little advantage to Sons of the Holy Church, who hereby may
flatter themselves that they are not so bad as they in that respect, while they
are worse in some other: What says St. Paul to the Romans? I^ is neither good
to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy brother stumbleth,
Romans 14. 21. which surely holds good against Gluttony and Drunkenness,
whereby thy weak Brother is so far scandalized, or pretends at least, that he
stumbleth, that he will not Communicate with such an one. For such even walking
does God require, and such outward as well as inward Holiness does our Church
require, as should give no occasion to the Adversary to blaspheme. But through
such the name of God is blasphemed every day; Religion despised, holy Communion
avoided: and lastly, a greater party made against the Church, than the
cunningest or ablest Teacher in a Conventicle, were otherwise able to patch
together by his Doctrine: as is before observed.

How do the Ancient Fathers: the Author of the imperfect Work upon St. Matthew,
bearing Chrysostoms name. Salvian, Of the Providence of God. Origin upon St.
Matthews Gospel. Chrysostom in several places: and Austin (as we shall
hereafter see more fully) declaim against the scandal given by Christians evil
lives, to Infidels and Gentiles? How absurd is it, that a Gentleman well
affected to the Church, but noted for being given to Drink, shall scarce be
able to answer a Fanatic, who shall reproach him for punishing Nonconformity
in a Ceremony, and himself stand accused unanswerably for the unquestionable
Sin of Intemperance? How incongruous (say they) is it, and unreasonable, that a
man should escape the just punishment of the Law, who by foregoing Excess,
has cast himself into a Fit of Sickness, and disabled himself to arise and to
appear in Gods House; and a man who sits soberly at home, or is Preaching and
Praying in a select Congregation, should be punished? I would these things
could be bettet answered than as yet they have been.

But when the Salt it self has lost its savor, and corrupts when it is
expected it should preserve, when they of the Clergy shall be offenders and
scandalous in this kind? When he that, like Enoch, by Office and Consecration,
should be a Teacher of Righteousness, shall be a Practicer of such
Wickedness; when by his Word he shall direct to Heaven, and by his Actions and
Example lead to Hell; when he shall (as often it happens) confute zealously the
Phanatick in his Pulpit, and in the Street, or in the Tavern, or in his own
private House, by ill Government of himself, undo all; being a Priest to God,
and a Deacon to the Devil: What shall we say to such an one? How pernicious
must he needs be to the whole State of Religion? As Traitors in heart of a City
besieged, privately, at Postern doors, letting in the Enemy, are much more
destructive to the place wherein they live, than the open Enemy, who without
assail it with Fire, Sword, Cannons and Bombs. Ridiculous are they, and at the
same time impudent, who, because they allow some Formalities in the Church,
pretend to be Friends to the Church, which to their power, whether they intend
it or not, ruin the same. And think thou, O man (we all know who says it)
that judge them which do such things, and do the same, that thou shall
escape the judgment of God? Romans 2. Or will thou betake thy self to that
trivial, but bold refuge and excuse, Do as I say, and not as I do? Know
assuredly, that God the Righteous Judge will say one day to thee: Out of thine
own mouth will I judge thee, thou vile and wicked servant: doubly condemning
thee; first, because thou committedst such sins; next, because thine own mouth
pronounced thee guilty, as thy mind convinced thee.

But let us now see a little, whether such persons as these, can be any better
Subjects than Saints; or Common-wealths-men than Churchmen. For we suppose to
be true, what Tully lays down for a Principle of his Politics, That no man
is born for himself only, but for his Country. But that Drunken men are right
Achans, and troublers of Israel, and that they perish not alone in their
iniquity, but draw down Plagues upon the place and party they are of, may
briefly and easily appear from the general indignation conceived by God against
that sin, moving him to punish that Nation wherein that s^^ abounds, as is
touched before; a^ also from the proper mischief it ca^ries along with it,
against the two great Orders, Civil and Military, b^ which, and upon which (as
two su^ Bases) all Communities do subsist For how unfit is that man, who cannot
govern himself, to govern others How can he discharge the Office of faithful
Counselor of State, wh^ can keep no secrets? but blabs out a^^ he knows, and
more too a great deal who cannot keep his own counse^ It is therefore related
by Seneca, as ^ Miracle, that Tiberius the Empero^ (who for his Vice of
Drinking, amongst others, was scoffingly calle^ Biberius, as Suetonius writes)
committing the Government of Rome to Pis^ and afterward to Cossus, two drunken
Companions of his; they notwithstanding, revealed not the se^rets of State. But
how can this be ^rdinarily expected from such whose Brains are hot, and Reason
cold at ^he same time? vehement causes of ^oquacity.

And what Military service is he ^ble to do for his King and Country, who,
though he be not always Drunk, ^et is easily drawn in to be disorder^y? and if
his Adversary pleases to ^et that Trap in his way, by subtle Contrivances, he
is soon made unfit for business. And too often did ^t fall out in our late
Civil Wars, that when the occasion earnestly called ^or Action, Vigilance,
Industry, the Vice of Drinking prevailed so far as ^o say, Let us take but one
Pint more, we will drink but one Bottle more, and take the the other Pipe and give
^ver; and by that time they were either surprised in their Quarters, o^ the
advantage they might have had was neglected and fled, and only a^ empty
ostentation of Valor serve in the stead of noble Exploits: An^ if heightened
with Liquour they come to Action, it being commonly without counsel and
discretion, an^ performed with more rashness tha^ good conduct, the Success
falls ou^ accordingly. And Officers being given to such a Vice which will no^
be maintained at the ordinary rate What must they of necessity do, bu^ instead
of Warring against their Enemies, fall foul with, and spoil their Friends with
whom they Quarter, o^ basely rob and cheat the poor common Soldier of his
slender allowance, to maintain their Lusts? When such practices as these are
tolerate^ by any Prince, there is that Army little otherwise than delivered up
to ruin and confusion: and so is the Cause too, be it never so just and good,
and necessary. For what heart can the poor oppressed and thus tyrannized common
Soldier have to fight for such his Enemies, and the production of his own
misery and calamity? the valor of his Commanders chiefly consisting in
swelling, and swearing, and swaggering against his own Soldiers, expecting
their due from them. Yet I would not have it so understood, as if I did believe
this to be the only cause of mutinous Spirits in an Army, but that too often
this is the cause: and that they, who drink and spend high, and make others
thus pay for it, are very rarely of a truly Military Spirit: for they who are
such, love Valor in others too well to abuse it, or to be base in either of
these way St. Paul makes use of a known an^ approved Rule of Discipline in h^^
Age, applying it to Christianity, Ev^ry man that striveth for the mastery, ^^
temperate in all things, 1 Cor. 9. 24. In timating, that they who are not
temperate, are unfit for such weight^ matters, upon which the felicity o^
unhappiness of a Kingdom so much depends.

And how much better he is to hi^ own Family than he is to the Roy^^ Family,
which is the Kingdom where in he lives, will be easily seen. Nay it may be
easily understood, what (...) Friend he would be to the whol^ Nation, if it
were in his power, by the good usage he gives to his own flesh and blood, and
inferiors under them: For does not the holy Apostle declare that Christian to
b^ worse than an Infidel, who provides not for his own family, 1 Timothy 5. 8. How
much more culpable is he then, that shall undo himself and relations, by his
riotous living? Yea, the very Woods, Fields and Pastures, feel the evil effect
of his Drunken humor: For after he has lavished out that full stock and store
which his Friends left him, he proceeds to seize upon the very Corpse of his
Estate, the annual Revenue not sufficing him to maintain two homes; the one his
own House, and the other the Tavern, if he be of the greater Rank; ^ut if of
the meaner, the Alehouse: or perhaps he brings the Tavern home to his own
House, which ^s worse, and breeds more disorder and confusion in a Family, than
the other; and so bottle after bottle, and sometimes dozen after dozen of
bottles are brought forth; so that the Butteries or Cellars expenses
equallizing many times, and sometimes exceeding the expenses of the Kitchen*
the Gentleman, as the Prodigal in the Gospel, begins to be in want, and falls a
borrowing; and when his credit fails there, wooes his distressed Wife a second
time for to release her Jointure, and never considers how want and infamy is
coming upon him, as an armed man, and upon his children: In the mean time the
Timber falls, and makes the Earth groan and tremble, as it were perceiving its
own fate not to be far off; and that Ax is laid to the Entail, to cut that off
too; and the Tenements mourn and hang their heads, droop, and ready to fall;
the Woods and Groves are turned into Champion: And first goes one Farm, and
then another; and when there remains no more to secure the Prodigal, himself
goes to the Country House of such persons, the Prison: And his Children, if he
has any, to their Friends, or the miserable allowance of the Parish. And he
that is thus an Enemy to his own Family, must needs likewise be an Enemy to his
Country. For particular persons thus wasting their own Estates, do at the same
time weaken the Nation it self, by the unnatural spoil of that part: which were
inconsiderable, were it not that this is the Case of so many now adays.

And having briefly touched these Inconveniences of Drinking, it may seem
superfluous to descend to the Personal Evils such disorderly persons bring upon
themselves: For all the foresaid Evil falls heavy on the Authors head. Yet are
there some which more immediately affect and afflict his very Body, Mind and
Soul. For God having made Man after his own Image, and endued him with
Understanding and Divine Reason, these are commonly wasted with his outward
Goods, and he becomes the worst of all Iconoclasts, in defacing the Image of
God himself, in himself. What Prince, yea what meaner man would not be incensed
to see his Picture despitefully broken to pieces and trampled on? And can we
believe that God will bear the affront of deforming and ruining his? And what
dreadful effects does our Land, yield to its shame, of such as these; some
egregious Instances of which, I could give, but that I would not disoblige any
of the Name or Family, who to heighten their Wits have lost their common
Reason, and become little better than dumb Beasts, remaining Living Monuments
of Folly and Madness in this kind: Others sinking under the design of
Monstrous Intemperance, and becoming glorious for Brutality, have slept an
everlasting sleep. And if this falls not out constantly, yet do they procure
infallibly to their Bodies, infinite Troubles and Distempers: and by the
frequentation of Glasses going about, do as it were, shake Deaths Hour-glasse;
as if it stood, and they were weary of their Lives. Hence proceed Dropsies, and
Fevers, and Plurisies, and Gouts, and shaking Palsies; and what not, to
recompense with many days grievous Torment, the inordinate Pleasure of a few
hours: In which also, while they please themselves, they make sport for others,
by their apish, foolish, wild and frantic speeches, postures and gestures;
not amiss described thus by Chaucer, in his Man of Laws Tale:

O messenger fulfilled of Drunkenness,
Strong is thy breath, and thy limbs faltr^naye.
And thou bewraiest all secretnesse:
Thy mind is lorn, thou janglest like a Jay.
Thy face is turned into a new array.
There Drunkenness reigns in any rout,
There is no counsel hidden without doubt.
It may also be not unworthy the hearing from some of the Ancient and Holy
Fathers, what they have observed of the mischiefs of Drunkenness, accruing to
the user of it. Clemens Alexandrinus, in his Clemens Alexand. Paedag. lib. 2.
c. 2.
Institutions of Youth, or Pedagogie, says, (...) etc. By excess of Wine, the
Tongue trips and stutters, the Lips hang down, the Eyes are distorted, the
Sight wavering, the Eyes darkened through redundance of moisture, and are
constrained to make false reports. All things turn round, and are turned about.
And Origin upon Levitious (Scholar to Clemens) declares Drunkenness to be an
enemy to all, weakening the Soul as well as the Body. But Chrysostom more fully
Chrysostom. T^m. 5. Hom. 84.
and particularly thus writes, in an Homily on Drunkenness and the
Resurrection: Drunkenness, is nothing else but an ecstasy, and alienation of
the understanding, a perversion of reason, a want of judgment, and penury of
knowledge. And to Chrysostom let us add Chrysologus, agreeing as well in sense
as name, with the other, in a Sermon he has of the Faithful Steward, writing
thus: Ebrietas est matter caedis, etc. Drunkenness is the Mother of Slaughter,
the Parent of Quarrelling, the Breeder of Fury, the Dam of scurvy Brawling: He
that has this, has not himself: he that has this, is not a man: he that has
this, does not so much commit Sin, as is Sin. Drunkenness is a fawning Devil,
a sweet Poison, a voluntary Madness, an incensed Enemy, temptation to
Dishonesty, an injury to modesty. This no Christian can be acquainted with: A
Priest may not so much as hear of it, lest he, who should be a pattern of
Virtue, should become an example of Vices. Thus he there having a little before
said, Drunkenness, which is an offense in others, is Sacrilege in a Priest;
because there it only kills the Soul, but here the Spirit of Holiness.

And to these I might add innumerable others, and especially Saint Augustine:
but I reserve him to speak for himself, and others at large, in the Conclusion
of this Treatise, and proceed now to consider some causes of this reigning and
raging Sin, which being duly understood, the cure of this Epidemical Disease is
more easily attained. Only from what has been said in the description of
Drunkenness, and Drunkards, I think I may end this Section with that very true
and accute Saying of Bernardus Sylvestris: De Cura rei Familiaris, to be found
amongst the Works of St. Bernard: Ebrius nihil recte facit nisi cum in lutum
cadit: The Drunkard does nothing as he should, but when he falls into the
dirt. Where we leave him for the present, and proceed.

SECT. VI. Some general causes of the prevailing Sin of Drunkenness recited.
THe Causes of this notorious Sin against God, the Church, the Commonwealth, a
Man's private Family and his own Person, may be diverse. Some of which, I shall
first in general briefly touch, and then more fully proceed to that grand one,
Drinking of Healths: which not so much disposes to Excess, but by violence
imposes that Sin on men.

The first general occasion hereof is, in truth, none other than the Original
of all transgressions against God, the indulgence men naturally use toward
their Senses. And it being necessary and laudable both, for Men, by Eating and
Drinking to repair the daily decays of Nature in their Body; to incline them to
which, God has wisely placed a delight in those Actions tending to that end:
Blind Man, not considering the excellent end appointed by God, by only finding
a pleasure in satisfying his just Appetites, and gratifying his Palate, knows
no mean, and admits no rule, but his unruly Senses, which betray him to
infinite Imprudencies and Exorbitancies, of which this of excessive drinking is
not the least.

But as to follow our Senses brutishly is no small cause of this evil; so may I
say most truly, Not to follow our Senses is a second, and more shameful cause
of Intemperance. For, though God has indeed placed in Man a strong desire
after those things which are necessary for the due subsistence of such
particular Creatures, and the whole Kind in general: So has he, by his
singular Wisdom and Goodness, set a bound to the same; which men of Reason
especially, should not easily pass; and, as it were gaged them, so as men do
Vessels, that it may be known easily, what is their proper and convenient
Contents; which exceeding, they may know they offend. These Limits prescribed
thus by Nature, are a sensible Satiety, which every Man feels in himself in
Eating and Drinking; so that upon such sufficiency, the very pleasure and
delight which push Men on to take a competency, cease, that being attained; and
a certain opposition and renitency is found in Men to that, which, need
requiring, they were eager after. Hence sure it proceeded, that some of the
Ancient Philosophers described Virtue and Happiness too, in this World, to be
a following of Natures dictates and ducture, and that with a great deal of
Truth. For if Men would be but so well advised, especially in Eating and
Drinking, as to acknowledge what they feel in them-selves, viz. a quietation of
Appetite and Saturity; and would not, contrary to the dictates of Sense it
self, even against Pleasure, take more than is useful, there would be but few
Gluttons or Drunkards in the World, to what are found now adays. But alas! by I
know not, or will not say what violences Men at first offer to Nature it self,
and frequentation of unnatural Acts, what was at first resisted by us, becomes
in time tolerable, then acceptable, then desirable, and at last so pleasurable,
that it is a more difficult thing to resist that monstrous Appetite, than it
was to bring a man's self to comply with it. For what will not custom and
continuance do in time? And therefore (as is before observed) no Apology of
necessity, under which a Man may have by these means brought himself, can here
take place, because he was the unjust Author of such necessity to himself; but
either reflecting upon what an unnatural change he has made in himself, he is
bound by retrograde Mortifications to deny himself first Superfluities,
according to the rule of Nature: and then, according to the old and holy rule
of Christian Religion, deny himself some things that are in themselves lawful,
as well to revenge upon himself the abuse of lawful things, as to reduce Nature
to its pristine simplicity and mediocrity.

A third cause of this Disorder, I make disorderly company: For Vice, of what
nature soever it be, is no better than a certain Itch of the Soul, which is
caught by intimate conversation. Show me (says the foreign Proverb, now almost
endenized) what a man's companion is, I will easily tell you what he himself is:
For thus speaks the holy Psalmist of wicked persons, Psalm. 69. 5. They
encourage themselves in evil. And it being in the nature of most men to appear
excellent in whatever they undertake, it is looked on as a piece of noble
emulation, to be chief in sinning, and exceed in the faculty of Drinking too.
But the Apostle tells us with what a foul mistake, being such as glory in their
shame: Phil. 3. 19. Come ye (say these Good-fellows, as they would be esteemed
even while they are notoriously evil) I will fetch Wine, and we will fill our
selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more
abundant: as the Prophet Isaiah aptly describes them.

A fourth cause of Drunkenness I make examples of greater Men had in repute
for Riches, or Power, or place of credit, who though they perhaps converse not
with others beneath them ill inclined, yet show themselves as Lights (though as
out of a dark and black Lanthorn) to others to imitate. It is in fashion, great
Men do so; and therefore the obscure and mean person thinks it is for his
credit to be Great, at any rate, and commonly with a contrary event to his
expectation, acquiring detestation and contempt, instead of esteem: Folly, Sin
and Misery, are the consequents of such imitations: but they, who by setting
such evil Examples, do as much as in them lies, dub with a badge of Honor such
Infamous Vices, must needs fall under a double Condemnation, as shall be shown
hereafter.

And fifthly, as Idleness and Slothfulness: A man having no ingenious Science
to engage him in, no Art Liberal or Mechanical to employ himself about, or
vilely neglecting these, exposes himself to all manner of temptations, so
especially to Drinking, to pass away the time. And perhaps hence it proceeds,
that Persons of good Family, Birth and Fortune, not bending their minds and
spending their precious hours in laudable Exercise, degenerate so often into
this Ignoble Vice, and become Examples to others in the same, who should be
patterns of Honor and Virtue to them.

Sixthly, The not putting the Penal Statutes in execution against Drunkenness,
has given presumption to many to offend boldly herein. When Queen Elizabeth
gave assistance to the distressed Netherlands, these Succors soon learned the
Art, and catched the Disease of Drinking, rife in those Countries, and
transported the same soon after into England; where it so far prevailed, that
in the fourth of King James it was judged necessary, a Law, with severe
Penalties, should be made to redress that spreading mischief. But when, what
the baser sort only, (as common Soldiers, etc.) at first offended in, Men of
Estates and Fashion afterward were guilty of, the wholesome Laws soon became
but as spiders webs, and lie still languishing, craving, as it were, new vigor
and enforcement: answerable to what we read, Great Defenders of Virtue, and
Enemies to this hateful Vice, have signally showed when it became common and
contumacious, resisting and despising ordinary Remedies. And the Reverend
Spotwood, in his History of Scotland, tells us, That about the year 970.
Constantine, Son of Keneth King of Scotland, made a Law, by which it should be
death to be Drunk. Which Law, if it were in force in England at this day, it
might for a time make greater slaughter than the greatest Enemies to
Drunkenness could be content to see; yet, in a short time, it may be supposed
to prevent more Bloodshed, than such impunity as now is allowed. For seeing,
and with horror lamenting, the many and foul Murders committed in Drunken
Meetings, I have been inclined to believe, That God, beholding the abounding of
this Vice, and the little regard to execute deserved punishment upon such
Offenders, takes the punishment of it into his own hands, and lets these mad
Beasts loose, to tear one another to pieces, and kill one another by frequent
Assassinations; and suffers an easy way to be open for the Murderers to
escape: Notwithstanding what the Scripture advises to the contrary, Prove. 28.
17. A man that does violence to the blood of any person, shall flee to the pit,
let no man stay him. Which Rule admits only of this Exception that we know,
viz. When it is offered involuntarily, and merely casually, or upon extreme
necessity of saving our own Lives; which necessities we must not bring upon our
selves by becoming first Assailants. But when the best account and plea made
for offering violence to the blood of a Man, shall be, that he was Drunk, or at
least had first offered violence to his own Reason by Wine, Ale or Brandy; to
accept this for Innocence, which adds guilt to guilt, is to encourage both
Murderers and Drunkards, by a Clemency which will certainly end in Fury,
against that Land where such gentleness shall be in use, if not against the
person so pitiful. It seems to me more reasonable and just a great deal, that
the frequent users of Brandy (that pernicious Spirit to the Bodies, Brains and
Souls of men) should be brought under the Common Law, against such as have to
do with Familiar Spirits, and suffer the same punishment: For Brandy is a
Spirit, we all know, and they who abuse it (as now adays it is upon no
necessity) make it an Evil and Familiar Spirit both; and are in this respect
more blameable than they who confederate with the Devil: For the Devil was
evil, and so were his petty Imps, before Men had to do with them; but Brandy,
as commonly used, is made wicked and mischievous by him that corresponds thus
with it. How evil then must needs that Soul be that so accustoms it self to it,
that he is not sensible of the evil it brings along with it; nor perceives how
it wastes and preys upon the Natural and Vital Spirits? This surely is an
iniquity (if any) to be punished by the Judges, as Job speaks, chap. 31. For it
is a fire that consumes to destruction. But though I presume upon such just
and apparent grounds, to determine what such a monstrous and still growing
custom deserves, I presume not to determine without better Authority, and
counsel how to give it its deserts, but leave it to the severer lashes of
others; or rather to the Scorpions it carries with it in its own tail.

SECT. VII. A Seventh Reason of the increase of Drunkenness: Drinking of
Healths.
OUt of the store of Causes, or at least occasions of Drunkenness, I have
thought requisite to single that of Drinking Healths, become so common and
familiar to all sorts of Persons, and so generally tending to such an evil
Event, that all endeavors of curing this Epidemical Disease of Drunkenness,
must needs prove vain and ineffectual, this remaining in its acquired
reputation and force; which that it may, we find great Wits, great Authority,
yea Grave too, not wanting to defend and support this Darling of our Age, which
we judge more fit to be dashed against the Stones: What hurt is in it, say
some, moderately used? What Scripture against it, say others Phanatically
urging, for once? Do not the greatest (say others) dignifie it? Do not the
Gravest grace and justify it? Is it not a good Character, diverse times, to
testify our affection and honor, and obsequiousness to our Friends, to our
Betters, to our Governors, especially our Supreme? And there are not wanting
some who can fetch an Argument from the Church and Religion, which yet I am
ashamed to set forth at length after the authors and users of it. This, and
much more is alleged, hereafter to be considered more directly. Here it may
suffice in general, to render the truest reasons of this to be men's Fancies,
and Appetites irregular; and lastly, that which St. Augustine once confessed to
be Frailty in him, viz. Plus valebat in me inolitum deterius quam insolitum
melius, i. e. An accustomed evil more prevailed with me, than an unaccustomed
good: as will appear by these following reasons against it.

And in the first place, I argue against it from the Heathenish, Superstitious,
yea Idolatrous original of Healths, invented and intended for a fit Worship of
false Gods and Demons, supposed to be the Souls of some great Hero's departed
this Life, whom they so remembered: but with this extenuating Circumstance, That
this they did chiefly, if not only, on Festival days appointed to their honor;
but the Custom with us is become much worse, for there are amongst us, that do
this every day, and scarce ever to omit it, where two or three Companions meet
together: and commonly they joined eating to them, drinking to them, and
feasting at their Tombs. They supposed that they were Deified, and thereupon so
honored them. We drink in remembrance of them whom we know to be alive, as if
we would Deifie them: For all Worship given unto such as are at that distance,
that they cannot receive nor perceive the same done unto them, does imply
somewhat in him more than of humane order. And yet it missed but a little, but
such jolly compotations had prevailed in the Church among the devouter and
ignoranter Christians, who began to do the same office to Martyrs for the
Faith, by Feasting at their Tombs, till the vigilance of some Holy Bishops
observing the ill consequence of it, timely opposed and suppressed the same.
But because the Heathens, who had a mind to be merry and religious at the same
time, could not presently go to the Sepulchers of the deceased, there to
carowz, they brought the Ceremony home to their own Houses, and there performed
the same diverse times in memory of them, as was pretended, though in all
probability, this was commonly done more for their own Bellies sake, than their
admired Friends: which is the case of Drinkers of Healths at this day prompted
to it rather from their Lusts than Loyalty so much pretended. Yet this of
honoring the dead was anciently the occasion of Grace-Cups, as at this day they
are called, though really Graceless. For as Lampridius writes in the Life of
Alexander Severus: Cum Amicos Militares babuisset, ut usum Trajani, etc. When
he had his Friends of his Army about him, to keep up, in some degree, the
custom of Trajan (that Warlike Emperor, but notable Soaker, as it should seem)
who was wont, after the second Course, at Meals, to drink five Glasses; he
offered but one to his Friends, to the honor of Alexander the Great, and that a
small one; unless any (as he might) demanded a bigger. The gods of the Heathen
therefore, having been known to be Good-Fellows while they lived; they may
possibly be esteemed to retain that humor in another World, and approve such
courses: but to use any such Ceremony as an honor either to the Living or Dead,
savors of profaneness with us. And besides this, there may be another reason
for those Ancients to drink freely after Meals, which will not hold with us; as
probably of an Opinion that it was not so healthful to themselves, to drink
within their Meal, which some, not unskilful in Physic this day maintain,
notwithstanding the Rhiming-School of Salerne writes otherwise, saying,

Inter prandendum tibi saepe parumque bibendum. And the late History of
Ludolphus of Ethiopia, or the Habbesines, tells us, That these are wont to
defer Drink altogether till the ending of their Meals, and then Drink what is
sufficient for all; alleging this for a reason of their so doing, That we must
plant before we water: But modern vain Wits are willing to mistake, and
believe, the Ancient Gallants of Old drank both as heartily in their Meals, and
afterward, as they do now adays: or that they drank the Healths of Persons
present, as the fashion now is; or of the Living, as if they were dead, which,
according to their opinion, would be ridiculous and abusive. For Tully in his
Tusculane Questions, says of the Greeks: Graeci in Conviviis solent nominare
cui poculum tradituri: The Greeks in their Banquettings were wont to name the
Person to whom they were to deliver the Cup: implying first, That this was only
the practice of that Nation; and that ordinarily, they did only name the person
they next drank to, without the Ceremony of an Health, Which has been an
immemorial Custom amongst us, and other Nations very innocent, until depraved
by Modern Additions.

2. But a second Evil is yet more apparent amongst us, in Drinking of Healths;
and that is, the spoiling a Man of his native Liberty, command of his own
Actions, and especially the use of his Reason and Senses both. So that hereby
is a double violence offered against a Man, as he is a Man endued and governed
by Reason: The first is outward, in taking away his Reason before he drinks,
denying him the liberty to judge what is fit for him to drink: but the Drunken
Dictator of mis-rule comes to him with his Glass or Cup in his hand, his Sword
many times by his side, and a great Name, and sometimes a base name in his
mouth, and offers, obliges, obtrudes, threatens the civil, modest, and moderate
person that would willingly, if he might be permitted, be in health still, and
enjoy himself as becomes a man of reason, but it will hardly be allowed him;
and there is that they call a Moral Necessity upon him to do as is required of
him, by a Tyranny greater than that of Princes in a Commonwealth, laying
grievous Taxes, and commanding unreasonable things at their Subjects hands. For
though possibly they hereby exceed the measures of Law and Justice, they do not
usurp a Power which belongs not to them, but abuse it. But these Princes tax
whom they please, and what they please, and will exact it of them or they shall
suffer for it, not as Princes in their execution of Laws, speak what the Law in
such cases does provide, but the Martial Law of these Arbitrary Hachsters, or
Hectors. And so again having made this Invasion upon the Ingenuous freedom of a
man, they commit the spoiling of his inward Reason to the merciless Wine or
Ale, which generally follows. They will tell you, perhaps, They scorn to force
any body to Drink: and with some, this I deny not to be true, such I mean, who
being not so perfect in this trade, make a conscience of taking Apprentices to
be bound to them: yet the very nature and end of Healths importing an
obligation to accept it, and fear of offending the propounder, and disobliging
the Person for whose sake it is offered, carries with it generally the force,
though not the form of Constraint, upon which it becomes uncivil, as well as
unjust, to the sober and ingenuous Person.

3. But I may well make these, and worse events than these lightly touched, a
third distinct Reason against Healths: The barbarous Conflicts, and tragical
Effects so frequently concluding these Villainous Practices, Fightings,
Woundings, and Murderings: For though Drunkenness simple too much disposes men
to unnatural Violences of this sort, yet this Drinking of Healths much more is
the cause of Bloodshed, or Mischief, very near akin to it. For into the same
Dilemma, or desperate Snare, do they bring civiler Persons than themselves,
into which an arch Fellow of the rebellious Houses of Parliament boasted once,
they had brought that Blessed King Charles the First, by their most unjust
Propositions for Peace, offered as a due ground of a Treaty: If he grants our
demands (says he) he undoes himself; If he does not grant them, we will undo
him. So these tyrannical Healthfounders treat their Companions in imposing
Healths, knowing very well, that they who Drink what they offer, receiving the
same, undo themselves; and if they do not receive it, then will they undo them
by wicked force. And that these base unchristian, ungentile prancks are no
untruths framed by me, innumerable instances are given us in Taverns and out of
Taverns also: But I shall only instance in that committed upon a Suffolk
Gentleman, the only hopes of a flourishing Family: who at Norwich Assizes last
Summer, 1684. having before Drunk to sufficiency, had, (as I am credibly
informed) six Glasses of Wine bearing the Titles of so many Healths, set before
him by a more unruly Spirit, obliging him by wonted adjurations to drink them
all off: which the other refusing, he took an occasion to quarrel with him to
that degree, as unexpectedly to stab him, so as he fell down, presently dying:
the Author of this Tragedy suffering condign punishment according to Law: which
course of Law severely executed, would more than one way clear this Nation,
lying under more guilt of Blood than any I can hear of in Christendom. For what
is the reason so many have been of late so basely murdered, but a fair prospect
before them of escaping the hands of Justice? And what is the reason that so
many have actually suffered that death which they deserved, but the same hopes
of Pardon, without success? So that customary Clemency herein, ends in
greatest tyranny and cruelty: according to the Divine Saying of Solomon, Prove.
12. 20. The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel. Not so much understood (as
commonly) of the hard-heartednesse of ungodly men, who would be thought gentle
and mild, when really they are unjust: but in that sense which Drusius in his
Observations interprets them, agreeably to the Jewish Expositors; viz. Sparing
or forbearing the due execution of Justice on heinous Malefactors, is a cruelty
to such as are Innocent, or have lost their Goods or Lives by the hands of
Wicked men; and not only to them is this a cruelty, but to their near Relations
too: and not only to these, but to such as not as yet are brought under such
Violencies, upon such easy terms passed over; perhaps no better than this,
That the Offender was in Drink, allowing one Sin to justify another, and
absolve the Malefactor: like to that bold Fellow in Seneca, Epist. 83. Tillius
Cimber, who being one of them that in the Senate murdered Julius Caesar; when
this was objected to him, being a great Drunkard, he with a bold face replied:
Ego quemquam feram, qui vinum non possum: Should I bear with any man, who
cannot bear Wine? And he that allows this for a tolerable reason of such
Wickednesses, may as well connive at men for the Phanatical Religion they have
drunk in, who may allege for Murderings and Treasons against Princes, their
Zeal for Religion putting them upon it; for had they been of a sober Religion,
they would never have meditated or contrived so notorious an act.

4. And the consideration of this puts me upon a Fourth reason against Healths,
quite contradicting what vain persons pretend, loving in truth more their
Palates and Bellies, than their King or Country. For they say, It is an Honor
done to the Kings Majesty, a Testimony of their Fidelity and Loyalty, and a
Well-wishing to the good success of their Friends, and the prosperity of the
Nation. Very good hitherto, if this were all; but, What advantage, I pray, is
it to King, Church, or Country, to have these empty Fumes and glorious
Ostentations of such pretended good affection, and at the same time by the
frequent abuses and excesses under such colorable Proclamations, to pull down
real damage and judgment upon all these? I will only demand this one thing of
such Zealots as these, thus advancing the Persons, or Cause they so nominate,
whether in their very Consciences they are persuaded, that by such means as
these are, any of those ends were ever any whit promoted? or rather, Whether
they have not all of them been much retarded and blasted? This latter I affirm,
upon the consideration of the Curse of God drawn down upon the frequent abuses
thereby committed, and the apparent scandal to more sober persons than
themselves, and the indisposing of such persons to contribute any noble or
worthy act to such purposes. I would likewise appeal to their own Consciences,
Whether such persons as these, urging these acts of Drinking devotion to the
King, are proportionably more devout and fervent by the most Divine and
effectual means of obtaining his Welfare, Prosperity and Happiness; viz.
Prayers, private and public, than other who dislike and decline this way of
using Gods Name with such Concomitants. For if they be not, nay (which too
often is true) they less concern themselves in such most proper means tending
to the safety and honor of the King, than others: What vain pretense of good
Affection that way, must that needs be, which satisfies it self in a zeal for
Drinking, as well as wishing well to the King, and is chill and rare, and
perhaps half ashamed to be known to be really Religious to that end? Or do they
think that God will now adays also accept of such a Libamen, or Drink Offering,
to appease him and oblige him to their wishes? This imagination, not altogether
groundless to be supposed in them, were to suppose God to be like to men, and
them none of the best, and to be won to do good by good Liquor. Besides this,
What a grand piece of Honor is it for Kings in a Just and Righteous Cause, or
for Honorable and Virtuous Ladies, to have that character of Honor done to
them, which we have found lately done to the blessed memory (as they call it)
of that Infamous Traitor Stephen College; and is commonly done by the same
Zealots for Healths, to Queans of lewd Life and Conversation. Yet if you deny
this, you become obnoxious, as if some notorious affront had been put upon the
Propounder and Propounded too.

Fifthly, the judgment of ancient Fathers, and their excellent Wisdom and Zeal
against the Sin of Drunkenness, allianced so straightly to Drinking of Healths,
that they commonly walk together, oppose this custom: as has been partly
showed already, and might be farther made good from other Testimonies: but I
suppose those most concerned, do not like to hear much of the severity of the
ancient Fathers, which will not suit with our days. But methinks they should
not so easily pass over or contemn that Royal Law of Feasting and Drinking,
made by that glorious Ahasuerus, recorded in Holy Scripture: who in his most
sumptuous, ample, and splendid Entertainment of Wines of all sorts, took great
care that none should be imposed upon, but drink according to his own mind and
election; which is wholly voided now adays by contrary practices. Yet that most
Noble, Virtuous and Renowned Emperor, Charles the Great, thought that Example
worthy his Imitation, and the vulgar Vice worthy his care to restrain and
banish his Court and Army: For thus we find it Decreed in his Imperial
Constitutions, to be found in Goldastus Imperial. Constit. Tom. 1. page 147.
Artic. 7. concerning Military Discipline: Ne alius alium ad bibendum
provocaret, aut cogeret. Ebrium in exercitu de caetero aquam potare compulit.
i. e. He forbade any to instigate or challenge another to drink. Whoever was
Drunk in his Army, he compelled to drink Water for the time to come. And the
same do we find in Aventine his Annals of Bavaria, lib. 4. page 217. related
of that Great Prince; with a more plain expression of his singular care to
prevent Drunkenness: Ebrietatem inhibuit, neve alius alii propinaret: He so
restrained Drunkenness, that he would not suffer one to drink to another; I
suppose, so as to engage him to pledge him by such obligations as Healths bring
along with them. Which would be looked upon now adays as such a violation of
the Charter of Freeborn and Freespirited Carowzers (as the late word is) that
it would go near to hazard a mutiny in the Corporation of Goodfellows, as they
like to be termed, being observed and imposed.

But because we hear very scandalous Accusations made by the Adversaries of the
Conforming Clergy of this Church, of their liberty in this kind; which as we
no ways wholly believe, we cannot but partly believe, as seeing less
scrupulousness and exactness in very many of them in their walking, than
Charles the Great required of his Soldiers (as if the Soldiers of Jesus Christ,
and especially the Leaders, ought not to walk more unblameably, than the
secular Soldiers) we hold our selves bound to put them in mind of some special
Canons of the Church; which when this vile Custom of Drinking of Healths crept
into the Clergy, provided against such Scandals: as did the Council of Laterane
under Innocent the Third, chap. 15. which begins thus A crapula and ebrietate
omnes Clerici diligenter abstineant, etc. Let all Clergymen carefully avoid
Gluttony and Drunkennss: wherefore let them temper their Wine [with Water] and
themselves with Wine. And lest the common excuse may seem to take place here,
which says, Drunkenness indeed, and forcing any body to Drink, is no ways to
be allowed, in the Clergy especially; but Drinking an Health or two and away,
cannot be condemned; let them hear what follows in the same Chapter: Neither
let any man be moved to drink, seeing Drunkenness banishes the understanding
and reason, and stirs up the fuel of lust: Whereupon we Decree that abuse to be
wholly abolished, whereby in some places, Drinkers are wont to oblige
themselves to drink equal draughts: so that he, in the judgment of such, is
most applauded, who makes most Drunk and takes off fullest Cups. But if any
offend in this kind, unless upon admonishment from his Superior, he shall
make competent satisfaction, let him be suspended from his Benefice, and from
his Office. And this seasonable and necessary provision was made likewise by
that excellent Prelate Hermannus, Elector and Bishop of Colon, in a Council
held there, in the year 1530. tending toward a Reformation, though
improsperously, which is still extant in the twenty fourth Chapter, De Officio
Clericorum, where the above-quoted words of St. Hierome, are related against
Drunkenness, and urged especially against the Clergy, in these words
following: A crapula itaque and ebrietate, a compotationibus illis ad aequales
Calices, a luxu ab alea, etc. This Council calls all of the Clergy from
Gormandizing, from Drunkenness, or Drinking-matches by equal Cups, from
Luxury. They of the Clergy therefore, who engage in such Bouts, are Offenders
against their Order, against Reason, against Authority of Doctors and Councils,
and become pitiful Sheep themselves, and cowardly instead of being Pastors, and
Leaders of Christ's Flock, being led away with such a corrupt Custom; are much
more culpable and disorderly than others who do the very same thing: unless we
except those who will put off, or at least forget their Gown, to put on the
Gallant and Gentleman, as they fondly imagine. Is this to be sober, grave,
temperate, as St. Paul to Titus requires, chap. 2. of the Presbiters of the
Church? Is this to be examples to the Flock, as St. Peter enjoins them, 1 Pet.
5. 3? Or do we think Phanatically so well of our selves and Profession, that we
can hallow a bad and scandalous act by our Personal Sanctity, or the excellency
of our Profession? and that that presently becomes lawful, grave and sober,
which we, so accounting our selves, shall do, and by our example commend to
others?

And whereas it is here frequently said by way of vindication, That Excess
they condemn as much as others, but Healths moderately used can give no just
offense, nor do any harm: hereby intimating and giving out, that they
(forsooth) have this mad Dog in a string, and can rule him as they please.
Which if I should, as I do grant is often true, amongst truly staid and grave
Persons (especially when the Author of such and such an Health is Master of
the Company) yet amongst equals, if there be but one or two unlucky and ill
inclined persons in the knot, this general limitation seldom comes to any thing
of due restraint: but the prevalency of Custom is such, as Blind men having
indeed a Dog on a string, as if they led him, are really lead by him; so these
Pretenders to Regulations, are themselves blindly and insensibly drawn away
into Intemperance, by that cunning old Dog of Custom going before them, which
they pretended to govern as they pleased.

6. And from hence I draw my last Reason against Drinking of Healths; and that
is, the scandalousnesse of the same: which, were the thing more harmless than
generally it is, the known and confessed miscarriages and wickedness of more
than one sort, are such, that a sober man may not well endure the occasion of
evil. And to make good this my Argument, I shall not need to engage in the nice
Doctrine of scandal given, and scandal taken. For it suffices to condemn
inexcusably all such scandal, that it has no authority at all but bare
connivance to defend it. It has no justifiable occasion to suffer it: It has
the wisest and holiest Votes against it: It is attended with so many Tragical
Mischiefs and Impious Effects, which though they always happen not, yet hereby
are set on foot. Such scandal, I say, as this, which has no good at any time
in it, but most frequently a great deal of evil, is certainly offered, and
deservedly taken, and therefore as deservedly to be altogether laid aside.

But now adays, every Healthfounder is become a Philosopher, and makes use of
his Metaphysics to assert the innocence of this Custom, at least. For he will
tell you, that Healths and Drunkenness are really distinct; and those things
that are so distinct, may be separated; and those things which may be
separated, may be the one without the other. And does not all this prove also,
that both ought to be done too? If it does not, in vain is this Argumentation,
which is only tolerable when some good Authority enjoins it, besides examples
(which are rather great than good) or some benefit at least, sometimes arises
therefrom: But if none of these appear but rather the contrary, what a cold
Reason is it for doing it, that it is possible there may be no sin in it? But we
know by experience (though in the nature of some actions precisely taken, there
be no sin) yet Circumstances make them very evil. And this of Healths has more
than enough so to do. But this I may say likewise, That if Men in ordering
their Conversations, refuse the obvious notices of things as represented to
their Understanding by common appearances, and estimation, and fly to
subtilties of disputing that which they might know better without disputing,
they will or may at least arrive to that finenesse of Arguing, as did that
Polonian Gentleman, Scholar to Socinus, who went beyond his Master (as may be
seen in his Epistles) and took up this Dogm to maintain, That there is no such
thing as sin in the World: His capital Ground for such his monstrous Opinion,
being taken from the unwillingnesse all Men naturally have to err. Of which
Evil, Faustus Socinus himself complains he could not cure him, nor convince him.

Will we yet allege for our Defense, that we are unawares fallen into Company
greater and better than our selves, and therefore must comply with them in some
degree to avoid offense. It will be easily answered, The best way to avoid
offense, is to avoid such company, or to depart. Another way to avoid offense
(I mean of the greatest of all, God Almighty) is to forbear modestly at least,
where boldness does not become a Man; but yet directly. For if, while thou
have the true use of thy Reason, thou can not command thy self, but must
needs yield to Importunity and Custom, how will thou be able to resist, when
the flattery of Drink shall combine with the importunity of others instigating
thee, and make thee facile and flexible to greater measures, and so liable to
greater mischiefs.

But I am not unsensible of the Relics of an Apologetical Reason for Drinking
sometimes more freely than ordinary, even to hilarity; and that by good
warrant, and to good ends, as the alternation of Joy after sorrows possessing
Men, and reparation of Spirits wasted or fled by too much labor or dejection
of mind. All which I grant to be true, and therefore no ways condemn all
Refreshings, not only by usual Meals, but allow somewhat for extraordinary
Occasions, answerable to Physic taken in the Spring and Fall, to remove or
prevent Diseases entering upon the Body. But what can be more unreasonable, than
for any man under pretense of such usefulness, to take Physic every day, or
every week? Or to suppose, That when a man is alone, he should not need this
foresaid relief of Body or Mind, but only when he meets Companions for his
turn: and that all of these should at the same time fall into such
indidisposition of Body or Mind, as to stand in need of such Restoratives. And
besides, these true (...) Aristophan. in Ranis.
Sons of the Tankard, as Aristophanes ingeniously calls Bacchus their
Grandsire, seldom carry so much Philosophy about them, as to have an eye to
these their own Reasons, but follow the motions of their Appetites, considering
nothing so much as the delighting their Senses: which every wise Man should
most carefully avoid, especially having imbibed the sincere Milk of Gods Word;
and given root to Principles of Mortification and Selfdenial: wherein chiefly
consists the true imitation of Christ.

And thus having briefly run through the Design against Drunkenness, and the
grand promoter thereof, Drinking of Healths, I should here cast my self at the
feet of so ill accustomed Persons, in a pathetical, humble, and earnest
Exhortation and Supplication, that, by the many Bonds and Obligations lying
upon them from the Honor of God, whose Laws are daily contemned, and his Name
blasphemed by such Practices; from the scandal brought upon the Church and
Religion, requiring Fastings and abstemiousness from things, and quantity of
things not unlawful in themselves; from the King and Kingdom, which should be
dearer to us than our own inordinate Lustings, both which are shaken; the one
in his Throne, and the other on its bottom, where such Iniquity abounds; from
the health of the Body crazed hereby, and the soundness of the Mind corrupted
by it; from the ruin of our Dependences imminent upon this Vice; from the
sorrow and anguish of our Friends, conceived at the sight hereof; and the joy
of our Enemies, especially evil Spirits, who clap their hands and shout
heartily at the inharmonious Consort of such roaring Boys: as we read in
Scripture, that the good Angels in Heaven rejoice at the conversion of a
sinner, repenting and returning from such evil courses. Lastly, From the most
important thing of all, the Immortal Soul forced, by such tyranny of
Sensuality, to contract it self into an obscure corner here, from whence
tremblingly it foresees it self ready to be haled by such violences into
everlasting flames, for these momentany sparks of Pleasure, which are almost as
soon out as kindled. But the prosecution hereof, I shall choose rather to
commit to two Sermons, which that excellent and unprejudiced Father, St.
Augustine, has upon the same subject with me; that so all true Christians and
Ingenuous Men, may see what I have said, vouched, and more divinely urged: To
all which, God of his infinite Grace and Goodness, grant a due and much
desired success.

Amen.
THE Two hundred and one and thirtieth SERMON OF St. AUGUSTINE, De Tempore, Of
shunning Drunkenness.

THE Two hundred and one and thirtieth SERMON of St. Augustine, De Tempore, Of
shunning Drunkenness.
NOtwithstanding (most Dear Brethren) I believe, through Christ's goodness, ye
dread the evil of Drunkenness, as the pit of Hell: and that not only you your
selves will not Drink more than ye should, but neither oblige, nor compel Men
to drink more than becomes them: Yet it can scarce happen but some will be more
careless herein, and neglect Sobriety. Let it not turn to your prejudice, who
constantly give sober Entertainment, that it is necessary we should reprove
some that are given to Drink. For seeing (Dear Brethren) that Drunkenness is a
grievous and hateful sin to God, it is so spread over the World by diverse
thereunto accustoming themselves, that now adays, it is scarce looked on as a
Sin: but it is come to that, that they scoff at such in their Feastings, who
cannot drink as much as themselves; so that they adjure Men by unfriendly
friendship, to take off their Cups more largely than then behooves them. But he
that compels another to drink more than he is well able, should do him less
injury, if he wounded his Body with a Sword, than by slaying his Soul by
Drunkenness. For our Bodies being made of Earth, like as when too much Wet is
poured into it, and that daily, it is resolved into dirt, so that ye cannot
Till it; in like manner is it with our Flesh, having drunk too plentifully, it
cannot admit of any Spiritual Husbandry, nor produce any Fruits profitable to
the Soul. Whereupon, as all men covet sufficient Rain in their Fields, that
they may Till them, and rejoice in the plenty of Fruit; so in the Close of
their Bodies, they should drink in so much only as may suffice; lest by
Excess, the firm Land of their Bodies becomes a Lake, breeding Worms and
Serpents, and Vices rather than the Fruits of good Works. For Drunkards are
just like to Lakes; and what is bred in Lakes, your Charity knows very well.
Whatever is there bred is nothing of Fruit: There are produced Serpents,
Leeches; there are Frogs, and several sorts of Vermin, which are more apt to
scare a man than profit him, as concerning Food. And those very Weeds and Trees
as grow in those Swamps, or near unto the sides of them, are of no use at all:
so that every year they are burnt. Observe likewise, that whatever arises from
Drunkenness, is ordained for the Fire. And such are all they (as I have said)
who are given to Drink: who draw out their Dinners to the Evening, and the
Day Star beholds their Suppers: who when they should be Fasting, cannot stand
on their Legs: whose Senses are dull, blockish, and themselves, as it were,
buried alive.

Lastly, in their Drunkenness they neither know themselves nor others; they
can neither go nor stand; they can neither speak nor do any thing with reason:
and oftentimes they are not ashamed to swill till they Spew, and drink in
measures without measure: For Cups of the larger size are called for. They
contend by a certain Law, and the Conqueror deserves applause for his fault.
From hence arise strifes and brawlings; and then the parts of the Body are
wreathed this way and that way, with horrible leapings; and hence it is, that
Adulteries and Murders are committed. And as often as they Drink too much, as
if they were troubled with the Palsy, they cannot walk on their feet, but
their filthy sides are dragged to the Bed by the hands of others. They have a
mist before their Eyes, a Vertigo, Heaviness, and pain of the Head, falling of
the Countenance, trembling of all their Limbs, stupidity of Mind and Spirit:
In such as these is fulfilled what is written, Who has woe, who has wrath,
who has strifes, who has wounds without cause, who has redness of eyes?
Have not they who stay long at the Wine, and they who enquire where there is
good Drink, and give themselves over to take up their Cups?

But they who are such, endeavor to make this miserable excuse; I shall
disoblige my Friend, if, as often as I invite him to Dinner, I shall not offer
him as much Drink as he desires. But let not him be thy Friend, which would
make thee Gods enemy, who is thine and his own enemy. If thou shall make thy
self and another Drunk, you shall have Man your Friend, and God your Enemy.
Consider therefore with thy self, if it be reasonable, that thou should
separate thy self from God, whilst thou unitest thy self to a Drunkard. At
least, do not thou adjure him; do not thou constrain him, but leave him to
himself, so that he may drink what he pleases: And if he has a mind to fuddle
thee, let him perish alone, but do not thou perish with him: O the misery of
Mankind! How many are there, who force Drunkards and deboist Men to drink more
than they should, and when the Poor beg but one Cup at their Doors, refuse to
give it them? nor consider, that what they put upon deboist Persons, Christ
ought to have received, who has said, What ye have done to one of the least of
mine, ye have done to me. But such as they, who bury others in too much Liquor,
say to the poor Man who asks an Alms, Be gone, be gone, and God will give you
something: and indeed, while he proceeds, some body bestows something on him.
What is it therefore that he means, when he says, Go on, and God will give
you somewhat, but, Go to him who has God in him, and God will give you. And so
by the confession of his own mouth, God is not with him, who moving him, he
might give to the poor. I beseech you, dear Brethren, consider and observe
diligently, that when Beasts are led to the watering, so soon as they have
satisfied their Thirst, though ye hold them long in the Water, their Thirst
being quenched, they neither will, nor can drink at all. Let Drunken men
consider, whether they be not worse than Beasts: For seeing Beasts will not
drink more than is requisite, they take down twice, yea thrice as much Drink as
is expedient for them. And what might suffice to satisfy them for three or
four days reasonably, they strain hard to consume in one day, to their grievous
Sin, rather than spend it out of Malignity or Drunkenness. And it were to be
wished, they only wasted the Drink, and not destroyed themselves.

How great a Sin is Drunkenness, when the King caused his chief Butler to be
hanged for ill will, or Drunkenness? Yet the people of the Jews, of whom it is
written: The people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play, after
they had drunk more Wine than they ought, caused Idols to be made for
themselves; and in honor to their Idols, began to dance, and wring their Bodies
by diverse skippings.

What besides springs from Drunkenness, the Holy Spirit witnesses by Solomon,
saying, Wine and women draw away wise men from God, and reprove the sensible.
Herod also, when he was heated with Wine too much, upon the dancing of one
Lass, cau^ed St. John Baptist to be slain. And again Solomon says, Look not
upon the Wine, when it shows its self in the Glass. It enters in
flatteringly, but at last it will bite as a Serpent, and diffuse its poison as
a Basilisk: Thine eyes shall behold strange women, and thy mouth shall speak
perverse things.

And the Apostle Paul also advises us against the evil of Drunkenness, saying,
Be not drunken with Wine, in which is Excess. Again and again we plainly show
out of the Scriptures, what mischiefs there are in Drunkenness: In Solomon it
is written, He that loves wine and oil, shall not be rich. Again, Give not wine
to Kings, because nothing is kept private where Drunkenness bears rule, lest
peradventure they drink and forget the Judgments of God, and change the cause
of the children of the poor. And he also says, The labourer that is drunken
shall not become rich. Again, If you drink Wine moderately, you may be sober.
Again, Wine was made for cheerfulness, and not for Drunkenness, from the
beginning. Wine drunk moderately, exalts the mind and body, and is healthful
for body and soul. Wine much drunk, is the stoutnesse of Drunkenness, the
stumbling of the unwise; eclipsing virtue and causing Wounds. If at any time we
advertise men hereof, drunken men are angry at us, and mutter. But though there
may be who are offended, yet by Gods grace, there will be many who willingly
listening to good counsel, by Gods blessing, will be delivered from that
grievous sin. But they who are angry when they hear men speak against their
Foster-brother and Friend Drunkenness, let them hear us freely speaking to
them: Because whatever Drunkard he may be, who does not repent of it, he
certainly shall perish everlastingly: Forasmuch as the Holy Spirit speaking by
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. lies not, Nor Drunkards shall inherit the kingdom of
God. And therefore Drunkards should do better to be offended with themselves,
than with us; and by Gods help, should quit themselves from the mire of this
Filth, or jakes of Drunkenness: while time is of repenting, let them hasten by
Gods assistence to rise, and with all the powers of their mind calling humbly
on God, let them say with the Prophet, Take me out of the mire that I stick
not: and that, Let not the flood over-whelm me, nor the deep swallow me up, nor
the pit shut her mouth upon me. For Drunkenness, like the pit of Hell, lets
none of them go, whom she holds, unless worthy repentance relieves them, and
reformation follows upon it, but keeps them so fast, that it suffers them not
to return from the pit of Hell, so dark, to the light of love and soberness,
but by repentance.

But here we must in the first place understand and know, that men are not made
Drunkards in one day, but when by little and little their cruel Enemies oblige
and constrain them, rather than their Friends, to add one or two Glasses to
their usual Drinkings. But when once they have brought a Custom upon
themselves, so does the drought of Drunkenness seize on them, that it makes
them always thirsty. But he that desires to free himself from this evil, as he,
by certain distances of days, adding to his Drinking, comes to the darkness of
Drunkenness, so let him by little and little withdrawing, arrive at the light
of Sobriety: who if at once he withholds from himself all that was more than
necessary, which he took, when he finds himself to burn with too great thirst,
with great bitterness will exclaim and say, He had rather dye than deny
himself the custom of drinking and intoxicating himself; and sees not that it
were more tolerable for him to dye according to the Flesh, than to be killed as
to his Soul by Drunkenness. And therefore, as is said, that he may neither
suffer so great drought, and he may be delivered from the great evil he
endures, let him by distances of days, withdraw somewhat of the excess of
Drinking, until he shall be reduced to a moderate habit of Drinking. He who
shall thus gradually withdraw, shall be both freed from Drunkenness, and shall
not suffer that intolerable punishment.

I, my Brethren, while I admonish you hereof, acquit my self before God.
Whoever shall refuse to hearken to me, and shall be given to Drink, and will
adjure or force others to drink at his Entertainment, shall both answer for
himself and others, at the Day of Judgment. And because, (which is worse) some
of the Clergy, who ought to restrain this themselves, compel others also to
drink more than they ought, let them henceforward begin to correct themselves
and others, so that coming to the Judgment of Christ, they may neither for
their own Drunkenness, nor the Drunkenness of others, incur punishment; but
rather correcting themselves, and rebuking others incessantly, they may be able
to attain eternal Reward.

And this I above all entreat you, by the dreadful Day of Judgment, as often as
ye make entertainments one for another, that ye reject that filthy Custom,
whereby three men are wont to drink in a great measure unmeasurably willing or
nilling, as the poison of the Devil, out of your Feastings; for that Custom is
still a Relick of Pagan Observation. And whoever admits this in his or others
Banquetings, let him not doubt but he Sacrifices to the Devil: by which
Drinking, the Soul is not only slain, but the Body weakened. But I trust, by
the mercy of God, that he will vouchsafe so to inspire you, that you should so
abhor so lamentable and shameful evil, that you will in no wise suffer such a
thing to be done, but let that which would be quite lost in such Drunkenness,
be advanced to the comfort of the Poor; our Lord Christ so bringing it to
pass. Who with the Father and the Holy Spirit, lives and reigns God for
evermore.

The end of the first Sermon.
The second SERMON OF St. AUGUSTINE, Of avoiding Drunkenness.

The second SERMON of St. Augustine: of avoiding Drunkenness.
Sermon 232.
I Have often advised your Lovingnesse, most dear Brethren, with Fatherly pity,
that ye ought to shun and flee the mischief of Drunkenness, as the pit of
Hell. And however my reproof succeeded with diverse, there are notwithstanding
many, who neither fear God, or have respect to them who are honest and sober;
and still Drink in such manner, that they find it necessary sometimes to ease
their Guts stuffed with too much Drink, by vomiting: and like unto broken and
split Ships, are themselves tossed by the Waves of Drunkenness it self, so
that they know not where they are; and are altogether unable to speak or hear
any thing that savours of Reason.

But what shall we judge of that, when such miserable and drunken Fellows being
soaked in too much Wine, deride and vilify those who will drink no more than
is sufficient, saying to them, Blush and be ashamed. Why cannot ye drink as
much as we? For they will say, they are no men. And behold the unhappiness of
these Drunkards; They call themselves men who lie in the sink of Drunkenness,
and will not allow such to be men, which stand on their legs soberly and
civilly. Are they men who lie grovelling; and are not they men who stand erect?
He that conquers Drunkenness is disparaged; and he that is conquered by
Drunkenness is commended. The sober man is scoffed at, who can govern himself
and others: the Drunkard is not laughed at, he is not lamented who neither
knows himself nor others.

Drunken men are wont to excuse themselves thus, as to say, A Great Person
constrained me to drink too much, and being at the Table with the King, I could
do no otherwise. To make good our shuflings, these things we pretended: and
that we will not perform, we say, we cannot do. Though it should come to this,
that it should be said to thee, Either drink or dye; it were better your Flesh
should dye sober, than that your Soul should dye by drinking: But that excuse
is falsely opposed. For Kings themselves, and whatever mighty Men else there
may be, who, by Gods Grace, are Sober, and Prudent, and Christian, and fearing
God with all their heart, shall perceive thee resolved not to yield to them, in
not being Drunk out of the fear of God, if by chance they should be offended
with thee for the present, they will afterward have thee in great admiration,
saying: How greatly did we treat with him? How did we labor with him by
threats and terrors, and we could never move him from his soberness? For God,
who sees that thou will not drink too much for his sake, will also himself
make thee gracious with them who stirred thee up, and seemed to compel thee to
drink too much. Let no man say, Most dear Brethren, that in these times there
are no Martyrs; there are Martyrs made every day: for Martyr is as much to say,
as Witness. Whoever therefore shall bear testimony to the Truth, and shall
judge all causes according unto Justice; whatsoever he shall suffer for the
Testimony of Truth and Righteousness, all that shall the Lord account to him
for Martyrdom. And so he that shall resist Drunkenness, and by Gods
assistance shall persevere, so that for that he shall endure any Tribulations,
the Lord shall ascribe all to him, even to the glory of Martyrdom.

But I would fain know, most Dear Brethren, when a Master has diverse Servants,
if he could be content that but one of them should be Drunk. Surely none is so
wicked, that he should at any time have desired this, or would have it so: With
what face? with what conscience shall he be Drunk himself, who will not endure
one of his Servants to be Drunk? See, through Gods blessing, thou have a
Servant, and God has thee for his Servant; in such manner as thou desire
that thy Servant should serve thee, ought thou to serve God. Tell me in good
earnest, what equity there is in this, that thou should have a sober
Servant, and God should have a drunken Servant? as if thou were so deserving,
that a sober Servant should serve thee. Consider therefore these things
diligently, my Deer Brethren, and mark, that there is no justice in this, that
we should do to God, what we would not have done to our selves.

Peradventure, thou will say: How do I that to God, that I would not have done
to my self? or, How does it not please thee to have a Drunkard to thy Servant,
and thou will not serve God in Sobriety? For therefore, Beloved Brethren, so
wretchedly do men make themselves Drunk, because they are of opinion that
Drunkenness is a very small, or no sin: But for such their ignorance, are
Priests more especially to give an account at the day of Judgment, if they
neglect to declare daily to the People committed to them, what, and how great
mischiefs arise from Drunkenness: So that he, who believes Drunkenness to be
a small Sin, if he does not mend his life, and become penitent for this
Drunkenness, Eternal Punishment shall unavoidably torment him, together with
Murderers and Adulterers; according to what ye know the Apostle teaches,
Neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters (says he) nor effeminate, nor abusers of
themselves with mankind, nor Covetous, nor Adulterers, nor Drunkards, shall
inherit the Kingdom of God. See, he joyneth here Drunkards with Fornicators and
Idolaters, and Sodomists, and Adulterers: And that also, Be not drunk with
Wine, in which is excess. And therefore let every man conclude, and consider
with himself, that Drunkenness is a grievous Sin: and so doing, Drunkenness
shall not master him.

For seeing Drunkenness shall not only torment a Man in the World to come, but
also Men in this Life are worsted with many Diseases in this present Life by
Drunkenness, let them at least be afraid of Bodily distempers, who have no
regard to the Salvation of their Souls: let them be afraid of dimness of sight
and darkness, the swimming of the Head, and trembling of the Members, who are
not afraid of the punishments of Hell. And this we speak not only to the Laity,
but Clergy also; for, what is yet worse, many of the higher Rank of Clergymen,
who ought with others, to Preach the excellency of Sobriety, not only forbear
this, but also tipple themselves and others without shame or fear. But whoever
are such, let them mourn and confess [their fault] for if they will not amend
their Lives, they shall be tormented for themselves and others also. But what a
thing is that, when the Meal being over, and Thirst satisfied; when they
neither can nor ought to drink any more, then, as if they were fresh, as if
they came in at that instant, they begin to drink under sundry names, not only
of Men living, but Angels, and certain other ancient Saints, imagining that
they do them great honor, when they bury themselves in too great Drinking; not
understanding this, that none do offer so great injury to the Holy Angels, and
holy Men, as they who make use of their Names to slay their Souls with
Drunkenness. For there are some, who for this reason only give order to have
salt Meats provided them, that by that saltness, they may overthrow themselves
with too much Drink. If Heathens who know not God should do this, we are not to
wonder at it, and less may we grieve, because they have no hope in God, they
keep to the old Custom of their Forefathers: but wherefore should Christians
follow their Intemperances most filthy, from whose Infidelity Gods mercy has
delivered them, whom God has brought out of Darkness into Light, has called
from Death to Life; and to whom all the Scriptures cry, That they should fly
Drunkenness, and love Soberness? Wherefore I entreat you, by the dreadful Day
of Judgment, and adjure you, That ye avoid Drunkenness as much as ye can
possible, by Gods help. And now begin to blush, that hitherto you have complied
with Pagans, and Gentiles in the foul Sin of Drunkenness. For because ye are
unlike them in Faith, you ought not to be like them at all in Drunkenness. For
supposing Christians should not commit the like Sins with them, Drunkenness
alone frequented, where amendment and repentance do not follow, tumbles them
into the bottom of Hell, as before we have said: Nor Drunkards, shall inherit
the Kingdom of God.

But some man may say, I am not for the Kingdom of God, I only desire
everlasting rest. Brethren, let no Man deceive himself; there are two places,
and there is no third for any body. Whoever shall deserve not to reign with
Christ, shall undoubtedly perish with the Devil.

Lastly, Whoever he be who Drinks too much to his Friend, becomes his Enemy as
to his Soul, and is convicted of weakening his Body, and destroying his Soul.
It were better that in stead of what he bestowed on him in too great quantity
in one day, and compelled him to drink, he should two or three days invite him
to an Entertainment: and wherein he worsted him with too much Drinking in one
day, he should refresh him other days with competent Drinking, and so he should
neither loose his Drink nor destroy his Friend. Or, which truly is much better,
whatever has been lost by too much Drink in the Throat, should be converted
into Alms to the Poor: so that their Bodies might be reasonably refreshed with
Drink; and by pitying of the Poor, recovery of the Soul may be prepared. And
this correction have we spoken of, not for their sakes who are sober and civil;
for that, through God, we know many that make frugall and sober Entertainments.
And therefore for you, who out of the love of God, take only that which is
expedient, and what is quite lost on Earth to Drunkards, is reserved, through
good Deeds a reward in Heaven.

Let it not suffice that ye your selves are sober, but as much as in you lies,
so rebuke and reprove Drunkards, that they may never be suffered in your
presence, to drink more than becomes them: so that whiles ye your selves love
Sobriety, and reclaim others from the destruction of Drunkenness, by your
counsel, ye may prepare a double reward in Eternal Bliss, not only for your
own Salvation, but the Salvation of others also. And my dear Brethren, how much
is that to be lamented and blushed at, that is reported of some Country people,
who when they have got Wine, or have made some other Drink for themselves, they
invite, as to a Wedding-Dinner, their Neighbors and nearest Friends to Drink;
that they may keep them Drinking for three or four Days, and bury them in too
much Drink, so that all that while they return not from that lamentable
Drinking-bout to their own homes, until all the Drink provided be spent; and
which sufficed to nourish them and their Families for two or three Months, they
consume in four or two Days, by lamentable and shameful carouzing.

Wherefore, most dear Brethren, while I with great love, as my Paternall care
requires, admonish you in this sort, I discharge my Conscience toward God. But
whoever hears readily and faithfully what I thus Preach to him, shall receive
an Eternal Reward. But he that shall slight this, let him fear lest he suffer
Eternal and Endless Punishment. But we trust, that through Gods goodness, all
Drunkards will so return to Sobriety from the Sin of Drunkenness, by Gods
grace, that they will cause us to rejoice, and themselves may deserve happily
to attain Everlasting Reward.

Amen.
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 7. r. speak? p. 10. l. 6. r. ingenuous, page 12. l. 18. r. man be. p. 25.
l. 2. r. to their wonted reason are, p. 24. l. 22. r. they acquire, p. 26. l.
2. r. make, p. 27. l. 9. r. quite out of, p. ib. l. 18. r. pens, p. 28. r.
thereby? p. 29. l. 3. r. thereof, p. 32. l. 10. r. (especially, p. ib. l. 13.
r. ingenuously, p. 33. l. 5. r. Valesius, p. 35. l. 1. r. nature offers, p. 37.
l. 8. dele and, p. 88. l. 2. r. too, p. 45. l. 9. r. Valesius, p. 50. l. 20. r.
in common letter, p. 54. l. 6. r. Religions, so p. 69. l. 9. r. (as barbarous)
p. 76. l. 9. r. precedents: in page 78. l. 9. (because -- letter) p. 105. cod.
acute, p. 121. l. 3. dele to.


