Christian Exortation against the fearc of Death.
For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead.

Corin: 15 Chapter p: 21.

TWO DISCOURSES, The FIRST, A CHRISTIAN'S EXHORTATION, Against the FEARS OF
DEATH: The SECOND, A brief and clear Declaration of the Resurrection of the
Dead.

With suitable Meditations and Prayers touching LIFE and DEATH.

Recommended as proper to be given at Funerals

By W. S.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Bever, at the Hand and Star, next to the Middle
Temple-Gate, near Temple Bar, 1690. Price Bound 1 Shilling.

A DISCOURSE Against the Fears of DEATH.
PLATO said, That the Philosophy wherein Man (living in this World) should
principally exercise himself, is the Meditation of Death. That is to say, of
his condition in the World, frail, diseased, and mortal; of the diverse
accidents of this humane Life, and of the Hour of Death, so uncertain and
unknown; to the end that considering these things, he might withdraw his
affection and trust from this World, that he might despise it, and all temporal
things, wherein he sees and discovers so much inconstancy, and such sudden and
frequent mutations or changes: and that by such a despising of uncertain and
casual things, he should stir up himself unto a contemplation of those that are
Divine and Heavenly; and forsaking that which is here perishing and transitory,
he should choose his part in Heaven, and should stay himself at that which is
permanent and eternal. For the like reason Philip, the Father of Alexander the
Great, a man of good understanding, and of very great consideration, to the end
that in the midst of his great prosperity, he should not forget himself in his
Duty, gave order that one of his Gentlemen should every day at his waking, come
and speak these words unto him; King, have in remembrance that thou art a
mortal Man.

Jesus Christ also, our Savior and Master, intending the same, does exhort us
to Watch, and to lay up Treasures in Heaven, and not on Earth, where all things
are uncertain and changeable. We see by this, that during our Life we cannot do
better then to think upon Death, and our Body being upon the Earth, to accustom
our selves to have always our Spirit and Heart in Heaven. Now because that the
remembrance of Death is a fearful thing to many, I have bethought my self to
pass away my Griefs, and to recreate my self from my other Studies; and also to
give you a testimony of the Obligation which I think I have toward you, as
well for the good which you have done unto me, as for the Friendship which you
bear me, to write unto you, and to present this small Treatise, wherein I have
briefly touched certain Points, wherewith the Faithful may Arm themselves
against Death: which he ought to do in time, and prepare himself to receive it
with assurance, at such time as it shall please God to send it; for that which
does astonish many, is that the coming thereof is sudden unto them, and that
they are surprised unlooked for. We see by experience in a frontier Town, that
when it is well Victualled and provided of all things necessary, to with-stand
a long Siege, those within are a great deal the more assured and bold; whereas
if it were unprovided, they would stand amazed and tremble with fear, if they
should chance to see the approaching of the Siege. It is easy to judge by
that, of what importance it is to have prevented a danger, and to be prepared
for it.

To provide therefore and arm the Faithful Man against Death, we must note that
there are two sorts of it: the one is temporal, of the body, which Christians
ought to desire; the other is eternal, of body and Soul, which they ought not
to fear, persevering in the Faith of our Lord.

That it is so, all Fear pre-supposeth evil and danger; we do not fear that
which is good, but long after, desire and pursue it, and when it offers it
self, we receive it joyfully; but an evil we apprehend and fear, we fly from
it, and when it happens unto us, we sorrow and do complain. If then it does
appear by good and evident Proofs, that the Faithful Man is not in danger of
this second Death, may we not then conclude, that if we fear it, it is foolish
and without occasion? And surely if we had judgment, and never so little Faith,
it were sufficient presently to take away the fear of it from us.

For first, the proper nature of faith is to animate and quicken our heart, so
soon as it is received in us. The Just (says the Prophet) shall live by Faith.
Now even so as the Body, whiles the Soul is in it, lives, and dies not, until
such time as it be separated from it; no more does the Faithful Man,
persevering in the Faith which has been inspired and put into his Heart by the
Grace of God. Although (says David) I should walk in the midst of the shadow
of Death, I will not fear; for Thou art with me O Lord! What was the cause of
this assurance? was it not Faith? Armed wherewith, we ought no more to fear
Death, then we do Sickness when we are in perfect health, well disposed, and in
good liking; or Poverty, when we have plenty and abundance of all good things.

Secondly, By Faith we have remission, and an abolition of all the faults which
we have done; Why do we then fear Death? There is no Death where there is no
Sin; (...) Death (...) Paul: and elsewhere; The Reward of Sin is Death: Sin
causes God to be angry with us, and that in His Anger He condemns us to
Death. Now all Seeds does bring forth according to their sort and quality: The
Wheat brings forth Wheat, and the Rye, Rye; and we must not hope for any
Fruit, if there be not Seed before hand.

This being true, and witnessed in a thousand places of the Scripture, that
unto a Christian all his Sins and debts are acquitted, by the Grace and Mercy
of God, that they are forgotten, that they are covered, that they are not
imputed, and that they are remitted and pardoned, that they are cast as far
from us, as the East from the West; provided that there be no more Seed
thereof, we need not look for any Fruit: That is to say, if there be no more
Sin, there is no more anger of God, nor of death, and by consequent that also
there ought to be no more fear.

Thirdly, By Faith we have the Word and the Promises of GOD, whereupon it is
grounded: Among others this; Whosoever Believes shall not Die, but is passed from
Death to Life. Now this promise can no more fail, than He that gave it us: It
is Eternal; and all that God says, is as sure and permanent as Heaven and
Earth: For this cause when we look into them, we ought in them to consider the
virtue and power of this Word, by the which they were once Created, and ever
since preserved and maintained in that estate wherein, we now see them; and to
infer thereupon, that being of the same power and efficacy in all other things,
nothing is, impossible nor uncertain of all that which God does say and promise
unto us. And therefore as St. James says, Receiving His holy Word by Faith in
our Hearts, and the Promises which He has made us, to give us Eternal Life, we
ought to assure our selves of it, and take away all fear and apprehension of
Death. What was the cause of the ruin of us and our Forefathers? Was it not
because they did decline from the Word of God, to follow their own Fancies and
the Counsel of Satan? If then on the contrary we will cleave to it, without
leaning any jot either to the right hand or to the left, we shall live by it,
and in it. Hearken unto Me, says GOD ( speaking by Isaiah) and your Soul shall
Live. And Zachary in his Song; He has given us a knowledge of Salvation. And
St. Peter, speaking to Jesus Christ, Thy Words are Words of Eternal Life. If
GOD, the Prophets and Apostles, do assure us, that the Word of God received by
a true Faith in our Hearts, does there quicken, keeping and retaining it; What
occasion have we then to fear Death?

Moreover, by Faith we dwell in Jesus Christ, and have him dwelling in us, who
having Life in himself as his Father, does quicken us, and all those unto whom
he does communicate himself: Wherefore then being his Members, Flesh of His
Flesh, and Bone of His Bones; in brief, being one with him, shall we fear
Death? Has not He power over it, and not only for Himself, but also for us? He
(says S. Cyprian) who has once overcome Death for us, will always overcome it
in us. Has not he beat down, dispossessed, chased and spoiled Satan, the
Prince and Lord of Death? Has not he accomplished the Law; and by this perfect
Obedience, which he has born to God his Father, appeased his Anger, satisfied
his Will, and abolished the malediction of the Law, which is nothing else but
Death? Did not he die to make it die, when he rose again? Has not he broken
and dissipated all the Torments, plucked down the Gates of Hell, and triumphed
over her and all her Power? Say not henceforth, faith St. Paul, who shall go up
into Heaven, or who shall descend into the depths, for to bring Life unto us?
For Jesus Christ is dead, and risen again from the dead, for to deliver us from
death; and risen again to restore us to Life: He is our Pastor; and for this
Reason we ought not to fear, that any Creature should snatch us by Violence out
of his Hands, or can hinder him from giving us Eternal Life. He is our
Advocate, we ought not then to fear to be overthrown in Judgment; nor that by
Sentence we should be condemned to death; He is our Mediator, we need not to
fear the Wrath of God; He is our Light, we not fear Darkness; He is our Shadow
and our Clouds, we ought not then to fear the heat of the Fire Eternal, no more
than did the Children of Israel the heat of the Sun in the Wilderness, being
hidden under the Pillar. Let us then for these Reasons forsake and cast behind
us all Fear of Death; which having had no Power nor Advantage over the Head,
shall have no Power over his Members.

Again, By Faith we have with Jesus Christ God his Father, and are allied and
joined together with him, as he says by his Prophet, I will marry thee if thou will promise me thy Faith: And Jesus Christ in St. John, He that loves me will
keep my word, and I and my Father will come and dwell in him: For this Reason
we are also called his Temples; because we are consecrated and dedicated unto
him by his Holy Spirit, that he should dwell in us. Now, seeing God is with us,
we have the Original, the Fountain, the Cause, the Beginning, and the Author of
Life; we have the great Jehovah, of whom all things depend, by whom all
things are, and move, in whom the Angels, Archangels, Principalities, the
Heavens, and all the Elements consist; we have him, from whom all Creatures,
Visible and Invisible, take their Life, and their Being, by the Participations
which they have with him: We have him who is the most Perfect, and most
Sovereign Workman of all things, who by his breath does quicken, and make them
to Live, and by his power infinite does preserve them: We have, to make short,
Him who only can fatisfie, and by his Presence cause that of Life, and of all
other good things we shall have, and think we have enough: Shall we then fear
Death in such company? If as St. Augustine says, God is the Soul of our Soul,
we cannot die but by being separated from him; the which David does confirm in
one of his Psalms, saying, Those shall perish O Lord, who do depart and go
from thee; which being considered, let us strive only to keep him with us by
Faith and Obedience; and besides, let us take away all the fear which we may
have of Death.

Again, by Faith we have the Spirit of God: You are not Carnal, says St. Paul,
(writing to the Romans) but are Spiritual, for who has not the Spirit of God
is none of his. And elsewhere speaking to the Galathians, Have you not the
Spirit of God by Faith? Now this Spirit is the Spirit of Life; if God withdraws
it from his Creatures they die, they perish, and come suddenly to nught: On the
contrary, when he pleases to send and pour it upon them, he raises and
restores them in an instant; even as we see a Hen brooding of her Eggs, by a
secret virtue does disclose and bring them to Life, albeit that before they
were without sense or feeling. Even so does the Spirit of God, all Creatures by
his Divine Power: He gives testimony, and does assure us in our Hearts that we
are the Children of God, to the end that from him as from our Father, by a
certain and assured hope we should wait and look for Life: He is a pledge unto
us for fear lest we should doubt. Having therefore such earnest of Life, having
testimony from him, who being the Spirit of Truth cannot lie nor abuse, having
him himself who is the preserver of all Creatures, shall we fear Death? It is
as much as who should fear the darkness at noonday, the Spirit of him who has
raised again Jesus Christ, and who has up-held him because he should not be
overcome of Death, being in us will quicken us also, says Saint Paul; and will
preserve us from it; let us then put away all fear of it.

Faith also causes that God does adopt and repute us for his Children: you are
all Children of God by faith, says St. Paul; and St. John, he has given power
to all those that shall receive him, and believe in his Name, to be made the
Children of God; then being Children, we are the Heirs and Coheirs with Jesus
Christ; and we are by the means of this adoption certain once to come unto
Life, unto the rest, and unto the glory wherein we shall Reign Eternally with
his Father. Moreover, being Children of God, we are of his Household, and it is
not in his House where Death dwells, it is in Hell in the Devil's House; in
Heaven and the Place where God abides, there is an unspeakable Light, so great
a Beatitude and Happiness, that in the Contemplation thereof, David crying out,
said, O how they are happy that do inhabit and dwell in thy House! And
elsewhere, In this consists all my good, Lord that I may be near unto thee.

Again, being Children we are at Liberty, free from Sin, free from Death, free
from the Condemnation and Rigor of the Law, freed from Service and Force of
the Devil: what do we fear being then Children of God, and consequently
Brothers of Jesus Christ? Is it possible that he can ever deny or abandon his
Flesh and Blood, or suffer them to die, having Power to save them? Therefore
being the Children of God our Father, he loves us with a Love unseigned and
Fatherly. And if, as says St. Paul, during the time that we were his Enemies,
he had such a care over us, that not sparing his only begotten Son, he has
delivered him over to Death to preserve us from it, and to reconcile us unto
himself, now that we are his Friends and in his Favor, will he not save us?
Who is that Man, who considering these Reasons, will not presently assure
himself, and cast away all fear which he had of Death? That which also ought to
assure us against Death, and take away all fear which we have of it, and of the
Horror and Anguish prepared for the reprobate and damned, is our Calling; that
God of his Grace has vouchsafed to withdraw us out of the Darkness wherein we
were, and to illuminate us by his Holy Spirit, teaching us by his Holy Word,
wherein we ought to trust, and wherein lies our Salvation; and so what we
ought to do to please and obey him, to the end that walking in his Law, and
serving him in all Justice and Holiness, we might after we have a little
suffered in this World, be faithfully glorified with him in the end; for that
which God begins he will accomplish; and when he has determined to call any
one to him and to save him he never changes his Counsel, neither does repent
himself of the good that he will do unto him. He us Unchangeable, and so
steadfast in his Purpose and Determination, that that which he once Wills and
Ordains, he does execute without being turned from it. If then we feel in our
selves that God has given us the Grace to hear, to believe, and to love his
Word, and to fly from and reject all that which is contrary to it, and to have
an Affection to observe that which he commands us, and a dislike, if happily by
infirmity or otherwise, we chrnce to commit any thing against his Law: Let us
not doubt but we are regenerate, elected, and predestined to Eternal Life,
and consequently out of danger of Death. Let us then take away all fear, and
let us say with St. Paul, What shall separate us from the Love and Charity of
God? What shall make us to think, that he has not a will to save us? It shall
not be Pain, Affliction, Hunger, Persecution, nor Adversity, nor Death, nor any
Creature whatsoever shall make us to doubt that he does not love us, in the
favor of Jesus Christ, and that having chosen, called and justified us in him,
but that finally he will also glorify us by him.

The Sacraments which Jesus Christ has left us for the Confirmation of our
Faith, ought likewise to assure and strengthen us against the Fear of Death.

First, Baptism by the which we are buried and die with Christ, that we may
rise again with him; in the which we are washed from all our sins, and clothed
with his Innocence, to the end, that presenting our selves to the Father, so
adorned and covered with the Robe of our Elder Brother, we may receive his Holy
Blessing, and be saved from the Deluge, wherein all the Infidels perish, as
Noah was in his time by the Ark. Having then the Promises of God, as we have
said before, and over and above his Sign and Seal, by the which he has bound
himself, to render that Life to us, which we havelost by our Sin; wherefore
then do we fear Death, do we think that he will revoke, or that he will deny
and disavow his own Sign and Seal.

Secondly, The Lord's Supper, where we take the Bread and the Wine, for to be
received into the Communion and Participation of the Body and Blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and by Consequent into the Fruits of them; that is, to have part
in his Obedience, in his Justice, in his Satisfaction and Redemption, in the
Testament and new Alliance, and generally in all the promises of God, the which
by his Death have been ratified, It remains now to conclude our purpose, and
to infer upon the precedent things, that if we fear Death, it is for want of
considering them, or if we do consider them, it is for want of believing them;
for there is no man so timorous, being firmly persuaded of that which is
spoken, but will take away all fear of Death, and will say with David, I shall
not die but always live, to declare perpetually the Works of the Lord, and
praise him. And who will not scorn at it with St. Paul, and insult upon it,
saying, O Death where is thy Victory? Where is thy Sting? Where is thy
Strength? Where is thy Terror and Fear which Men had of thee? Jesus Christ our
Savior perceiving the time of his Death draw near, said, that in short time he
should pass from this World to go to his Father, calling Death a Passage; which
should greatly comfort us. We have almost all this opinion rooted in us, and it
is that which does so Discourage us, that it is a dangerous passage and
uneasy. Now for to take it from us, and to stir up our Hearts, he would needs
pass it before us, and as it were sound the depth to the end, that we seeing
that he did not stick at it, should take Courage: As also we see before and
after him, the Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and other Holy Persons have done
it; who having passed it without any apprehension of Danger, and being escaped
safe and well, do now rejoice with God, that they are gotten to the Land, and
to the Port where they did aspire. Shall we then be such Cowards? shall we be
so faint hearted, and of such tender and effeminate Courage, as to fear to go
by a place so frequent, and a way so great and beaten, that Men go it, as said
some of the Ancients, Blindfold? Likewise we see that not one alone of those
that trusted in God, calling upon his aid, that put themselves to pass it, did
ever miscarry; when the Children of Israel did fear at the passage of the
Red Sea, Moses did show unto them, that if they would trust in God, they should
see his Glory and Power; which they did see, passing safely through the midst
of the danger, where their Enemies did perish: So shall all the Faithful
through the straights of Death, provided that they commend themselves to God,
and do only set their trust upon him. They being in the Deserts, although they
were bitten by the Serpents, yet were they preserved from the danger in looking
upon him, that Mofes had caused to be erected: So also, although the cursed and
envious Serpent has tainted us with his Venom, yet shall we not die, if by
faith we look upon Jesus Christ Crucisied. Let Death come, let it take us, let
it bind us, yet shall we break the bonds as easily as did Sampson those of the
Philistines his Enemies; let it swallow and devour us as the Whale did Jonas,
yet shall it fain to disgorge and cast us up again, if in the midst of the
depth we do remember God and call upon him. Let it bury us as it once did Jesus
Christ, yet shall we rise again as he did, and it shall be impossible for this
Tyrant to retain us under his Power. After having showed how we should arm our
selves against the apprehensions of Eternal Death: Let us also show that we
ought not only not to fear the temporal but also desire it; and when it
pleases God to send it unto us, to thank him for it, to rejoice at it, to
embrace it, and to sing for Joy; whether it be that we behold the Misery, the
Mishaps and evils of this Life, from which it does deliver us; or else the joy
and contentment of eternal Life, whereto it does bring us.

As for the poverties, miseries, incertitudes, accidents and mutabilities of
this Life, not only the Scripture, but also diverse wise and great Philosophers
does show them unto us: And there is one amongst them, who declaring the
Original of the Greek Phrase signifying Life, says (...), which is, that Life
has been so called of the Greeks, because of the violence of the assaults,
excess, pains, and outrages which therein we suffer, which are innumerable
both in Body and Soul.

Our Bodies are subject to cold, to heat, to hunger, to thirst, to time, to
age, and to so many Diseases, that there is no part but has his particular
infirmity: The feet are subject unto the gouts, the belly unto gripings, the
sides to pleurisies, the stomach to rawness, the lungs to the cough, the head
to a thousand Diseases; we need but a spider or other little worm to kill us,
we need but a hair or a crum to strangle us: in sum; the flesh with all its
strength, is nothing else but grass; Is it to day green and pleasant? let but
the Sith pass, it will cut down a thousand leaves at once, which in an hour
will be dry and withered. The Greeks do call the body of Man in their
Language, Soma and Demas, whereof the one is taken from a phrase which
signifies to bind, and the other comes near to that which signifies
Sepulcher, for to show unto us in what estate and disposition soever he be, he
does represent rather Death unto us than Life, and Servitude than Liberty. As
for the Soul, it is first subject to all the evils and diseases of the body;
for it is unpossible if that be ill, but that for the conjunction and amity
which is between them, it must endure and feel pain. Moreover, she has her own
distempers, as ignorance, sin, mistrust, suspicion, jealousy, hatred, envy,
love, lust, ambition and passions, the which as tormentors, do hale her the one
one way, the other another, as if they would pull it to pieces. I leave a
million of importunities which she has, and which man takes to attain to his
purposes, to live in rest and at ease, to be in honor, to maintain his
alliances and friendships, to beware of his Enemies, to increase his House, to
amintain and keep it in its greatness, the which do torment us oft-times in
such sort, that we can neither eat or sleep at ease.

And we must not think that there is any estate exempt from this misery; begin
at the highest Prince or Emperor that ever was in the World, and so
discoursing descend to the poorest beggar that ever the Earth did bear, and you
shall not find one content, neither the Artificer nor the Merchant, nor the
Advocate, nor the Gentleman, nor the Duke, nor the King; enter into their
closets, there you shall often find them, as said Menander, laid upon their
Beds with a mournful Voice, and pitiful, crying, Alas, alas. Valeri IX.
speaks of a King, unto whom the Scepter and Diadem were offered; before he
put it on his head, he took it in his hands, then having looked long upon it,
he cried out; O Diadem, if one knew the miseries and encumbrances which thou
do bring, there is no man that finding thee upon the ground, would once take
thee up; showing by that exclamation, that the Life of Kings is less happy than
that of private Persons. Tyberius Caesar, under whom Christ was crucified, and
who commanded that he should be worshipped as a God also, as Tertullian records
it, after the Death of Augustus his Predecessor, who by will had left him
Heir, as well of his Goods as of the Empire; which being offered him by the
Senate, according to custom, doubted a great while whether he might accept of
it, by reason of the fear that he had of the weight of this charge, and of the
pain that he was to suffer in the undergoing of it. Dioclesian after he had
held the Empire some twenty years, left it of his own accord, and chose for the
rest of his time to live a peaceable and domestical Life; wherein after the
great agitations and storms of trouble which he had during the time of his
Government, he found the rest to be so sweet and pleasing, and his mind so
contented and freed, that many times amongst his familiars he did witness, that
the time had never seemed so good to him, nor his Sunshine days so pleasant;
showing by these words how he did abhor the Imperial Life, although that few
Emperors before or after him had had such Honors in Victories, and other
prosperities as he had.

These Examples do sufficiently show, that the Life of Kings is not so happy,
as some men sometimes esteem them, more by error than by reason; and they are
far from being at quiet and without trouble: For by how much a Tree is planted
and seated in a higher place, by so much the more is it subject to the wind; so
also are the great men more than the commons, to diverse fortunes and accidents;
the Thunderbolts and the Tempests fall ordinarily in high places, so do the
greatest misfortunes upon Men of state and renown.

And if in this World the Estates which we esteem most of are subject to so
many mis-haps, what may we think of others, which we our selves by reason of
the discommodities which are joined unto them, do fly from and esteem unhappy?
So we see that there is not any estate, that of it self does make a body happy
or contented; and as in Estates, besides the common Miseries, every one has
his own particular; so also have all the Ages of Man evils which are proper
unto them.

In his Childhood he is full of Infirmities, without Virtue, without
Understanding, without the use of Reason and Speech, and without Wit; and he
must be fifteen years old before he is capable to know only what Estate is
fittest for him; wherein oftentimes he deceives himself, choosing that
whereunto he is least fit.

Is he come into his Youth? he is rash, adventurous, foolish, passionate,
voluptuous, prodigal, a drunkard, a gamester, quarrelsom; whereby it happens
often, that in this age he falls into great inconveniences and dangers, to be
Imprisoned, to be Hanged, to lose his Goods, and even to bring his Parents with
sorrow to the Grave.

When this great heat by little and little begins to cool and diminish; and
that he waxes a perfect Man; then he must labor Night and Day for to
entertain his House, nourish his Children, and provide for them for time to
come: he is Besieged, now with Defire and Covetousness, then with Fear, lest
his Children should remain unprovided for, lest they should behave themselves
ill, and lest they should do some dis-honour to their House.

The Age of Virtue and Perfection declining, behold in our sight old Age comes
creeping on, in the which Man is sickly, unweildy, cold and forsaken; and as
among the Seasons of the Year, the last is Winter, and the most troublesome; so
amongst all the Ages of Man, is the old Age.

That which I have said, is not the hundredth part of all the Evils whereunto
the Sick Man is subject; and nevertheless that little which we have spoken of
it, is sufficient to show that in all Estates and in all Ages, it is miserable;
and as said Merander, Life and Misery are two Twins; for they are born and
grow, they are nourished and live always together. Which Nature teaches us in
two things: First, in that the little Children (...) into the World, they
always (...) presaging the Evil which they are to endure if they live long:
Secondly, in that coming forth of their Mothers Belly, they are all bathed in
Blood, and are more like unto a dead Man, whose Throat had been lately out by
Murderers, then to any thing else. Two ancient Philosophers considering these
things said the one, That God did love those which he takes out of this World
in their Childhood: The other; That it were good never to be Born, or else to
die presently. Surely it is a wonderful thing, and which shows well that we
have want of Understanding, that although Life were never so ugly and
dis-figured, and that in all her parts there were neither Grace nor Beauty that
could commend it, we nevertheless should be so in love with it, that we always
desire to keep it, and never to change. But we are much abused, for it is more
uncertain then it is miserable: For to show us the uncertainty of it, the
Ancients called it a Shadow, and a Dream; which are the two things in the
World, the most vain and least fixed. Pythagoras being once demanded what
humane Life was, spoke never a word; for his custom was to answer and instruct
more by Signs than by Words; but went into a Chamber, and came forth again
presently: Signifying, That the Life of Man is but an entering in, and going
out. And Jesus Christ exhorts us to Watch, and grounds Himself upon nothing
else, but upon the inconstancy and uncertainty of this Life: Watch, says He,
for you know not at what Hour the Lord will come. And who is that Man, in how
good disposition and happiness soever he be, that can promise himself continue
in it but a day? Those 18 Men in Jerusalem doubted of nothing, when in an
instant they were destroyed by the ruins of the Tower of Syloe. In the time of
the Flood, they did Build, and made Marriages and Banquets; when suddenly,
contrary to the expectation and opinion of all the World, the Rain fell in
clear Weather; which Rain did overflow the whole Earth. The rich Man, whereof
mention is made in the Twelfth of Luke, though he was very secure; who having
so much Wealth that he know not where to Whord it, made account to give himself
to Pleasure, and to live after that time at his ease; when while he was
standing upon these terms, behold the Sergeant of GOD comes day, to give up an
account unto him, of all the precious things and goods which he had left, and
which he had gathered with such great labor.

But it is labor lost to go about to prove a thing so manifest, and which we
experiment and see daily: For in this World there is nothing more ordinary,
nor more frequent, then that which Ovid says, That the Life of Man, and all
humane things are hanged, and do hold but by a little Thread.

Let us behold then, seeing on the one side the great Evils whereof it is full,
and on the other side the inconstancy of the good which it has; if we have
great occasion to desire God, that he would prolong it unto us; or to complain
or discontent our selves at Death, when it takes it away from us? We have
understood the evils from the which Death does deliver us; let us now come to
consider the good which it brings unto us, from thence we shall yet better
know, that we ought not only not to fear, shun, and avoid it, but also desire
it with all affection; for one of the Goods only which we enjoy by Deaths
means, is greater than all those which we can have in the World, living in it
for ever.

By it first we rest, as says St. John is his Apocalypse. And after that we
have endured, and are almost consumed with innumerable troubles and labors,
Dying, our Spirit goes into Heaven, and our Body into the Earth, as into a
Bed, there for to rest and refresh it self. The poor Artificers are so glad
when Evening draws near, and that it is almost Night, that they may be paid for
their Labor, and go home to rest themselves; or when after they have labored
the six Days in the Week, that Sunday comes, when they hope to rest and refresh
themselves, and recover the force and vigor, as well of their Bodies as of
their Minds; we ought not to be less joyful when the time of our Death draws
near, which we ought to wait for, and desire as a Holy Day; in the which we
hope to rest, and by the pleasure which therein we take, presently forget all
the sorrows and troubles which we have had in this World. The end of all that
we do, and of that which we purpose, Is it not our Rest? Why do we gather Goods
with a thousand troubles, and as many dangers? Why do we Study? Why do we
Fight? Why do we Labor? Why do we all other things? Is it not by that means to
come to ease and to a rest, which we pretend and seek as a sovereign good?
What is the principal reward which God does promise to his People, and to all
those that serve him Faithfully; Is it not a perpetual rest, where into he
himself is entered since the Creation of the World? When we do Pray unto Him
that His Kingdom come; Is it peace and rest? Finally, what we do hope for at
his Hands, Is it not that? Then the rest which God has promised us, which we
demand of him, which we wait for, and which we do purpose as the end and
conclusion of all that we do and undertake, is given us by no other means, but
by Death. Some seek for it in their Goods, which they love, supposing there to
find it; others in Study, others in Voluptuousness and wordly Pleasures: But
all this is but an abuse; for it is found no where but in Death, which we ought
more to Love for this reason, than the Wordling does his Pleasure, the Covetous
Man his Treasure, the Scholar his Books, or the Ambitious his Humors; by
reason that in one Hour it puts into our hands, and gives us the enjoying of
Goods, which they cannot find by great Labor all their life time, in the
aforesaid things. Furthermore, Death causes that by it we are content,
fatisfied, and very happy. Happy are those which depart in the Faith of our
Lord, says St. John. Then is this Blessedness the sovereign good where unto we
aspire, and which we cannot find in this World, where we are never content. If
we have Goods, we desire Knowledge; if we have Knowledge, we desire Honors; if
we have Honors, we desire Health; if we have Health, we desire to be Young:
Briefly, we always want something which we seek after, and when we cannot get
it, that is a cause of grudging and coffeehouse: But then shall we be fully
satisfied, as says David, When by Death we are come to the Kingdom of God, and
his Glory has appeared unto us.

In it are all things; it is the Sovereign good which does comprehend all
other; therefore when we shall have it, our appetite and desire shall rest in
it; we shall rest there without going any further, without demanding or seeking
for any thing else. Then shall be accomplished that which Jesus Christ has
promised to all his Faithful, who, believing in him with an entire Faith, and
such a one as God requires in his Word, will raise up in their Hearts a Spring
of Water of Life, springing to Life Eternal. We shall no more fear any thing,
being no more in danger; we shall desire nothing, having all in our possession;
we shall hope for nothing, for all Promises shall be accomplished; we shall no
more ask any thing, for we shall have no more need; God shall be all in all. If
we will be rich, we shall then have Him that does in rich all those that call
upon His Holy Name; if we will be wise, we shall have the Heavenly Wisdom; if
we will be mighty, we shall have the Almighty; if we desire to be good, we
shall have the only excellent Good; if we will be fair, we shall have the great
Architect, and perfect Workman of all things; If we will be healthful and live
long, we shall have the Eternal.

All our Senses shall be ravished with the greatness of the Pleasures which
they shall have and feel. Our Eyes seeing the great, sumptuous, and magnificent
Palace of our God, seeing the perfect and sovereign Beauty of His bright
shining Face: Seeing the Sun of Justice, the Fountain of Water of Life, the
Tree of Life, the Paradise, that is to say, the pleasant Garden of our GOD, His
fair and noble company of Angels, of Apostles, Patriarchs, Martyrs, and of all
the blessed Spirits And if the only sight of Jesus Christ transfigured in the
Mountain, was of such great power, that St. Peter, (all other things forgotten)
in an instant, was thereby transported out of himself, and desired so to remain
perpetually: What may we think of the joy and pleasure that he receives who
sees Jesus Christ glorified, and with him his Father, his Holy Spirit, and all
the aforesaid Assembly? Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard, Heart has never
conceived, the good, the pleasure, the rest, and the contentment, prepared for
those which God has Elected to Salvation.

Our Ears shall likewise be ravished, hearing the Discourses and Sermons of the
incomprehensible Wisdom of our God: Again, the good Music, the sweet and
pleasant accords of the Angels and Saints reigning with Him, which Sing without
ceasing, To the Holy, Holy, Holy God of Hosts, be Honor and Glory, for ever
and ever. Selomon upon the Earth ravished the People, and made them astonished
at the great Wisdom and Knowledge that was in him. So did Jesus Christ also
when He Preached. What can he then now do in Heaven, where all the great
treasures of his divine Eloquence are unfolded and laid open? When Aeschines
had repeated to the Rhodians the Oration of Demosthenes, for the which he was
Banished, seeing that they marvelled at it, What would you have done (said he)
if you had heard him pronounce it? We also that are so ravished only with the
reading of the Holy Scriptures, when we shall hear Jesus Christ pronounce them,
and with open Mouth discourse continually with us; shall we not stand before
him. In the like ecstasy as was S. Paul, being ravished into the third Heavens?
Shall we not have our Eyes settled with continual looking upon our Master, and
our Ears always attentive to hearken unto him? Plato gave God thanks for Three
things; for that he was a Man, for that he was a Grecian, for that he had been
so happy as to hear Socrates. And shall not we give him thanks for that we are
Christians, for that we are Heavenly, and for that by the means of Death, we
hope Eternally to hear the Wisdom of God?

We have said, what we shall see and hear; and now what shall we taste? We
shall be set at the Table of our Lord, where we shall have abundance of all
good things. It shall be covered with meats that he has prepared, and reserved
a long while since, for that banquet; we shall there be fed with the bread of
Angels; we shall be made to drink in Brooks of Pleasure; we shall be filled
with all good things; we shall be always at Nuptials, and in an instant we
shall forget all the delights of the Earth, having tasted those of Heaven; as
did the Companions of Ulysses all other meats, when they had eaten Lotos so
celebrated by Homer. It is an other manner of Manna than that of the Children
of Israel, for they waxed weary of it, and were sorry in the desert, that they
had lost the Quails and Flesh pots of Egypt. But we in Heaven, at the first
taste of the meats, which there shall be served us, shall loose then all
appetite to the Pleasures of this World. We have hear eaten of the fruits of
the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, against the Command of the Physician.
Whereupon followed the Sickness and Death of all. But in the Kingdom of God,
and of Paradise, we shall eat of the Fruit of the Tree of Life, which shall
always keep us young and fresh; and which is more, will make us incorruptible
and immortal. This is that which we shall taste; what then shall we smell? A
Hall of Perfumes, the Garments of the Bride and the Bridegroom, perfumed with
all odoriferous and fragrant things. It shall be then that he Church shall
Triumph, and that the Vine being blossomed, shall give such a pleasant odor
that the whole Heavens shall be filled with it.

There shall be no stink, for there shall be no Corruption; we shall there
plainly smell the sweetness of the Sacrifice, which Jesus Christ made for us on
Earth, so great and pleasant, that the Father for the Pleasure which he took in
it, was reconciled with the world, and his anger toward us has been appeased.
What a pleasant Sacrifice, and precious Incense is also the praises of the
Saints, who with one accord do glorify God, and sanctify his holy Name? More
over what an odor gives that fair flower sprung from the root and sap of Jess
now that it is in its force and strength To conclude, we cannot miss then to
smell good odours; for our Winter shall then be past, and we shall be in a
perpetual spring time, where in all things shall grow and flourish for the
Delectation and Pleasures (...) the Church. For to satisfy our desire, and
content all our affection we shall touch no more, neither shat we be touched of
any thing that m^ hurt us. We shall be gathered up by Jesus Christ our Lord and
Savior, who will come at the entrance to receive us, saying, Come hither
faithful Servant, thou have served me faithfully in the World, while thou have
been in the World; enter now into the Joy and rest of the Lord. He will kiss
and embrace us, and will keep us near to his Person, without suffering us to
depart or go far from it.

Now if the greatest good, and that unto the which all others are referred, be
this felicity, which does consist in a possession and enjoying of all good, to
the contentment of our Will, and of all our senses, with what a desire should
we wait for Death, by the which we attain it?

Moreover, Death does deliver us out of all dangers: In this World night and
day, within and without we are always in fear of peril. Our Life is a cruel and
bloody War, we have a great many Enemies that invade us continually, and do
assay by all means to destroy us: The Devils Watch for us, and cease not
compassing about like devouring Lions, and as ravening Wolves, to see whether
they cannot surprise us, and carry us away; the World sometimes by enticings,
and allurements; some time by threats and violence, endeavors to try and turn
us out of the right way. Our Flesh on the other side, does flatter us, and the
better to undermine us, with great cunning does propound and lay before us,
things wherein we have most delight, It weepeth also sometimes, to stir us up
to pity it, all to the intent towin us, and cause us in all points to yield
unto it, and that it may master us.

Now if we consider our infirmity, our stupidity and negligence, the little
wariness and watchfulness that is in us we may judge in what danger we live It
is impossible that we should live in this World among so many that are
infected, and that with so great a Contagion, without falling often into
Sickness. Is it possible that we should so often grapple with such strong and
mighty Enemies, without being sometimes staggered and over-thrown? Is it
possible that we should go in such durty and muddy ways, without being defiled?
We see it in good Saints of old time, who could not govern themselves so well,
but the serpent who always dogs us at the heels, has reached them with his
venom; but that they have fallen in diverse faults, some in incredulity, others
in idolatry, others in adultery, others in excess and drunkenness, others in
murders; there is none of them but has his fall, yea sometimes so great and
heavy, that they had been altogether bruised, if God had not upheld them with
his hand. Ought not we then follow the example of St. Paul, and as he did cry.
Who shall deliver us from these dangers wherein wherein we live, while our Soul
is in this miserable and mortal body? Let us confess that it is our gain, and
profit for to die, that by death we may be fully delivered from all mortal
things.

Again, death put us in full possession of all the promises of God, and of
those good things which Jesus Christ has purchased for us, and that we hope
for him. He in dying has freed us, and purchased our liberty, and nevertheless
we see our selves still in great scrvitude.

We are Kings, Lords, Judges, hers of God, coheirs with Jesus Christ the
Prince of Heaven and Earth, yet it seems not so, while we live this World; for
there we are beaten and used like servants, like children under age, we have as
yet no use nor managing of our goods. Kings and great Lords though we be, we are
often in such necessity, that we have neither Bread to eat, nor Water to drink,
nor Wool to cover us. Moreover Jesus Christ has purchased for us the Grace of
God, a perfect Justice, life Eternal, an immortal Incorruption, glory and
virtue to our Bodies, and to our Souls an assured peace and quietness, a joy
and a contentment; but this good has not yet been delivered unto us, for
oftentimes we experiment the Wrath and Judgment of God; we seel the
concupiscences and vicious desires of our flesh.

In our bodies their is Corruption, Mortality and Weakness, and in our spirit,
Troubles, Anguish, and as it were a studious and intestine war between our good
and bad desires, which fight the one against the other, and because these evils
are more grievous, so are the abovesaid goods more great, and more to be
desired. If then, although they be already purchased for us, and that they be
ours, we nevertheless cannot come to the possession of them but by death, are
not we for this reason much bound unto it? Ought not we to love and desire it?
The children of Israel being arrived at the River of Jordan, seeing on the
other side thereof the fruitful Land which god had promised them, and that
being passed, they should begin to enjoy it and to rest, had they not great
cause to rejoice, and to pass the River with great alacrity? And why not we,
when we shall come near unto death, that is to say to the passage, beyond the
which is our Country, our House, our city, our Friends, and Kinsfolks, our
Rest, our Joy, and our Pleasure? The Child who during the time of his minority
has always lived in fear and base servitude, does he not rejoice when he
sees the day coming wherein he does hope to have liberty, and quietly to enjoy
his goods? So ought every faithful man, seeing the day of his death draw near,
in the which he shall be put in possession of all the goods which God has
given him, and the gift wholly resigned.

When a man that has undertaken some long and tedious Journey, having
traveled many days, and being wearied on the way, sees the gate of the Town
whether he goes, does he not rejoice, and as it were leap for joy? Does he not
give God thanks going into the Town, that it has pleased him to conduct and
bring him safely thither? Now ever since we were born, we have always been in
this world as strangers, we have done nothing else but travel in this low
place, as in a great desert, we have here wearied our selves; then seeing death
near unto us, that is to say, the gate whereby we must enter into the Kindom of
our God, and the stairs whereby we must ascend unto his Holy Mountain, have we
not occasion to consolate our selves, and to leap for joy, considering that we
are almost arrived at the place, where we hope to rest perpetually: If poor
Adam being driven out of the earthly Paradise, after he had tasted of the
miseries whereinto he precipitates himself by his sin, had been called thither
again, and set in his first Estate, what occasion should he have had to
rejoice? And we also, who after so many and diverse afflictions, are called out
by God, by the means of death, into no Earthly but Heavenly Paradise, not
Adams, but Gods, where there is no Sin, where there is no Serpent, where there
is no forbidding, in short where there is no fear nor shame. When Noah after
the flood, and falling of the waters which had broken and torn all, began to
see the firm land he did rejoice, and for joy sacrificed to God for a
thanksgiving; although it was accursed, and brought forth thorns and thistles as
before. What more great occasion shall we have, when after the great floods,
and desolations which we have in this world, we shall begin to see and salute
the Land of the living, the blessed Land, the land that was promised to the
good, the Land flowing with Milk and Honey, and all sweet and savory things?
When Joseph after he had a long time been prisoner in great calamity, suddenly
without thinking thereon, was raised to such dignity, that he was next the King
in Egypt, making Laws and Ordinances, for to dispose the State and Kingdom; had
not he matter of Consolation?

We have no less, but much more, when after our Prisons, Captivities,
Servitudes, Banishments, and so many other afflictions which we suffer in this
World, we by death are in a moment lifted up from the dunghill into Heaven,
there to reign with Jesus Christ, and to be partakers of his Glory, of his
Honor, of his Faith, of his Rest, and of his Table.

Was it not a great joy to the Jews, who had been captives three score years in
Babylon, amongst the Idolaters in great misery, deprived of the use and benefit
of spiritual things, such as to assemble together to praise God, and to hear
his Word, and to do other things appertaining to the office of a Christian;
weeping sometimes when they were by themselves, and hanging up their Harps and
Instruments, through grief that they could not serve God according to their
desires, nor sing his praises among the strangers; was it not a great joy then
in these circumstances to have the Kings letters to return into their country,
build their Temple? and there according to their ancient manner, in all
Liberty, serve praise and worship their God; and is it less to us, when after a
long and tedious captivity that we have endured in this world, conversing with
Idolaters, Unbelievers, Blasphemers, despisers of God and of his Word; we are
delivered and have our pas-port to go into this celestial Jerusalem, and into
the holy Temple of our God, there for to praise him perpetually, and in
beholding his goodness, to glorify and sanctify his holy Name?

Death is also to be desired by reason that with out sorrows in also ends our
mourning; we in this world are always sad, heavy, and melancholy. In it we
weep, we sigh and always wear the black weed: But when by death we go forth of
it, to go into the House of our Bridegroom, we put off and leave the mourning
weed for to take our goodly and and sumptuous a biliments, and everlasting joy
shall be powered on those which have been the faithful servants of God, and then
shall be accomplished that which has been promised them. You that do weep in
this world are happy, for you shall laugh: there shall be no more grief, nor
complaining, nor tears; for God at our coming into his Kingdom will wipe them
away from our eyes, we shall be comforted, and we shall rest in Abraham's
bosom, as did Lazarus, there shall be no other question but of singing and
saying every one to our Souls.

Praise thou the Lord, O my Soul! and all that is within me praise his Holy
Name.

So to the Harp and other instruments, Go to, a wake that you may now be set
up again in the estate to serve God, and praise him for his goodness, say to
all the Church.

O! give thanks unto the Lord, and call upon his Name, O! let your songs be of
him and praise him, and let your talking be of all his wondrous works.

Say to all creatures, bless the Lord in all his works, praise and exalt his
Name. Bless God ye Angels of Heaven, Sun, Moon, Fire, Air, Water, Earth,
Trees, and Beasts. A maid that has long time been betrothed, desires that the
day of her Marriage were come, and when it is come she rejoices, seeing that
she shall soon be brought to her Husbands House to dwell perpetually with him;
we ought also to comfort our selves, when the time draws near that our Lord
must come; and we ought to attend him waking as did the five wise Virgins, that
so soon as he shall be come, we may go in to the wedding with him, and that the
gate be not shut against us, as it was against the five foolish, because they
were fallen asleep.

Another reason why death is to be wished for, is that it causes us to see our
friend and Savior Jesus Christ, of whom we have as yet seen but the Picture.
The Prophets and Apostles have described him unto us so fair of such a comely
Stature, so Courteous, so Virtuous, so Loyal, so Eloquent, so Lovely, so Noble,
so Rich, so loving of Us, that for our salvation he did abandon his own life,
which ought more to move us then any other thing. Where is that Person, who
having heard of so many perfections to be in his friend, would not burn, and be
altogether transported with desire and affection to see him? If our King, or
some Prince of renown comes into our Country, we desire to see him, because of
the report which we have heard of his Virtue and Valor. If Hercules, Alexander
the great, Caesar Cato, of whom we so much commend the ancient Pictures, were
now in this world we would through curiosity go a hundred Miles to see them;
with what an affection then should we aspire to that day, in the which we shall
face to face see and behold that so mighty Prince, who with an invincible force
has broken the head of all our Enemies; who like unto a valiant Josua, in
despite of them has brought us through the dangers, and conducted us into the
land which God promised us? What a pleasure shall it be to us to see him
glorious, and in triumphant array, and round about him the goodly trophies of
his great victories set up? It is said that when Alexander had overcome Darius
King of the Persians, entering into the place where he made his residence. He
sits down in his Throne, and that presently a Greek Grentleman of his Company
began to weep for joy in speaking these words. O happy day in the which we see
our King victorious against the Barbarians, and their pride trodden under foot!
O that all Greece had now the sight and the pleasure of this Spectacle. Think
what joy it will be also to every faithful Man, to see Jesus Christ in his
Royal Seat, holding under his Feet all his Enemies and ours, but especially the
Serpent whose head is already broken, and now he does nothing else but wag his
Tail, waiting his sinal end, which shall be at the day of Judgment. Many Kings
and Princes did with great affection desire to see him when he was on Earth in
the form of a Servant. And Simeon because he saw him so, did so rejoice, and
was so satisfied, that he feared no more to die: Ought hot we more to desire to
see him in Heaven in a Kingly Robe, with company, greatness, majesty and pomp,
and in the state of a Lord? The Queen of Sheba, who being induced by the rumor
which was spread over all the Earth of the great Court of King Solomon, came
running thither, from the farthest part of the South, to see him, and to hear
his wisdom; and after she had diligently considered his great and mavelous
Wisdom; the order, the splendour, and state of his House, stood all astonished,
and with great admiration, said, O how happy are the Servants of thy House, who
may see thy Face every day, and hear thy Divine Speeches? Let us say also, O
thrice and four times happy are the Faithful, who dying go directly to Heaven,
to behold the Face of Jesus Christ, who is greater than Solomon: For the only
contemplation of it, makes man content in every point; in taking from us the
memory and feeling of all other pleasures, causes that we cannot, nor will not
turn our eyes and Thoughts from it. Now Death does not only cause us to see
Jesus Christ, but makes us with him to behold the Angels, the Patriarks, the
Prophets, the Apostles, the Martyrs, which have been singular in graces and
virtues. And if any Man that has a Heart toward God, desires to see the
Church well ordered in this World, and prefers it to all that can be given
him; albeit, the order is never so great, yet there will be many things more to
be desired; with what vehemence and heat then should he wish to see it in
Heaven, without spot or wrinkle, shining like the Sun, clothed in Robes as
white as Snow, set forth in Nuptial Order?

The last Reason, for the which we ought to desire Death, is, that by it our
Spirit being parted from the Body, which does clog it, is more at liberty, and
more capable to look into the Mysteries of God. We live all in this World with
a natural desire to know; therefore it is that for our contentment, we seek
always to hear and see some Novelties; now is it not possible that here beneath
we should come to any great knowledge, chiefly of the truth, as well because
that of it self it is obscure and hard to know; as also, for the Cares,
Peturbations, Afflictions, Passions, etc. wherewith our mind is entangled and
hindered, whilst it is in our Bodies, which are unto it as dust in a Man's Eye,
which does hinder it from discerning any thing understandingly. This is the
Reason wherefore God says unto Moses, That whilst we live we cannot see it
clearly; for the which also S. Paul says, That we know but in part; and S.
John, That we see the Mysteries of our god, but as it were in a Glass, or
through a Window; but when our Soul shall be parted from this Body, and the
vail taken away which blinds her Eyes, then shall it behold and see God Face
to Face, then shall it have the perfect Knowlede of him and of Jesus Christ his
Son, and in it Eternal Life. We shall behold that which now we Worship; for we
shall enter into the Sanctuary of our Lord, and there shall look on him without
ceasing, the Propitiation and the Cherubins: Nothing neither of the Law nor the
Gospel shall be any more unknown or hid from us. God will show unto us. God
will show unto us as unto his Friends and Familiars, all the Riches of his
House; he will talk Friendly with us, and will impart all unto us. An ancient
Man turning from Merchandise, and being entered into the Hall, where Demetri IX.
and Phalere IX. read; when he had heard him a little while, begins to complain,
and said, O unhappy Man that I am, have the Goods of this World been the Cause
that I have been so long deprived of such good things at these? Let us also
say, O Miserable Life, will thou last much longer? will thou not shortly let us
go whither we aspire? which is the School of our god. Must we lose so many
days? Happy Death will thou not hasten to bring us thither? We see by these
Reasons what occasion we have to fear, fly from, and complain of Death, which
is a rest and sleep most delightful above all other; for there is no noise nor
dreams to trouble or interupt it: it is a holsom Medicine, which being
swallowed, does heal us of all Diseases, and takes all pain from us. Which
Socrates considering, after he had drunk the poison by the commandment of the
Athenians, who had unjustly condemned him to die, when the venom was dispersed
in his Members, and his Friend Crito a little before he gave up the Ghost, had
asked him, if he would command him nothing; no, said he, but that thou offer
Sacrifice to Esculapi IX. the God of Physiek, to give him thanks; for I never
took a Medicine of such great force, nor which wrought better. It is a great
shame that these Pagans in their Ignorance and Infidelity seem to be better
instructed and more virtuous then we are; for we fear Death, and fly from it,
as an evil thing, and they hold and esteem it as an incomperable good.
Epaminondas at the hour of his Death perceiving his Friends about his Bed
weeping, comforted them, saying. Rejoice O my Friends, for your Friend
Epaminondas is going to begin to Live. Is Death then an Evil, which has
nothing else of that which we esteem Death, but the Name and Reputation, for
indeed it is a Life? Also is this life a good, which has but the Name of it,
for in effect it is a very Death? Both the one and the other, as says Saint
John Chrysostom, is masked and have both false Faces. Life which is so evil
favored has the fair, which makes it to be feared and hated. When it
presents it self unto us so masked, at the first it seems fearful; but if we
put up the mask we shall find it underneath so fair and Beautiful, that
presently we shall be inflamed with the Love of it. Let us then take away this
vain fear of Death; let us believe that which is true, that it is the greatest
good that can happen unto us. That which anciently Apollo answered to Pindar,
being questioned what thing he did esteem the most healthful and profitable to
Man. To die, answered he. It is said of Cleobis and Biton, that God would
recompense them for their piety, and obedience, and respect which they had born
toward their Mother. Now having given them leave to demand what they would,
they referred themselves to his Judgment, as knowing best what is most
profitable and necessary for us then our selves: What came of it? The same day
they died. Whereby did appear that there is nothing more profitable unto man,
than Death, by the which we are led into a place of pleasure, where we begin to
live. In the Old Time the Sepulchers were built in Gardens, which was done not
only for to bring into our minds our end, in taking off our Pleasures and
Delights, and by that means to moderate them, but also for to instruct us, that
Death is a Guide to Pleasure and Paradise, and is as a passage for to enter
into a pleasant Orchard; it is the reason for the which at Athens, when they
buried the dead Bodies, they turned their Faces toward the East, and not
toward the West, to show that in death our Life and Light begins: Why do we
put our Bodies in Sepulchers as in Chests, if it be not to show that they are
not lost, but laid up as precious Vessels of the Holy Ghost, and that in time
they shall be taken forth, and shall be put into Light, for the Decoration of
the House of their Lord. These things considered, let us take away all fear and
apprehension of Death, let us rejoice and sing as do the Swans when they are
near their Death: Let us say with David, Lord I have been glad when it has
been said unto me, Go to, let us go into the House of our Lord.

It remains now, before we end this present Treatise, to show how we should
behave our selves at the death of our Friends, and how to mittigate the
Sorrows, which we conceive for them, which to do we must consider that which
follows.

First, the unavoidable necessity of all Men, the which cannot be remedied
neither by Counsel nor any other means, David having a regard thereunto, did
comfort himself after the death of his little Child, for whom he had we pt and
prayed so much during his Sickness, when there was yet some hope to impetrate
of God, by humble Prayers, that he would restore him to Health: but when he saw
that it was too late, that all Tears were now vain and unprofitable, he left
his Mourning and began to rejoice. Jesus Christ says, that every day has
Afflictions enough o it self to trouble us, without heaping on those of others,
either of those that are gone, renewing it by the remembrance of them; or of
those which are to come, anticipating by Fear and Cunjecture. This is an
Instruction most necessary, and which we ought all to take, for the rest and
tranquillity of our Minds.

Secondly, we must consider when our Friends die, that it is the Will of God
which does, nor ordains nothing but for the good of his Children, as says
St. Paul, to those that are loved of God, all things succeed and turn to their
Profit: If we do not believe that, we are Unbelievers: if we believe it, we
ought not to grieve for any thing that befalls us; for all is profitable to us.
Now there is no great reason that we should hide us from our Profit. The
Sovereign Wisdom of God is the Cause that there is nothing better done than
that which he does; and his Goodness that there is nothing better: If there be
nothing better, nor better done than that which he ordains and disposes; and
he disposes of us and of our Affairs, and generally of all that which
happens unto us, why do we sorrow, why do we desire any thing else? For we
cannot have any thing that is better; why do we complain? For all is well and
cannot be better done.

We must thirdly think, that to dye is a thing general and common to all: We
pass and fly away as does the water of a Brook; and it is an act and stature of
our God, that we must dye all: if then that happen unto us which is common to
all, is it not a great Folly and Pride in us, to desire to be exempt from the
common condition, and to wish for a Particular? What are we the worse that our
Friends are Dead? so do those of our Neighbors die. Menander Writing to a
Friend of his to comfort him, alleged this reason unto him: Thou should
have, says he, just occasion to grieve if thy fortune and destiny were worse
than other Men's, but if it be alike, why do thou complain? There are more
that if we would diligently consider and make an entire comparison between us
and others, we should find there are an iufinite many worse fortuned than we
are. And that is true which Anaxagoras said, as reports Valerius, That if it
were possible to assemble all the Miseries of the World on a heap, and
afterward to part them by equal Portions, there is not he but would rather
choose his own, than his part of the whole Heap. Seeing that we are not alone
losing our Friends, and that if we will look into it, we shall find that there
are enough more ill at Ease than we: Let us content our selves, that so it
pleases God, and let us not desire Immortal Friends, where we see those of
others to be but Mortal.

Again, let us think that it is a natural thing to die, as it is for winter to
be cold, and summer hot. Our bodies (says St. Paul) are mortal; then let us
not marvel if in winter there be rain, frost and snow, for the season brings
it. Let us not marvel that the night follows the day and that man at night
after his labor goes to sleep, for all that is natural. Also ought not we for
the the same reason to be astonished when a man dyety; no more says St. Basil,
then when he is born and comes into the world, for the one and the other is
Ordinary: And want of considering it, is cause oftentimes that at the death of
our Friend we are so amazed, as if it were a thing prodigious and not
accustomed. When news was brought to Anaxagoras, that his son was dead, it
moved him not at all, only he said that it was not a new and unusual thing that
a mortal man should die, and that when he begot him, he did not beget him
immortal. What made him so constant, but that before hand he had foreseen and
often considered that it ought so to come to pass, being a natural thing?

Moreover, we must consider, than death is a tribute which we owe and are bound
to pay unto nature. Thou art dust and earth, and to earth thou shall return,
says God, speaking to man after he had sinned: Then, when one of our Friends
dies, why are we discontented? Because he has quitted himself and paid what
he ought? If he had paid his King the tribute and ordinary Tax, we would
approve of that as most right, and an obedience and duty toward his Prince;
and if he has done as much to nature, what reason is there to grieve at it?

Again, that in it God hears us, for we ask of God that his Kingdom come, and
that his will be done; what do we jest with God, asking him that which we would
not have, and fear to obtain? and do vex our selves, and murmur, instead of
giving him thanks when he has granted our requests? We show well that we think
little on the prayers which we make: for if we thought upon them, either we
would not pray so, or else in praying, so if God grant our request, we would
not be sorry for it.

Again, that when our Friends die we lose them not; for our Lord whose they are
both before and after death, is not the God of the dead but of the living.
Cirus speaking to his friends before his death, to comfort them said; Do not
think when I shall be dead that I am lost, or shall come to nothing. When we
sow a land, the grains of corn are not lost, they rot therein, but it is the
better to fructify; so are our bodies in the earth, for to revive one day, and
to rise again in incorruption, immortality, and virtue. When also a man goes
along and tedious journey, do we think him lost? When any one of our friends is
at the Court with his Prince, who will not suffer him to depart out of his
Company, raised to honor, and provided of great offices, are we sorry for it?
Why then are we sorry for a Friend, whom we know assuredly to be in the House
of God, in honor and credit, and so well at ease, that he would not change for
all the felicity of this world? Again, that it is a very unhonest and unseemly
thing in a faithful man to grieve so immoderately and as if he were desperate.
A Christian ought to have a strength and courage, which should be invincible
against all adversities, and even against the gates of Hell: He should be like
a building grounded upon a firm Rock, that may hold firm against all the
storms, waves and winds, and all the inconveniences wherewith he may be
assailed; he must not be soft, and yield presently to Adversity, melting in
Tears, and therein drowning (as David said) his Bed. The Lucians in time past
had a Law, by the which it was ordained that whosoever would weep for the Death
of his Friend, should put on Women's Clothes, to show that it is more answering
to a cowardly and esseminate Heat, than to manly Courage. And as it happens in
Men's Bodies, that when they are tender and delicate, they cannot endure the
cold in Winter, nor yet the heat in Summer; so may we judge of such Courages,
that if they cannot bear Adversity without Impatience, no more can they
prosperity without Insolency.

We must finally consider, that by the Tears and Complaints which we use at
death of our Friends, we do not remedy our selves, no more than does the sick
Man his Disease by his Sighs, but rather does increase his Misery. And we may
say that even as by common Experience, and the reports of Physicians, we see in
Choleric Folks, that the more they anger themselves their Rage and Choler does
augment: also in the mournful and heavy People, that continuing in their Tears
and Lamentations, their Sorrow does grow and strengthen. So said an ancient
Philosopher to Arcinoe, to comfort her; If said he, thou love Tears, they
will love thee reciprocally, and as Friends will always frequent and accompany
thee: What then does this great Mourning profit us, if not to make us more
miserable? I, but will some say, in excusing themselves, it is a natural thing
to weep at such an accident: I agree to it, neither will I condemn a moderate
Sorrow. As I certain Man saw an ancient Philosopher weeping for the Death of
his Son, and did reprove his inconstaney: he answered him very well, saying,
Good Friend, suffer me to be a Man. We must not be like Barbarians or savage
Beasts, without Humanity, without Affection, without Pity nor Feeling. I wish
says Pinder, not to be Sick, but if I am, I would not be without feeling; for
it is an evil sign, when in our Sickness we are dull and feel nothing. Then
when in our Mourning we shall keep the mean, and shall avoid the two Extremes,
which St. Basil does condemn as vicious, which is, that we be not Stoiks, that
is to say, without affection, nor soft on the other side, to suffer our selves
to be won and overcome with sorrow; I do approve that if we show our selves Men
in Weeping, let us also show that we are Christians furnished with Hope in
correcting and moderating our Sorrows. Others say, I loved them so dearly. If
thou lovedst him so dearly as thou say, show it and rejoice at his happiness
and rest: I rather believe that which causes in us this great Mourning, is the
love which we have of our selves, which is the cause that we grieve at the loss
of our Friends, not for the respect which we have to them, but to our selves,
being discontens to be deprived of the Pleasure and Consolations which they
gave us. Which Jesus Christ said unto his Disciples, Seeing that they grieved
that he had told them, that in short time he should be put to Death: It is not
for love of me that you are so heavy; for if you loved me you would be glad,
for as much as it is my good or happiness to die. Others say, he was so honest
a Man, therefore is it that God took him, as he did Enock, for fear lest by the
Malice and Corruption of this Age, he should change. When the Fruit is ripe
must it not be gathered, for fear lest it should rot on the Tree?

Others say be died in the prime of his Age; by so much the happier is he: for,
as said Anacharsis, That Ship is happiest which arriveth first at the Port.
Moreover, there is no certain time determined for all Men to die: But as we see
in Fruit time, some are gathered sooner than the others; so is it amongst Men.
There are some also that say, we must honor the Dead, by mourning for them,
falling into the superstition of the Jews, who holding his opinion, did hire
certain Singers and Musicians, to sing pitiful and funeral Songs for the Death
of their Friends; which Jesus Christ did reprove in the House of the Prince of
the Synagogue: and not without cause, for it is not good in praise o a Body to
mourn for it: Complaints and Tears are rather signs of Misery than any thing
else. We do not now weep for the holy Martyrs, which yet we should do, if in
Tears there did consist any Honor; but we honor them by a remembrance of
them, with blessing and thanksgiving, and by Pain and Study we endeavor to
follow them. If likewise we have a Friend whom we will honor after his Death,
it must not be with Tears and Lamentations, but rather by an honorable mansion
which we are to make of him and of his Virtues, and by a desire which we have
to imitate and follow his good and laudable course of Life.

It is time to conclude this present Treatise, and to resolve on the precedent
Reasons; that we must neither fear nor fly Death, but rather love and desire it
more than Life, and prefer the day of our Death before the day of our Birth:
for by our Birth we come to Pain and Affliction, and dying, we go to God, and
to perpetual rest. Let us then strictly examine them, and judge of them, that
we may take away the fear of the one, and the excessive love of the other. God
through his holy Spirit give us the Grace to do it. So be it.

A Clear Declaration Of the RESURRECTION Of the DEAD.
FOrasmuch as in all times there have been some who have mocked at the
Resurrection, and have utterly denied it: Mat. 12. Acts 17. 1 Cor. 15. It is
not without good Cause that the Apostle St. Paul does so carefully teach us,
that the Dead shall rise again: for even as the Knowledge does bring unto us a
Sovereign Joy and Consolation, and does give us a Will and Affection to follow
unto the end JESUS CHRIST our Head and Spouse, to be Crowned with him, with
that Eternal Beatitude which God has prepared for his Children. Mat. 25. So
also those that are not assured of the Resurrection which is the Foundation of
our Religion, are less affectionate to follow the Lord, and to give themselves
to Piety and Justice. And we must not doubt but the wicked, who abandon
themselves to all impiety against God and who without remorse of Conscience do
exercise all sorts of Wickedness against their Neighbors, they do it so much
the more freely, as to persuade themselves that if they escape the Judgment and
Punishment of Men, they shall hear nothing of it after this Life. For seeing
that to avoid only the vengeance of the Magistrate in this World, they hide as
much as they can their iniquities, and give such good Colors to their
mis-deeds as possibly they can, that they may not be convicted Wicked; how much
more do you think they would be bridled from doing Evil, if they were persuaded
that although their Bodies die, yet their Souls shall remain Immortal, and
shall endure the Judgment of God which it has deserved; and that one day their
Bodies shall rise again, that both Body and Soul may be Eternally tormented in
Hell, Heb. 10. by the Judgment of God so horrible and fearful; Heb. 10.
whereupon we may see how necessary it is to know that the Dead shall rise
again, this Doctrine being the principal upholder of Christian Religion; of
which if a Man be not altogether persuaded all is nothing. And it is impossible
to persevere amongst so many Difficulties and Afflictions which are daily
present at the serving of the Lord: For if the hope of the Resurrection were
not, we should be the most miserable of the Earth, Cor. 15. seeing that in this
World the Faithful are ordinarily more afflicted than the Infidels; but our
Consolation is the Promise of Jesus Christ, that although the World shall
rejoice for a time, and that we shall weep, Joh. 16. Romans 8. Psalm. 37. and 73.
the time will come that our Head will visit us, and rejoice our Hearts with a
Joy that shall never be taken from us.

Now for to understand this Article of Faith, we must well consider these three
Points.

First, we must know whether the Soul now dies with the Body or no.

Secondly, Whether the Body returns so to the Earth, that it cannot ^ise again.

Thirdly, If it does rise, who is ^t does raise it, and in what estate it shall
be when risen.

The first Point.
AS for the first Part. The Lord for to declare unto us the Immortality of
Souls, compares Death ^o the Sleep of Man, and says that those that are dead,
sleep: assuring us, that even so as when the Body does sleep, the Soul does not
sleep, as appears by so many Dreams which Men have, that also, although the
Body shall be put into the Sepulcher, as in a place of Sleep: nevertheless the
Immortal Soul shall be gathered and assembled in its place; from whence it
shall come again at the day of Judgment to put on her Body that therein she may
enjoy the happy Life, or suffer Eternal Punishment Romans 2. Mat. 25. Luke 8. The
Apostle speaking of the Daughter of Icairus, whom the Lord did raise again,
says, That the Spirit did return into her; showing that it was not dead like
the Body, but only that she was gone to the Place, from the which by the
Commandment of Jesus Christ she came again to re-enter into her Body: as also
that of Lazarus of Bethleem, Joh. 11. For ever so as the Body does return to
the Earth, from whence it was taken; so the Spirit does return to God, who gave
it. The same Evangelist declares, that the Soul of Lazarus lives in Heaven, and
that of the evil Rich Man in Hell. Luc. 16. And the Lord dying, to show that
the Soul was not subject to Death as the Body, did recommend his Soul to his
Father. Luke 22. Act. 7. Saint Steven the first Martyr, recommended his to
Christ. Saint Paul desired to be dissolved, and to be with Jesus; Phil. 1.
knowing that after his Soul should be delivered out of the Prison of his Body,
it should go to the Joy of the Children of god. Unto the Thief it was said,
This Day thou shall be with me in Paradise; Luke 23. Joh. 5.6. which cannot be
understood of the Body, but shows that the faithful Dying, makes the passage
from Death to Life.

The which ought only to be understood of the Soul, seeing that the Body must
first be brought to Earth, and that it must put off all Corruption, for to rise
at the last Day Incorruptible and in Glory. Mat. 22. Thus Jesus Christ against
the Saduces, who denied the Immortality of Souls, shows, that forasmuch as God
calls himself the God of Abraham, of Isaac and of Jacob, Exodus 3. infallibly
the Souls departed do live; for he is not the God of those that are dead in
such sort, that they are no more; but he is the God of those that are, and that
live; and does good to the Posterity of those that are, and not of those that
are not; which cannot be understood but of their Souls, seeing their Bodies
were returned to the Earth. Whereby we see that they deceive themselves
greatly, that say that their Souls die and vanish with the Body where they
Sleep; also those likewise who think that they enter into other Bodies Make 6.
Luke 9. Even the Pagans by natural Apprehensions, have believe that the Souls
were Immortal; a we see that Euripides in the Tragedy which he entitled
Hecuba, does declare it, when he brings in Polixen speaking to Hecuba, and
dying, saying to her, What shall I say to Hect^ thy Husband, who was dead, she
a^ swered her, tell him that I am the most wretched in the World: And in that
which he entitled, The Supplicant, he says, The Spirit shall return to Heaven.
Likewise, Pholicides says, That the Soul is immortal, and living always, waxes
not old: Pythagoras in his Golden Verses, said, If when thou have left the Body
thou come into Heaven, thou shall be as God, living always, and being no more
Mortal: Cicero likewise Writes of it in his Book of Friendship, and in that
which he writ of Age, in some sort comforting himself in the hope which he had
of the immortality of his Soul. We see then that it is a thing most assured,
that the Soul is immortal, as the Lord by his Word, which is the Infallible
Truth of Heaven, does show it us: And likewise, the Pagans, how Ignorant soever
they were of the true Religion, have well understood it. Wherefore those that
deny the Immortality of Souls, accuse God of lying, and make themselves in
worse estate than the Pagans.

This Knowledge is a great Consolation to the Faithful in all their
Afflictions, and does take from them the fears of Death, knowing that their
Souls being separated from their Bodies live in Heaven, 1 John 2 in which they
are admonished, not to settle themselves upon the transitory things of this
Life; and not to load their Souls with the burden of Sin, to the end that
dying they may be raised up toward God our Father, and Jesus Christ our
Savior, unto whom we ought with a steadfast faith to recommend them. Now even
as the faithful do rejoice at it, the unfaithful on the other side, knowing the
Souls to be immortal, are so much the more fearful of Death; seeing the eternal
pains, and torments to be prepared for them at their going forth of this World.
James 1. 1 Pet. 1.4. So that which serves to the Elect for Joy and
Instruction, is unto the wicked nothing but Sorrow, and occasion of Despair.

The Second Point.
TOuching the Body, it is all apparent that it is subject to die, as well
because that we know that those that were in times past are dead, and that we
see that those of our time die one after another; as principally because that
the Lord declares to Adam, that by reason of his Sin, he with his posterity
shall be subject to return into the Earth, from whence he was taken. Genesis 3.
The Apostle says, Romans 5.8.6. That by Man Sin came into the World, and by Sin
Death, and so Death came unto all Men, by reason that all have sinned, and the
reward of Sin is Death, whereof the hour is uncertain unto us. ^uke 12.
Although we are certain that it is the Journey that every man must go, by
reason that unto them ^ll it is ordained to die once. Jos. 12. 1 Kings 2: The
Scripture is full of Testimonies upon this matter, although it be well enough
known of all by every days Experience. Heb. 9. Job 14. The Pagans themselves
without Instruction of the Word of God, have well understood that unto Man it
is a thing that cannot be avoided; as Euripedes shows it in the Tragedy of the
Supplicants, saying, That every part of Man must return from whence it came;
the Spirit into Heaven, the Body into the ^^^ih, which is the Mother and Nurse
thereof. Wherefore it is a thing known to all, that we must die; but now by how
much it is easy to believe, that necessity to die is imposed upon us, by so
much is i^ more difficult to believe that our bodies being returned to dust,
shall ris^ again: And indeed the sensual Ma^^ cannot comprehend any thing there
in, neither has any thought of it; as we see that the Pagans never thought of
it, although that they have disputed of the immortality o^ Souls. But the Man
that is regenerate by the Spirit of God, doubt not but that the Lord can raise
the dead, seeing he will have it so, and that nothing can hinder his Will Psalm.
115. For as, says the Prophet he does what he will. Apoc. 4. We must then fee
how the Scripture dot^ assure us, that the Bodies as well o^ the good as of the
wicked, shall rise again, the first ^o be crowned with Glory, the other with
perpetual Infamy. Dan. 12. For to teach us the Resurrection, it compares Death
to a ^leep, as has been already said, to ^he end we may be certain that as the
bodies, after they have labored shall rest by Sleep, that they being awaked
may with so much more alacrity return to work; so when we shall have made an
end of this present Life, our Bodies shall be brought to the Tomb, as in a Bed
of rest, for to rise again from thence at the latter day, and be put into their
place. Job. prophesying of the Resurrection, the which he did firmly believe,
says, I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he will stand up at the latter
day upon the Earth, and although after my Skin, this Body shall be devoured by
Worms, yet with my Flesh shall I see God, I shall behold him, and my Eyes shall
look upon him, and none other for me, although my Reins are consumed within me.
Job. 14. and 19. David foretells the Resurrection of Christ, by whom we shall
rise again; the which was figured by this, that Jonas was three days and three
nights in the Whales Belly, as Jesus Christ himself declares it. Johu 2. Mat.
12. The Prophet Isay in the 26. Chap. speaking of the Elect, says unto the
Lord with Faith, Thy dead shall live and rise again with my Body. Awake and
rejoice ye Inhabitants of the dust, for thy dew is as the dew of the Fields,
and the Earth shall cast forth the dead. The Lord willing to assure his People
Israel, that delivering them from the Captivity of Babylon, he would bring them
back into the Land which he had given them, he said unto them in a Vision, by
the Prophet, Ezekiel. 37. that as certain as the dead shall rise, so certainly
will he deliver them from the Captivity of the Babylonians, for to set them in
Peace in their own Land. Danie says, that those that sleep in the dust shall
wake, some to Eternal Life, and others to perpetual shame and Infamy, and those
which have been wise, shall shine as the Brightness of the Firmament, and those
which do persuade Man to Righteousness, shall be as Stars for ever and ever.
Dan. 12. Jesus Christ shows the Saduces, that the dead shall rise again,
because that God is their God, Mat. 28. In St. John, Chap. 6. he says, that
the will of his Father who sent him, is, that he shall lose nothing of all that
he has given him; but that he shall raise it up at the larter day. The Apostle
declares that Christ is risen again for our Justification. Then he says that
even as we die in Adam, so we shall rise again, and shall be quickened in
Christ. Romans 4.5.6. 1 Cor. 15. For seeing that he who is the Life, when he was
put into the Tomb, thereby made many to rise again, by much more reason now,
being risen again and glorified, will he raise us again. John 19. Psalm. 36.
Mat. 27. In like manner he declares, That he that believes Jesus is dead, and
risen again (of which we have the surest Testimonies) ought by the same parity
of Reason to believe, that God will bring from the Grave those that sleep in
Jesus, who shall from thence forth ever live with the Lord, wherefore, says St.
Paul, comfort one another with these Words, that is, let this be your
Consolation in the midst of all your Trials, Afflictions, and Troubles upon
Earth, that they cannor last long, but must end with your Life; when you shall
descend into the Grave, where you shall not long remain, but the same Power
that raised your Blessed Redeemer from thence, shall have the same effect on
you, and likewise raise you from the Dead, and you shall be joined with Christ
your Head, and live with him in everlasting Glory; this is the very sum of our
Christian Profession, and the highest point of our Faith.

All humane wisdom, which is folly before God, Mat. 24.25. cannot persuade
themselves, that the bodies which are returned into dust can rise again, 1 Cor.
15. Phil. 7. nor those which have been burned, whereof the ashes have been
dispersed with the winds, 2 Cor. 5. Acts 2.4. nor those which have been
devoured by birds and by beasts, and digested, and reduced to dung, 1 Thessalonians. 1.
nor those which have perished in the waters, which have been food for fishes, 1
Pet. 1. 1 Cor. 1. But the Lord by that which he had done before, plainly
shows, that hereafter it shall be very easy for him to do what he will with
our bodies; for seeing he has made all things of nothing, can he not make that
to return to life, which has already been? Genesis 1. Psalm. 33. Genesis 1. And as he
made man first of the Earth, can he not as well make him to rise again from it?
Genesis 1. in the beginning the Earth was so obedient unto him, that when he
commanded it to bring forth the bud of the herbs that bears seed, and the
fructifying tree, and the living creature, beasts, worms, etc. It of it self,
immediately brings forth that which before had never been; how much more easily
by the commandment of God, may it restore many which have already been, and
shall be returned into it? John 11. We see that although that Lazarus of
Bethania, had already been three days in the Earth, and nevertheless when the
Lord commanded him to come out of the Earth, presently it was done; He himself
also rose again from the Earth the third day, for to assure us that he will
raise us again, Mat. 28. Apoc. 1. for as death could not overcome Jesus Christ,
but that he is risen, so shall it not be able to hinder his members from rising
again, because that he has as much power over the dead, as over the living;
Romans 14. Gal. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 1.4. If God has raised the head, it follows, that
he will also raise the body, which we are if we believe, When we consider that
he did hinder the so hot burning furnace from doing any hurt to Sidrake,
Misake, and Abednego, Ephesians. 4. Dan. 3. we shall not find it an impossible thing
to God, to make them rise again which have been buried, that they may be
reunited unto their Souls. And he that shut the Lions Jaws, because they should
do no harm to Daniel, Dan. 6. shall be able to raise those again which have
been devoured, And he commanded the fish to cast up Jonas, Jon. 2. also can be
easily cause that the Sea shall obey him, when he shall command it to cast up
his dead. In brief, the faithful cannot doubt of his Resurrection, knowing that
neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, Romans 8. nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature, can separate him from the love which God bears in him, in Jesus
Christ our Lord, Revel. 20. For also the Sea must cast up those dead bodies
which are in it, and death and the Grave, those which are in them; for as much
as the Lord has the keys of the Grave and of death, having power over them.

Rev. 1. Moreover God cannot be true, nor truly wise, nor Almighty, nor Just,
if he does not raise the dead, and by consequence cannot be God. And so who
denies the Resurrection, denies also that there is a God: for seeing by his
Word he promises to raise up the dead, if he do it not, he is not true. And
seeing that he declares that he will have it, if he does it not, it follows,
that it is for want of knowledge, and of power, and so shall neither be truly
wise nor Almighty. Also he shall not be just if he does not render to every one
that which he promises him; for the Author to the Hebrews saying that God is,
says also that he is a rewarder of those that seek him. Heb. 11. Mat. 10.
Marc. 8. Luc. 9, Now in this world, the children of God have nothing but
afflictions every day, being set out for a show, as men condemned to death, and
being made a spectacle to the world, to the Angels and to men. Cor. 4. John 16.
As our Savior also says to his disciples, You shall weep and lament, and the
world shall rejoice, 2 Timothy 3. And the Apostle declares, that whosoever will
live holy in Christ, he shall endure affliction. Act. 5.20. 21. We see that the
Apostles and those which received their doctrine, have almost always been in
continual afflictions. Col. 1. Heb. 10.11. In our time the afflictions of the
faithful have been notorious, that there is none so simple but may see them.
Mat. 6. Marc. 14. 1 Cor. 10, 11. 1 These. 1.3. On the contrary part the wicked
instead of receiving punishment in this world, are ordinarily better at their
ease than the faithful, and do flourish like the bay Tree, as says the
Prophet, Psalm. 37. Wherefore there must necessarily be another place where the
good shall be recompensed with joy, and the wicked with sorrow, otherwise God
should not be just, and Christ should have dyed in vain. But some one will say,
God does accomplish his promises upon the souls of the just, and his
threatenings upon those of the unjust, and by that means God shall not cease to
be just, although he should not raise again the bodies of men. With this we
must consider, that if it be so, that a free retribution is done to the soul,
as (according to the promise of God) it ought to be done to the just, and
punishment is justly inflicted upon the soul of the reprobate, to the end that
the justice of God may be safe; so must it also of necessity be, that the
bodies be recompensed, some with honor, others with disdain, to the end that
God may remain just for ever. For even as the Soul of man renewed by the holy
Ghost, gives it self to serve God, so does the body, when it cease from evil
doing, and being even ready to be martyred for professing the Lord, serving to
Justice and Holiness. Rev. 12. For Example we have the Prophets, Romans 6. Act.
7. St, Stephen, the Apostles, and so many Martyrs, and true Servants of God,
whose bodies have greatly given themselves to serve God; Rev. 6.8. Also in like
manner as the spirit of the wicked does employ it self but only to offend God,
likewise they employ their bodies to serve to filthiness and iniquity, and to
do all evil; Romans 6.7. therefore just it is that the bodies of the Saints which
served God, and of the wicked which disobeyed God, should both be raised by him
to receive according to what they have done for or against him. Furthermore
they who deny the Resurrection of the body, do likewise make the incarnation
and bodily passion of Jesus Christ unprofitable. For if the body do not rise
again, what needed he to take humane nature upon him, and to suffer in it, to
deliver our bodies from the everlasting curse? Seeing that if it were so, that
the bodies being dead, should so return to the Earth, that they should have no
more being, and so could neither enjoy happiness, nor suffer pains and sorrows;
had it not been enough that he had only suffered his soul, being heavy to
death, for to deliver the Souls from Hell? Marc. 14. Whosoever then denies the
re-establishment of bodies, through ignorance makes the humanity of Christ
unprofitable, and accuses God the Father of cruelty, as if he had taken
pleasure to see his well beloved Son so cruelly entreated, without having (for
his part) deserved it, and without that it should serve to the Elect; he makes
him also (for his part) in blaspheming, a Liar with his Father, because he
says, that he will raise his at the last day. In like manner does he accuse the
holy Ghost of vanity, which by the mouth of the Prophets has prophesied and
foretold the Resurrection of the Dead. Also he disanulleth Christian Religion;
for if the dead do not rise again, Christ also is not risen, and so the
preaching of the Apostles should be false, and we should be abused to believe
their doctrine, and those which are dead in Christ should be cast away. Cor.
15. The Lord fitting himself to our capacity, as the mother to the child,
teaches us the Celestial things by the comparison of the things Terrestrial,
to the end we comprehend that which otherwise is incomprehensible unto us. And
touching the matter which we have now in hand, the Prophet Esaias declares unto
us, Esai. 19. that even as in Winter the grass of the field seems to be dead,
and in the spring after it has felt the dew it springs and waxes green again,
so likewise our bodies being dead shall rise again, when at the latter day they
shall feel the dew of the grace of God, hearing the voice of the Son of man.
The Apostle says, Mat. 24. that as the seed must die before it be quickened, 1 Thessalonians. John 5. and then it rises by virtue of the sap which it has had in the
Earth, in greater glory then it was sown; 1 Cor. 15. so likewise all men must
die, that they may rise again, the elect in greater glory then they were set
upon the Earth, by the virtue of the eternal Spirit of Jesus, in whom they
died; Romans 1 Thessalonians. 4. the probate in greater dishonor then they were before,
by the virtue of the immortal spirit of Satan, in whom they are departed. For
seeing the Lord does excellently unfold his power toward the insensible
creatures, we ought not to doubt, but he has at the least as much will to show
his power in making them to rise again for whom he died, to the end to crown
them with glory; and his enemies to be charged with shame and infamy, seeing
they have so much dishonored him. When a nut, or the kernel of a Pear or Apple
is rotted in the ground, God causes it to rise again to a great tree, for to
bear much more fruit, being risen again, then it did before; and a grane of
Wheat, being put into the ground, and dying, brings forth much fruit; John 12.
do we think that the Lord has not as great power to raise up men, as he has
to raise these things, so small; and as it were of no value? Shall it not be
easy for him to raise us again, as it has been easy to him to draw us forth
of the matrix of the mother alive, where before we were born, we were as it
were in a Sepulcher? If the Prophets and Apostles in the name of God have
raised up the dead, Psalm. 18, shall it be impossible to the Lord by his power
to raise them? 2 King 4. Acts 9. Let us assure our selves, that nothing can
separate the body and soul of the faithful from the love which God bears
them, neither hinder, but that he shall make the wicked both in body and soul
to be his footstool.

Now by reason that the Apostle says, John 6. that the body which is sown is
not that which rises again; Heb. 10. 1 Cor. 15. there are some that will infer
thereupon, that at the Resurrection our souls shall not return into those
bodies which now we have, but into other bodies which the Lord shall give us.
He himself in that place shows us, that he speaks not that, but only to show
us, that although our bodies shall rise in the same substance which now they
have, they shall notwithstanding be changed in quality and glory; seeing that
this corruption most put on incorruption, and that this mortality shall be
swallowed up of life, and put on immortality; 1 Cor. 15. declaring that they
shall be these self same bodies in substance, but diverse in qualities. St. Paul
says, Phil. 3. Christ will transform this vile body, that it may be made like
unto his glorious bo^y, according to the power by which he is able to make all
things subject unto himself. Mat. 27. Whereon follows, that as Jesus Christ
rose again in the same body, which was crucified for us, being cleansed and
discharged of all infirmity; Luke 24. John 20. also we shall rise again in the
same bodies which now we have in this world, having in them, cold, heat, hunger
and thrist, poverty, sickness, banishment, imprisonment, and such like
adversities: Heb. 10. 11. being cleansed and disrobed of all that which by sin
did cause us any grief; for Justice of God cannot consist without remunerating
the bodies of those that have sought for his glory, in crowning his graces in
them, and punishing those which have labored to offend him. Moreover we see
that those which the Prophets and Apostles, and Jesus Christ himself have
raised again, Mat. 27. it has been in the self same bodies in the which the
had lived before. Who doubts but those that rose again at the death of our
Lord, did rise in the self same hodies which they had before; for otherwise how
should they have been known by those to whom they did appear? The Apostles puts
us out of doubt of it, saying, 1 Cor. 15. That if the Spirit of him who raised
Jesus from the dead, does dwell in us, he that has raised up Christ from the
dead, will also quicken our mortal bodies, because his spirit dwells in us;
he says more over, that the body which is sown in corruption, shall rise again
in incorruption. It is sown in dishonor, it shall rise again in glory; it is
sown in weakness, it shall rise again in power: it is sown a sensual body, it
shall rise a spiritual body. Wherefore we ought to believe that the bodies
which now we have, shall be the self same which shall rise again in the same
substance, but the earthly qualities shall be changed into heavenly; which is
no small consolation, seeing that we love our bodies so much, although that in
this world they be laden with so many miseries.

The Third point.
AS concerning the Author of the Resurrection, the Scripture does declare unto
us, that God the Father in the beginning made man by his word. Genesis 1. 2. which
is his son, John 1. and having made his body, breathed into him a living soul,
by his spirit; Genesis 2. Psalm. 33. so in the Resurrection of the dead, 2 Cor. 4.
he shall raise us again by his Son in a quickening spirit.

And when the Son of justice shall come in judgment for to judge the quick and
the dead, Mal. 4. the Sun shall wax dark, Revel. 1. and the Moon shall not
yield her light, 2 Timothy 4. and the brightness of the Stars shall be seen no
more then if they were fallen from Heaven, and the virtues which are in the
Heavens, as the Stars, Mat. 24. the Planets, and other celestial creatures,
with Heaven and Earth shall be shaken; Luke 21. Revel. 6. then the Sea and her
waves shall roar after an unaccustomed manner; 2 Pet. 3. and when the order of
nature shall be changed, those shall be signs of the coming of the Son of man.
Mat. 16. And when that Jesus Christ, the Son of God shall come, who took humane
nature upon him in the Virgins womb, Luke 1. Acts 1. he shall come in the same
body, wherewith he did converse here below upon the Earth, before and after his
death, as he himself declares, calling himself the Son of man, sent of God his
Father, Mat. 24. Mark 13. (who gave him power to do judgment, in so much as he
is the Son of man) Luke 24. John 5. set above the clouds, at the right hand of
the power of God, Mark 16.24. 1 Thessalonians. 4. accompanied with the voices of
Archangels, and of Angels with Gods Trumpets, Rev. 1. and all eyes shall behold
him; Mat. 24. for he will cause his sign to appear in Heaven, 1 Cor. 15. and
his voice to be heard, the which at the last trump shall be heard of those that
have been put into the Sepulchers, to the end that first they may rise again: 1 Thessalonians. 4. and those which shall be found living shall hear it also, to the end
they may be translated, which unto them shall be a kind of death, being changed
from mortal and corruptible, to immortal and incorruptible bodies, 1 Cor. 35.
and shall rise again, and shall be changed in a moment and twinkling of an eye.

This day shall not surprise the elect that are in the light, because it shall
be the day which they have so long waited for, and wished, with the other
creatures, 1 These. 5. 1 John 1, for to those who have overcome Satan by the
blood of the Lamb, 1 Cor. 1. and by the word of their testimony, Romans 8. and
have not loved their lives to death, 1 John 2.4.8.5. it shall bring unto them
an unspeakable joy, Rev. 12.21. making them lift up their heads aloft, seeing
their perfect deliverance come. For their Savior shall send his Angels with
great sound of Trumpets, to gather them together, Esaias. 35. how far in sunder
soever they be from the four winds, Zach. 9. from the end of the earth to the
end of heaven, Luc. 22. Romans 8. and then they shall be altogether caught within
the clouds to meet the Lord in the Air, 2 These. 4. for to be joined with their
head, as members of his body, and shall be always with him who will separate
them from the reprobates, as the Shepherd does the Sheep from the Goats, Mat.
25. to put them both in body and soul in full possession of the everlasting
heritage and happiness by them so long hoped for.

The Estate of the Elect that are Risen again.
THen their bodies which shall be risen again in triumph shall be changed, not
in substance but in quality, being discharged of the earthly heaviness, for to
be made spiritual bodies, 1 Cor. 15. to the end to be fit for the heavenly
habitation; where they have no need of meats which do corrupt, Rev. 7. for they
shall be no more hungry, nor thirsty, and they shall dye no more, but shall use
the heavenly food, which is the word of God, Luc. 20. they shall also be
delivered from the bondage of sin, for to serve evermore to Justice. For these
are the two principal things which hinder man from beholding the face of God,
this heavy earthly body, and infectious sin. And for the first, we see that the
Lord said to Moses, Exodus 33. who was desirous to see him; Man shall not see me
upon the Earth and live. As for the other, it was cause that the wicked Angels
were cast down from Heaven, and man out of Paradise, Genesis 3. for there is
nothing common between God and a sinful man. Wherefore the faithful shall have
a spiritual body, discharged and purified from all sin. There shall also be no
defect in their bodies, nor imperfection, and all deformity and vice, which
comes of sin, shall be done away; for the Lord will transform their vile and
contemptible bodies, and make them conformable and like unto his glorious body.
Phil. 3. 1 John 3. Moreover, they shall no more suffer any torments, pains,
sickness, nor any other adverse thing, because there shall (...)rning, nor
weeping nor ^^^^uring; for the Lord will wipe away all tears from their Eyes.
And there shall happen no more corruption to them by death, Rev. 25. whereof
there shall be no more remembrance, Isa. 25. but being made immortal, they
shall be made incorruptible, Rev. 7.21. and delivered from all suffering, for
to be in a happy state for ever.

Their Soul, which before was a living Soul, Genesis 2. shall be changed into a
quickening spirit, 1 Cor. 15. then it shall be delivered from all sorrows,
griefs, annoy, perturbations and fear, which came through sin, Psalm. 61. and
shall be set in rest, joy, consolation, happiness, and perpetual assurance,
without being any more perplexed nor defiled with troublesome affections.

Then being put in so excellent estate, both of Body and Soul, the Image of God
shall truly shine upon them, having this power to serve God, being perfectly
wise, holy, pure, irreprehensible, innocent, without spot, 1 Cor. 1. good,
just, true, immortal and incorruptible, being resplendant in glory and honor,
before the Throne of God Col. 1.

The which shall be the white vesture, wherewith St. John says, Rev. 14.21.
They shall be clothed, which is the pure and shining Vestments, Rev. 3.4.6.7.
which are the justifications of the Saints that shall hold the Palms in their
hands in sign of Victory, Rev. 19. after that the books being opened, they
shall hear the Voice full of meekness, Rev. 7. grace and mercy, receiving in
the presence of the wicked, who judged them the outcasts of the Earth, Rev.
10. the sentence of eternal blessing, being found written in the book of life,
which is the book of the Lamb, Sap. 4.5. being clothed with the innocence of
Jesus Christ: 1 Cor. 4. and having the name of their Father written in their
forehead, Rev. 13.21. they shall be with Christ the Spouse, 2 Cor. 5. crowned
with the incorruptible crown of life, Gal. 3. and eternal glory, Apoc. 14.
being pronounced the sons and heirs of God, and coheirs with Jesus Christ,
Rev. 2. and Judges with him of the Apostate Angels, 2 Timothy 4. and of the
reprobate, 1. Pet. 5. for all power and judgment is so given to the Son. Romans
8. Gal. 4. that he will participate in this honor as his assistants, Wisd. 3.
they shall be put in possession of the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 19. having
praise of God, Luc. 22. which is the incorruptible heritage, 1 Cor. 6. which
cannot contaminate, nor wither, and which is preserved in Heaven for them, John
5. they shall shine therein as the Firmament, Rev. 2. and as the Sun, Mat. 25.
and as the Stars for ever. 1 Cor. 4. Then they shall have their right in the
Tree of Life, Pet. 1. and shall enter into the new Celestial Jerusalem, Dan.
12. in the which there shall be no Temple, Mat. 13. for the Lord Almighty is
the Temple thereof, and the Lamb, Wisd. 3. They shall be in it everlasting
Kings and High Priests, Rev. 2.21, 22. offering sacrifices of Praise and
Thanksgiving unto the Lord. Then being in the House of God, Rev. 15.7. which is
the blessed house which the faithful have in Heaven, which is not made with
hands, 2 Cor. 5. they shall be filled with the magnificence of the Lord, and
shall bud like the Olive branch, and blossom like the Palm, and like the Cedar
which is in Lebanus, Psalm. 16.17.52. and 92. being immortal and incorruptible,
and shall not be importuned by Satan, to sin and offend God. The face of God
which is the Fountain of Light, 1 Cor. 13. the River of Pleasure, Psalm. 16. and
Ocean of Goodness, Rev. 22. they shall see, which shall give them such a great
and perfect Joy, that all the Joys which may be compared to that, are but as a
sparkle compared to a great Fire, Marc. 9. It will make them forget all
Terrestrial, Heb. 11.12. what pleasure soever they could take in them in the
world, and they shall not remember any thing that may bring them sorrow or
grief. They shall be led to the Mountain of Sion, and to the City of the living
God, (which has no need of the Sun nor Moon to shine in it, Rev. 21.22. for
the light of God has lightened it, and the Lamb is the Candle thereof) and of
thousands of Angels, and of the assembly of the first born, which are written
in Heaven, 2 Cor. 11. and to God which is the Judge of all, Col. 1. and to the
sanctified Souls of the Just, Ephesians. 1. and to Jesus Christ their Head and their
Spouse, Mediator of the new Covenant, Rev. 19. and of the blood shed, speaking
better things then that of Abel: then with all his company, and the other
Saints, with whom they shall be fellow Citizens, being domestics of God; they
shall be called to the nuptial banquet of the Lamb, and shall enjoy the Kingdom
of God their Father, Rev. 19. the felicity which Jesus Christ by his death has
conquered for them, Heb. 2.5.9.10. in whom they have put their whole trust,
Gal. 3.4. as he himself promises, saying, Romans 4.5. Father, I will that those
which thou have given me be with me, Ephesians. 1.5. and see my glory which thou have
given me, Romans 5.9.10. and then I dispose the Kingdom unto you, as the Father
has disposed it unto me John 12.14.17. to the end that you may eat upon my
Table in my Kingdom. The Apostle says, Luc. 22. If we dye with him we shall
live with him; and if we suffer with him we shall reign with him, 2 Timothy 2. and
shall be glorified with him, Romans 8. Of these promises the Children of God need
not doubt; for seeing that the Lord when he died, gave Paradise to the Thief,
can be not more easily give it to those to whom he has promised it, Luc. 23.
when he shall come into such great Glory and Majesty? And now being with him,
and seeing him as he is, they shall have a much greater Joy then had the
Disciples, seeing him transfigured; that shall be so understanding, Mat. 17.
that they shall know all the Saints that ever have been, Marc. 9. Luc. 9. and
even those with whom they have conversed in this world joyfully, and according
to God. For if it be so that in the transfiguration of our Lord, which was but
a little demonstration, as well of the Glory of the Body of Jesus, as of the
estate and condition in the which the Children of God shall be in Heaven, (for
their meanness and infirmity could not have been able to see the
incomprehensible Majesty of the Lord, without being destroyed) The Apostles,
although they had never seen the body of Elias and of Moses, nevertheless they
knew them. How much sooner shall the Elect know one another, when they shall be
endued with this perfect knowledge and intelligence of the Image of God, which
shall be in them? And if Adam in his first estate, which was a great deal less
glorious then that of the sanctified by Christ, 1 Cor. 13. did know the beasts
which God brought before him, 1 Cor. 1. and did properly impose a Name to each
one: and even knewn Eve to be bone of his bones, and flesh of his Flesh;
although that the Lord took the rib from him without his feeling it; shall not
we in this admirable glory have more wisdom to know each other? Luc. 16. Now
this knowledge shall be disrobed of all carnal and corrupt affection; for the
Elect shall not be known for loving the one more then the other, or hating one
reprobate more then another, or in calling to mind the injuries and
displeasures which they may have received in this world.

But they shall love directly without respect of persons, those which God
loves, and shall hold in abomination those which God shall detest; For then
all Paternity, brotherhood, and Marriage shall be abolished, and there shall be
but God alone Father of all, whose Children we shall be, and Brothers and
Sisters one to another: the Children of God shall be made Partakers of the
divine Nature, Marc. 12. for God shall be glorified in his Saints, Ephesians. 4. and
shall be made admirable to those that have believed. 2 Cor. 6. 1 Pet. 1.
Wherefore seeing God will communicate his Glory, Virtue and Justice to his
Elect, imparting himself unto them; let us know, that this benefit contains the
sovereign good of man, which all desire, and which the wisdom of man could
never comprehend. And indeed when by all the similitudes which the Scripture
does teach us, we shall have said and learned much of the excellency of the
children of God, it is almost nothing in comparison of that which shall then
appear; surely then the Apostle with the Prophet has good reason, 1 John 3.
having tasted in spirit the inestimable glory of the Elect in the heavenly
life, to say, the things which Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, and which is
not come into the heart of man, are those which God has prepared for them
which loves him, which are unspeakable: and it is not impossible for man to
tell them. 1 Cor. 2. For although Adam was created in a very noble estate,
Isai. 64. yet so it is, that if the Elect were to reassume that estate, 2 Cor.
12. they should be miserable in regard of the sovereign excellency, in the
which they shall be set.

For, First, he had an earthly and sensual body, Genesis 2. the Elect shall have
Spiritual and Celestial bodies, 1 Cor. 14.

2. He had a living soul, they shall have a quickening spirit.

3. He could fail and render himself subject to death, they shall not be able
to fail, nor fall in danger of death; 1 Cor. 15. the which then shall be
abolished.

4. Satan had power both to tempt him, and to make him to fall; but he shall
not have power of either to them.

5. He was husbanding in an earthly Paradise, they shall be in rest and enjoy
the Heavenly Paradise.

6. He had command over the birds of the Air, the fishes of the Sea, the beasts
of the Earth; Genesis 2. they being in greater power shall condemn Satan and all
the wicked: and the holy Angels shall be their companions, Mat. 22. and shall
have power in the Kingdom of their Father.

7. Adam had such great wisdom, that he named every beast according to their
property; 1 Cor. 9. they shall be endued with such wisdom, all filled with such
a perfect knowledge, Romans 2.3.5. that they shall be ignorant of nothing. 1 Pet.
3, Surely then we ought to be much moved and stirred up to worship and serve
God; 2 Cor. 1. who, without any desert of ours, Romans 15. Romans 3.4. will for the
love of his well-beloved Son so admirably unfold his incomprehensible goodness
unto us, Mat. 3.17.

The Estate of the reprobate.
NOW this day shall surprise the wicked and reprobates which are in darkness,
Romans 2.2. (whom the Lord has borne and suffered with great patience, to the
end to bring them to repentance) as the Thief by night steals upon the Master
of the family while he sleeps: and they shall be found without clothes, and
shall walk naked, Rev. 3. and their shame shall be seen: Rev. 16. for when they
shall say peace and security, 1 Cor. 4. then shall sudden destruction come upon
them, like to a woman in travel, 1 These. 5. and they shall not escape, but
shall be marvelously afraid, by reason that it shall be a day of darkness unto
them, Amos 5. and not of light, an obscure and not a clear day, and then they
shall be condemned by their own consciences, like unto Cain, giving praise to
God, seeing the Lord with his Saints come, which are by millions, for to give
judgment against those that have not had the fear of God before their eyes: and
to the end to convince all the wicked of all the evil works which they have
wickedly done, Sap. 4.5. and of the rude speeches which the wicked have
preferred against him: Genesis 4. then for to weigh down the Winepress of the
anger and wrath of Almighty God, Romans 14. because they have persecuted Jesus
Christ in his members, Jude. Romans 3. which are bones of his bones, and flesh of
his flesh; Rev. 19. Ephesians. 5. so that they shall be in such great Agonies and
Afflictions, feeling the terrible judgment of God to come upon them, Heb. 10.
that they shall hide themselves in holes and between the stones of the
Mountains, Romans 2. and shall say to the Mountains and stones, fall upon us, and
hide us from the Face of him who is set upon the throne, Rev. 6. and from the
wrath of the Lamb; Rev. 9. for the great day of his wrath is come, and who is
it shall be able to subsist; They shall seek for Death and not find it, and
shall desire to die, but Death shall fly from them; they shall strike
themselves with despair, and shall be as dead for fear, by reason of the
expectation which they have of those things which shall suddenly come upon
them: Luke 21. they shall lament before the Lord, who shall have a flame of
fire to do Vengeance and Judgment, according to Truth and Justice, upon those
which have not acknowledged God, and who have not obeyed the Gospel of the
Lord, Mat. 24. Rev. 1. and shall punish them in Body and Soul with eternal
perdition in the Face of the Lord, 2 These. 1. and in the Glory of his strength.
Romans 2.2.

The bodies of those which are dead before, shall come out of the Earth: Job 5.
1 These. 4. and of those which shall be found living shall be changed, and put
on immortality, and shall be charged with opprobrious infamy before God and his
Saints: for he shall make clear the things that are hid, and shall manifest the
counsels of hearts.

And then their immortal Soul shall be laden with fear, with sorrow, with
terrors, with grief, with desolation, and with such despair, Mat. 24. Luke 21.
that it is impossible for us to comprehend it. Mar 13. Rev. 1.

Then being in such confusion of Body and Soul, the image of Satan their heard
shall appear upon them: that is to say, infidelity, iniquity, wickedness,
abomination, filthiness, hatred, cruelty, tyranny, perjury, lying, envy, and
all that is of impiety and unjustice, which is the black Roab of the reprobate:
and even so as the Elect have Christ for their head, 1 Cor. 11.12. of whom they
are the body, unto whom they shall be made alike; Ephesians. 1.5. so likewise the
reprobates have Beelzebub for theirs, Mat. 25. unto whom they shall be made
conformable.

For although that all the Devils are all Apostate Angels, nevertheless the
Scripture in sundry places attributes the principality to one alone, to the end
to gather all the wicked unto him, as members in one Body, for to be put to
perpetual ruin.

Then the wrath and indignation of God shall show it self clearly upon all the
infidelity and unjustice of the unbelievers, and execrable, 2 Cor. 4. Ephesians. 2.
which shall not be found written in the book of Life; Mat. 9.10.12.25. for
which they shall receive sentence of Condemnation, Mark 3. and being separated
from Christ, Luke 11.21. shall be driven from before the presence of the Lord,
as the dust before the wind, Romans 1.2. Romans 2. and cast like dogs forth of the
City of the Children of God, Rev. 21. and 17. Romans 9. and sent with their
Captain Satan and his Angles, who did accuse the elect before God night and
day, Psalm. 1. Isa. 17. Rev. 21. and 22. in perpetual malediction, for to drink
of the wine of the wrath of God, Rev. 12. Mat. 25. filled into the cup of his
wrath, and shall be tormented with fire and brimstone before the holy Angels,
and before the Lamb, and the smoke of their torments shall mount for ever, Rev.
14. 15. and 16. and they shall have no rest neither day nor night.

Now this place of torment for the wicked is so horrible, 2 These. 1. that it is
incomprehensible unto us; and even as God is eternal, also this ruin shall be
eternal. The Scripture for to declare it unto us, uses many comparisons. David
says, Psalm. 55. That the wicked shall be cast into the Pit of ruin, and of the
bottomless Pit. Rev. 9. Isa. says, Isa. 30. That the torture is already
prepared for the wicked, which God has made deep and large; the Building of it
is fire and much wood, and the breath of the Lord like unto a stream of
Brimstone does kindle it; Isa. 66. then he says that the worm of the wicked
shall not die, and therefore shall not be quenched, and they shall be hateful
to all flesh. Daniel says also, Dan. 12. That they shall be in perpetual
shame and contempt, Malachy declares, Mal. 4. That the day of the Lord shall
come burning like an Oven, and all the proud and those that do wickedly shall
be like stubble, and the day of the Lord shall burn them, and shall leave them
neither root nor branch. St. John Bapist says, Mat. 3. that the chaff shall be
put into the fire, which shall never be quenched, Mat. 3. The Lord says, that
they shall be cast into the Furnance of Fire, Mat. 25. which is the everlasting
Fire. Saint Luke shows, Luc. 16. that the evil rich man whose Soul is in
Hell, is in such great heat, that he greatly desires to have a drop of Water,
which he shall never be able to get; how much more shall he be tormented when
he has put on his body? The Apostle says, Heb. s10. that they shall feel a
ferventness of fire, which shall devour them. St. John declares, Rev. 19, 20,
21. That they shall be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, which is the
second death. For although they shall live, yet by reason of these incredible
torments, they ought rather to be called dead then alive: Now although that by
all these similitudes it is demonstrated unto us, that the damned shall be
grievously and everlastingly tormented; yet nevertheless, man cannot think nor
comprehend how great the everlasting sufferings shall be, no more then he can
comprehend the joy of the Children of God, Mat. 9. 1 Cor. 2. Wherefore with
good cause the Author to the Hebrews says, Heb. 10. that it is a terrible and
fearful thing to fall into the bands of the living God. For although that we
should see one continually knawed with worms, and burnt with fire, that torment
should notwithstanding be as nothing in regard of that which is prepared for
the wicked. For besides that their bodies shall be horribly afflicted, their
souls shall be in incredible distresses and sorrows. This ought well to stur us
up to watch and pray, and to refrain from doing evil, and to move us to serve
God, Rev. 3. Mat. 24. 1 These. 1. Psalm. 25. and 51. and to desire him with the
Prophets and Apostles, Jer. 31. to change, review and increase our faith, that
so being made new creatures, we may escape this place of torment, and be
numbered amongst the Sons of God. Lamen, 5. Cant, 1. Luc. 17. Joh. 3. Wis. 4.
and 5. Which the Lord grant for the love of his well beloved Son our Savior,
to whom be all honor and glory for ever and ever, Amen.

Prayers and Meditations touching Life and Death.
Meditation the First.
THe life of Christians ought to be occupied in considering the things that
follow, and to put them in practice; to wit, to have always in remembrance the
benefits which they have received at the hands of God; to give him thanks for
them without ceasing, both with heart and mouth; to love him, who is goodness
it self, to fear and worship him, seeing he is the Almighty, and only Wise; to
be stirred up by the love which they bear to God, also to love their
Neighbors. The love of God draws us from the love of corruptible things, lifts
us up to Heaven, and inflames our hearts to a holiness of life. The love of our
Neighbor turns us from all troublesomness in will or in deed, and does stir us
up to integrity, and well doing.

Another.
LEt us often think what we are: The principal part of us is the Soul, the
which is endued with understanding, with reason, and with judgment, to know the
sovereign good, which is God, to love him, to adhere and unite our selves unto
him, that we may have part of his immortality and happiness. Now we forsake and
contemn this great good, for to grovel upon the earth, and to go down into the
pit of carnal desires, applying the vigor of our understanding and judgment,
to things that are not worth the pains that we employ in them. We bury our
selves quick, of heavenly we become earthly, and of men created for eternal
life, we endeavor as much as in us lies, to set our selves in the rank of
brute Beasts. God does not forsake us nevertheless, although that our
ingratitude has well deserved it, but calls us unto him by his word, presents
unto us infinite testimonies of his grace, continues it daily, he supports,
exhorts, counsels, chides and fatherly chastises us; Nevertheless we continue
blind, deaf, and negligent, despising his goodness, or use it not as we should,
or indeed abusing it; nay, which is worse, we love vain and transitory things
better, and have our minds too much fixed and settled upon them. God stretches
forth his hand to conduct us, we draw back ours, and fly when he calls us. If
he put us into the way of salvation, we grudge and repine for the world, we
look behind us, deferring and remitting our amendment till to morrow. Let us
awake then, let us not always stick in the mire, let us strengthen our selves
in the virtue of him that supports and succors us, let us a little undertake
to despise corruptible things, and to desire those that are truly good and
everlasting. When God calls us, let us hearken, if he guids us, let us follow
him, that we may come to his house: let us receive his good things, and himself
too; for he gives himself unto us in the person of his Son. He shows us the
means to get to Heaven, let us then desire of him to give us the will and
courage by faith, repentance, charity and hope to aim thither, and that he
would maintain his grace in us until the end, to sigh in this mortal life, and
to wait (through the assurance of his mercy) for our departure out of this
world, and our last day, which shall be the beginning of our true life.

Prayers and Meditations.
HOW great are the illusions and impostures of the enemy of our salvation? He
shows us afar off things that are ridiculous and vain, and persuades us that
it is all good and happiness; he scares us with things that we ought not to
fear; and makes us to fly from those things which we ought to embrace. He
calls, inticeth and flattereth us, by the means of our desires; if that will
not serve, he roars and storms, and endeavors to astonish us within and
without. O eternal Light and Verity, O Lord and merciful Father, disperse those
clouds of ignoranee and error, illuminate our understanding, and do not suffer
us to come near to that, which thou have commanded us to fly from, and which
is hurtful and pernicious unto us; let us not desire, but what is truly to be
desired, to wit, thy self, who art the springhead of all goodness of our life,
and of eternal happiness. All flesh is grass, and the glory of the man is like
the flower of the field: cause then that we may seek for our firmness and
contentment in the grace which thy Son has brought us: let our life lie hid in
him, so that at the day of the separation of our souls from our bodies, we may
find it holy in Heaven, waiting with assured rest and joy, the happy
Resurrection of this flesh; in which all corruption, infirmity and ignominy
being abolished, and death being swallowed up of victory, we shall live
eternally with thee, in an incomprehensible happiness in thee, by the which
thou shall be glorified. Maintain then thy Children, O Lord, in this faith and
hope, finishing thy work in us, until they be altogether with thee, for to
enjoy the inheritance, and the glory which thine only Son has by his Merit
purchased for them, Amen.

Prayer.
OLord Jesus Christ, Creator and Redeemer of Mankind, who have said, I am the
way, the Truth, and the Life, I do bessech thee by this unspeakable Charity
which thou have showed, in yielding thy self to Death for us, that I may never
stray any jot from the, who art the way; nor that I doubt of thy Promises,
seeing thou art the Truth, and do accomplish that which thou promisest. Cause
that I may only take pleasure in thee, who art the Eternal Life, beyond the
which there is nothing to be desired, neither in Heaven nor Earth. Thou have
taught us the true and only way to Salvation, because we should not abide
erring like strayed Sheep in the lost ways of this World; showing us clearly
that which we ought to believe, to do, to hope, and wherein we ought to yield
and settle our selves. It is thou that have given us to understand, how cursed
we are in Adam; and that there is no way to escape from this Perdition in the
which we are plunged, but by Faith in thee. Thou art that true Light which do
appear to those that walk in the desert of this Life, and who having drawn us
out of the darkness of the spiritual Egypt, have driven away the darkness of
our Understanding, and do enlighten us, to the end we may tend toward the
promised Inheritance, which is the Life Everlasting; into the which the
Unbelievers does not enter, but those that have assuredly relied upon thy holy
Promises. O what a Goodness is it that thou have vouchsafed to descend from thy
Fathers-Bosom, and from the Everlasting Throne to the Earth, to put on our poor
Nature; of Master to become Servant, to the end that by thy Doctrine thou
might do away the darkness of our Ignorance, to guide our feet into the way
of Peace, and to make plain the way of Salvation unto us; which if we follow,
we cannot stray nor wax weary, seeing that thy Grace and Power do accompany us
therein all the days of our Life.

Moreover, by thy Spirit thou do strengthen us in it, and double our Courage.
Thy word is Bread, which nourishes us therein; thy promise is the staff which
upholds us. Thou thy self by thy secret and incomprehensible virtue do bear
and maintain us in it, in an admirable manner; to the end, that both in fair
and foul weather, we may walk with all Alacrity unto thee. And as in preserving
us, thou hinderest that we do not fall into the snares of Satan and the World;
also seeing thou art the Truth, thou take away all doubts, scruples, and
mistrusts, which may trouble and let us, or turn us during our course; thou
causest us to behold the supernal Vocation, the misery and vanity of the World,
the frailty of this present Life, the Gate of Death, and the most happy Life
which is beyond that. And as thou art this true Life, even in this World thou
do quicken by thy Truth, us that are poor, wretched, and dead in Sin; thou
do augment that life by the Ministry and Efficacy of thy holy Gospel, and
do confirm it by the use of the Sacraments which thou have established to
confirm the Faith of those that are thine, until that our Corruption, and what
we have in mortality in us, being abolished by the Resurrection, we shall be,
and live everlastingly with thee, both in Body and Soul, when thou shall be all
in all. Life Everlasting is to know the true God, and thee his Son, which were
sent unto us. Now we see thee by Faith in a Glass, and in Obscurity; but one
day we shall behold thee face to face, and shall be transformed into thy Glory,
nd wholly reformed unto thy Image. I do beseech thee, merciful Savior, to
increase my Faith, that I may be so well grounded in the Doctrine of my
Salvation, that nothing may turn me from it. Increase in my Heart the Reverence
which I owe thee, that I may never turn from thy Obedience; Strengthen me in
such sort, that the allurements nor threatenings do neither entrap nor astonish
me, but that constantly I may cleave unto thee (who art my Life) till Death.
Cause that in virtue of thy holy Promises, and of thy Spirit, I may increase
more and more in thy Love; and leaving behind me the things of this World, I
may tend to that which is firm and perfect. Increase thy Grace in me, that
every day I may dye in my self, for to be quickened and guided by thy Favor,
fearing no other but thou God Almighty, loving nothing but thee, as there is
nothing but thee to be beloved; boasting my self in nothing but in thy only
Grace and Mercy, which is the Glory of all thy Servants; seeking no other good
but thee, nor desiring any thing but thee, who art the full and entire felicity
of all the Faithful, Amen.

Another.
LOrd Jesus, who art always merciful, who do not stick to be my Savior, as
well in Adversity as in Prosperity. Give me the Grace in all humble obedience
to yield unto thy will, when it shall please thee to mingle bitterness amongst
so many sweet things which thou causest me to taste in living under thy
Protection. Thou art admirable and most good in the time of Afflictions: In
that by such means thou do heal spiritual Diseases, and in visiting of us in
this World, thou disposest us to meditate of a better Life, having thy self
showed us the Example thereof. True it is, that I find it very hard to digest,
but thou have been brought to a more strange condition, when for to draw me out
of Hell, thou wentest down into it thy self, and for to reconcile me to thy
heavenly Father thou have undergone his Curse, by reason of my Sins. I have so
often deserved Hell and the fiery Torment, and thou deliveredst me, assuring me
that I have part in the merits of thy Death, and thy Obedience, and that I am
one of thy Coheirs, for to reign one day with thee in thy Kingdom; and at this
present in the midst of so many Afflictions, to be nevertheless set in the
heavenly Places. Having part in so many good things, why shall I vex my self
for a little endurance, by the means whereof thou will awaken me, and make me
better, and draw me so much the more to thee? But seeing thou know me better
then I know my self, if it be thy pleasure to put me to any trial, give me
necessary force and patience to glorify thee, converting all the evil that may
happen unto me, to good and Salvation. And if in supporting my weakness, thy
goodness is pleased to advertise me by some light affliction, cause that this
thy well-willing may draw me more and more to love and honor thee, to give
thee thanks for the care which thou have of thy poor Servant, and by that means
to dispose me to weight for thee at my Death, that after it I may find the Life
which thou have purchased for me by thy Death, and therein with thee to have
part in Joy and Rest for Ever, Amen.

Another.
Lord God Heavenly Father, when I consider in how many sorts I have sinned
before thy Face, and against thy high Majesty, I have horror in my self, in
thinking that I have so often turned from thee. Propitious and favorable
Father, I detest my ingratitude; seeing in what servitude of sin, I have been
too often precipitate, selling as much as in my lay of the precious Liberty
which thy Son had purchased for me. I condemn my folly, I altogether dislike of
my self, I see nothing but Death and mishap hanging over my head, and my
Conscience rising for a Judge and Witness of my Iniquities. But when on the
other side I enter into a Contemplation of thy infinite mercy the which
surmounteth all thy works, and in the which, if so I dare to speak, thou
surmountest thy self, my soul is comforted. And indeed, why should I make my
self believe that I cannot find grace before him that summons and so often and
gently calls the sinner to repentance, protesting expressly that he desires not
the death of a sinner, but rather that he turn from his wickedness and live.

Moreover thy only Son has so well assured us, that we shall find favor in
thy sight, by the sweet words which himself had uttered, as that of the lost
sheep, and of the prodigal Son, the image of whom I acknowledged my self to be;
that I should be most unthankful, incredulous and wicked, to go back and to be
ashamed of thy presence, although I am wretched; seeing thou do so stretch
forth thy hand unto me, and draw me to thee with such wonderful affection. I
have very vildly forsaken thee; O merciful Father, I have unhappily let slip
thy Graces; and adhering to desires of my flesh, and straying from thy
Obedience, I have wrapped my self in the base servitude of sin; I am fallen
into extreme misery, I know not whether to retire, unless it be toward thee
whom I have abandoned. Let thy mercy receive this poor supplication whom thou
have supported during his errors. I am unworthy to lift up mine Eyes unto thee,
or to call thee Father; But I pray thee bow down thine Eyes to me, seeing thou will have it so, being without that, in the power of thine Enemies. The sight
of thy Face will revive me, and bring me again to thee. Seeing I have some
displeasure in my self, I know thou look upon me, that thou have given me
Eyes to see the danger wherein I was: thou have sought and found me in death,
and in the world, and have through thy mercy given me a desire to enter into
thy house. I dare not desire that thou should kiss and embrace me, nor that
hou should weep for joy that thou have found thy poor Servant and Slave: I do
not demand the precious Ornaments wherewith thou do honor thy great
servants and most affectionate Children. It is enough for me to be among of the
least of thy House, amidst the greatest sinners, that have obtained pardon of
thee, and that have some shelter in thy Palace, where there are so many
Dwellings: That even in thy House I may be as little as thou shall please,
provided that thou will preserve me thine for ever.

O Merciful Father, I beseech thee that for the love of thy well beloved Son my
only Savior, thou would give me thy holy Spirit, which may puri^^e my heart,
and strengthen me in such sort, that I may always dwell in thy House, there to
serve thee in Holiness and Justice all the days of my Life. Amen.

Prayers.
WHat do we in this world but heap sins upon sins? So that the morrow is always
worse then the day before, and we do not cease, drawing thy indignation upon
us; But being out of this world in thy heritage, we shall be altogether assured
of our perfect and eternal felicity, the miseries of the bodies shall be
abolished, the vices and filthiness of the Soul shall be done away. O Heavenly
Father, increase our Faith in us, for fear lest we should doubt of things so
certain; Imprint thy Grace and thy Love in our Hearts, which may lift us up to
thee, and strengthen us in thy fear. And because thou have lodged us in this
World, there for to remain as long as it shall please thee, without declaring
unto us the day of our departure, the which thou alone know. I do beseech
thee to take me out of it when thou in thy mercy please; and then to do me
that good that I may acknowledge the same, that in the mean while I may fit my
self thereuuto, as thou have appointed by thy holy Name, through Jesus Christ
our blessed Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

Another.
THis body is the Prison of the Soul, yea, a dark Prison, narrow and fearful;
we are as it were banished men in this world, our life is but woe and misery:
on the contrary, Lord, it is in thy heavenly Kingdom, that we find our Liberty,
our Country, and our perfect Contentment. A wake our Sold by thy word, to the
remembrance and apprehension of such a good; imprint in our Hearts the love and
the desire of the Everlasting good things, and only to be wished for; give unto
our Consciences some taste of that joy wherewith the happy Souls which are in
Heaven are filled, that I may hold as dung and filth all that which the
Worldlings find so fair, and covet so much, which so obstinately they retain,
and do adore with such fervency. Cause that finding taste but in thy verity and
grace, I may wait for (calling upon thee) the day of my perfect deliverance,
through Jesus Christ thy Son, to whom with thee and the holy Spirit be glory
Everlasting. Amen.

Another.
O Lord Jesus, the only Salvation of the Living, Life everlasting of the dead,
I submit my self to thy holy Will, whether it be thy pleasure yet to suffer my
Soul to be some space within this body, for to serve thee, or that it please
thee to take it out of prison, being assured that what thou keep cannot
perish. I am content with all my heart, that my Body return into the Earth,
from whence it was taken, believing the last Resurrection, which shall make it
immortal, incorruptible, and full of Glory. I do beseech thee to fortify my
Sold against all temptation, environ me with the buckler of thy Mercy, to beat
back the darts of Satan. As for me, I am weakness it self, but I rely upon thy
strength and goodness. I cannot allege any good thing before thee whereof to
boast; on the contrary, alas, my sins, infinite in number, accuse and torment
me, but thy merit assures me that I shall be saved; for I hold for certain,
that thou were born for me, that thou were tempted, that thou have obeyed to
God thy Father, that thou have taught and brought Life Everlasting for me;
seeing thou have given thy self to me with all these good things, let not such
a gift be unprofitable; let thy blood wipe out the filth of my faults, thy
Justice cover my Iniquities, thy Merits make me to find Grace before the
heavenly Throne. If my Evils do increase, augment thy Grace in me; so that
Faith, Hope, and Charity may not dye, but rather wax strong in me: that the
apprehension of Death do not daunt me, but that even after this body shall be
as it were dead, cause that the Eyes of my Soul may lift themselves up to
Heaven, that the Heart may then cry fervently unto thee, Lord I commend my Soul
into thy Hands, fulfill thy work, for thou have bought me, I am thine by the
Gift of thy Father, to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost be Everlasting Glory,
Amen.

The Humble Suit of a Sinner for the Pardon of his Sins.
O Most just and dreadful God, equitable in all thy Judgments, who suffer no
Sin to pass unpunished either in this Life, or in the Life to come. Let me have
with Job this Consolation, That afflicting me, thou would not spare me here,
to punish me hereafter. Here rather burn, here cut, that hereafter thou may
spare me. That Union, O God, which thou did put at my Creation betwixt my
Soul and my Body, I have not employed for to serve thee, therefore I will that
henceforth it be dissolved. For too great affection I had to Riches, and for my
ill employing of them, I will deny my self of all things under the Sun, and
will have no more but a Sheet, Coffin, and an hole to lie in, and wait for thy
Coming. For the too great love I carried to my Husband, Wife, Children,
Parents, Friends, Companions, Conversation and Company, I will now willingly
abandon them all, and their Embracements and kindly Usage. I will also have an
end put to all my Senses, that henceforth I neither See, Hear, Touch, Taste nor
Smell any thing, for not having ruled them, nor shut them up by mortification
when the Devil was seeking entry into my Soul. From henceforth, Lord, I will
put silence to this wicked Tongue of mine, which has been so great an
Instrument of Impiety, swearing, lying, cursing, defaming, backbiting,
detracting, and breaking forth so often in impure, dishonest and injurious
Speeches, against thee and my Neighbor.

For the too great mind I had to run, go, and walk in the ways of the wicked;
For the too frequent, impure postures, gestures, and motions of my Body, I will
lie dead in the Grave, and desire that henceforth none do so much as name me,
or speak a word of me, by reason I was too desirous to be in every ones mouth,
and to be praised and conserved in their Memories; and because I did so much
affect Honor, Dignity, and the things of the Earth, and did so much search
after delicate fare, soft bedding, and good clothing, and did nourish and
pamper this flesh of mine with too great care; for honor, I will lie in
abjection; and for that I aspired to have others bowing their heads to me, and
to be lifted above them, I will have them to trample over me. For my love to
the Earth, I will return to it; for my Food, I will have the Worms to crawl in
and out at my Mouth; for my Bed, I will have a Grave, for my Garments, a Sheet;
and for thy dainty usage of my Body, I will henceforth turn all my Beauty into
Corruption. Receive then O just God, all these things in Punishment of my many
Offenses, for so this being thy just Will, it is also mine. Only, O god of
Justice, let my Punishment be here in this Life, that I may find thee to be a
God of Mercy in the Life to come: (for thou have declared by thy Servant David,
that thy Mercies are above all thy Works.) Grant this O Lord, for the Merits of
thy only Son, my Savior, Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.

