portrait of Johannes Scott JOHANNES SCOTT S. T. P.


Printed for S. Manship at ye Ship near ye Royal Exchange.

THE Christian Life, Wheren is showed, I. The Worth and Excellency of the Soul.
II. The Divinity and Incarnation of our Savior III. The Authority of the Holy
Scripture. IV. A Dissuasive from Apostasy.


VOL. V. and Last.

By JOHN SCOTT, D. D. late Rector of St. Giles's in the Fields.

The Second Edition.

LONDON: Printed for S. Manship and R. Wilkin, and are to be Sold by W. Davis
at the Black Bull in Cornhill, and I. Bonwick at the Hat and Star in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1700.

To the Honorable SUSANNA NOEL, ( Mother to the Right Honorable Baptist Earl
of Gainsborough,)
THis last Volume of the Works of my Dear Deceased Friend, the Reverend Dr.
Scott, is humbly and gratefully Dedicated, by,

Her Honors, Most obliged, and most Devoted Servant, Humphrey Zouch.

The CONTENTS.
Discourse I. Of the Worth and Excellency of the Soul.
THe Connection and Explication of the Text, p. 1, 2. The inestimable price and
value of the Soul of Man, in respect of its own natural Capacities, represented
under 4 Heads, viz. Its Capacity of Understanding, p. 4, 5. Of Moral
Perfection, p. 6, 7. Of Pleasure and Delight, p. 8, 9, 10. Of Immortality, p.
11, to p. 15. Of what Esteem the Soul is in the Judgment of those who know the
best worth of it, viz. the whole world of Spirits, p. 15. to p. 25. Four
Inferences from hence, p. 26. to p. 34. What is meant by losing ones Soul
explained, p. 34. The Soul liable to a sevenfold Damage in the other World, p.
35. to p. 50. Seven Causes of the Danger we are in of incurring this Damage, p.
51. to p. 69. Men may forsake Christ and thereby lose their Souls, 4 ways; By a
total Apostasy, p. 70, 71. By renouncing the profession of his Doctrine, p. 72.
By obstinate Heresy, p. 73. By a willful Course of Disobedience; of which
there are three degrees; the first proceeds from a willful ignorance of Christ's
Laws, the 2d from a willful Inconsideration of our Obligation to them, the 3d.
from an Obstinacy in Sin against Knowledge and Consideration, p. 74. to 80.
Four Reasons why our forsaking of Christ infers this fearful loss of our Souls,
p. 81. to p. 90. That God, if he be so Determined, may without any injury
either to his Justice or Goodness, detain lost Souls in the bondage of Hell for
ever, proved in 6 Propositions, p. 91. to 101. That God is actually determined
so to do, demonstrated by 3 Arguments, p. 102. to p. 108. A Comparison between
the gain of the World, and the loss of a Man's Soul, in 6 Particulars; whereby
it is shown of which side the Advantage lies, p. 109. to p. 128.

Discourse II. Of the Divinity and Incarnation of our Savior.
A General Explication of this Term, The Word, P. 130. A full account of it in
4 Propositions, showing, that it was derived from the Theology of the Jews and
Gentiles, 131. to 135. That we ought to fetch the Sense of it from that ancient
Theology, p. 136, 137. That in that Theology it signifies a vital and divine
Subsistence, p. 138, to 139. And that our Savior to whom it is applied in the
New Testament, is that vital and divine Subsistence p. 140, 141, 142. To be the
Word of God denotes 4 Things, to be generated of the Mind of the Father; To be
the perfect Image of that Mind; To be the Interpreter of the Fathers Mind; and
to be the Executor of it; and in these is founded the Reason of our Saviors
being called The Word, p. 143. to 153. What we are to understand by the Words
being made Flesh, p. 153, 154. Five Inferences from this Doctrine, p. 155, 166.
What is meant by the Word's dwelling among us, explained, p. 167. to 174. His
dwelling among us full of Grace, explained in five particulars, p. 175. to 190.
His dwelling among us full of Truth, explained in general, 191. to 198. Four
Instances of his dwelling among us full of Truth, in Contradistinction to that
obscure typical way of his Tabernacling among the Jews, p. 199. to p. 229. Four
Inferences, the first from his dwelling among us, p. 229, to 234. The 2d from
his dwelling among us full of Grace, and that, 1. in respect of his own
Personal Disposition, p. 235. to 238. 2. Of his Laws, p. 238. 239. 3. Of the
Gracious Pardon which he has procured for us, and promised to us, p. 240, 241.
4. Of the abundant assistance he is ready to vouchsafe us, p. 242, 243. And 5
Of the glorious Recompense he has promised to and prepared for us, p. 244, 245
The 3d, From his dwelling among us full of Truth, p. 246. to 249. The 4th, From
all these laid together, He dwelt among us full of Grace and Truth, p. 250, to
256. The Glory of the Word which the Apostles beheld consisted in 4 Things. 1.
A visible splendour and brightness which encompassed him at his Baptism and
Transfiguration, p. 258, 259. 2. Those great and stupendous Miracles which he
wrought, p. 260, 261, 262. 3. The surpassing Excellency and Divinity of his
Doctrine, p. 263, 264. 4. The incomparable Sanctity and Purity of his Life, p.
265, 266, 267. This Expression, The Glory as of the Only-begotten Son
explained, p. 268, 269 That the Glory of Christ in the Tabernacle of our
Natures, was such as became the Only-Begotten Son of the Father, proved in the
several particulars wherein it consists, P. 270. to 279. Four Inferences from
this fourfold glory of the Word, which the Apostles saw, p. 280. to the end.

Dis. III. Of the Authority of the Holy Scriptures.
THe fullness of the Scriptures as a Rule of Faith and Manners, proved in 3
Propositions; 1. That the Holy Spirit inspired the Writers of them with all
that is necessary to eternal Life, p. 301. 2 That they preached to the World
all those necessaries which they were taught, p. 302. 3. That all these
necessary Truths which they preached are comprehended in the Scriptures, p.
303. to p. 316. The clearness of the Scripture proved, 1 From express Testimony
of Scripture, p. 317. to p. 321. 2. From the avowed design of writing it, p.
322, 323. 3. From the frequent Commands God lays upon us to read it, p. 324,
325. 4. From the Obligation that lies upon us under pain of Damnation to
believe and receive all those necessaries to Salvation contained in it, p. 326.
Four Considerations in answer to those of the Church of Rome, who tell us, that
though all things are not revealed clearly in the Scriptures, yet we have
sufficient reason to believe them, since God has left us to the Conduct of an
infallible Church, p. 327. to the end.

Dis. IV. Of the Obligation of the People to read the Scriptures.
THat the People are obliged to search and read the Scriptures, proved 1. From
the Obligation the Jews were under to read and search the Scriptures of the Old
Test: p. 343, 344. 2. From our Savior and his Apostles approbation of this
practice of the Jews, p 345, 346. 3 From the great design and intention of
writing the Scriptures, p. 347, 348. 4. From the Directions of these Holy
Writings to the People, p. 349. to 352. 5. From the great concernment the
People have in the Matters contained in the Scripture, p. 352. to 356. 6. from
the universal Sense of the Primitive Church in this Matter, p. 355. to 359. An
Answer to that Objection of the Church of Rome, That a general Permission of
the Scriptures to the People must necessarily open a wide door to Errors and
Heresies, p. 360. to 366. Another Objection, That it will prove an unavoidable
Occasion of great Corruptions in Manners, answered, p. 367. to 371. Two
Inferences from the whole, p. 372. to the end.

Dis. V. A Dissuasive from Apostasy.
AN Explication of the Words of the Text, p. 385. to p. 388. The general
Proposition, p. 389. Six Instances of the mighty Tendencies there are in a
vicious course of Life to Error and Apostasy from true Religion. As 1. It
corrupts Men's Reason and Understanding, p. 390, 391. 2. It renders the
Principles of true Religion uneasy to their Minds, p. 392, 393, 394. 3. It
deprives Men of the greatest encouragements to constancy and steadiness in
Religion, p. 395. 4. It weakens the natural force of Men's Consciences, p. 396.
to p. 399. 5. It strengthens and enforces the Temptations to Apostasy, p. 400.
to 402. 6. It provokes God to give us up to the Power of Delusion, p. 403. to
p. 406. Two Inferences from the whole, p. 406. to the end.

OF THE Christian Life. PART. IV.
MATTHEW. xvi. 26. What is a Man profited if he shall gain the whole World and
lose his own Soul? Or what shall a Man give in Exchange for his Soul?


IN the 24th. Verse our Savior urges his Disciples to that necessary Duty of
denying themselves, that is, of surrendering up their Wills to the conduct of
his, and renouncing all their Worldly Interest when it comes in Competition
with their Duty, and of taking up their Cross, and following him; that is, of
preparing themselves to endure Persecution for his sake, and to persist
courageously in the Profession and Practice of his Religion whatsoever
Oppositions they should meet with from the World. And to press them hereunto,
he urges this Argument, Ver. 25. For whosoever will save his Life shall lose
it: and whosoever will lose his Life, shall find it. Where the Greek Word (...)
which we render Life, may perhaps be better rendered Himself, it being familiar
both with Hebrews and Syrians to call a man's Life and Soul Himself: so the
Psalmist, thou shall not leave my Soul in Hell, that is, thou shall not leave
me Perishing in my Grave, Psalm. 16.10. And Levit. 20.25. Ye shall not make your
Souls abominable, i. e. your selves; And that it should be so rendered here is
evident, because St. Luke so expounds it, What is a Man profited, if he gain
the whole World and lose himself, or be cast away? Luke 9.25, And indeed the
Soul being the Principal Part of a Man, and that which advances him into a
Species of Being above that of a mere Animal, may very well be called himself,
according to that of Hierecles, (...). Thy Soul is Thee, thy Body, thine, and
thy outward Goods thy Bodies. And if instead of Life we render (...) Himself,
the Words will be very plain and easy; for whosoever will save himself by
renouncing me and my Religion, shall lose himself for ever; and whosoever will
be content to lose himself for my sake, shall save himself for ever. And this
he farther inforces in the Text, What is a Man profited, if he shall gain the
whole World, and lose his own Soul? or what shall a Man give in exchange for
his Soul? that is, what will it avail a Man to gain the whole World, if he for
ever ruin himself by it? and when he has thus ruined himself, what would he
give, if it were in his Power, to save and recover himself again? The Words
thus explained, I shall resolve the sense of them into these five Propositions.

I. That a Man; or the Soul of a Man is a Thing of inestimable Price and Value;
for our Savior here weighs it against the whole World, that is, against all
the Pleasures, Profits, and Honors that this inferior World can afford; and
declares that in the just Balance of his Esteem it out-weighs them all. And
certainly that must needs be exceeding precious, whose Worth the whole World
cannot counter-poise.

II. That this precious Soul may be lost. This our Savior plainly supposes in
these Words, if he lose his own Soul.

III. That our renouncing of Christ and his Religion will most certainly infer
this Loss. For these Words, as I have showed you, our Savior urges as an
Argument to dissuade Men from Apostasy; but if without losing our Souls, we
might renounce him and apostatize from him, there would be no Force in all this
Argument to dissuade us from it.

IV. That when this Soul is lost, it is lost irrecoverably. What shall a Man
give in exchange for his Soul? where the Greek Word (...), which we render
Exchange, is used in the same sense with (...), which signifies a price of
Redemption, denoting that if a Man should or could give never so much to buy
his Soul from Perdition, yet no Price of Redemption will be taken for it.

V. That this irrecoverable Loss of a Soul is of such a vast Moment, that the
Gain of the whole World is not sufficient to compensate it. What is a Man
profited, that is, he is not at all profited, nay he is so far from that that
he is a vast Loser.

I. That the Soul of a Man is a Thing of an inestimable Price and Value. And
for the Proof of this Proposition, I shall endeavor these two Things.

First, To represent to you of what vast Worth it is in Respect of its own
natural Capacities.

Secondly, To show you of what vast Esteem it is in the Judgment of all those
who, as we must needs suppose, do best understand the Worth of it.

1. I shall endeavor to represent to you of what vast Worth it is in Respect
of its own natural Capacities, particularly in these four. (1.) In Respect of
its Capacity of Understanding. (2.) Of Moral Perfection. (3.) Of Pleasure and
Delight. (4.) Of Immortality.

1. The Soul of Man is of vast Worth in Respect of its Capacity of
Understanding. For certainly to understand, is the greatest and noblest
Operation that a Being is capable of; for it is this that gives Beauty and
Excellence to all our other Operations whether they be natural or moral: It Is
this that proposes the Ends, and directs the Course, and Prescribes the
Measures of all our other Actions; and tho we had never so much Force or Power,
yet unless we had Understanding to guide and manage it, it would be altogether
insignificant. For Blind Power acts at Random, and if we had the Force of a
Whirlwind, yet without a Mind to stear and manage it, it would be an equal
Chance whether we did well or ill with it. So that unless there were some
Understanding either within or without us to conduct our active Powers, and
determine them to our Good, we were as good be altogether without them; because
while they act by Chance it is at least an equal Lay whether they will injure
or advantage us. Since therefore Understanding is the Rule and Measure of all
our other Powers, it necessarily follows that it self is the greatest and
noblest of them all. What an excellent Being therefore must a Soul be, in which
this great and Sovereign Power resides? a Power, that can collect into it self
such prodigious Numbers of simple Apprehensions, and by comparing one with the
other, can connect them into true Propositions, and upon each of these can run
such long and curious Descants of Discourse, till it has drawn out all their
Consequents into a Chain of wise and coherent Notions, and sorted these into
such various Systems of useful Arts and Sciences; That can discern the
Harmonious Contextures of Truths with Truths, the secret Links and Junctures of
coherent Notions, trace up Effects to their Causes, and sift the remotest
Consequents to their natural Principles; That can cast abroad its sharp-sighted
Thoughts over the whole Extent of Beings, and, like the Sun with its
outstretched Rays, reach the remotest Objects; That can in the Twinkling of an
Eye expatiate through all the Universe, and keep Correspondence with both
Worlds; can prick out the Paths of the Heavenly Bodies, and measure the Circles
of their Motion, span the whole Surface of the Earth, and dive into its
Capacious Womb, and there discover the numerous Offsprings with which it is
continually teeming; That can sail into the World of Spirits by the
never-varying Compass of its Reason, and discover those invisible Regions of
Happiness and Misery, which are altogether out of our sight whilst we stand
upon this hither Shore; In a word, That can ascend from Cause to Cause, to God
who is the Cause of all, and with its Eagle-Eyes can gaze upon that glorious
Sun, and dive into the infinite Abyss of his divine Perfections. What an
excellent Being therefore is that Soul that is endowed with such a vast
Capacity of Understanding, and with its piercing Eye can reach such an immense
Compass of Beings, and travail through so vast an Horizon of Truth? Doubtless
if humane Souls had no other Capacity to value themselves by, but only this,
this were enough to give them Pre-eminence over all inferior Beings, and
render them the most glorious Part of all this sublunary World.

2. The Soul of Man is of vast Worth in Respect of its Capacity of Moral
Perfection. For by the Exercise of those human Virtues which are proper to it
in this state of Conjunction with the Body, it is capable of raising it self to
the Perfection of those Angelical Natures, which of all Creatures do most
nearly approach and resemble the great Creator, and Fountain of all Perfection.
For by keeping a due Restraint upon its bodily Appetites, and thereby gradually
weaning it self from the Pleasures of the Body, it may by degrees be educated
and trained up to lead the Life, and relish the Joys of naked and immortal
Spirits; it may be contempered to an incorporeal State so as to be able to
enjoy it self without eating and drinking, and live most happily upon the Fare
of Angels, upon Wisdom and Holiness, and Love and Contemplation. And then by
governing its own Will and Affections by the Laws of Reason and Religion, it
may by degrees improve it self so far in all these Moral Endowments, which are
the proper Graces of every reasonable Nature, as to be at last as perfectly
wise and reasonable in its own Choices and Refusals, in its Love and Hatred, in
its Desires and Delights, as the Angels themselves are. For though it cannot be
expected that in this imperfect state a Soul should arrive to such a Pitch as
this, yet even now it may be growing up and aspiring to it; which, if it does,
as I shall show you by and by, when this is expired, it has another Life to
live, which being antecedently prepared for by those spiritual Improvements it
has made here, will furnish it with Opportunities of improving infinitely
faster than here it did, or possibly could. For in that Life it shall not only
be freed from those many Encumbrances which do here retard it in its spiritual
Progress, nor shall it only be associated with a World of pure and blessed
Spirits, whose holy Example and wise Converse will doubtless wonderfully edify
and improve it; but be also admitted into a more intimate Acquaintance with
God, who is the Author and Pattern of all Perfection; the sight of whose
ravishing Beauty will inflame it with a most ardent Love to him, and excite it
to a most vigorous Imitation of him: All which considered, it is not to be
imagined how much the state of Heaven will immediately improve those happy
Souls that are prepared and disposed for it. But then considering that Moral
Perfection is as infinite as the Nature of God, in which there is an Infinity
of Holiness and Justice and Goodness within this boundless Subject, there will
be Room enough for Souls to make farther and farther Improvements in, even to
Eternity. And then when they shall still be growing on so fast, and yet be
still forever improving, to what a transcendent Height of Glory and Perfection
will they at last arrive? For tho no finite Soul can ever arrive to an infinite
Perfection, yet still it may be growing on to it, because there will still be
possible Degrees of it beyond its present Seize; and when it is arrived
to the farthest imaginable Degree, yet still it will be capable of farther, and
so farther and farther to all Eternity. And if so, O blessed God, of what a
Capacious Nature have thou made these Souls of ours, which tho they will
doubtless improve in Goodness as fast in the other Life as is possible for
them, with all the Advantages of a Heavenly State, yet will never attain to an
utmost Period, but still be growing perfecter and perfecter for ever?

3. The Soul of Man is of vast Worth in Respect of its immense Capacities of
Pleasure and Delight: For its Capacity of Pleasure must necessarily be as large
and extensive, as its Capacity of Understanding, and of Moral Perfection;
because the proper Pleasure of a Soul results from its own Knowledge and
Goodness, from its farther Discoveries of Truth, and farther Proficiency in
inward Rectitude and Virtue, and consequently as it Improves farther and
farther in Understanding and in Moral Perfection, it must still gather more and
more Fuel to feed and increase its own Joy and Pleasure. For the Pleasure of
every Being consists in the vigorous Exercise of its Faculties about convenient
and agreeable Objects; but the Faculties of a Soul are Understanding and Will,
to which the only agreeable Objects are Truth and Goodness; and therefore the
more Truth there is in the Mind, and the more Goodness there is in the Will,
the more vigorously will they employ and exercise themselves about them, and
consequently the more they will be pleased and ravished. Since therefore, every
new Discovery of Truth, and every new Degree of Goodness gives new Life to our
Minds and Wills, and renders both more sprightly and vigorous, it hence
necessarily follows that our Souls are capable of as much Pleasure as they are
of Truth and Goodness; and how vastly Capable they are of both these I have
already showed you. So that it is not to be imagined by us, who have here so
little Experience, what Heavens of Joy a Soul is capable of; only at present we
find by Experience that the more we improve in Knowledge and Goodness, the more
pleasant and cheerful we find and feel our selves, and that our Faculties still
grow more active and lightsom the more we disburden them of that Ignorance and
Sin that cloggs and incumbers them. And upon great Proficiencies in Knowledge
and Virtue we find a strange Alacrity within our selves; we are as it were in
Heaven upon Earth, and do feel a Paradise springing up within us, the Fragrance
of whose Joys grows many times so strong that our frail Mortality can hardly
bear them. When therefore such Souls do cast off this Mortality which now does
only fetter and entangle them, and have made their Entrance into the invisible
Regions of Blessedness, how sprightly and active, how lightsom and cheerful
will they feel themselves? For in the first Moment of their Admission, all that
Mist of erroncous Prejudice which now interrupts their Prospect of Truth, and
all those Remains of irregular Affection that check and distract them in their
Choice of Goodness, will be forever chased from their Minds and Wills by the
clear Light of the Heavenly State; and their Faculties having disburthen'd
themselves, and shaken off every Clog, with what unspeakable Vigor will they
move and act, especially in the Presence of such suitable Objects as the
Heavenly State will present before them? When infinite Truth, and infinite
Goodness shall be always present to their free Minds and undistracted Wills,
and nothing shall interpose to hinder them either in seeing the one, or in
choosing the other, here will be work enough for both to all Eternity; and both
being freed from all Encumbrance, the one will be discovering every Moment
farther and farther into that infinite Truth which it loves and admires, and
the other will be improving every Moment more and more in that infinite
Goodness which it chooses and adores. And then every new Discovery and new
Improvement will spring new Heavens of Joy in the Soul, and by reason of those
new Acquests of Truth and Goodness, which we shall every Moment make, we shall
every Moment be entertained with new Pleasures, and so before we have spent one
Joy, another will succeed, and another that, and so on forever. For when a God
of infinite Truth and Goodness becomes the Objective Happiness of a finite
Nature which cannot comprehend and enjoy him, but in an infinite Succession,
every new Delight the Enjoyment of him creates in us must necessarily raise a
new Desire, and every new Desire immediately find a new Delight, and so round
again to all Eternity. Of what a vast Capacity therefore is this Soul of ours,
in which there is room enough successively to entertain all the ravishing Joys
and Pleasures that make an Everlasting Heaven; That can drink in those deep
Rivers of Pleasure as fast as they spring up and flow from God's right hand for
evermore? What Tongue can express the innumerable Joys that such a Soul can
hold, whose Capacity is so large as Heaven, and so near to infinite as to be
able to contain all those Joys and Pleasures that infinite Truth and Goodness
can create?

4. And lastly, The Soul of Man is of vast Worth in Respect of its Capacity of
Immortality. For by its Operations it is evident that the Soul is not composed
of Corruptible matter, but is a spiritual and immaterial Substance; for if it
were Matter, it would act and move only when other Matter presses upon it, and
not be able to determine the Course of its own Motion, but would be forced to
move backwards or forwards according as it was thrust on by that outward Matter
that continually moves and presses upon it, and all its Motions would be as
necessary as that of a Stone in the Air, when it is thrust up by an impressed
Force, and pressed down again by the weight of the Air above it: Whereas in
this Soul of ours we sensibly feel and experience a natural Liberty of acting,
a Power to move it self and to determine its own Motions which way it pleases;
when it is pressed forward never so vigorously by the strong Impulses of
outward Objects, it is in its Power to go on or retreat, and to divert the
Current of its Thoughts into a quite contrary Channel to that whereinto it is
thrust and directed by all the Impressions of its Sense. For thus in the midst
of the Alarums and Shoutings of an Army, of the Noises of Drums and Trumpets
ringing in our Ears, our Soul can recollect it self, and reduce its scattered
Thoughts into profound Contemplations of a sweet and Blessed Peace; and when it
is pressed from without with never so much Importunity to this or that
particular Choice, it is in its Power to reject the Motion, and to choose the
quite contrary. By all which it is apparent that the Soul has an innate
Liberty of acting, that she is not necessitated from without by the different
Concourses and Motions of the several Particles of Matter; but that all the
Diversity of her Wills and Opinions is principally owing to her own Freedom and
Power of self-determination, and to make the least doubt of it is to question
the common Sense and Experience of Mankind. Since therefore the Soul is not
determined in its Motions by the different Pressures of material things as all
other Matter is, but has power to swim against the Torrent, and move quite
counter to all foreign Impressions, it hence necessarily follows that it is
immaterial. And indeed considering how much its Operations do exceed the utmost
Power of dull and passive Matter, I cannot but wonder that any Man should be so
forsaken of his Reason, as to rank it among material Things; for how is it
possible that a Piece of dull unactive Matter, that a little Grass or Dirt, or
Mire, after all the Refinings, Macerations, and Maturations, that can be
performed by the help of Motion should ever be able to make a thinking Being,
or grow up into the Soul of a Philosopher? That a Company of dead Atoms, which
cannot move unless they are moved, can ever be capable of framing Syllogisms in
Mood and Figure, and disputing pro and con whether they are Atoms or no? That
such inert and sluggish Bodies should by their impetuous jostling together
awaken one another out of their senseless Passiveness, and make each other hear
and feel their mutual Knockings and Jostlings, and then from this sense into
which they have thus awakened one another, and (which they are as incapable of
as a Musical Instrument is of hearing its own Sounds, or taking pleasure in the
harmonious Aires that are played upon it) should proceed and consult together
to make wise Laws, and contrive the best Models of Government; to investigate
the Natures of Things, and deduce from them the several Systems of Arts and
Sciences; in a word, how is it possible that a Company of fluid Motes and
Particles of Matter should ever be so artificially complicated and twisted one
with another, as to form an Understanding that can lift up its Eyes, and look
beyond all this sensible World into that of immaterial Beings, and conceive
abstracted Notions of things which can never be Objects to any material Senses;
such as a pure Point, Equality and Proportion; Symmetry, and Asymmetry of
Magnitudes, the Rise and Propagation of Dimensions, infinite Divisibilty, and
the like Notions that never were in Matter, nor consequently could ever be
extracted out of it: That can correct the Errors of all our material
Perceptions, and demonstrate Things to be vastly different from what they
apprehend and report them; can prove the Sun, for instance, to be one hundred
and sixty times bigger than the Earth, when to our Eye and Imagination it
appears no bigger than a Bushel; that can lodge within it self all that Mass of
sensible Things which takes up so much Room without it, and when it has piled
them up upon one another in vast and most prodigious Numbers is still as
capacious of more, as when it was altogether empty; in a word, that can grasp
the Universe with a Thought, and comprehend the whole Latitude of Heaven and
Earth within its own indivisible Center; how senseless is it to imagine that
such Noble Operations as these can be performed by a mere Complex of dead Atoms
and senseless Particles of Matter? And if they cannot, as doubtless they cannot,
then from hence it will necessarily follow that the Soul of Man is an
immaterial Thing. Furthermore we see, that tho the Soul takes in Objects of all
sizes, yet when once they are in, they are not as Bodies in a material Place in
which the Greater take up more Room than the Less: For the Thought of a Mile,
or ten thousand Miles does no more fill or stretch a Soul, than that of a Foot
or an Inch, or a Mathematical Point; and whereas all Matter has its Parts, and
those extended one without another into Length and Breadth and Thickness, and
so is measurable by Inches, Yards, or solid Measures; there is no such Thing as
measurable Extension in any thing belonging to the Soul. For in Cogitation
which is the Essence of a Soul, there is neither Length, nor Breadth, nor
Thickness, nor is it possible to have any Conceit of Foot of Thought, or a Yard
of Reason, a Pound of Wisdom, or a Quart of Virtue. And if what belongs to a
Soul be immaterial, it will necessarily follow that the Soul it self is
immaterial too, and as such capable of Immortality. For immaterial Natures
being pure and simple, having neither contrary Qualities nor divisible Parts in
them, as material Things have, can have no Principles of Alteration and
Corruption in them; and being devoid of these, they must needs be capable of
living and subsisting for ever. What Noble Beings therefore are the Souls of
Men which, together with those vast capacities of Understanding, of Moral
Perfection, of Joy and Pleasure, are naturally capable of Immortality, and
consequently of improving in Knowledge, in Goodness, and in Joy and Pleasure
unto all Eternity? And therefore certainly a Soul must needs be a most precious
thing, that can thus outlive all sublunary Beings and subsist forever in so
sublime a state of Glory and Beatitude.

Having thus shown you the invaluable Worth of the Soul in Respect of its own
natural Capacities, I proceed

2. To show you of what vast Esteem it is in the Judgment of all those, who we
must needs suppose to best understand the Worth of it; and that is the whole
World of Spirits. For to be sure Spirits must best understand the Excellency of
Spirits, because they have a clearer In-sight into each others Natures, and a
more immediate Prospect of the Virtue, Power and Excellency of each others
Faculties. For as for us, whilst we are in this imbodied state, and do
understand by corporeal Organs, we generally judge of the Worth and Excellency
of Things by the Impression they make upon our Senses, and as these are more or
less gratified and affected with them, we set a higher or lower Value upon
them. Since therefore Spirits are a sort of Beings that cannot touch or affect
our Bodily Senses, it is impossible we should be competent Judges of the true
Worth and Value of them; and therefore in this matter we ought to be guided by
the Judgment of Spirits, who must needs be supposed to have a more intimate
Acquaintance with one another Natures. And if we will be guided by these, we
shall find the whole World of Spirits, even from the highest to the lowest,
unanimously rating the Souls of Men at an inestimable Price and Value. And to
make this appear, I shall show you the vast Price there is set upon them.

1. By God the Father. 2. By God the Son. 3. By God the Holy Ghost. 4. By the
Holy Angels. 5. By the Devils.
1. Let us consider the vast Price which God the Father has set upon Souls.
For when he intended to form these Noble Beings, and transmit them into
terrestrial Bodies, that so being compounded with a sensitive Nature they might
clasp the Spiritual and Animal Worlds together; he being sensible of the vast
Hazards and infinite Snares they would be exposed too, was so deeply concerned
for their Preservation, that he thought nothing too dear to save and secure
them. And foreseeing their Fall from that terrestrial Happiness which he
originally designed them, notwithstanding the liberal Care he had taken to
preserve them in the State of Innocence, he designed to remove the Scene of
their Happiness from Earth to Heaven, being resolved, if possible, to repair
the Loss of a terrestrial with a calestial Paradise. For which end, instead of
the Covenant of Innocence the Blessings whereof by their Sin they had forever
forfeited, he introduces the Covenant of Repentance, that so by the help of
this Plank after their general Shipwreck, they might be preserved, and to safe
to the Shore of a happy Eternity. And that by this Covenant he might the more
effectually recover them, he designed to grant it to them in such a Way, and
upon such a wise and weighty Consideration, as might at once affect them with
the greatest sense of his Love and the deepest A we of his Severity; that so
whilst by the former he allured, by the later he might terrify to Repentance:
To which end he determined not to grant it to them upon any other Consideration
than that of another suffering for them, and undergoing the Punishment of
their Sin in their stead; that so whilst he showed his Love to them in
admitting another to suffer for them, he might express his Hatred to their Sin
in not Pardoning it without another suffering. And that he might manifest this
his Love to them, and this his Hatred to their Sin in the highest Degree, as he
admitted another to suffer for us, so he resolved to accept no meaner Suffering
than that of his own beloved Son. And that this his suffering might be the more
effectual, he proposed to send him down to us into this lower World clothed in
our Natures, that so he might not only the more familiarly instruct us by his
Doctrine and Example, but the more exactly personate us in undergoing the
Punishment of our Sin; and upon his undertaking to undergo it, the most
Merciful Father agreed to this Covenant of Mercy, by which he obliged himself
to receive us into his Favor upon our unfeigned Repentance, and empowered his
Son to govern us according to the Tenor of it, that is, to Crown us with the
Rewards of it if we Repented, and inflict on us the Punishments of it if we
went on in our Impenitence. And that there might be nothing wanting to render
this Government of his Son successful and us obedient to it, he also agreed
upon this his Mighty undertaking to substitute to him the Holy Ghost to be the
supreme Minister of his Government, that so by the Agency of this vicarious
Power he might bow and incline the Hearts of Men to submit unto him, and comply
with the Terms of this Merciful Covenant in which their everlasting Welfare is
so abundantly provided for.

This is the mighty Project which, for the sake of the Souls of Men, the Father
of Spirits has contrived, and upon which he has acted and proceeded even from
their first Fall to this very Moment; And by this he has most plainly
expressed the high and great Veneration that he has of them; for doubtless had
they not been exceeding precious in his Eyes, he would never have thought it
worth the while to project and act, such mighty Things to redeem and save them:
He would rather have left them to their own Fate, and not have concerned
himself about them, or not have concerned himself to that Degree as to make
them the Subjects of such a vast Design. For all wise Agents measure their
Designs by the Worth and Value of the Things they aim at, and do never lay
great Projects for the sake of little Trifles; and unless God had a mighty
Value for the Souls of Men, his making such vast Preparations to save them
would be like that foolish Emperors raising a numerous Army, only to go and
gather Cockle-shells.

2. Let us consider the vast Price which God the Son has set upon Souls; For
it is plain he valued them at that mighty Rate, as that for their sakes he
willingly undertook to execute this vast Design of his Father, and that to save
these precious Beings he thought it would be very well worth his while to come
down from Heaven and vail his Divinity in our Natures, to put on the Form of a
Servant and make himself of no Reputation; to live a Miserable Life, and die a
painful and accursed Death. And can we think he would ever have laid down so
vast a Price, as his Glory and Happiness, his Life and Blood amounts to for
Things of a mean and inconsiderable Value? Had he so low an Esteem of his
Father's Bosom, and his own Heavenly Glory as to part with them for Trifles?
Such slight Apprehensions of Shame and Sorrow, Pain and Misery, as to cast
himself into them for the sake of Beings he had little or no Esteem of? Could
any thing but what is inestimable countervail to that Glory he parted with, and
that Misery he endured? Or, can you think those Souls of little Worth which the
Son of God thought worth his dying for? No certainly, if we knew nothing of our
Souls but this, that the Son of God thought them a good Purchase at the dear
Price of his Bliss, his Glory and his Blood; yet from thence we have infinite
Reason to conclude them most precious and inestimable Beings, it being
impossible that he who does so perfectly understand the Worth and Value of
Things, should ever be so over-seen as to pay so vast a Sum for slight and
cheap Commodities.

3. Let us consider the vast Price which God the Holy Ghost has set upon
Souls; For it is for their sakes that he does so Industriously operate in the
Kingdom of our Savior, that he takes so much Pains in it, as he does and has
always done, ever since it was first erected, to drive on that blessed Design of
making the Souls of Men, the native Subjects of it happy. It is upon their
Account that he has made so many Revelations of God's Will to the World, and
confirmed them by so many Miracles, that so he might extricate those precious
Beings out of those Labyrinths of Error in which they had involved and lost
themselves, and direct them into the way to true Happiness. And it is for their
good that he still continues shedding forth his Heavenly Influences upon them,
that he still inspires them with so many good Thoughts, importunes them with
such urgent Motives, presses upon them with such earnest Struglings and
vigorous Efforts, not only of his preventing but of his assisting Grace too,
that if possible he may awaken them into a Sense of their Danger, and excite
and quicken them to pursue the Methods of their own Safety and Happiness.

So infinitely jealous is this blessed Spirit lest these precious Beings should
Miscarry, that tho one would think them sufficiently safe-guarded in their
Voyage through this dangerous Sea under the Convoy of their own Reason, yet he
dares not trust them to themselves, but bears them Company all along, and keeps
a watchful Eye over them, and when any Rock is nigh he warns them of it, and
when they are beset with evil Spirits, those mischievous Pirates that lie in
wait to Captivate and Inslave them, he presently comes into their Assistance,
and, unless they are resolved to betray themselves, always brings them off
victoriously. Nay, tho they many times not only yield to these Piratical
Spirits, but join their Forces with them to resist and beat off their merciful
Friend and Deliverer, yet he does not therefore presently abandon them, but
being infinitely concerned for their Rescue follows them even to the Mouth of
the Enemies Harbor with his blessed Motions and Importunities, and never gives
over the Pursuit of them till he has either actually recovered, or left them
past all Hopes of Redemption. And when he sees that they are utterly lost by
their own Madness and Folly, and that it is in vain to follow them any farther,
he casts a sorrowful Look upon them, and like a grieved Friend after the utmost
strugglings and extreme Efforts of his affronted Goodness, unwillingly leaves
them to their own sad Fate, and gives them up as it were with the Tears in his
Eyes. And can you think this blessed Spirit would be so industrious as he is in
his Ministry for Souls, that he would take such infinite Pains to save them, be
so extremely urgent and solicitous for their Welface, if He did not know them
to be a sort of Beings of an inestimable Worth and Value? O blessed God, what
are not our Souls worth, that are worth all the Pains thy blessed Spirit takes
to save, and make them happy! That not only thou thought worth all those
vast Thoughts and Counsels, which thou have spent upon them; that not only thy
Son thought worth all those vast Condescentions he stooped to to put those
Thoughts in Execution; but thy blessed Spirit also thinks worth all that
unwearied Pains and Endeavor, all that incessant Care and Importunity which he
employs about them to save and rescue them from Sin and Misery? Doubtless those
Beings must needs be exceeding precious, for whose Safety and Welfare all the
blessed Trinity are so unspeakably concerned.

4. Let us consider the vast Price which the Holy Angels put upon Souls: For
tho they are the Crown and Top of all the Creation of God, and do by their
essential Perfections border nearest upon him, yet such is their Opinion of the
Souls of Men that they think it no Disparagement to converse with and minister
to them; but from the beginning of the World till now have been always ready to
maintain a close Intercourse and intimate Correspondence with them; and so far
forth as they are permitted by the Laws of their invisible World they are
continually attending to stretch forth a helping Hand to them in all their
Needs and Necessities. Tho they are the most Illustrious Courtiers of Heaven,
yet they disdain not to be the Life-Guards of Souls, to pitch their Tents round
about them, as the Psalmist expresses it, Psalm. 34.8. And interpose between
them and their Danger; to prompt them to, and assist them in their Duties; to
strengthen them against, or to remove their Temptations; to comfort them in
their Sorrows, and chase away from them those malignant Spirits that are always
about them watching all Opportunities to seduce and destroy them. Hence Heb.
1.14. They are said to be ministering Spirits sent forth to minister for them,
who shall be Heirs of Salvation. And how much they are concerned for the Safety
and Welfare of these precious Beings they are charged with is evident by that
Passage, Luke 15.16. There is joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one
Sinner that repents. So Considerable are the Lives of Souls to the Angels of
God, that though they are always entertained with the most ravishing Pleasures,
yet Heaven it self cannot divert them from being over joyed at the Repentance
of a Perishing Soul, and celebrating its Recovery with a new Festival. And
whenever the happy News is brought them that such a dying Soul is revived,
they not only attend to it in the midst of all their Joys and Triumphs, but
upon the hearing of it they shout for Joy, and fill the Heavens with a new
Acclamation. And whenever such a Penitent Soul has bidden adieu to the Body,
those blessed Spirits stand ready to receive and guard it through those Legions
of malignant Spirits that do always infest these lower Tracts of Air, and to
conduct it safe to those happy Abodes where it is to lodge till the
Resurrection; for it is said of Lazarus's Soul, Luke 16.22. That it was carried
by Angels into Abraham 's Bosom. All which is a clear Demonstration of the vast
Esteem which those blessed Angels have of Souls. For can it be thought that
such noble Beings who have a God and themselves to converse with, and have so
immediate a Prospect both of his Beauty and their own to exercise their
Faculties and employ their Contemplation, would be so ready and willing as they
are to atttend upon Souls, and minister to their Safety and Happyness, if they
had not a mighty Value and Estimation of them? Surely if these immortal Spirits
within us were not unspeakably dear and precious, those Angelical Beings who
have always the most sublime and enravishing Objects before them to employ and
entertain their Faculties, would never have thought it worth the while to
stickle so zealously in their Affairs, and concern themselves so much about
them. And thus our Savior himself argues, Mat. 18.10. Take heed that ye
despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you that in Heaven their
Angels do behold the Face of my Father which is in Heaven; that is, do not
undervalue any Soul; for how mean or little soever some of them may appear to
you, they are under the Guardianship of those blessed Angels that are the
Courtiers of God, and do always attend upon his Majestic Presence.

5. And Lastly, Let us consider the vast Price which the Devils themselves do
put upon Souls; for ever since those malignant Spirits through their own Pride
and Ambition revolted from God, and conspired to make War with heaven, and
revenge their Expulsion thence, the constant Drift of all their Designs and
Actions has been to seduce and ruin them, being conscious that of all the
Beings that are within the reach of their Power, there are none so dear to God
as these, and that by seducing from him these his most precious Creatures, they
shall do him the greatest spite and most effectually revenge upon him their
own Damnation. For doubtless were there any Beings below the Moon more dear to
God than these, they would bend their Force and Malice against them, and not
make these as they do, the only Centers of their mischievous Activity. Had they
any nobler Game to fly at, their ambitious Malice would disdain to stoop to the
Quarry of Souls; but because of all others These are the noblest and best worth
the ruining, therefore do these malignant Spirits turn all their Artillery upon
them, and level all their fiery Darts against them. And how ambitious they are
of seducing our Souls, and training them on to Perdition, is evident by the
infinite Wiles, and Snares, and Stratagems they contrive against them; by their
unwearied Diligence to watch all Opportunities against them; to surprise them
where they are careless, and assault them where they are weakest, and cheat
them with disguised Suggestions; to inspect their Humors, and apply themselves
to their Interest, and nick their Tempers, with convenient Temptations. And if
after all their Labout, Craft, and Contrivance they can but seize the Game they
hunt for, the Blood of a Soul is so rich a Draught that they think it a
sufficient Recompense for all their painful and mischievous Devices; for St.
Peter tells us that they go about like roaring Lions, seeking whom they may
devour. And to be sure those malignant Spirits would never be so impertinently
mischievous, as to spend their time in catching Flies; and did they not know
our Souls to be noble Preys, they would never go so far about as they do, nor
take so much Care and Pains to Catch and Ensnare them. So that from their
unwearied Diligence to seduce and ruin us, we may most certainly conclude
either that they are very foolish Devils, or that our Souls are very precious
Beings; but howsoever, their Diligence to destroy them is a plain Argument that
they esteem them precious, it being by no means to be supposed, that such Wise
and Intelligent Beings as they are would so much concern themselves, as they do
about things which they had little, or no Esteem for.

And thus you see at what a vast Rate our Souls are valued by the whole World
of Spirits, how from the highest to the lowest, those best and wisest Judges of
the just Worth of Souls do all unanimously concur in a great and high
Estimation. So that whether we value them by their own natural Capacities, or
by the Estimation of those who are best able to judge of their Worth and
Excellency, we have abundant Reason to conclude them most precious and
inestimable Beings. And now I shall concude this Argument with some Inferences.

1. From hence I infer, by what it is that we ought to value our selves, and
estimate the Dignity of our own Natures, viz. by our rational and immortal
Souls, those excellent Beings that are so invaluable in themselves, and so
highly esteemed by the best and wisest Judges. It Is this intelligent and
immortal Nature within us, that is the Crown and Flower of our Beings; it is by
this that we are exalted above the Level of mere Animals; by this that we are
allied to Angels, and do border upon God himself: And he that values himself by
any thing but his Soul, and those things which are its proper Graces and
Ornaments, begins at the wrong End of himself, forgets his Jewels, and
estimates his Estate by his Lumber. And yet, good God, what foolish Measures do
the Geneerality of Men take of themselves? Were we not forced by too many woeful
Experiments, it would be hard to imagine that any Creature that believes a
rational and immortal Soul to be a Part of its Nature, should be so ridiculous
as to value it self, by the little trifling Advantages of a well-colored Skin,
a suit of fine Clothes, a Puff of popular Applause, or a few Baggs of white and
red Earth; and yet, God help us, these are the only things almost by which we
value and difference our selves from others. You are a much better Man than
your Neighbout; he, alas, is a poor contemptible Wretch, a little, creeping,
despicblae Thing, not worthy to be looked upon, or taken notice of by such a
one as you. Why in the Name of God, what is the Matter? Where is this mighty
Difference between you and him? Has not he a Soul as well as you? a Soul that
is capable to live as long, and to be as happy as yours? Yes, yes, it is true
indeed; but notwithstanding, God be thanked, you are another-guess Man than he;
for you have a much handsomer Body, your Apparel is much more fine and
fashionable, you live in a more splendid Equipage, and have a larger Purse to
maintain it, and your Name forsooth, is more in Vogue, and makes a far greater
Noise in the World. And is this all the Difference between your mighty selves
and your pitiful Neighbors? Alas poor Men! A few Days more will put an End to
this, and when your rich Attires are reduced to a Winding Sheet, and all your
vast Possessions to six Foot of Earth, what will become of all those little
Trifles by which you value your selves? Where will be the Beauty or Wealth, the
Port or Garb, which you are now so proud of? Alas! Now that lovely Body looks
as pale and ghastly, that losty Soul is left as bare, as poor and naked as your
despised Neighbors. Should you now meet his wandering Ghost in the wide World
of Spirits, what would you have to boast of more than he, now your Beauty is
withered, your Wealth vanished, and all your outward Pomp and Splendour shrouded
in the Horrors of a silent Grave? Now you will have nothing distinguish you
from the most Contemptible, unless you have wiser and better Souls, and by so
much as you were more respected for your Beauty and Wealth, your Garb and
Equipage in this World, by so much will you be more despised for your Pride and
Insolence, your Covetousness and Sensuality in the other. Let us therefore learn
to value our selves by that which will abide by us, by our immortal Souls and
by those heavenly Graces which do adorn and accomplish them; by our Humility
and Devotion, by our Charity and Meekness, by our Temperance and Justice; all
which are such Preheminences, as will survive our Funerals, and distinguish us
from base and abject Souls for ever. But for a rational and immortal Creature
to prize it self by any such temporary Advantages is altogether as vain and
ridiculous, as it was for the Emperor Nero to value himself for being an
excellent Fiddler.

2ly. From hence also I infer how much we are obliged to live up to the Dignity
of our Natures. Should a stranger to Mankind be admitted into this busy Stage
of humane Affairs, to survey our Actions, and the paultry Designs we drive at,
certainly he would hardly imagine that we believed out selves, to be such a
noble sort and strain of Beings as we are. If you saw a Man seriously employing
himself in some sordid and beggarly Drudgery, could you imagine that he
believed himself to be the Son of a King, and the Heir of a Crown? And when it
is so apparent that the main of our Design is to prog for our Flesh, and make a
comfortable Provision for a few Years Ease and Luxury, who would think that we
believed our selves to be immortal Spirits that must live for ever in an
inconceivable Happiness or Misery? When we consider the high Rank which we hold
in the Creation, the vast Capacities which there are in our Natures, and the
noble Ends which we were made and designed for, are we not ashamed to think how
poorly we prostitute our selves, and vilify our own Faculties by the sordid
Drudgeries wherein we exercise and imploy'em? When we think what a Reputation
we have throughout all the World of Spirits, what a vast Rate we are valued at
by God, and Angels, and Devils, are we not confounded to think how we
under-value our selves by those low and inglorious Ends, which we pursue and
aim at? O good God, that thou should give me a Soul of an immortal Nature, a
Soul that is big enough for all the Joys which thy everlasting Heaven is
composed of, and I be such a Wretch to my self, such a Traitor to the Dignity
of my own Nature, as to give up my self and all my Faculties to the Pursuit of
such vain and wretched Trifles? That I who am akin to Angels, should make my
self a Muck-worm, and choose Nebuchadnezzar's fate to leave Crowns and Scepters,
and live among the salvage Herds of the Wilderness? That having such a great
and noble Nature, I should content my self to live like a Beast, and aim no
higher than if I had been born only to eat, and drink, and sleep, and wake for
thirty or forty Years together, and then retire into a silent Grave, and be
insensible for ever? Wherefore in the Name of God, let us at last remember what
we are, and what we are born to. Let us consider, that we have Faculties that
are capable of exerting themselves for ever in the most inravishing
Contemplation, and Love of the eternal Fountain of Truth and Goodness; of
Copying and Transcribing his most adorable Perfections, his Wisdom, Goodness,
Purity, and Justice, from whence the infinite Happiness of his Nature derives;
and thereby of glorifying us into living Images of God, and rendering us like
him both in Beauty and Happiness; in a word, that we have Faculties to converse
with Angels and with blessed Spirits, to bear a part in the eternal Confort of
their Joys and Praises, and to relish all those unknown Delights of which their
everlasting Heaven does consist. And having such great and noble Powers in us,
is it not a burning shame that they should be always condemned to an endless
Pursuit of Shadows and Impertinencies? Let us therefore rouse up our selves,
and shake off this sordid and degenerate Temper that sinks and depresses us,
and makes us act so infinitely unbecoming the Dignity of our immortal Natures.
And since we are descended from and designed for the Heavenly Family, let us
learn to demean our selves upon Earth, as becomes the Natives of Heaven. Let us
disdain all base and sordid, all low and unworthy Ends of Action, as Things
beneath our illustrious Rank and Station in the World of Beings, and live in a
continual Tendency toward, and Preparation for that Heavenly State which is
the proper Orb and Sphere of our Natures.

3ly. From hence also I infer how much they undervalue themselves, that sell
their Souls for the Trifles of this World. For since we know beforehand that
the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all Unrighteousness and
Ungodliness of Men, and he has plainly assured us that our Souls must smart
for ever for our Sins, it necessarily follows, that whenever we knowingly
suffer our selves to be enticed into Sin, we make a wilful Forfeiture of our
Souls. He that knows that such a Draught, however sweetened and made palatable,
is yet compounded with the Juice of deadly Nightshade, and notwithstanding that
will have the poisonous Draught, is wilfully bent to Murder and Destroy
himself. And when we see that the Pleasure of our Sin draws after it the Ruin
of our Souls, and yet will Sin notwithstanding, we do in effect stake our Souls
against it, and with our Eyes open, make this desperate Bargain, that upon
Condition we may enjoy such a sinful Pleasure, we will willingly surrender up
our immortal Spirits to the Pains of an endless and intolerable Damnation. And
if so, O blessed God, how do the Generality of Men depreciate and undervalue
themselves? For how often do we see Men in their little Frauds and Cozenages,
sell their Souls for a Penny gain; in their lascivious and intemperate Humors,
barter their Souls for a Moments Mirth or Pleasure; in their ambitious Projects
and Designs, part with their Souls for a Blast of vulgar Breath and popular
Noise. For in every Temptation to Sin the Dewil cheapens our immortal Souls,
bids so much Pleasure, or so much Profit for them; and in every Compliance with
the Temptation we take his Offer, and strike the fatal Bargain; So that if we
will Sin, we had need Sin for something since we must pay so dearly for it. But
alas! there is no Proffer the Devil can make us, that is a tolerable Price for
the Blood of our Souls; though he should offer us the whole World for it, our
Savior assures us that he would bid us infinitely to our Loss; and if so, what
wretehed Sales do we make of our Souls, when we Sin for Trifles, lie and cheat
to get a Penny, consent to a wicked Motion for a Pleasure that will wither
while we are smelling to it, and expire in the very Enjoyment? For so much we
value our Souls at, and do in effect declare, that in our Esteem these precious
Beings, which God and Angels set so high a Price on, are worth no more than
what that Profit or Pleasure, for which we Sin, amounts to. O good God! What
cheap and worthless Things then are our Souls in our Esteem, who sell and
barter them every Day for such mean and worthless Trifles? How do we part with
our Gold for Dross, and exchange our Jewels for Pebbles? What sordid Thoughts,
what wretched vile Opinions have we of our selves, that are so ready upon all
Occasions to sell our selves for naught, or which is next to naught, for the
sorry Proffers of every base and infamous Lust? O would to God we would at last
make but a just Estimate of our selves, and thereupon resolve, as it is most
reasonable we should, never to comply with any sinful Motion, till we can get
more by it than our Souls are worth, and then I am sure we should be for ever
Deaf to all the Proffers which the Devil or World can make us.

4ly. And lastly, From hence also I infer how much we are obliged above all
things to take Care of our Souls: For since they are Beings of such vast
Capacities in themselves, and of such an high Estimation in the World of
Spirits, methinks we should all be convinced that to take leave of their
Welfare, and prevent their everlasting Miscarriage, is the highest Concern and
Interest of a Man. And yet, God forgive us, if we consult the common Practice
of Mankind, we shall find that there is scarce any thing in which we have any
Interest at all, that is more slighted and disregarded by us. Our Body is the
Darling that has our Hearts, and takes up all our Care and Thoughts; and to
entertain its Appetite, and accommodate it with Pleasures and Conveniences,
there is no Expense either of Labor or Time grudged, or thought much of; but
as for the Soul, that precious and immortal Thing which will be living and
perceiving unspeakable Pleasures or Pains when this Body is dead and
insensible, that is overlooked as a Thing not worthy our serious Notice or
Regard. And though we cannot but be sensible how much it is diseased in all its
Faculties, how much its Understanding is overloaded with Error and Ignorance,
its Will festered with unreasonable Malice and Obstinacy, and its Conscience
oppressed with Loads of Guilt sufficient to sink it to the nethermost Hell; yet
we seem for the Generality to be no more concerned at it; than if its Ruin or
Recovery were equally indifferent to us. We can set it perishing before our
Eyes, without any Remorse or Compassion; we can pass Day after Day wihtout
making the least Offer or Attempt to recover it, without offering up a Prayer
for it, or entertaining a serious Thought what will become of it for ever. O
insensible Creatures that we are, thus to neglect and abandon the most precious
Part of our selves! The Part that makes us Men, and by which alone we are
capable of being happy or miserable for ever. Let me therefore beseech and
conjure you, even by all that is sacred and serious, by every thing that is
dear and precious to you, by your best Hopes, and the most important Concern of
your everlasting Fate, to take pity upon your perishing Souls, to consider the
amazing Dangers whereunto you have exposed them, and to consult the Means of
their Recovery; to prick and affect your Hearts with the Sense and
Consideration of their impending Ruin, till you have forced them to cry out
what shall we do to be saved; to bath their Wounds with the Tears of
Repentance, and to pour into them that most sovereign Balm of a serious Purpose
and Resolution of Amendment; to pray earnestly for them, and keep a continual
Guard about them, and to strive vigorously with those sinful Inclinations that
threaten to sink and ruin them. And if we will be but content to undergo these
necessary Cares and Pains to secure them, we shall be sure when they leave
these Bodies to reap the Fruits of all in the Possession of an unspeakably
happy and glorious Eternity.

II. I proceed now to the Second Proposition contained in these Words, that our
precious Souls may be lost. And this our Savior here plainly supposes, If he
gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul. The Greek Word is (...), which
properly signifies to receive a Mulct, or to suffer Damage; and therefore it is
here opposed to (...), if he shall gain, So that the Word does not denote the
absolute Loss or Extinction of the Soul, but its undergoing some dreadful
Mulct, or suffering some irreparable Damage. For as Hierocles has observed
(...). Immortal Substances cannot so die as to lose their Being, but so, as to
lose their Well-being they may. And accordingly our Savior himself calls the
Punishment of the Wicked in Hell Fire, destroying them, Mat. x. 28. Fear not
them which kill the Body -- but fear him which is able destroy both Soul and
Body in Hell. Where by destroying, he does not mean putting a final End to
their Being, but putting them into an irrecoverable State of Ill-being; for in
this State of Destruction, they still continue to act, to weep and wail, and
gnash their Teeth, as Christ elsewhere tells us, Mat. xiii. 42. which Actions
plainly suppose their Continuance in Being, though in a most wretched and
deplorable Ill-being. So that by the Loss of the Soul here is not meant the
Destruction of its Being, but its being exposed to an irreparable Damage in the
other World. And to prove that in this Sense a Soul may be lost, I shall
endeavor these two Things.

First, To show you what Damages the Soul is liable to in the other World.
Secondly, Upon what Accounts it is liable to, and in Danger of them.
I. What Damages the Soul is liable to in the other World. To which I answer,
that there is a sevenfold Damage whereunto the Soul of Man may be exposed
hereafter.

1st. It is liable to be deprived of the highest Happiness it is capable of.
2ly. It is liable to the most dreadful Punishment and Correction of the Father
of Spirits. 3ly. It is liable to the Fury and Violence of Devils, and other
malignant Spirits. 4. It is liable to be confined to the most dismal and
uncomfortable Abodes. 5ly. It is liable to the perpetual Vexations of its own
cross, wild, and furious Passions. 6ly. It is liable to the intolerable Anguish
of its own guilty Conscience. 7ly. It is liable to endure all these dismal
Things for ever.
1st. The Soul of Man is liable to be deprived of the highest Happiness it is
capable of. The highest Happiness that a Soul is capable of is to enjoy God,
that is, to know, and love, and resemble him; and to be admitted into the noble
Society of those pure, and blessed Spirits that do thus enjoy him; of all which
Happiness a Soul may be for ever deprived by its own vicious and depraved
Temper. For besides that by such a Temper it may provoke the just and holy God,
who has the Disposal of the fate of Souls, to deprive it of, and banish it
from this Happiness for ever; it may thereby also utterly incapacitate it self
from ever enjoying it; it may promote and raise that Temper to such a Degree of
Averfation and Antipathy to God, and canker it into such an inveterate Enmity
to all the Perfections of his Nature, as that at last it may be utterly
incapable of any such beatifical Knowledge of them, as can any ways incline it
to love and imitate him: For the Apostle tells us, that the carnal Mind is
empty to God, Romans viii. 7. From whence it is evident, that in every Degree of
Sin, there is a Degree of Aversation to God, which Aversation may be improved
into such an implacable Malice against him, as that our Knowledge of him,
instead of endearing him to us, or engaging us to imitate him, may only avert
us from, provoke, and irritate us against him, and by presenting to us those
immense Perfections, for which he deserves our dearest Love, and deepest
Adoration, may only fill our Minds with the greater Rage and more invincible
Horror. And when the Soul is arrived to such a Degree of Malignity against God,
it is as impossible for it to enjoy him, as to be recreated with Torment, or
delighted with the Objects of its own Antipathies. And for the same Reason also
it must be incapable of enjoying the Society of blessed Spirits, because it
has acquired a Temper that is infinitely repugnant to their Heavenly Genius;
so that if such a prejudiced Soul should, when it is arrived into Eternity,
find the Gates of Heaven open to receive it, it would doubtless be so offended
at every thing that is Heavenly, so startled at the Sight of God, and the
Displays of his hated Perfections, and seized with such a Horror against those
god-like Beings that dwell there, and are perpetually contemplating and
adoring, loving and imitating him, that it would fly away of its own Accord
from that blissful Habitation, as Bats and Owls do from the Light of the Day,
and rather choose to banish it self into eternal Darkness and Despair, than be
shut up for ever in a Heaven so infinitely repugnant to its Nature. And
certainly to be thus excommunicated from the supreme Happiness of our Natures,
and be forced to live in everlasting Exile from God and blessed Spirits, and
wander about like wretched Vagabonds that are chased and driven from all Hopes
of Contentment, will be unspeakable Damage to our Souls.

2ly. The Soul of Man is liable to the most dreadful Punishment and Correction
of the Father of Spirits. There is no Doubt but spiritual Agents can strike as
immediately upon Spirits, as bodily Agents can upon Bodies; and though we who
are Spectators only of corporeal Action cannot discern the Manner how one
Spirit acts upon another, net there is no Reason to Doubt of the thing; and if
there be such a mutual Communication of Action between them, there is no Doubt
but they can mutually make each other feel each others Pleasures and
Displeasures; and if so, then it is only to suppose that the less powerful
Spirits are subject to the violent Impression of the more powerful ones, and
consequently that all finite Spirits are liable to the Lash of an infinite one;
for why should it be more difficult for the Father of our Spirits to correct
our Spirits, than it is for the Parents of our Flesh to correct our Flesh? For
though our Souls are no more impressible with material Stripes than Sunbeams
are with the blows of a Hammer, yet are they liable to horrid and dismal
Thoughts, and to be as much pained and aggrieved by them, as our Bodies are by
the most exquisite Torments. So that if God be displeased with us, he can
imprint his Wrath upon our Minds in black and ghastly Thoughts, and cause it
perpetually to drop like burning Sulphur upon our Souls. He cannot only abandon
us to the furious Reflections of our own natural Consciences, which, as I shall
show you by and by, will be hereafter extremely painful and vexatious, but he
can also infuse supernatural Horrors into us, and pour in such Swarms of
terrible Thoughts upon us as will give us no Rest, but sting us perpetually Day
and Night with inexpressible Anguish. And of this you have a woeful Example in
that miserable Wretch Francis Spira, who, upon that fearful Breach he made in
his Conscience by a cowardly Renouncing of his Religion, was without any
Symptoms of a bodily Melancholy immediately seized with such an inexpressible
Agony of Mind as amazed his Physicians, astonished his Friends, and struck
Terror into all that conversed with him. For he was so near to the Condition of
a damned Ghost, that he verily believed Hell it self was more tolerable than
those invisible Lashes that were continually laid upon his Soul; and therefore
wished he were in Hell, and would gladly have dispatched himself thither in
hope to find Sanctuary there from those vengeful Thoughts which continually
preyed upon his Soul. And if in this World our Soul is so liable to the Rod of
the Father of Spirits, we may be sure it will be so in the other too, where
God, if he pleases can render it an eternal Hell to it self by pouring
continually into it fresh Floods of horrible Thoughts, which being thrust on by
an Almighty Power, and perpetually urged and repeated on the Mind, must
necessarily create in it not only exquisite, but uninterrupted Torment. And it
being in his Power thus to lash our Souls, to be sure when once he is
implacably incensed against them, (as he will be hereafter, if we do not
appease him) he will let loose his Power upon them, and make them feel his
wrathful Resentments in those dire and frightful Thoughts with which he will
Sting and Scourge them for ever. And if the Soul carry into Eternity with it
those provoking Lusts which do here incense God's Displeasure against it, it
will there have no Shelter from the Storm of his Vengeance, which like a Shower
of Fire and Brimstone, will be continually pouring down upon it. For while it
continues in this Shop of Vanities, it has a great Variety of Objects to
divert those dismal Thoughts which God many times infuses into it; but in the
other World all these diverting Objects will be removed, and then every dismal
Thought which God lets loose will seize and fasten upon it, and like
Prometheus's Vultures, prey on its wretched Heart for ever.

3ly. The Soul of Man is liable to the Fury and Violence of Devils, and other
malignant Spirits. For when ever the Souls of Men do leave their Bodies, they
doubtless flock with the Birds of their own Feather, and consort themselves
with such separate Spirits as are of their own Genius and Temper; for besides
that Likeness does naturally congregate Beings, and cause them to associate
with their own Kind, good and bad Spirits are by the eternal Laws of the other
World distributed in two separate Nations, and there live apart from one
another, having no other Communication or Intercourse but what is between two
hostile Countries that are continually designing and attempting one against
another. So that when wicked Souls do leave this terrestrial Abode, and pass
into Eternity, they are presently incorporated by the Laws of that invisible
World into the Nation of wicked Spirits, and confined for ever to their most
wretched Society and Converse; and then how miserable must their Condition be,
who are damned to such a hellish Neighborhood, and are allowed no other
Company but Devils and devilish Spirits? For since, as I have already showed
you, Spirits can as well act upon one another as Bodies, what can be expected
when such malignant Spirits meet, but that they should be continually snarling
among themselves, and baiting and worrying one another? When Wrath and Envy,
Malice and Ill Nature are the common Genius that inspires and acts the whole
Society, what can their Conversation be, but a continual Intercourse of mutual
Mischiefs and Vexations; especially considering how they have here laid the
Foundations of an eternal Quarrel against one another? For there the Companions
in Sin will meet, who by their ill Counsels, wicked Insinuations, and bad
Examples did mutually contribute to each others Ruin; and when these shall meet
in that woeful State, how will the tormenting Sense of those irreparable
Injuries they have done each other incite them to exercise their hellish Fury
upon, and play the Devils with one another? And when a Company of waspish
Spirits so implacably incensed against one another shall meet, and like so many
Scorpions, Snakes, and Adders be shut up together in the infernal Dens, how is
it possible they should forbear hissing at, and stinging, and spitting Venom in
one another Faces. But then besides the mutual Plagues which those incensed
and furious Spirits must needs be supposed to inflict upon one another, they
will be also nakedly exposed to the powerful Malice of the Devils, those fierce
Executioners of Gods righteous Vengeance, who, as we now find by Experience
have Power to suggest black and horrid Thoughts, and to torture our our Souls
with such dreadful Imaginations, as are far more sharp and exquisite than any
bodily Torment. And if now they have such Power over us when God thinks fit to
let them loose, what will they have hereafter, when these our wretched Spirits
shall be wholly abandoned to their Mercy, and they shall have a free Scope to
exercise their Fury upon us, and glut their hungry Malice with our Vexations
and Torments? It seems at least a mighty probable Notion that that horrid Agony
of our Savior in the Garden which caused him to shriek and groan, and sweat as
it were great Drops of Blood, was only the Effect of those preternatural
Terrors which the Devils, with whom he was then in Combat, impressed upon his
innocent Mind. And if they had so much Power over his pure and mighty Soul that
was so strongly guarded with the most perfect and unspotted Virtues, what will
they have over ours when God has abandoned us to them, and throws us as Preys
into their Mouths? with what an hellish Rage will they fly upon our guilty and
timorous Souls, in which there is so much Tinder for their injected Sparks of
Horror to take Fire on? When therefore our guilty Spirits shall not only be
liable to the Scourge of God, but Devils and damned Ghosts too shall have their
full Swing at them, doubtless the Hell within them will be far more
intolerable than any Hell of Fire and Brimstone without them.

4ly. The Soul of Man is also liable to be confined to the most dismal and
uncomfortable Abodes. What or where the Abode of wicked Spirits is till the
Morn of the Resurrection, is no where expressly determined in the Holy
Scripture; but since, wheresoever they are, they are doubtless under the Power
and Dominion of the Devil, who, as the Scripture assures us, is Prince of the
Power of the Air; it is highly probable that their present Residence is in
these lower Regions of the World; that either being chased by those infernal
Powers under whose Tyranny they are, they are continually hurrying about in
these inferior Tracts of Air, or, which perhaps is more probable, that they
are imprisoned by those invisible Ministers of the divine Justice within the
dark Abysses and underground Vaults of the Earth, and not permitted, but upon
special Occasions, to come abroad into this upper Region of Light and Liberty.
But wheresoever they are, it is doubtless in some such horrid and dismal
Prison, as is fit only to receive such vile and desperate Malefactors, and
secure them till the great Assizes, when they shall be brought forth to receive
their Trial and final Judgment: And then being united to their Bodies, and
thereby made liable to corporeal Torments, the Scripture expressly affirms that
they shall be shut up in everlasting Flames, and be tormented for ever in a
Lake of Fire and Brimstone; for then the Lord himself shall come in Flames of
Fire to render Vengance to all those that obeyed not his Gospel; and having
with those raging Flames set every Part of this lower World on Fire, he will
re-ascend with all his Train to the celestial Mansions, and leave the Wicked
weltring for ever in this burning Vault below; for it is plain, that the
everlasting Fire to which he will then Sentence them is the Conflagration of
the World, which, after the Just are raised, and caught up in the Clouds above
the Reach of its aspiring Flames, shall break forth on every side, and turn all
this Atmosphere into a Furnace of inquenchable Fire, and therein shall those
wicked Miscreants that would not be reclaimed, be condemned to live for ever.
For the Judgment being ended, the Judge and all his Retinue shall return, and
leave them in the midst of a burning World surrounded with Smoke and Fire,
Darkness and Confusion, and wrapped in fierce and merciless Flames, which shall
stick close to and pierce through and through their Bodies, and for ever prey
upon, but never consume them. And what an intolerable Mulct this is, I leave
every Man's natural Sense to judge.

5ly. The Soul of Man is also liable to the perpetual Vexations of its own
cross, wild, and furious Passions. We have sufficient Experience in this Life
how vexatious our cross and excessive Passions are; for when our Passions are
divided, and contrary Objects have raised contrary Desires and Appetites in us,
how do they rend and distract our Souls, and cause perpetual Mutinies and
Tumults within us? But by Reason of those many sensual Gratifications with
which we now make a shift to stop the Mouths of those Daughters of the
Horse-Leech, when they cry out give, give; we cannot be so sensible of the
Trouble and Vexation of them; unless we now subdue and mortify them, we we
shall be forced to carry them into Eternity along with us. For by being
separated from their Bodies the Souls of Men are never separated from their
prevailing Tempers, but in their separated State are for the main of the same
Disposition as they were here: and do retain the same Passions and Appetites.
It Is true, they cannot be supposed to retain their bodily Appetites after they
have thrown off their Bodies, but when they have wholly accustomed themselves
in this Life to fleshly Pleasures, and have never Experienced spiritual ones,
it is impossible but that in the other they should be tormented with an
outrageous Desire of being imbodied again; that so being incapable of relishing
any other, they may repeat those fleshly Pleasures which heretofore they were
accustomed to, and act over the brutish Scene anew. And this vehement
Hankering of these earnalized Souls to return into their Bodily State, is
perhaps the only Sensuality that a separate Soul is capable of; but it is such
a Sensuality as must necessarily render such Souls extremely miserable; for in
that State it will be like the Hunger of a Starving Man that is Immured between
two dead Walls, that is, it will be a fierce Desire without Hope of
Satisfaction, a corroding Hunger, sharpened with Despair of Food, than which
there is nothing more intolerably grievous and tormenting. For how will it vex
the wretched Spirit to look back from the Shores of Eternity into this
corporeal World, and to ruminate thus with it self; O miserable Creature that I
am! here am I cast away for ever upon a strange and desolate Shore, where I
must Famish for want of Food, pine away a long Eternity, and wander to and fro
for ever tormented with restless Rage and hungry unsatisfied Desires; where is
not one Pleasure that I can relish, not an Object that I can taste any
sweetness in. We is me! yonder are all my Joys and Comforts, all that is dear
and precious to me. O that I might go back again, and be once more restored to
the Enjoyment of them! but alas! between me and them there runs an impassible
Gulf, that deprives me of all hope of returning! For thus will the unhappy
Soul torment it self with an outrageous Longing for that which it can never
hope to enjoy. But then besides this Appetite of Sensuality which it will there
be vexed with, it will also carry along with it all that Envy and Malice, that
Wrath and Impatience, Pride and Insolence which it here contracted; which Black
and Hellish Passions will prove perpetual Furies in its Bosom; For in that
wretched State it will not only have Objects always present. to excite them,
but such Objects too as will excite them all at once to the most outrageous
Excesses. For when all at once it shall see others advanced to the greatest
Heights of Glory and Happiness, and it self not only rejected but abandoned to
endless Misery, the Sense of this must necessarily irritate all its devilish
Passions to the highest Extremities, and cause its Pride to swell, its Envy to
burst, and its Wrath to boil into a Diabolical Fury; and what a continual Hell
must this create in the Soul, to be perpetually worried with so many black and
rabid Passions, to have all its inferior Parts and Affections, like those of
the Monster Scylla whom the Poets talk of, as so many Dogs continually barking
and snarling at one another, and yet remain unseparable, as being Comparts of
the same Substance?

6ly. The Soul of Man is also liable to the intolerable Anguish of its own
guilty Conscience. The Spirit of a Man, says Solomon, can bear his Infirmities,
but a wounded Spirit who can bear? Intimating that of all the Passions which
humane Nature is liable to, there are none so grievous as that of a Mind
awakened with a sense of Guilt. And of the Truth of this we have some
Experience even in this Life, tho now we can make a shift either to divert our
selves by our sensual Mirth and Jollities, from listening to the Clamours of
our guilty Minds, or else to deceive our selves into a groundless Peace by
indulgent and fallacious Principles; but unless we expiate our Guilts here, we
shall carry them into Eternity with us, where all those sensual Pleasures, with
which we now divert our selves from reflecting on our Actions, will be removed,
and all those fallacious Principles, with which we cheat and deceive our
selves, will be baffled by a woeful Experience. So that then our Soul will be
nakedly exposed to the Lash of its own furious Thoughts, and having nothing to
guard or defend it self against the cutting Reflections of a guilty Conscience,
which being roused up and kept awake by the unintermitting sense of our Misery
will be always clamouring upon us, and continually torturing our wretched Minds
with sharp and vexatious Reflections: and besides, whilst our Soul does act by
bodily Instruments, and work in this Mire of Flesh, it is impossible it should
be so nimble and expedite in its Motions, as it will be when it is a naked
Spirit. For then its Perceptions will be much clearer, its Convictions more
strong and evident, and all its Reflections active as the Lightning, and quick
as the Wing of an Angel. So that whereas now the sharpest Stings of our
Conscience have an Intermixture of Fancy and Imagination in them, being gross
and material Powers do dull and rebate the Edge of them, and render them less
pungent and sensible; when we are stripped out of our Flesh, and sent naked
into the other World, we shall have no Clog about us to break or allay those
sharp Reflections with which we shall be forced to lash our selves for ever.
And then our Conscience will cut to the quick, and sting with a corroding
Venom; then will the Remembrance of those Guilts which brought our Miseries
upon us, rouse up such a Swarm of Horrors in our Minds, as we shall be able
neither to avoid nor endure. For the Sense of our Misery will be every Moment
suggesting those Guilts to our Minds that were the Cause of it, and continually
upbraiding us with those desperate Follies by which we ran our selves into it;
the Consideration of which will cause us to hate and curse our selves for ever,
and to discharge our Fury upon our own Heads, which will make our Soul turn
Devil to it self, and force it to be its own Executioner. For it being now
conscious to it self that its Miseries are nothing else but the rueful and
pitiless Deserts of its own Folly and Madness, it will be continually
meditating horrible Reflections and singing Satyrs on it self. So that while it
is wandering among wretched Ghosts through the dismal Shades below, it will
never cease lashing it self with its own sharp and stinging Thoughts, till it
has chafed it self into a Fury, and boiled up its self-condemning Rage into
everlasting Madness.

7ly. And lastly, The Soul of Man is also liable to endure all these dismal
things for ever: For that our Souls are naturally immaterial and immortal, I
have already proved; so that if God in his infinite Justice shall think fit to
sentence wicked Souls irrecoverably to all these above named Miseries, they
must by the Constitution of their own Natures live in, and undergo them for
ever. And that he does think to pronounce and execute such a Sentence upon
them, he himself has assured us; for so in Scripture he has plainly declared,
that their Punishment shall be everlasting, Mat. 25.7. These, says he speaking
of the Wicked, shall go away into everlasting Punishment: and accordingly the
Fire in, and with which they are to be punished, is called everlasting fire,
Mat. 25.41. and that that they shall subsist for ever in this Fire, and be
coeternal with it, is evident by those Passions and Actions that are
attributed to them in it; for Rev. 14.11. they are said to have no rest day nor
night in it, but to be in a continual unintermitting Fever, that will necessary
burn and scorch them, and not allow them the least Intervals of Ease or
Comfort. And in Mat. 13.42. the bitter Anguish which they shall endure in this
Fire is described by their weeping, and wailing, and gnashing their Teeth;
which Actions are plain Indications not only of their subsisting in this
everlasting Fire, but of the extreme Horror and Anguish that they shall therein
endure. And indeed when God sentences any immortal Being to Misery, its Misery
must be supposed to continue as long as it lives, and consequently to continue
for ever, since it is to subsist and live for ever. And what a fearful
Accession is this to all those above named Miseries? If we were to endure the
softest and most gentle Pain without any Interval for thirty, forty, or a
hundred Years, the Prospect of that which is to come would render that which is
present so intolerable, that we should quickly grow weary of our Lives, and
wish our selves in our Graves. Lord! what shall we then do when we come to
languish out a long Eternity in the tormenting Agonies of damned Ghosts? How
will it imbitter every present Torment to us, to think of that never-ending
Duration of Torment to come, that after we have consumed Millions of Millions
of Ages on the Rack, we have still an eternal Hell behind, and are as far
distant from the End of our Misery, as we were when it first began? O! now if
we could die and be insensible for ever! what welcome Tidings would it be? how
gladly should we receive that fatal Blow that could put an End to a woeful
Eternity? But now it will be in vain for us to cry, O Death, Death, have mercy
upon us, and dispatch us quickly into an eternal Grave! For Death is deaf and
cannot hear, every Moment it stabs and wounds, but woe is me! it cannot kill;
it strikes and strikes but cannot strike home, and so is forced to continue as
struggling under the Pangs of an immortal Death. If there were any Prospect of
an End of our Misery, though it were after a Million of Ages, this would give
some Ease to the languishing Sufferer; But never, never -- O how that fatal
Word stabs the wretched Soul, and rankles its Anguish into eternal Desparation!
For to be in extreme Misery, and see no End of it, is the Perfection of Hell,
and the utmost Possibility of Damnation.

And thus have I endeavored to represent unto you the fearful Mulcts our Souls
are liable to in the other World; which are such as, one would think, were
sufficient to awaken the most stupid and insensible Creature.

II. I now pass on to the second thing proposed, which was to show you upon
what Accounts it is that our Souls are liable to these dreadful Things; or what
it is that exposes us to the Danger of them. In general, it is our own Sin and
Wickedness, which does not only incense the holy God against us, who is of
purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity, and provoke and urge him to inflict these
endless Miseries upon us as the just Retributions of our desperate Folly and
Obstinacy; but does also by its own natural Causality prepare us for, and sink
us into that miserable State: So that if God should not damn us, yet our own
Wickedness would; the Misery of Damnation being little else but the Perfection
and Consummation of Sin. For the Sting of eternal as well as temporal Death is
Sin, and it is Goodness and Wickedness that makes Heaven and Hell, those two
opposite Hemispheres of the Invisible World; and as, if Goodness were plucked
out of Heaven, it would cease to be Heaven, and be overcast immediately with
the dismal Shades of Hell; so if Wickedness were banished out of Hell, it would
be Hell no longer, but presently clear up into Light and Serenity, and shine
forth into a glorious Heaven; But wheresoever Sin and Wickedness reigns, there
is Hell and Damnation in its necessary Causes. Since therefore in necessary
Causes that which is the Cause of the Cause is also the Cause of the Effect,
our best way to be resolved what it is that renders us liable to these future
Miseries, will be to enquire what it is that renders us liable to fall into a
sinful Condition at the present; for whatsoever renders us liable to Sin, must
necessarily expose us to the Danger of Misery. Now the Danger of our falling
into and continuing in a State of Sin, proceeds from these following Causes.

1. From the natural Liberty of our Wills to Good and Evil. 2ly. From the many
Temptations to Evil among which we are placed, 3ly. From the more close and
intimate Access which these Temptations have to us, than the contrary Motives
to Goodness. 4ly. From the great Correspondence of these Temptations with the
corrupt Inclinations of our Nature. 5ly. From the unwearied Diligence and great
Subtilty of the Devil to make Use of, and apply these Temptations to us. 6ly.
From the plausible Pretenses we are furnished with to excuse, and justify our
Compliance with them. 7ly. From the extreme Difficulty which this our
Compliance brings us under to reject and vanquish them for the future.
1. We are liable to fall into a sinful State, and from thence into eternal
Misery from the natural Liberty of our Wills to Good and Evil. If indeed we
were necessarily determined to Good, our Happiness would be intailed upon our
Natures, and it would be as impossible for us to be miserable, as it is for the
Fire to freeze, or for the Ice to burn; but to be so determined I am apt to
think is not consistent with the condition of a Creature. For to be good by a
natural Necessity requires an infallible Understanding, or a Mind that is
infinitely removed from all Possibility of being deceived and mistaken; and
this no finite Mind can be: But how should the Will be in all particulars
necessarily determined to what is Right, so long as it is under the Conduct of
a fallible Mind that has a natural Possibility of misleading it? So that to be
naturally, necessarily, and essentially good, seems to be an incommunicable
Prerogative of the Divine Nature, according to that of our Savior, There is
none good save one, and that is God, Luke 18.19. For since no Will can be
essentially good but that which is guided by an infallible Mind, and no Mind
can be essentially infallible but that which is infinite in Knowledge, it hence
necessarily follows, that to be free to Good and Evil is as natural to
reasonable Creatures, as it is to be finite in Knowledge and Understanding.
It Is true the greater Light of Knowledge there is in the Mind, the less Freedom
to Evil there must be in the Will, unless it has some antecedent Biass and
Inclination to Evil; and consequently the Angels being of far more intelligent
Natures than we Men, must needs be naturally less free to Evil; but yet that
even they are naturally free to it is evident, for that some of them have
actually lapsed into Devils; and if they are so by their Natures, then much
more are we by ours, who are so much their Inferiors in the rational World.
For as we are finite Intelligences we must necessarily have some Degree of
Freedom to Evil in us, but as we are of the lowermost Rank of Intelligences, we
must naturally have greater Degrees of this Freedom in us than any other Order
of intelligent Natures; And if this were all, yet this very Condition of our
Natures renders us more liable to degenerate into an evil and sinful State,
than any other kind of reasonable Creatures. If we were now in a State of
perfect Innocence, yet of all intelligent Creatures, we should have the
greatest Reason to apprehend the Danger of our Fall; because being the least
intelligent we have the greatest Freedom to Evil, and consequently are on that
Account in the greatest danger of falling into it. By the very Condition of our
Natures we are of all rational Creatures placed nearest to the Brinks of the
fatal Precipice, and therefore have most Reason to apprehend the Danger of
falling headlong into it. For doubtless among innocent Creatures, there are
none so near the Danger of sinning as those whose Wills are least restrained
from it, and therefore though we were now as innocent as the blessed Angels
are, yet our Condition would be unspeakably more unsafe; because by how much we
fall short of them in Knowledge and Understanding, by so much we should exceed
them in our Freedom to Evil, and consequently be so much the more liable to it.
But this alas is the least of our Danger; For

2ly. We are liable to fall into a sinful State, and from thence into eternal
Misery, from the many Temptations to Evil among which we are placed. For this
State of Being in which we now are, being intended by God for our Trial and
Probation, it was requisite in order thereunto that we should be placed among
Difficulties, that we might have sufficient Opportunity to exercise our Skill
and Courage in Religion; for unless we had some such Difficulties to encounter,
there could no Proof or Trial be made of our Virtue. Hence therefore has God
placed our rational Souls in mortal Bodies, which do naturally abound with
brutish Appetites and Desires, and compassed us round with this World of
sensual Goods and Evils, which continually importunes and excites them, that so
we might have sufficient opportunity to exercise those humane Virtues which
consist in the Dominion of our rational Faculties over these our bodily
Appetites and Desires, that we might never want occasion to give the most
glorious Proofs of our Patience and Chastity, Temperance and Equanimity,
Meekness and Sobriety; all which are proper to us as Beings made up of Soul and
Body whence all those brutish Appetites arise, in the good or bad Government
whereof consists the Nature of humane Virtue and Vice. So that this present
State of humane Life is intended by God for a Field of Combat between Reason
and Sense, between the Law in our Minds, and the Law in our Members; and that
the Victory of Reason might, through the Difficulty of it, be rendered more
glorious and remarkable, he has furnished its Antagonist, viz. the bodily
Appetite with various Weapons, with the Temptations of a World of sensitive
Goods and Evils to assault and oppose it, to try its Metal, and exercise both
its active and passive Virtues; and upon the success of this Combat depends the
everlasting Fate o the Soul. If Sense prevail, and lead her finally Captive
into Vice and Wickedness, she is lost for ever; but if Reason ger the Victory,
and finally reduce the Desires and Appetites of Sense under the Dominion of
Virtue, when this mortal Life ends She shall triumph for ever, and be
translated hence into a free and disintangled State, where she shall be vexed
and enticed no more with the Importunities of sensual Lusts and Affections, but
to all Eternity enjoy the Serenity and Pleasure of a pure Intellectual Being.
This being therefore the true State of Affairs, it is too too obvious how
liable the Soul is to miscarry when it is placed in a Body among so many
brutish Passions and Appetites, and that Body is placed in a tempting World,
among so many sensitive Goods and Evils that are continually importuning those
Appetites to mutiny against Reason, and carry us away Captive into Folly and
Wickedness. How much Reason have we to look about us, when we are placed in the
midst of so many Dangers, and have such numberless Snares on every side ready
to decoy and entangle us? But this is not all neither; For

3ly. We are liable also to fall into a sinful State, and from thence into
eternal Misery, from the more close and intimate Access which these Temptations
have to us, than the contrary Motives to Goodness. For the great Advantage
which these Temptations to Vice have over the most powerful Motives to Virtue
is this, that they are all of them persent and sensible; for as for those grand
Motives to Goodness that are drawn from the Consideration of our future State,
they propose to our Hopes and Fears, those Master-Springs of our Motions, such
Goods and Evils as are a great way off, and beyond the prospect of our bodily
Senses, which makes the Land-skip of them appear exceeding dim and faint upon
the Mind; their Futurity, which is one sort of Distance, causing them like
Things afar off to look confused and indistinct, by reason of which they cannot
affect us so powerfully, and draw such strong and lasting Draughts of
themselves upon our minds: For Goods, like Magnets, have always the strongest
Attractions when they are nearest; but as for those invisible Goods of the
other World, they are at such a Distance from us that they can hardly reach us
who live upon the remotest Circumference of the Sphere of their Attraction. And
as Distance lessens all Objects to to the Eye, and renders them much smaller in
Appearance than they are in Reality; so the remote Futurity of those eternal
Goods which the Motives of Virtue do propose, detracts from their just
Magnitude, and makes them, tho unspeakably vast in themselves, appear exceeding
small and inconsiderable to our short-sighted Minds. And the same is to be said
of those future Evils also, which they denounce against us; and besides, being
not only remote, but invisible too, they cannot strike upon our Senses, by
which the most vigorous Impressions of Things are made upon our Minds; whereas
the Temptations of Vice are all present and sensible, and do so circle us round
as soon as we look abroad into the World, that which way soever we turn our
Eyes they are still before us thrusting themselves into our Minds, and with
their constant Importunity stirring and working our Desires. So that whenever
these outward Goods or Evils do assault us, we lie bare and open to them, and
they continually press so close upon our Senses, that we are not able to avoid
their Impressions: When any outward Good invites us to a sinful Action, it has
the vast Advantage of being prescnt and sensible; by Reason of which, it having
a more immediate Access to our Minds does many times prevail before we can
Rally up a sufficient Strength of Considerations against it; and when we set
our selves to resist and struggle with it, the best of our Weapons is a Company
of thin and faint Notions of Things afar off; Things that we never saw nor
felt; which whilst we are recollecting, the Vice we are Tempted to, has its
Powers ready to seize upon the Will, which having oftentimes experienced the
Pleasure it invites to, is the more easily seduced to a fresh Compliance. And
whilst our Enemies are so near us, and our Helps and Succors so far off, we
must needs acknowledge our Danger very great and urgent.

4ly. We are liable to fall into a sinful State, and from thence into eternal
Misery, from the great Correspondence of these Temptations with the corrupt
Inclinations of our Natures. For by Reason of the Nearness and Sensibleness of
those outward worldly Goods by which we are continually tempted and solicited
to Evil, they have the Advantage of preingaging our Affections to them before
we arrive to the Use of our Reason; for in our tender years these are the only
Goods that we can relish, they are these that do feed, clothe, and furnish us
in hand with whatsoever our natural Appetites do gape for; that are the sole
Entertainment of our childish Fanices, and the only Objects our yet unfledged
Thoughts and Desires can reach at; and our Youth being thus entirely inured to
them, by that time we are grown up to the Age of Reason and the Capacities of
Virtue and Religion, we have generally contracted such an excessive Inclination
toward them, and are so strongly biased with the Love of them, that
whenever they beckon to us we are ready to follow them through all the
forbidden Tracts that lead to everlasting Ruin. For our Natures being thus
vitiated, the Temptations without us have a strong Party within us, a Party of
traytorous Inclinations which upon every Summons solicites us to yield, and
surrender up our Virtue and Innocence; and no sooner can any Temptation from
without give the Alarm, but presently our own Lusts are up raising a Mutiny
within us, and with the Heats of our corrupted Fancy do many times so disorder
our Understanding that it cannot rally up its Considerations against them. For
before ever our Understanding could be Furnished with Considerations, our
Hearts were prepossessed with such an excessive degree of ambitious, covetous,
and luxurious Inclinations, that when afterward the Pleasures, Profits, and
Honors without begin to hold forth their grateful Lures to us, and to tempt us
away to Fraud or Treachery, to Vanity or Licentiousness, those depraved
Inclinations have gotten such Head within us, that they prove most commonly too
strong for all our Consideration, and with their impetuous Current carry us
away, and drive us headlong down toward eternal Ruin; and unless we put forth
all the strength of our Reason and Resolution, and the Grace of God also come
in to our Aid, it will be impossible for us to stem such a furious Tide when it
is driven by the Wind of an outward Temptation. When therefore our own
Inclinations do so vigorously conspire with the Temptations without to thrust
us on into Sin and Perdition, how we can be insensible of the eminent danger we
are in of Miscarrying for ever? But

5ly. We are liable also to fall into a sinful State, and from thence into
Eternal Misery, from the unwearied Diligence and great Subtilty of the Devil to
make Use of, and apply these Temptations to us. For that the Devil does
commonly, as an assistant Genius to the Corruption of our Natures, excite and
provoke Men to Wickedness is very evident from Scripture; where he is said to
work in the Children of Disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. To fill the Heart of Ananias to
lie to the Holy Ghost, Acts 5.3. And to take away the Word out of Men's hearts,
lest they should believe and be saved, Luke 8.12. All which Expressions do
plainly imply that the Devil is a constant Agent in the Sins of Men. And being
a Spiritual Agent, he must needs be supposed to have a nearer Access to the
Soul than any material Cause whatsoever. For tho he be totally debarred from
all kind of Intercouse with the immediate Operations of the reasonable Soul,
and can no more look into the Thoughts than we can into the Bowels of the
Earth; yet he can easily get into the Fancy which stands next to that
mysterious Chamber that is open to no Eye but Gods, and make what use he
pleases of the infinite Images and Phantasms that are in it, and dispose, and
order, and distinguish them into the Pictures of what Objects he pleases, just
as the Painter does his numerous Cojours that lie confusedly before him in
their several Shells, and continue and repeat those Pictures and
Representations as long and as often as he pleases. And then considering what the
natural Use of the Fancy is, both to the Understanding and Will, how it prompts
the one with matter of Invention, and supplies it with Variety of Objects to
work on, and draws forth and excites the other to choose or reject those Objects
it presents, according as they are pleasing or displeasing; we must needs
suppose that the Devil has a vast Advantage of insinuating his black
Suggestions into the Soul, by having such free Access into the Fancy. And
accordingly he is said to put it into the heart of Judas to betray Christ, John
13.2. But then he being not only a spiritual, but also an intellectual Agent,
of a vast and capacious Understanding by Nature, and particularly improved in
the black Art of temping by a long Experience of its Wiles and Stratagems,
having been a Tempter almost ever since he has been an Angel; he must needs be
supposed to be wonderfully expert and fagacious in it; that after having had
five Thousand years experience of the Methods of seducing Souls to increase and
perfect his natural Subtilty, he must by this be fully instructed when and how
to apply himself to every Age and Constitution. For this has been his sole
Business wherein he has been infinitely intent and active ever since he became
a Devil, and if from a Man, then much more from a Devil of one Business. Good
Lord deliver me, from a Devil that for five Thousand Years has been
continually making Experiments of Temptation, and drawing them into Rules to
direct and order his mischievous Practice on the Souls of Men. But besides, as
the Devil is of a spiritual and ingelligent Nature, so he has a vast Number of
his black Angels continually roving about the World to seduce and captivate us
into Sin and Ruin. And tho these malignant Spirits have no ligament of natural
Love between them to tie and oblige them to one another, yet by that perfect
Hatred which they all bear to God and Men they are united together in an
inviolable League, and go hand in hand with one another in pursuance of their
desperate Design to involve our wretched Souls in the same eternal Ruin with
themselves, which renders their Force so much the more formidable. And when we
have so many spiritual, subtle, and Powerful Adversaries combining against, and
continually wandering to and fro like roaring Lions to devour us, we cannot but
apprehend our Danger exceeding great; especially considering the infinite
Temptations from without, that this World affords the great Variety of sensual
Goods and Evils which they have to object to our carnalized Minds. For these
mischievious Spirits, having so great Insight into our Tempers, and so great a
Choice of Objects to suggest to our Fancies, can never be at a Loss how they
may nick us with a convenient Temptation; and that which gives their
Temptations a vast Advantage over us is, that we know not how to distinguish
them from the Motions of our own Hearts; For could we see the Devil at our
Elbows, or hear him whispering at our Ears every time he insinuates his wicked
Suggestions into our Minds, we should doubtless reject them with an unspeakable
Horror; but because when they are conveyed into us, we know not how to
distinguish them from the natural Births of our own Minds; therefore we do make
no scruple to hug and dandle them in our Thoughts and entertain them with an
actual Complacence. And when the Devil can convey his Poison into us in such an
invisible manner, without discovering his Devils Face; when he can thus prompt
us behind the Curtain, and so disguise his Whispers that we cannot discern them
from the secret Lustings of our own Hearts; how can we be safe, without great
Care and Watchfulness, from the Malice of such a formidable Enemy? But

6ly. We are also liable to fall into a sinful State, and from thence into
eternal Misery, from the plausible Pretenses we are furnished with to excuse
and justify our Compliance with them. When by our own Folly and the Devil's
Malice we are actually betrayed into any wilful Sin, a speedy Repentance would
recover us immediately, and heal the Wound as soon as it is made; but instead
of that we have a thousand plausible Excuses to palliate and skin it over? but
alas! in the mean time it rots inwardly, and is festring apace into an
incurable Gangrene. For when our Conscience begins to fly in our Faces, we have
no other Way, but either presently to repent of, or to excuse and cloak our
Wickedness; the later of which is usually pitched on as being both the most
easy, and the most agreeable with our corrupt Inclinations. And indeed there
are so many Coverts which Men have found out for their Lusts to shelter them
from the Persecutions of their Consciences, that this Way there are no Men can
be long to seek; for either they may blanch them over with an innocent Name,
and call their Intemperances, Good-fellow-ship, their Knaveries, ingenious
Fetches; and their Incontinences, Tricks of Wit; or else they may extenuate and
mince them into Peccadillo's, and smooth over their grossest Rebellions with
the softer name of humane Failings and Infirmities; or else they may furnish
themselves with some Show of Argument to vindicate their Vices and assert them
lawful, as some of late have done in the Case of Fornication and Vncleaness: or
else they may set up for Philosophical Sinners, and quote Texts out of their
Gospel, the Leviathan, against the eternal Differences of Good and Evil. But if
their Consciences will not be put off with such poor Pretenses as these, there
are Religious Pretenses enough in the World to protect and give Countenance to
all their Impieties; and they may either fly to the Romish Doctrins of
Confession and Penance, of Venial Sins, and of probable Opinions, with any one
of which they may easily reconcile their Lusts and Consciences: Or if they
chance to have an Antipathy to the name of Roman Catholic, they may furnish
themselves with such Doctrins out of some of our modern Euthusiasts, as will be
as favorable to their Lusts as they need, or wish, or desire; that will
consecrate their irregular Passions into Signs of Grace, and dwindle their
grossest Crimes into the Sports of God's People; that will exalt a mechanic
Train of Fancies and Passions into a sincere conversion, and improve an
Hysterical Fit into a spiritual Experience. By these, and such like ways may
men easily excuse their Vices to their Consciences; and when they are furnished
with so many Expedients whereby to enable themselves to sin on quietly, in how
much Danger are they of falling fast asleep in the midst of their Guilts, and
never waking again till they flame out about their Ears into everlasting
Burnings? For whereas this Faculty of Conscience was implanted within us by the
Author of our Natures, to be a Guard to our Innocence, and a Scourge to our
Lusts, the Generality of Men have invented so many Tricks to shift and evade
it, that it is become almost totally useless to them. And when they have thus
disabled their Consciences from defending them against the Importunities of
their Lusts, in what unspeakable Danger must they be, not only of falling into,
but continuing in them till they have utterly ruined and destroyed them?

7ly. And lastly, We are also liable to fall into a sinful State, and from
thence into eternal Misery, from the extreme Difficulty which this our
Compliance with those Temptations brings us under, to reject and vanquish them
for the future. For every new Compliance with Temptations to Evil foments and
inrages our evil Inclinations, and when once these evil Inclinations are by our
customary Compliances educated into sinful Habits, it will be impossible for us
without a mighty Assistance of divine Grace to vanquish and subdue them. So
that as upon the former Accounts we are in extreme danger of falling into
sinful Courses, upon this Account we are in no less Danger of continuing in
them. For by complying with this Temptation, I shall very much disable my self
from withstanding the next; and if I yield to that too, the third will find me
much more ready and tractable, and so on, till at last the Temptation grows
first familiar, and then natural to me, and then it will be hard, and then
harder, and then almost impossible to reject or deny it. And when Things are
reduced to this Issue that my Sin is naturalized to me, and grown into an
inveterate Habit, the Lord have mercy upon me! for now I am in the Suburbs of
Hell, but one Remove from the State of the Damned, and am so far gone in a
confirmed State of Impiety, that I have almost lost my Liberty of returning;
and unless I am speedily rescued by some Miracle of Grace, it is morally
impossible I should ever escape. Thus as we go on from one Degree of Wickedness
to another, we do as it were break down the Bridge behind us, and do what in us
lies to disappoint our selves of all Hopes of any future Retreat. For every
Step forwards in our sinful Progress, renders our Return more difficult; and
when once we have proceeded into a Custom and Habit of Sin, we shall find
Repentance so irksom to us, and so much against the Grain of our Nature, that
it is a thousand to one but that the Difficulty of it will utterly dishearten
us from attempting it; and so rather than take so much Pains as we must
necessarily do in swimming against the impetuous Stream of our Natures, we
shall tamely yield to it, and suffer our selves to be born down by it into the
dead Sea of endless Misery. When therefore there are so many Causes conspiring
together to betray us into sinful Courses, and when there are so many
Difficulties when once we are in to oppose and hinder our Retreat, what eminent
Danger are we in of falling into, and perseering in Sin to our everlasting
Ruin! And thus you see how extremely liable we are upon all these Accounts to
be lost for ever, that is, to plunge our selves into all those endless Miseries
which the loss of our Souls implies.

What then remains but that being seriously affected with the Sense of our
Danger, we presently awake out of our Security, and with the deepest Concern
for our immortal Souls, cry out with St. Peter's Auditors, Men and Brethren,
what shall we do to be saved? Verisly when I reflect upon the strange
Unconcernedness of Men about their future Condition, I am tempted to think
either that they do not believe that they have an immortal Soul in them, or
that if they do, they believe it is impossible it should for ever miscarry. For
how is it conceivable that Men, who in other matters are so solicitous when
their Interest is at Stake, and exposed to the least Hazard, should believe
that they have Souls in Danger of perishing for ever, and yet take no more Care
or Regard of them, but (like the forgetful Mother, who, when her House was on
Fire, to save her Goods forgot her Child) lay out all their thoughts upon the
little Concerns of this frail and mortal Life, and in the mean time forget
their precious Souls, and leave them perishing in the Flames of Perdition? O
stupid Creature! what art thou made of that can consider that thou have an
immortal Soul, surrounded with so many Dangers of being lost for ever, and yet
be no more concerned for its Preservation? Methinks if thou had any Sense in
thee, having a Prospect of such endless Miseries before thee, the remotest
Possibility of falling into them should be enough to startle and awake thee;
but when thou art so near the Brink of those Miseries, and have so many Causes
round about thee shoving thee forward, and thrusting thee headlong down into
them, and yet be no more concerned at it, is such a Prodigy of senseless
Stupidity, as Heaven and Earth may justly be astonished at. It Is true, if the
Danger thou art in were such as is impossible to be evaded, it would then be
the wisest Course thou could take to concern thy self as little as may be
about it; but rather to live merrily whilst thou may, and not antedate thy
Misery, by thinking of the dismal Futurity. But God be praised this is not our
Case, though our Condition be dangerous, yet it is far from desperate; for if
we will use our honest Endeavor, and vigorously exert the Faculties of our
Nature, we not only may, but shall escape. There are indeed a great many Causes
of our Danger, a great many Enemies concurring to our Ruin, but none of these
are able to effect it, unless we our selves join hands in the fatal Conspiracy:
If we will be but faithful Friends to our selves, and true to our own eternal
Interest, it will be beyond the power of all those Causes together to do us any
material Injury. For blessed be the good God those that are for us, are far
greater and mightier than those that are against us; against us we have the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil, the weakest of which is, I confess, a
dangerous and puissant Enemy; but for us we have God and Angels, and our own
Reason assisted with the most invincible Motives; with vast and glorious
Promises, that stand beckoning to us with Crowns of Immortality in their Hands,
to call us off from the Pursuit of our Lusts to the Practice of Virtue and
Religion; with direful Threatenings, that are continually Alarming and warning
us of the dreadful Consequents of our Sins; and sundry other such mighty, I had
almost said Almighty Motives, as, if we would seriously attend to, would
certainly render our Souls impregnable against all the Temptations of Vice. And
besides our Reason thus Armed and Accountered, we have on our side the Holy
Angels of God, who are always ready to prompt us to, and assist us in our Duty,
and to second us in all our spiritual Combats against the Enemies of our Souls.
And besides all these we have with us the Almighty Spirit of God, who upon our
sincere Desires and honest Endeavors is engaged to aid us, and cooperate with
us in working out our Salvation; whose Grace is abundantly sufficient for us,
to strengthen us in our Weakness, to support us under our greatest
Difficulties, and carry us on victoriously through the most violent
Temptations. And being backed with such mighty Auxiliaries, how is it possible
that we should miscarry, unless we are resolved to betray our selves, and give
fire to the fatal Trains of our Enemies; and if we are so bent there is no
Remedy for our Obstinacy, and it is just and fit we should be left to the
dismal and pitiless Effect of our own Folly and Madness. For if when we see our
sleves in so much danger, and it is yet in our Power to escape if we please, we
will notwithstanding precipitate our selves into Ruin; all the World must agree
upon an impartial Inquisition for the Blood of our Souls, that we murdered our
selves, that God is just, and that his hands are clean from any stain of our
Blood, and that our own Ruin is wholly owing to our own invincible Obstinacy.

III. I proceed now to the Third Proposition, That our renouncing of Christ,
and his Religion, will most certainly infer the loss of our Souls. For, as I
have showed you, these Words are urged by our Savior as a Motive to deter his
Disciples from forsaking him, as is plain from Ver. 24, 25. which necessarily
supposes that upon their forsaking him, this Loss would most certainly and
inevitably follow. In the Prosecution therefore of this Argument I shall
endeavor these two things.

1. To show you what that forsaking of Christ is, which infers this Loss. 2.
Upon what Accounts our thus forsaking him infers it.
1. What that forsaking of Christ is, which infers this Loss. To which I
answer, there is a Fourfold Forsaking of Christ, which the Scripture takes
notice of as capital and damnable to the Souls of Men.

1. When we forsake him by a total Apostasy. 2ly. When we cowardly renounce the
Profession of his Doctrine, or any Part of it, notwithstanding we still believe
and are convinced of the Truth of it. 3. When by obstinate Heresy we either add
to, or subtract from the Faith of Christ. 4ly. When by any wilful Course of
Disobedience we do vertually renounce the Authority of his Laws.
1. We lose and forfeit our Souls, when we forsake Christ by a total Apostasy
from him: When after we have been Baptized into his Name, and thereby have made
a visible Profession of our believing his Doctrines, and obeying his Laws, we
turn Runagadoes, and cast off our Belief of the one, and disown our Obligation
to the other; we do most justly incur the Loss and Forfeiture of our Souls. For
so strong and cogent is the Evidence of Christianity, that it is not to be
supposed that any professed Christian can be either innocently or excusably
seduced into a Disbelief of it; For Religion being a Matter of the vastest
Moment and Concern, he is a Traitor to himself that either takes up his
Religion without Examination, or that upon Examination refuses to be swayed by
the strongest Reason; And I am sure it is impossible for any Christian to turn
Infidel that is but so honest to himself as first to examine carefully the
Reasons of his Faith, and then to resolve sincerely not to reject it till
better Reasons appear to the contrary; But if either through their wilful
Ignorance of the Evidence of Christianity, or vicious Prejudice against the
Purity of it, they suffer themselves to be seduced into Apostasy, they are
false Traitors to themselves, and as such are justly liable to all those
eternal Damages they expose themselves to. And hence it is said of those that
draw-back, that is, apostatize from Christianity, not only that God's Soul
shall have no pleasure in them, but also that they draw back to perdition, Heb.
10.38, 39. and 2 Pet. 2.20. It is said of those Apostates, that their latter
end is worse than the beginning; and that it had been better for them not to
have known the way of Righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn
from the holy Commandment; which implies that Apostates from Christianity do
not only forfeit their Souls, but that without Repentance they will be for ever
forfeited to the most wretched Condition, even to the nethermost Degree of
Perdition.

2ly. We lose our Souls when notwithstanding we do still believe, and are
convinced of the Truth of Christ's Doctrine, we do cowardly renounce the
Profession of it, or any Part of it. For when once we have received the Faith
of Christ, we are thereby obliged not to renounce the Profession of it
whatsoever Hazard it may expose us to, our blessed Lord having assured us that
if we deny him before Men, he will also deny us before his Father which is in
Heaven, Mat. 10.33. And St. Paul also having warned us, that if we deny Christ,
he will also dany us, 2 Timothy 2.12. That is, that he will reject and abandon us
before God and Angels to everlasting Misery and Damnation; for so St. John
assures us, Rev. 2.8. that the fearful and unbelieving, i.e. the faint-hearted
Cowards that for fear of Persecution renounce the Profession of the Gospel,
shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone. Not
that in Times of Persecution we are always bound to make an actual Profession
and Publication of our Faith, to run to the Tribunals of our Persecutors before
we are sent for, and accuse our selves of those Doctrines for which we are
Persecuted; but whenever we are apprehended, accused, and examined by them,
either upon knowledge or suspicion, we are bound under the Penalty of
forfeiting our Souls to own and confess our Faith, and not to deny any Doctrine
or Article of it, whatsoever the Consequence may be. For in this Case to deny
our Belief is not only a wilful Lie, which is in it self a damnable Crime, but
an Act of High Treason against our Lord and Savior; for by renouncing any
Doctrine which he has revealed and committed to us, we do not only betray his
Trust, but blaspheme his Veracity; to deny what we believe he has revealed,
being in effect to declare him a Cheat and an Impostor. And having thus
incurred the Guilt of so black a Treason against our Savior, and wilfully
persisting in it, what can we expect the Consequence of it should be, but the
eternal Loss and Perdition of our Souls?

3ly. We forsake Christ to the Loss and Forfeiture of our Souls, when by
obstinate Heresy we add to, or subtract from that Heavenly Doctrine which he
has revealed to us. By Heresy I do not mean barely a false Opinion in our
Religion whether it be of greater or lesser Moment; for I doubt not but the
same Error May be an innocent Mistake in one Man, and a damnable Heresy in
another; that in the one it may be the Effect of a weak Understanding, but in
the other, of a perverse and obstinate Will; and when the Understanding
misleads the Will it is Weakness, but when the Will misleads the Understanding
it is Wickedness. For simple Error is only a defect of Understanding, which in
a fallible Creature is every whit as inculpable as Sickness in a mortal one;
but Heresy is a Fault of the Will, which is the only Subject of Virtue and
Vice. When therefore by the wicked Prejudice of our corrupt Wills against the
Purity of Christianity, our Understanding is betrayed into loose and erroneous
Principles; when we understand by our vicious Affections, and adapt our
Opinions to the Interests of our Lusts; when we believe for the sake of any
darling Vice, and suffer our own factious, covetous, and extravagant Passions
either to tempt us to profess those erreneous Opinions which we do not believe,
or to prejudice us into a Belief of them; then is our Error no longer to be
attributed to the Weakness of our Understanding, but to the Wickedness of our
Wills which Improves our Error into a damnable Heresy. For he would be a wicked
Man, though he were not an Heretic, that harbors those sinful Lusts which
betrayed him into Heresy; but by being an Heretic he is much more wicked,
because now he is wicked under a Pretense of Religion, and cloaks his Impieties
with the Garments of Righteousness. And what greater Profaneness can any Man
be guilty of, than to make his Religion a Baud to procure for his Lusts? So
that if out of a vicious Propension of Will we obstinately persist in any
Religious Errors, we are not only guilty of that wicked Propension which is of
it self sufficient to ruin our Souls; but we are also accountable for vitiating
our Religion with those erroneous Mixtures by which we have rendered it a
Shelter and Protection to our Lust. And what the Consequence of this will be
St. Jude will inform us, who speaking of certain Heretics, who to gratify
their own wicked Inclinations, had sophisticated Christianity with sundry black
and poisonous Principles, pronounces this fearful Doom on them; for whom is
reserved the blackness of darkness for ever, ver. 13.

4ly. And lastly, We forsake Christ to the Loss and Forfeiture of our Souls,
when by any wilful Course of Disobedience we do virtually renounce the
Authority of his Laws. For whilst we continue in any Course of wilful Sin, we
live in an open Rebellion to our Savior, and do by our Actions declare that we
will not have him to Reign over us. And accordingly, Tit. 1.16. the abominable
and disobedient are said to deny God in their works, even while they profess to
know him; and what the Fate of such will be, St. Paul has forewarned us, Romans
2.8, 9. But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey
unrighteousness; indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every Soul
of Man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile. And the same
Apostle speaking of these obstinate Rebels, who live and persist in an open
Defiance to our Savior's Authority, tells us that they shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, 2. These. 1.8, 9. But
before we dismiss this Argument, it will be requisite more particularly to
explain what those wilful Courses of Sin are by which they thus renounce him;
all which may be reduced to these three Heads. First, We renounce the Authority
of his Laws, when we sin against him out of wilful Ignorance of them. Secondly,
When we sin on against him out of wilful Inconsideration of our Obligation to
them. Thirdly, When we persist in our sin against Knowledge and Consideration.

1. We vertually renounce the Authority of our Savior, when we sin on against
him out of wilful Ignorance of his Laws. For the Laws of our Savior, in which
the great Lines of our Duty are described, are so plain and legible, that no
Man can be long excusably ignorant of them. But if our Ignorance proceed either
first from a profane and profligate Mind that is altogether regardless of God,
and has utterly worn off its natural sense of Religion, and so neither heeds
it nor concerns it self about it, but is become quite deaf to all the Means of
Instruction; or if it proceed, Secondly, from the vicious Prejudice of our
Wills, and we Industriously set our selves for the sake of some darling Lust,
to exclude from our Minds all the Means of Conviction; and either studiously to
avoid all thoughts of Religion, that we may sin on without disturbance, which
is the way of those that are openly Profane and Irreligious; or to use all
possible Arts to wheedle our Understandings into the Belief of such Principles
as are most indulgent to our Lusts, which is the way of Hypocrites and false
Pretenders to Religion: If, I say, our Ignorance of Christ's Laws proceeds from
either of these Causes, it will no more excuse our falling into sin, than the
want of Light will a Man's falling into a Ditch that shuts his Eyes at Noon,
and winks on purpose lest he should see, and escape the Danger that is before
him. But then

2ly. We vertually renounce the Authority of our Savior, when we sin on
against him out of a wilful Inconsideration of our Obligations to obey him. For
we being reasonable Creatures, are bound by the very Constitution of our
Natures to act considerately, especially in matters of Religion, which are of
the greatest Moment and Importance to us; so that if we miscarry herein through
wilful Inconsideration, we are every whit as inexcusable as if we had
considerately betrayed our selves. Now wilful Inconsideration is either actual
or habitual; Actual, is either, first when notwithstandin we have been
sufficiently warned by precedent Surprises, we take no care for the future; for
though it cannot be expected we should always keep so strict a Guard upon our
selves, as never to be surprised by an Enemy; yet when we have been overtaken,
there is all the Reason in the World we should take warning by it, and grow
more wary and vigilant for the future; that we should awaken in our Minds such
Considerations as are necessary to prevent our being surprised again, which if
we do not, our next Surprise will be inexcusable. And if the sense of the Lapse
which was perhaps but an innocent Error, or at most but a Sin of Infirmity,
does not make us more careful of our selves for the future; the next will be a
wilful Fall: Or else in the second Place, this actual wilful Inconsideration
is, when upon the presenting of any beloved Temptation we either quench the
good Motions of our Minds, and refuse to consider the Evil and Danger of the
Sin we are tempted to, lest we should be thereby deterred from committing it;
or purposely contrive to basfle our own Consideration by opposing it either
with some ungrounded Hope of Impunity, or some fallacious Promise of future
Amendment; and if to make way for our sin, we do either of these ways wilfully
drive all good thoughts from our Minds lest they should disturb and interupt us
in the Enjoyment of it, our Inconsideration is to be resolved into the
Wickedness of our Wills, and not into the Weakness and Infirmity of our
Natures. And he that will not consider because he will sin, and afterward
extenuate his sin by his Inconsideration, urges one sin in excuse for another,
and makes that which is his Fault. his Apology. Whenever therefore we sin out
of any actual and wilful Inconsideration, we sin wilfully, and consequently do
thereby vertually renounce the Authority of our Savior; the final Event of
which, without our Repentance, will be our everlasting Ruin and Perdition. But
then besides this actual there is also an habitual Inconsideration, which is
wilful; and that is, when by often stifling the Convictions of our Consciences
we have seared them into a deep Insensibility of Good and Evil, so as that now
we sin on without any Remorse or Reluctance, and return to our Lusts with the
same indifferency as we do to our Beds or our Tables, without either
considering what we are doing, or reflecting on what we have done; And this is
so far from palliating our sin, that it is one of the highest Aggravations of
it: For as it is no excuse that we sin out of an evil Habit which we
voluntarily contracted by frequent Acts of sin, so neither will it at all
excuse us that we sin out of an habitual Inconsideration which we wilfully
contracted by often refusing to consider. But as vicious Habits have a proper
Evil and Guiltiness in them distinct from those vicious Acts that produced
them; so habitual Inconsideration has in it a peculiar Venom of its own beyond
what was in those actual Inconsiderations whereby it was acquired. And
accordingly it is described in the Scripture as the worst, the most desperate
and incurable state of a Sinner: It is called a reprobate-Mind, Romans 1.28, 29.
a scared Conscience, 1 Timothy 4.2. a hard and unrelenting heart that treasureth
us wrath against the day of wrath, Romans 2.5. So that if we go on in sin without
considering, with a Mind habitually regardless and insensible, we are hardened
and inveterate Rebels, that have not only renounced the Authority of our
Savior, but have also forfeited our Selves, and that almost irreparably
against all his Methods of conquering and subduing us. But then

3ly. And Lastly, We vertually renounce the Authority of our Savior, when we
persist in our sin against Knowledge and Consideration. For to sin on
obstinately against Knowledge and Consideration, argues an invincible Malice of
Will; for though the Condition of the ignorant and inconsiderate Sinner be very
sad and deplorable, yet there is much more Hope of him because he has never
yet had the Force and Efficacy of Knowledge and Consideration, which perhaps,
if ever he be brought to experience, may prove a successful Means of his Cure
and Reformation. But the knowing and considerate Sinner has tried and
conquered the Remedy, has experimented the only means of his Cure, and yet it
grows worse and worse under the Application; he knows what his sin is, and
considers the Consequence of it, and yet sins on; which argues a desperate
Resolution of Will in him thus to run himself upon a foreseen Ruin, and leap
into Hell with his Eyes open. And what Hope is there of dissuading him from his
sin, that knows and considers the Arguments against it, and every day breaks
through them all at the Call of every sinful Temptation? And as his Condition
is most desperate, so his Soul is most guilty and criminal; for every Act of
his sin is an open Defiance to the Authority of God and his Savior; his
Rebellion is barefaced, and has no manner of Pretense wherein to mask or
disguise it self; and he knows and owns himself to be in a Rebellion, and yet
perseveres in it, which extremely aggravates and inhanses the Guilt of it. For
the Sinfulness and Immorality of Actions is to be measured by the Degrees of
Will that are in them, and the Degrees of Will in them are more or less
proportionably, as the Nature and Evil of them is more or less known and
considered. Hence is that of St. James 4.17. To him that knows to do good,
and does it not, to him it is sin. Had he not known the Nature of his Action,
the Weakness of his Understanding would have excused the Error of his Will, and
rendered it pardonable at least, if not altogether innocent: But when his
Understanding has discharged its Office, and showed him the Evil that he ought
to avoid, that has fairly acquitted its self, and can stand no longer
chargable for his Miscarriages: So that now the Man chooses his own Peril, and
if he still choose what he ought to avoid, his Understanding is clear, and his
Will alone is Culpable. And when our Rebellion against our Savior is not only
wilful, but the wilfulness of it is so extremely aggravated by our Knowledge
and Consideration, what the Consequence of it will be that fearful Passage will
assure us, Luke 12.47. The Servant that knows his Masters will and does it
not, shall be beaten with many Stripes. And thus I have endeavored to
represent to you what that Forsaking of Christ is, which exposes us to the
Hazard of losing our Souls.

II. I proceed in the next Place to show you upon what Accounts it is that our
forsaking of Christ infers this fearful Loss; of which, I shall Briefly give
you this fourfold Account.

1. Our thus forsaking of Christ infers the Loss of our Souls, as it is a most
inexcusable Contempt of the greatest Mercy. 2ly. As it renders us the most
unfitting Objects of Mercy for the future. 3ly. As it is an open Violation of
the fixed and stated Condition of Mercy. 4ly. As it is an utter Rejection of
our last Remedy.
1. Our forsaking of Christ by any of the aforenamed Instances infers the
everlasting Loss of our Souls, as it is a most inexcusable Contempt of the
greatest Mercy. For when the Son of God came down from Heaven, he brought from
thence with him the largest Offers of Mercy that Heaven it self could make to a
sinful World; he did not only bring down with him a Grant of universal Pardon
and Indemnity under the Broad-Seal of Heaven for every Sinner that would lay
down his Arms, and return to his Allegiance, together with the most endearing
Invitations of the God of Heaven, to woo and win us to accept it; but he also
brought along with him all that an everlasting Heaven means, Crowns of Immortal
Glory and Pleasure to encourage us to, and reward our Acceptance of them. And
what greater Mercy could the God of Heaven have expressed to us, than to send
down his blessed Son, not only to tender to us an Indemnity, but also to invite
us to accept it with a Promise of Heaven? So that if now we reject him, now he
is come to us with such vast and endearing Proposals, what an intolerable
slight will it be to the tender Mercies of God? When we shall declare by our
Actions that we will not exchange the sordid Pleasures of our Lust for the
Pardon of Heaven, for the Favor of God, and for all the Hopes of a glorious
Immortality? How can we expect any farther Relief from God's Mercy, after we
have put such an intolerable Affront upon it by preferring such an unworthy
Rival before it? When God has laid his Pardon, his Love, and his Heaven in our
Way, to stop us in our sinful Courses, what a barbarous Indignity will it be to
trample upon them all, and run over them into Hell? With what Face can we hope
for any farther kindness from Heaven, after we have treated its Kindness with
so much Rudeness and Contempt? Certainly for sinful Men to reject and run away
from their Savior, when he comes to them with so much Kindness, when he courts
them with such astonishing Expressions of Mercy, is a Provocation sufficient to
incense an infinite Goodness, and turn the tenderest Mercy into an implacable
Fury. And when infinite Love is so infinitely provoked, what less Expiation can
it claim and exact, than the everlasting Ruin and Perdition of our Souls?

2ly. Our Forsaking of Christ infers the everlasting Loss of our Souls, as it
renders us the most incapable Objects of Mercy for the future. For when we are
arrived to that Height of Wickedness as finally to reject Christ, and the
Mercies of his Gospel, there is no farther Mercy that we are capable of; if
after this God should be so kind and indulgent as to pardon us, alas! what
would it signify? for we should still be wretched and miserable in Despite of
his Pardon; and that wicked Temper of Mind which made us reject our Savior,
would be an everlasting Hell to us though it should indemnifie us. What will a
Pardon avail a Man that is dying of the Stone or Strangury? He can but die if
he be not pardoned, and die he must though he be. And as little Advantage it
would be to a wicked Soul to be pardoned and absolved by God, while she has a
Disease within her that preys upon her Vitals, and hastens her to a certain
Ruin. She could have been but miserable in the future Life if she had not been
pardoned, and miserable she must be if she continues wicked, whether she be
pardoned or no; there being an everlasting Hell in the very Nature of
Wickedness, which no outward Act of Pardon can quench or extinguish. Nay, if
after our rejecting Christ, and the Mercies of the Gospel, God should not only
pardon, but admit us into Heaven, and indulge us the free Enjoyment of all its
Pleasures and Felicities; yet that vicious Temper of Mind which finally seduccd
us from our Savior, would render us for ever incapable of relishing the Joys
of it. Those Rivers of Heavenly Pleasure would never agree with the hellish
Temper of our Minds, which, like a feverish Tongue, would utterly disgust their
delicious Streams by Reason of its own overflowing Gall. So that after we have
finally rejected our Savior, we are neither capable of being indemnifyed from
Hell, nor of enjoying Heaven; and having cast our selves beyond the Reach of
all Mercy, into a State wherein we can neither begin to be happy, nor cease to
be miserable, our Case is desperate, and there is no Remedy but our Souls must
be lost and undone for ever.

3ly. Our forsaking of Christ infers the everlasting Loss of our Souls, as it
is an open Violation of the fixed and stated Condition of Mercy. The fixed and
immovable Condition of the Mercy of the Gospel is, that we should constantly
adhere to our Savior by a true Faith and a sincere Obedience, and that
whenever we fall off from him either into Infidelity, or Heresy, or
Disobedience, we should remember from whence we are fallen, and return again to
him by a deep and serious Repentance. And indeed this Condition is so low and
condescending, that it was impossible for the wise God and Governor of the
World, to propose his Mercy to us at a lower or easier Rate; and if God should
have asked our Consent upon what Conditions he should propose to us the Mercies
of his Gospel, this would have been the utmost Favor that we could in Modesty
have craved of him, that he would be so gracious as to accept our unfeigned
Faith and sincere Obedience; and that whenever we fall off either from the one
or the other, he would admit us to Repentance, and receive us again upon our
Return and Amendment. And should he have proposed his Mercy to us upon lower
Terms, he must of Necessity have let go the Reins of his Government, and given
us a free Toleration for all manner of Wickedness. Had the Condition of his
Mercy been but one step lower than Repentance, it had totally dissolved the
Obligation of his Laws, and reduced the humane World into a perfect Anarchy.
For should be have prostituted his Mercy to impenitent Sinners, he must have
made it a Refuge for obstinate Rebels to fly to, and shelter themselves from
the Reach of his Authority; and how inconsistent would this have been with the
Wisdom of his Government? This therefore being the lowest Condition upon which
the wise and holy God can propose his Mercy to us, there is no Ground to hope
that after we have rejected this, and are finally fallen off from it, he will
make any new Proposal to us. For he has yielded as much already to the
Weakness and Inconstancy of our Natures, as he could possibly do with safety to
his Government; and if this will not suffice, we may depend upon it that he
will rather consent to sacrifice our Souls to his righteous Vengeance, than his
own Authority to our obstinate Wills. So that when once we have finally
rejected our Savior, and shaken hands for ever with Faith and Obedience, and
Repentance too, we are quite beyond the Reach of any wise Mercy; and then how
deplorable must our Condition be, when Things are reduced to this desperate
Issue, That God must either consent to be foolishly merciful to us, or to
abandon our Souls to everlasting Perdition?

4ly. And lastly, Our forsaking of Christ infers the everlasting Loss of our
Souls, as it is an utter Rejection of our last Remedy. For the last Remedy
which God has prepared for Mankind to heal the Malignity of their Natures, and
recover them from eternal Misery, is the meritorious Death and Sacrifice of his
Blessed Son, who voluntarily undertaking to be the Attorney General, and Common
Representative of sinful Men, suffered Death in our stead as a vicarious Mulct
and Punishment for our Sins; upon which the most merciful Father has granted
to all believing and truly penitent Sinners, a general Indemnity from eternal
Punishments, to which they were bound over by their Sins and Rebellions; by
virtue of which Grant as soon as we believe in Christ, and do thereupon
sincerely Repent of our Sins, we are totally absolved from those everlasting
Punishments whereunto they have exposed and obliged us. And this Sacrifice of
Christ being the last Remedy which God has provided for our Guilt, and the
Grant of Pardon God has made in Consideration of it, being confined to
believing and penitent Sinners, it hence necessarily follows, that they who
finally persist in Unbelief or Impenitency, do thereby for ever cut themselves
off from all Interest in that Sacrifice; and from all Title to that Pardon that
is granted upon it, and consequently leave themselves for ever destitute of all
Hope of Pardon and Indemnity for the future. So that by renouncing Christ we do
renounce his Sacrifice, which is the last and only Remedy we have to depend
upon. Hence Heb. 10.26. we are told, that if we sin wilfully after we have
received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin;
that is, after we have been Baptized, and Initiated into Christianity, we
relapse into Infidelity or wilful Disobedience, we do thereby forfeit our
Interest in Christ's Sacrifice; and when we have once rejected our Interest in
that, there remains no other Sacrifice for Sin, i.e. no other Sacrifice upon
which God will Pardon and Indemnify us. So that now all that remains to us, is
that which follows in the next Verse, viz. A certain fearful looking for of
judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries. For when
we have finally baffled our last and utmost Remedy, the Condition of our Souls
must needs be desperate and incurable. When by our obstinate Unbelief or final
Impenitence we have out-sinned the Virtue of our Savior's Sacrifice, we are
out of the Reach and Compass of God's Pardon, and so consequently are sunk
beyond all Hopes of Recovery, into endless and irreversible Damnation. For now
that precious Blood which, if we had believed and repented, would have spoke
better things for us than the Blood of Abel, will rise in Judgment against us,
and, like the Blood of those Souls that are under the Altar, will Charge and
Impeach, and be continually imprecating the Vengeance of Heaven upon us. And
when that which was prepared for the last and utmost Remedy of our Souls shall
be converted into their Bane, and that which was intended for their Advocate
shall become their Accuser; when that vocal Blood and those speaking Wounds
which pleaded for, shall plead against, and cry out instantly for Judgment upon
them; what can they henceforth expect but everlasting Ruin and Destruction?

What then remains, that since our forsaking of Christ will so infallibly infer
the Ruin of our Souls, we all return to, and cleave fast to our Savior in our
Belief and Obedience: That we, who are fallen off from him into a Course of
wilful Sin and Disobedience, immediately return again by a deep and serious
Repentance. For the Way in which we are walking leads directly to Destruction;
every Step of it is a Descent into Hell, and next to the lowermost is the
bottomless Pit, and for all we know, the very last Step we took brought us to
the Brinks of the flaming Abyss; and if it did, one Step further will set us
beyond all Hope of Recovery. For in our sinful Progress we are wading forwards
in a shelving Pool, which the farther we go, the deeper it is, and so deeper
and deeper till we come to the Bottom of it; so that at every Step we are in
Danger of going beyond our Depth, and plunging our selves into in irrecoverable
Ruin; for we know not how soon we may be snatched away in our Iniquities; and
if it should so happen, that after we have sinned this Moment, we should die
the next, this will determine our everlasting Fate, and sink us into eternal
Misery.

Wherefore as we tender the safety of our precious Souls, let us speedily
forsake this dangerous Road in which Perdition way-lays, and Hell gapes to
devour us every step we go; and return unto our Lord in whom our safety lies.
As yet the Opportunity of Salvation is in our Hands, but before to morrow
Morning it may slip away from between our Fingers, and vanish for ever, and we
that are this day wallowing in our Sins, may before the next be roaring in
Hell. So that while we defer and put off our Repentance from day to day, we do
as it were cast Lots for our Souls, and venture our everlasting Hopes upon a
Contingency, that is not in our Power to dispose of. As yet the Gate of Mercy
is open to us, and our blessed Lord stands ready with his Arms outstretched to
welcome and receive us; but for all we know if we enter not presently, the Gate
may be shut within a few Moments, and then though we knock and cry till our
hearts ache, Lord, Lord open to us, we shall receive no other Answer, but Depart
from me I know you not. O Good God, how are we besotted then, that rather than
begin our Repentance to day we will wilfully run the Hazard of being eternally
miserable before to morrow Morning! For if this should be the Evening of our
day of Trial, as for all we know it may, our Life and Eternity depends upon
what we are now doing; and therefore one would think it should highly concern
us wisely to manage this last stake, the winning, or losing whereof may prove
our making or undoing. In pity therefore to our pershing Souls let us return to
our Savior, before it be too late, before our Feet stumble on the dark
Mountains, and we fall down into everlasting Darkness. And being returned and
reunited to him, let us have a Care we do not revolt again; for if we draw
back we cancel our Repentance, and forfeit all its blesed Fruits and Benefits;
and unless we steadfastly persevere and hold out to the end, all the Pains we
have taken in our Christian Course will be for ever lost, and the Remembrance
of it will only administer to our future Misery. For how will it vex us in the
other World to consider the Labor it cost us to take Heaven by Storm? How
vigorously we strove to mount the Scaling Ladder, through how many Difficulties
we had forced our way to that height of Virtue and Religion we were arrived to,
and then when we are got as it were to the topmost Rounds, and had laid our
Hands upon the Battlements of Heaven, just ready to leap in and take possession
of all its Joys; how basely we let go our Hold, and so tumbled down from that
stupendous height into the bottomless Abyss of endless Misery? Doubtless this
Consideration must necessarily sting our woeful Souls hereafter, and for ever
inrage them against themselves. Wherefore as we value the Safety of our
precious Souls, let us, who by our wilful Rebellions have gone astray, return,
and constantly adhere to our blessed Savior. Alas, where can we be happier
than in his Service, who imposes nothing on us but what contributes to our
Welfare? Where can we be safer than in his Arms, and under his Protection, who
has the Command and Disposal of all Events, and to whom all Power is given in
Heaven and Earth? Where can we be placed more to our own Advantage than under
his Guidance and Authority, who never permits any to serve him for naught, but
has engaged himself to recompense our Labor with a Crown of Glory that fades
not away? And is it not strange that after so many advantageous Invitations, we
should need to be scared to our Duty? that after our blessed Master has
enjoined us such a reasonable, gnetle, and infinitely beneficial Service, he
should be forced to terrify us into it with the Flames of Hell?

IV. I proceed now to the Fourth Proposition, That when the Soul is lost, it is
lost irrecoverably; where the Greek word (...), which we render Exchange, is
used in the same sense with (...), which signifies a Price of Redemption,
denoting that when once a Man has sold his Soul to Perdition, it is
unredeemable, and that no Price will be accepted for its Ransom and
Deliverance; when a Man's Soul is in Hell under the wretched Bondage of a
Damned Spirit, how little soever he regards it now, he would give all the
World, if it were in his power, to be released again; but if he had a thousand
Worlds it will not do, his bondage being such as will admit no Ransom. For
these Words of our Savior seem to have been a common Proverb of the Age he
lived in, and that derived from those words of the Devil in Job, All that a Man
has, will he give for his Life; that is, when a Man is dying, he would
willingly part with all to redeem his Life, but all will not do. Which Proverb
our Savior adapts to his own Argument, in which he proceeds from temporal to
eternal Life: If a Man would give so much for his temporal Life, what would he
not give for his eternal one? But as our temporal Life is not to be redeemed,
so neither is our eternal one when once it is lost; for when once our Soul is
lost or abandoned to the State of the Damned, it is lost for ever, and there is
no (...), or Ransom that will be accepted of by God for its Redemption thence.
In the Prosecution of which Argument I shall endeavor these two things.

1. To show you that if God be so determined he may, without any Injury either
to his Justice or Goodness, detain lost Souls in the Bondage of Hell for ever,
and absolutely refuse to accept any Ransom for them.

2. That he is actually determined so to do.

1. That if God be so determined, he may without any Injury either to his
Justice or Goodness, detain lost Souls in the Bondage of Hell for ever, without
accepting any Ransom for them. And this I doubt not will plainly appear upon
the due Consideration of these following Propositions.

1st. That God being the Sovereign Being of the World, has an unalienable
Right to impose Laws upon all other Beings. 2dly. That having this Right, he
may justly enforce those Laws with whatsoever Penalties he sees necessary or
convenient. 3dly. That when those Laws he imposes are for the good of his
Subjects, it is not only Justice but Goodness in him to enforce them with the
severest Penalty. 4thly. That the Penalty of eternal Bondage under Misery, is
the severest and most effectual Way to enforce those beneficial Laws, and
oblige us to the Observance of them. 5thly. That if God think good to enforce
his Laws with this Penalty, he has as much Right to exact it when we disobey,
as he had to threaten and impose it. 6thly. That his actual exacting of it can
no more impeach his Goodness, than his threatening and denouncing it.
1. that God being the Sovereign Being of the World, has an unalienable Right
to impose Laws upon all other Beings. For he being the greatest and most
powerful Being, can himself be subject to no other Law but only that of his own
Nature; and his Power being infinite and unconfined as well as his Wisdom,
Justice, and Goodness, does sufficiently warrant him to do whatsoever is
consistent with them. For to be sure a Being of infinite Power and Greatness,
can have no Superior, but must be necessarily exalted above all other
Authorities by this incommunicable Prerogative of his Nature; and being raised
above all Authorities, he must have Authority above all, and his essential
Dominion having no other Law to bound it, but only that of his own Nature, he
must necessarily have a Right to command whatsoever is consistent with his
Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness. His Will therefore being by the infinite
Pre-eminence of his Power and Greatness supreme, all other Wills are obliged to
bow before, and prostrate themselves to its Sovereign Authority; and there is
no Law whatsoever but he may justly impose upon them, provided it be not
repugnant to that supreme Law that is founded in his own Nature. This therefore
being premised, that God has a Right as he is the Sovereign Being to give Laws
to all other Beings; it hence follows,

2dly. That he may justly enforce those Laws with whatsoever Penalties he sees
necessary or convenient. For Laws without penalties are rather Petitions than
Commands; and unless they carry force enough with them to over-aw the subject,
and make themselves obeyed, they want the formal Sanction and Obligation of a
Law. To have a Power therefore of imposing Penalties must necessarily be
inseparable from the Power of making Laws, because they are the Penalties that
make the Laws to oblige, that give them Power to command, and enforce them with
an awful Authority. And as the Power of giving Laws supposes the Power of
imposing Penalties, so it supposes a Power of imposing such Penalties as may be
sufficient to incline and aw the Subject into Obedience, against all Reasons to
the contrary. For unless the Penalty be great enough to outweigh all other
Considerations, the Law which it inforces will be extremely defective in Point
of Obligation, and leave the Subject as much reason to disobey as to obey. God
therefore being by his own natural Right the Supreme Lawgiver of the World,
must be supposed to have an equal Right of enforcing his Laws with such
Penalties as in his own infinite Wisdom he shall think necessary to oblige his
Greatures to obey him; and there is no Penalty can be too rigorous or severe
which is necessary to enable his Laws to oblige and command us. Wherefore
according as he sees his Subjects more or less tempted, or inclined to disobey
him, so will he need greater or less Penalties to oblige us to Obedience; and
therefore foreseeing what a strong Propensity to Evil there would be in our
Nature, and with what importunate Temptations this would be excited and wrought
upon, he could not but foresee that the severest Penalties would be necessary
to back and enforce his Laws, and being necessary for that end, he must needs
have a Right to impose them, how severe soever they might be; nor is this
severity less good than it is just; considering.

3dly. That when those Laws he imposes are for the good of his Subjects, it is
not only an Act of Justice in him to impose them with the severest Penalties,
but of Goodness. And this is really the Case as to those Laws which God has
imposed upon us; for the Matter of them all is something tending to our good,
something or other that is perfective of our Natures, and conducive to our
Happiness; and being so, the greater the Penalty is which they are backed and
enforced with, the greater Demonstration it is of God's Care and Zeal for our
Happiness. For the End of Penalty is to oblige us to Obedience; and when all
Obedience is for our good, the more strictly he obliges us to it, the more he
befriends us. When a distracted Man is endeavoring to mischief and destroy
himself, it is Kingness to bind him though it be with Chains of Iron. When
therefore God found us so prone to injure our selves by wicked and mischievous
Actions, it was Mercy to bind our Hands with his Threatenings of Punishment; and
the stronger his Bands are, the more they express his Kindness; because the
more they oblige us to be kind to our selves, and true to our own Interest. And
certainly for God to lay us under the strongest Obligations to be happy, is so
far from being a Blemish to his Goodness, that it is a most glorious Expression
of it; but if we will be so obstinate as to run into the mouth of those
Threatenings which he has levelled against us to scare us into Happiness, it is
just with him to discharge them upon us, and make us feel the Essects of our
Folly and Madness. Since therefore the Reason of the Penalty wherewith God has
enforced his Laws, is to oblige us to be happy; and since the greater it is,
the more force it must have to oblige us, it hence necessarily follows, that
though it be not only a great, but an eternal one; yet it is not at all
inconsistent with his Goodness; especially if we consider,

4thly. That the Penalty of eternal Misery, as it is the severest, so it is the
most effectual to enforce those beneficial Laws which God has imposed on us,
and to oblige us to the Observance of them. For to deter us from Sin, who are
so vehemently prone to it, it was very requisite that the Penalty denounced
against it, should not only be great as to the Degree, but endless also as to
the Duration of it; that so it might cut us off from all pretense of
Presumption, and leave us no ground of Encouragement to be wicked. For we are
exceeding apt to slight and undervalue those Evils which are proposed to deter
us from the Goods which we vehemently desire, especially when these Goods are
present and sensible, and those Evils future and invisible. For thus we
conclude, the Good that is before us we may enjoy a great while; and, which is
very considerable, we may presently enter upon the Possession of it; but as for
the Evil that is consequent to it, it may be a long while before it befalls us;
and when it does, there is this Comfort, that it will at last have an end; and
therefore let what will follow, let us ever seize the present Good, and make
the best use we can of it; and as for the future Evil, whenever it happens, the
Prospect of its End, though it be never so remote, will enable us to bear it
more cheerfully. For ten Years present Pleasure vehemently desired, will far
more effectually persuade us, than a future Misery of double the Duration; and
therefore if the future Penalty denounced against our Sin were finite and
temporary, it would not be sufficient to balance those present Pleasures with
which we are continually importuned and solicited; for the Penalty being
proposed to deter us from Pleasures which we dearly love, we are upon that
account inclined to make as light of it as may be, and to flatter our selves
with the softest and easiest Representations of it; so that to be sure if there
were any one comfortable Circumstance in it, our Thoughts would presently
insist upon that, and urge it as a Reason why we should not be afraid of it. So
that if the Penalty of our Sin had in it but the Circumstance of being finite,
to be sure when ever it controuled our vicious Desires, we should still make
this a Pretense to despise it; Well, let it be never so terrible, it will have
an end. Wherefore to enable it to terrify us effectually, it was requisite that
it should not only be great, but endless; that it being stripped of all
tolerable Circumstances, we might be able to find nothing in it to qualify the
Terror of it. But now it being not only great but eternal, the Threat of it,
which, like a Cloud, hangs lowering over us, has no bright side to divert our
Thoughts from the Blackness and Horror of it; so that whenever we think of it,
and weigh it in the Balance with our Sins, we must resolve to forsake them, or
choose to be desperate. Since therefore an eternal penalty was so necessary to
enforce God's Law; and since his Law is for our good, it is plain that his so
enforcing it can blemish neither his Justice nor Goodness. Wherefore though we
should smart for ever for our Disobedience hereafter, we can have no just
Reason to complain, of God; especially considering,

5thly. That if God shall think good to enforce his Law with such an eternal
Penalty, he must be supposed to have as much Right to exact it upon our
Disobedience, as he had to threaten and impose it. For as Supremacy over all
other Beings gives a Right to make Laws, and enforce them with Threatenings of
Punishment; so when he has actually imposed Laws upon us, our Disobedience to
them gives a Right to inflict on us the Punishments which he threatened when he
imposed them. For in all legal Funishments the Right of Threatening them is
founded on the Power of the Sovereign; but the Right of executing them in the
Disobedience of the Subject; and if the Penalty be such, as that upon the
Subjects Disobedience the Sovereign cannot justly execute it, it was unjust for
him to threaten it; for to threaten legally, is to claim a Right to punish upon
Condition the Law be broken and violated; and that Sovereign who upon Condition
of the Subjects Disobedience, claims a Right to mcre Punishment than he can
justly exact of him when he disobeys, pretends to more Right than he really
has, and so by consequence his Claim is unrightcous. If therefore by the
Threat of his Law God may justly claim a Right to punish us for ever if we
disobey, then doubtless when we have actually disobeyed, he may as justly exact
it, and does no more exceed his Right when he inflicts what he threatened, than
he did when he threatened to inflict it. If he had Right to say, I will punish
you for ever upon Condition you transgress my Laws, then upon our performing
that Condition he must necessarily have Right to do as he said. So that our
transgressing his Law being a sufficient Condition for him to found a rightful
Claim to punish us eternally, by our doing this Condition we justly forfeit our
selves to eternal Punishment, and by our own Act and Deed voluntarily resign up
our precious Souls to the just lash of an everlasting Vengeance; which as the
Justice of God is no way obliged to suspend, so neither is his Goodness, which
now is our only Reserve; considering.

6thly. And lastly, That God's exacting this eternal Penalty of us can no more
impeach his Goodness than his threatening and denouncing it. That it is highly
consistent with his Goodness to threaten it, I have already proved; but if it
were not also consistent therewith to inflict it, to be sure his own Wisdom
would never admit him to threaten it. For to what end should he threaten to act
contrary to the Goodness of his Nature? Either he must design to make us
believe that he intends to act, or not; if the first, he must thereby design to
abuse, and misrepresent himself in the Opinion of his Creatures, to blemish the
Reputation, and expose the Honor of his own infinite Goodness. But if he did
not design to make us believe it, to what end should he threaten it, since
unless we believe it, it can no more affect us than the firing of a Gun that is
charged with nothing but Powder, and was designed to make a noise only, but to
do no Execution? So that if it be repugnant to God's Goodness to execute this
Penalty, it must be repugnant to his Wisdom to denounce it; but it being not
only consistent with, but an Expression of his Goodness to denounce it, when he
designs thereby to oblige us more firmly to our Duty, in which our everlasting
Happiness is included, it may be no less an Expression of the same Goodness to
execute it upon us, when we by our obstinate Persistance in Sin have rendered
our selves incapable of Mercy. For now there being no more good to be done upon
us, it will be an Act of Goodness in God to punish us for ever, if thereby any
good may be done to others by us; if by making us everlasting Monuments of his
just Indignation, he can everlastingly warn and secure others from those
desperate Courses that ruined us. For in this Case his punishing us for ever,
may be an effectual means to do that good to others which he intended to do to
us by threatening to punish us for ever, and they may take warning by our
Punishment, though we would take none by his Threatening. And when by being
obstinately deaf to the Threat of eternal Perdition, which God denounced on
purpose to oblige us to be happy, we have not only forfeited our selves to it,
but have also sinned our selves into an Incapacity of having any good done upon
us; the only Use which the Divine goodness can make of us for the future, is to
do good to others by us; which it can no otherwise do, but by making our
everlasting Suffering an everlasting Example for them to take warning by. For
though there is no doubt but every virtuous Soul shall be hereafter so
confirmed in its state of Beatitude, as that it shall never fall from it, yet
shall it be confirmed no otherwise than by the force of those Reasons and
invincible Motives which shall then continually urge, and immoveably determine
it unto that which is good: One of which Reasons, as we may reasonably suppose,
will be their prospect of the endless Miseries of the Damned, which will be an
everlasting Monitor to them, and together with their own fense of the ravishing
Pleasures of Goodness, will secure them for ever from falling. For if the
Angels of Heaven took warning by the Fall and Ruin of their Apostate Brethren,
as doubtless they did, and thereupon became more immovably confirmed in
Innocence and Goodness; why may we not as well suppose, that one of those
Reasons b which the Spirits of just Men are so immovably confirmed in their
Heavenly State, is the sad Example of the endless Miseries of the Wicked? If
therefore when God has denounced eternal Misery against us on purpose to
threaten us into Happiness, we will take no warning it is an Act of Goodness in
him to inflict it upon us, since thereby he may so effectually contribute to
the confirming of others in eternal Happiness. For if we will not be wrought on
by such a dreadful Denunciation there is no good can be done upon us; and when
we are past Recovery, and are forfeited by our own Obstinacy into the hands of
God's Vengeance, it will be an Act of Goodness in him so to dispose of us as
may be most for the good of others, and consequently to dispose of us to
eternal Misery, and by so doing to make use of us as Arguments to confirm and
establish oaths in eternal Happiness; that so our Sufferings may be to them
what hs Threatenings were to us, Arguments to oblige us to be happy for ever.
And so I have done with the First Thing proposed, which was to show you that if
God be so determined, he may, without any Injury either to his Justice or
Goodness, retain lost Souls in the Bondage of Hell for ever, and absolutely
refuse to accept any Ransom for them.

I now proceed to the Second Head of Discourse, namely, to prove that God is
actually determined so to do. And this I shall endeavor to demonstrate by
these three Reasons.

1. Because he has already exacted a Ransom for the Souls of Men, to which no
other can be equivalent; from whence we may reasonably infer, that if this be
rejected he will accept no other. 2. Because he has expressly declared himself
to be thus determined. 3. Because having thus declared himself, we must suppose
that either he intended this Declaration only for a Scarecrow, or that he is
determined to act accordingly.
1st. That God is determined to conclude lost Souls under endless Misery, and
admit no Ransom for them, appears from hence; because he has already exacted a
Ransom for them, to which no other can be equivalent; from whence we may
reasonably infer, that if this be rejected, he will accept no other. When by
our first Apostasy from God, we stained the Innocence of our Natures, and
forfeited our Lives to the just Vengeance of Heaven; so terribly was it then
incensed againstus, that it would accept no meaner Ransom for us than the
precious Blood of the Son of God; for so St. Peter tells us, That we were not
redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold; but with the prccious
blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot, 1 Pet. 1.18,
19. And though this Ransom was of such a vast and incomparable Value, that all
the Treasures in Heaven and Earth are insignificant. Trifles to it; yet was the
Virtue of it to extend no further than to those, who, by a lively Faith, and
unfeigned Repentance, returned from their Rebellion to their Duty and
Allegiance; which if we do not, but instead thereof obstinately persist in our
Wickedness and Folly, we renounce all our Part and Interest in the Blood of our
Savior; and do ineffect declare, that upon such Terms as those we will not be
beholding to him for our Ransom; but that rather than accept of Redemption upon
such ungrateful Conditions, we will trust to the Courtesy of the Vengeance of
God, and abide the most fatal Effects of it. When therefore by persisting to
the End in our Unbelief and Impenitence, we have finally rejected the Blood of
Christ, and utterly extinguished all our Right and Title to it; what Pretense
of Reason have we to hope, that God will ever accept of any other Ransom for
us? When to the Sins, by which we made the first Forfeiture of our Souls, we
have added the rank and horrid Impiety of trampling on the Blood of the Son of
God, and so are not only not Redeemed by it from the Vengeance to come, but are
a thousand times more deeply inthralled to it by reason of that additional
Guilt we have contracted by squandring away the Price of our Redemption: With
what Face can we expect, in the midst of such black Circumstances, that God
should accept of any Exchange for our Souls? He that would not release us from
the Obligation of our first Guilts upon any less Consideration than the Blood
of his Son, what likelihood is there that any Consideration should move him to
release us after we have so prodigiously augmented our Guilt by rejecting his
Blood, and finally renouncing all our Interest in it? Doubtless he that
demanded so vast a Ransom for us when our Guilt was so comparatively small and
inconsiderable, will account no Ransom sufficient when we have so
transcendently inhanced and multiplied it. For if the Blood of Christ, which is
of such an unspeakable value, can give us no Relief without our willing
Acceptance of it upon the Terms it is proposed to us, then when we have finally
refused it on those Terms, it must be something that is more valuable than his
Blood that must relieve us; something that is sufficient not only to Redeem us
from those Guilts which his Blood was a Ransom for, but also to expiate the
Guilt of our trampling on his Blood, which is the greatest and blackest of all.
But since the Blood of Christ is incomparably the most precious Ransom that
Heaven and Earth could afford, what hope is there that whn this is rejected by
us, God should accept any other in exchane for our Souls?

2dly. That God is really determined to conclude lost Souls under endless
Misery, and admit no Ransom for them, appears also from hence, Because he has
expressly declared himself to be so determined. For so our blessed Savior, who
was the great Messenger of his Will to the World, has expressly told us, that
the final Sentence of the Wicked shall be to everlasting Fire, Matthew. 25.41.
and that the Fate of obstinate Sinners, whom he compares to Chaff, shall be to
be burned up with unquenchable fire. But perhaps you may object, that these
Texts only prove the Everlastingness of the Fire in which they shall suffer,
and not their everlasting Suffering in it; for this Fire perhaps may
immediately consume, and utterly destroy them, and render them insensible of
Misery for ever. To which I answer, That the contrary is most evident; for they
are expressly said to live in this Fire, and to perform the Functions of living
Beings in Misery; to weep and wail, and gnash their teeth, Matthew. 13.42. and in
the Parable of Dives, he is said to life up his eyes in Hell, being in
torments, and to see Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom; and to cry out
to Abraham, Father Abraham have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip
the top of his finger in water, and cool my tongue, for I am tormented in this
flame, Luke 16.23. -- A plain Evidence that this Fire is to torment and not to
consume them. Well, but this you will sav imports no more than their being
tortured in hell for some period of Time, after which, it may be, they may
cease to be, and consequently to be miserable. To which I answer, That
elsewhere it is expressly asserted, that this Torture is to endure for ever; for
these, says our Savior, speaking of the Wicked, shall go away into
everlasting Punishment, Matthew. 25.46. And how can their Punishment be
everlasting, unless we suppose them to subsist everlastingly in it? If you say
it is everlasting, only as it is an everlasting Destruction, or Privation of
their Being: I answer, That in other Places of Scripture it is expressly
asserted, that this everlasting punishment is a positive thing; for it is said
to be a Worm that never dies, Mark 9.44. that is, that to all Eternity lives
and preys upon the wretched Sufferers; and more expressly yet, Revel. 20.10.
those that are cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, are said to be
tormented there day and night for ever and ever: Where the Greek word (...)
does plainly denote positive Torment, and referring peculiarly to a Rack,
denotes the kind of this positive Torment to be such as is not designed to put
an end to our Lives, but to continue them with inexpressible Pains. For this we
know is the proper Use and Design of a Rack; and accordingly upon this
tormenting Rack of Hiellish Punishment they are said to have no rest day nor
night, Rev. 14.11. So that the eternal Misery of lost Souls is as fully and
expressly asserted in Scripture, as it could well have been, had it been
expressed with a Design to leave no pretense of Exception for Gainsayers; and
when a thing is as plainly asserted to be as it could well have been if it
really were, either we must suppose the Thing to be, or else the Assertion to
be fallacious. So that if we think that God's own Word does truly signify his
Determination, we must from hence be forced to conclude, that he is really
determined to shut up lost Souls in eternal Misery, and admit no Ransom for
them.

3dly. And lastly, This also appears, because if after he has thus declared
himself, there were any Reason to think that he is not determined to act
accordingly, that Reason would warrant us to believe that this Declaration was
only intended for a Scarecrow, and consequently to contemn and despise it. For
against all that has been said, it may be (and is by some Men) objected, That
God is not bound to do as he threatens; that when by our Disobedience we have
incurred the Penalty he threatens, he has an undoubted Right indeed to inflict
it upon us, and consequently may, if he please, inflict it without any Wrong or
Injustice; but then, if he please, he may dispense with it too, either in the
whole, or in part, as he sees convenient. For the Punishment being only a Debt
which the Sinner owes to him, he is no more obliged than other Creditors are to
exact the utmost farthing of it; but may exact or remit the whole, or abate
what part soever he pleases; and therefore it is to be hoped, that he being a
merciful Creditor will not be so extreme and rigorous as to exact of us the
utmost Punishment we owe him; but that when he has made us smart a while for
our Folly, he will either release us into a more happy Condition, or put an end
to our Beings and Miseries together. To which I might answer, That when by our
Sins we have forfeited our selves to the just Vengeance of God, it is infinite
Mercy and Goodness to others, to punish us according to his Threatening; and
therefore when we by our sins have rendered our selves incapable of his Mercy,
that Mercy which now inclines him to do good to us, will then equally incline
him to good to other, by the dreadful Example of our Punishment; and so he may
be a very merciful Creditor, and notwithstanding exact of us the utmost
Farthing. But this I have already largely insisted on, and therefore, 2dly. I
answer, That what God may do is not for us to determine when he may, or may
not, and is obliged to neither; but when he has expressly denounced what he
will do, we can have no Reason to hope that he will be better than his Word.
For if after that he has denounced, that if we persist in our Sin he will
punish us for ever for it, he should have left us any just Reason to hope that
eh will not, he would thereby have countermined himself, and bassled the Design
of his own Denunciation, which is to terrify his rebellious Creatures from
their Sins, and to aw them into Obedience to his Laws. But how much Reason
soever he has given me to hope, that he will not be so severe to me as he
threatens, so much Reason he must have given me not to be afraid of his
Threatenings. If I had any just Reason to believe that he will be more merciful
than to inflict what he denounces, it is an irrational thing for me to dread
his Denunciations; for I know God will do as just Reason directs, and therefore
I must conclude either my Reason to be false, or God's Denunciation to be a
Scarecrow; for if there be any just Reason why his Mercy and Goodness should
interpose, and avert the Execution of his Threats from me, I ought not to be
afraid of them, because I am sure he can do nothing that his Mercy and Goodness
forbids: But if there be no Reason for such an Interposure, I am unreasonably
presumptuous to expect it. So that either my Expectation must be groundless, or
my Fear of God's Threatenings irrational: And can it be imagined that the Wise
God would ever go about to aw his Creatures into Obedience by threatening their
Sin with such Punishments as he knows they have just Reason not to be afradi
of? Whatsoever therefore God may do, I am sure if we go on in our Sins, we can
have no Reason to hope that he will either not punish us at all, or less than
he has threatened; or consequently, that he will abate us one moment of that
eternal Misery which he has so plainly and expressly denounced against us. What
then remains, but that since when our Soul is lost, it is lost for ever, we now
take all possible care to secure it while we may.

V. I proceed now to the Fifth and last Proposition; That this irrecoverable
Loss of the Soul is of such VAST and UNSPEAKABLE Moment, that the Gain of all
the World is not sufficient to compensate it: What shall it profit a Man, if he
shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? That is, It will not profit
him at all; nay it will be so far from that, that it will turn to his
unspeakable Loss and Disadvantage: Though by renouncing his Profession of my
Doctrine, or his Obedience of my Laws, a Man were sure to make himself Lord of
all the World, and to possess and enjoy it as long as he lived; yet if for so
doing he should afterward lose his Soul, as most certainly he will, he will
find in the issue that he has made a woeful Bargain of it, and be forced to
acknowledge himself a vast Loser when he comes to suffer those intolerable
Damages which the loss of a Soul implies. For the Proof of which, I shall run a
Comparison between the Gain and the Loss, and therein endeavor to represent to
you how much the Evil of this Loss exceeds the Good of that Gain; and this I
shall do in these following Particulars: 1st. The Good that is in the Gain is
imaginary and fantastical; but the Evil that is in the Loss is real and
substantial. 2dly. The Good that is in the Gain is narrow and particular; but
the Evil that is in the Loss is large and universal. 3dly. The Good that is in
the Gain is convertible into Evil; but the Evil that is in the Loss is never to
be improved into Good. 4thly. The Good that is in the Gain is mixed and
sophisticated; but the Evil that is in the Loss is pure and unmingled. 5thly.
The Good that is in the Gain is full of Intermissions; but the Evil that is in
the Loss is continual. 6thly. The Good that is in the Gain is short and
transitory; but the Evil that is in the Loss is eternal.


1st. The Good that is in the Gain is imaginary and fantastical; but the Evil
that is in the Loss is real and substantial. For whatsoever we gain of this
Worlds Goods beyond what is necessary to serve the real Occasions, and modest
Conveniences of this present Life, administers to no other purpose but only to
gratify an extravagant Fancy: For all the real Need that a Man has of these
worldly Goods, is only to maintain and provide for his Body; for his Soul has
no more need of them, than an Angel has of Money to buy Victuals and Clothes
with: And one would think so small a thing as an humane Body is, could not need
many things; and that a piece of animate Matter, some six foot long, might be
very easily and cheaply provided for: And indeed so it would be if we could
once forbear fancying its Needs to be greater than they are; but if we let
loose the Reigns to an ungoverned Fancy, That will so extend its Needs beyond
the Capacities of its Nature, that all the World will be too little to content
the extravagant Appetites of this little Clod of Earth. Lay but your Fancies
aside, and you will want no other Apparel but what is sufficient to keep you
warm, and clcan, and modest, and with this you may be very cheaply provided;
but if you will resolve to humor that capricious thing, you will want the
Revenue of a Lordship to cover your Nakedness. Keep but your Fancies in order,
and your Appetites will be contented with plain and wholesome Provisions, and
this a small Income will furnish you with; but if once you let loose that
roving Faculty, and suffer it to grow wanton and delicate, that will so stretch
your Appetites, that the stores of all the four Elements will scarce be
sufficient to gratify their Luxuries. And so it is in all other things
appertaining to the Body; whose Wants according to Natures Measures are small,
but according to Fancies are infinite. So that if a Man had all the World in
his Possession, yet all but that little little part of it that is either
naturally necessary, or rationally convenient for his bodily Subsistence, would
be good for nothing but to humor the Desires of an extravagant Fancy; which
are so far from being quenched, that they are but the more inflamed by
Enjoyment. If I had all the Wealth of Croesus, the good Fortunes of Caesar, and
the Dominions of Alexander, what would it advantage me? I should only have
abundance of things that I have no real need of; things, that if I would my
self, I might easily be as happy without, as I can be with them. For would I
but make my Nature and my Reason the measure of my Wants, I might always live
next door to Satisfaction; and as for my Wants, they would be so light and
portable, that I might easily take them, and carry them along with me, and lay
them down almost wheresoever I pleased. Whereas if I permit my Fancy to grow
wild and imaginative, I shall always find my Wants doubled with my Enjoyments;
and whereas when I had but five Pounds, I needed but five hundred; when I have
five hundred, I shall need five thousand; and so on till at last I need beyond
all possibility of Satisfaction. Since therefore all that this World can do for
me, besides the supplying of a few modest Needs, which a very little of it will
do, what a miserable Loser shall I be, if merely to gratify my Fancy, I forfeit
my Soul, and incur the real Miseries of a woeful Eternity in Pursuit of the
fantastic Joys of a moment? If to purchase things which I shall never be the
better for, which while I have not, I do not need, and which when I have I
shall not enjoy; I should not only squander away the most substantial
Happiness, but plunge my self into a vasts Abyss of real and intolerable
Miseries: O good God, what a woeful Bargain shall I have of it? For though the
Pleasure of our Sin does always vanish on the Brink of Fruition, and like a
golden Dream, concludes in a disappointed Expectation; yet the Sting that is to
follow it will produce in us not only a real, but an extremely sharp and
dolorous Perception; so extremely sharp, that it will pierce our very Hearts,
and cause us to roar out with Anguish for ever. And alas! what a poor
Compensation is it for a Man that must e're long be enduring the Tortures of a
tedious Famine, to be entertained a few Moments with the Picture of a Feast, or
the Story of Cleopatra's Banquet? Or what Man in his Wits would ever forfeit
himself, for the mere Fancy of a Pleasure, to the lingering Torments of a Rack?
And yet, O wretched Sinner, thou actest a thousand times more extravagantly;
who, by thy unlawful Pursuits of the imaginary Pleasures of this World,
betrayest thy Soul to the bitter Torments of Hell.

2dly. The Good that is in the Gain of this World is narrow and particular, but
the Evil that is in the Loss of a Soul is large and universal. It Is but a Part
of our selves, and that the worst Part too, that this World's Goods can benefit
and advantage; they can only clothe our Bodies more splendidly, and feed them
more deliciously, and furnish them with more Plenty of outward Accommodations;
but alas for the Soul, they are as insignificant to her, as Musical Sounds are
to the Eye of the Body, or magnificent Shows to the Ear: They cannot improve
the meanest Faculty about her, nor make her in any respect either the better or
the wiser. And as for the Body it self, wherein all their Lines do center,
there are a thousand Cases in which they are perfectly useless; for they cannot
give Health to it in any Sickness, for Ease in any Pain; they cannot recover a
lost Sense, nor restore a withered Limb, nor rectify a deformed Feature; nor is
it in their Power to reprieve it from the Grave one moment beyond the natural
Period of its Mortality. So extremely narrow are these worldly Goods which we
are so greedy of, that they can extend their Benefits no farther than the Body;
nay, and even to that they are vastly inadequate, there being a thousand bodily
Necessities whereunto they cannot extend themselves. So that if to purchase
these we expose our selves to eternal Perdition, we shall have in comparison
but a drop of Good to compensate our selves for an Ocean of Misery. For the
Misery of Hell is as vast and extensive as our Capacity of Suffering, and has
in it an appropriate Torment for every sensible Part of our Natures. It racks
the wretched Soul in every Faculty, and fills up all its Capacities of Misery
with Anguish and Vexation: It afflicts its Mind with horrid Apprehensions,
wounds and gashes its Conscience with dismal Reflections; it festers its Will
with black and venomous Passions, and starves its Desires with everlasting
Famine. And as it leaves no part of the Soul untormented, but covers it over
from Head to Foot with Wounds, and Bruises, and putrefying Sores; so when the
Body at the Resurrection is reunited to it, the Misery of Hell will extend to
this also; for then it will have superadded to its Spiritual Plagues the most
exquisite Instrument of Corporeal Torment, viz. the dark, and noisome, and
scorching Flames of a burning World, which will seize upon the Bodies of
Reprobate Sinners, they being sinally abandoned to them by the last and final
Sentence, and stick close to, and burn through them for ever. And their Bodies
being thus wrapped and clothed in flaming Sulphur, must needs be exquisitely
vexed in every Part and Member, and feel as many Torments as they have Senses
to endure them. Thus the Miseries of Hell, you see, are far more extensive than
the Goods of this World; for whereas these extend only to our Bodies, and can
relieve them but in a few of their Necessities, those overspread both the Body
and Soul, and are both coeternal and coequal with their utmost Capacities of
Suffering: So that when by our unlawful Pursuits of the Goods of this World we
forfeit our selves to eternal Perdition, we plunge our whole Nature into
intolerable Misery for the Ease and the Pleasure of one particular Part. Now
would any Man in his Wits, do you think, eat Rats-bane for no other Reason, but
only because it is sweet? Would he to please his liquorish Palate diffuse a
tormenting Poison over all his Parts and Members? Or would he think the
Pleasure of one sweet Gust a sufficient Compensation for all the succeeding
Spasms and Convulsions? Surely no; none but a Madman could ever admit of such
an Extravagance. And yet, O wretched Sinner! thou art far more wild and
extravagant; for a particular Good thou throwest thy self headlong into an
universal Misery; and to gratify thy Body in a few little things do utterly
ruin both thy Body and Soul. To please thy self in one part, thou punishest thy
self in all; and for the gratifying one Sense, derivest a tormenting Venom over
all the Senses of thy Nature; and so in fine, wilt have nothing but the
Pleasure of a Taste or a Touch to compensate thee for all the Agonies and
Torments that thy Body and Soul together are able to sustain. And what a poor
Compensation this is, I leave you to judge.

3dly. The Good that is in the Gain of this World is convertible into Evil; but
the Evil that is in the Loss of a Soul is never to be improved into Good. When
we are arrived to the Possession of those outward Goods which at present we do
so greedily grasp after, it is a very uncertain thing whether they will prove
Goods to us or no; whether, even as to this Life, we shall be the better or the
worse for them. For it is very often seen that these worldly Goods prove the
worst of Plagues to those that are the Owners of them, and that those things
which we account the Blessings of this Life, do prove the Curses and Miseries
of it. When by a thousand Lies, Flatteries, and Circumventions, a Man has
raised himself up to that pinnacle of Preferment which his Ambition aspired to,
how often has that Height proved the Occasion of his Fall, by exposing him to
those Storms of Envy and Misfortune which would have blown over his Head, had
he sat quietly below, and been contented to enjoy himself in a more private
Fortune? And so when by an infinite number of Rapines, and Oppressions, Frauds,
and dishonest Compliances, a Man has amassed together a vast deal of Wealth,
how often has that proved the Occasion of his Undoing? Sometimes by exposing
him to the rapacious Covetousness of others, but most commonly to the ill
Effects of his own extravagant Luxuries. For usually when Frand is the Procurer
of Wealth, Wealth is the Baud of Luxury; this being the best Expedient to drown
the Cry of the Guilt of our Dishonesty. And then by that time Luxury has
produced its natural Effects, it commonly leaves the wealthy Possessor in a far
worse Condition than Poverty; it leaves him so rackt with the Gout or the
Stone, so overwhelmed with Catarrhs or Dropsies, that the miserable Man would
be heartily contented to part with all his Wealth for Ease, and to return to
Poverty so he might but return to the Health of an honest Plough-man; whereas
would he have contented himself with the honest Acquest of a moderate Fortune,
he need have wanted nothing but Temptations to Luxury, and Provisions for
tormenting Diseases. So that in short, whilst we are pursuing this World's
Goods, we know not what our Game will be till we have seized on it;
peradventure instead of Venison we are hunting a Serpent, which, when we have
caught, will sting and invenom us, and prove a Plague instead of a
Satisfaction. And is it not extravagant Madness then for Men to run themselves
into all those Miseries, which everlasting Ruin and Perdition implies, for the
sake of such uncertain Goods, which when they are possessed of, for all they
know, may do them a thousand times more Mischief than Good? For as for those
future Miseries, which by our sinful Pursuits of these present Goods we incur,
they are all such absolute and essential Evils, that there is not one drop of
Good to be extracted out of them; for as they are eternal they are of an
unalterable Nature, and the same insupportable Plagues they were yesterday,
they will continue to be to day, and for ever, Indeed if we were to outlive
them, they might be accidentally advantageous to us; they might discipline our
Natures for an Happiness to come, and serve as so many Toils to our future
Pleasures; and when they are past, the Remembrance of them, like bitter Sauce,
might give a Relish to our Joys, and render them more grateful and delicious:
But we being to endure 'em for ever, there is nothing Good can succeed them, no
possible Advantage can be derived from them; for in Miseries that have no End,
there can be nothing but Misery. And is it not very strange then, that Men
should forfeit their Souls to such unalterable Miseries, for such Goods as may
be Plagues to them? when for all they know there may be such a Train of
Mischiefs at the heels of these Pleasures, and Prosits, and Honors they are so
greedy of, as may outweigh all the good of them, and render them a dear
Pennyworth, though they had never pawned their Souls for them. And if it so
prove, as it is very probable it may, then their Bargain is worse than if they
had pawned their Souls for nothing; because they have incurred one Misery only
to seize upon another, and have waded through a temporal to come at an eternal
one.

4thly. The Good that is in the Gain of this World, is mixed and sophisticated;
but the Evil that is in the Loss of a Soul is pure and unmingled. Should a Man
sell his Soul for never so great a share of this World's Goods, he would find
he had gotten but a very uneasy Purchase; a Purchase as he can neither secure
without a great deal of care, nor yet enjoy without a great deal of
Dissatisfaction. For what we call ours, is really ours but for our Portion of
Expense and Use; and all that is ours beyond this, is only the Title and the
Care, and the Trouble of securing and dispensing it; for let but your Servants
walk into your Gardens of Pleasure, and the Air shall fan them with as gentle
Gales, the Flowers delight them with as fragrant Odours, and the Birds
entertain them with as ravishing Melodies. And in some sense your meanest
Servants enjoy what you have with far more freedom than you; for your
Possessions are like a great Harvest, which many Laborers must bring in, and
more must eat of; only you are the Center of all the Cares, and you they six
on; but the Profits run out to all the Lines of your Circle, who usually enjoy
their several shares with much more Peace and Quiet than you. You take the
Pains to dig the Well, and undergo the Care of supplying and maintaning it; and
when you have done, you can drink no more of it than the meanest Slave about
you; but what you drink cannot be so sweet and pure, because it is dashed with
many more Cares and Disturbances. For considering the infinite Hazards these
worldly Goods are exposed to, they must needs carry with them abundance of
Cares and Disquietudes; so that when you are possessed of them, you only grasp
a Bundle of gilded Thorns, which while they please your Eyes, will prick your
Hearts, and continually disease you in the Enjoyment of them. And then for the
Enjoyment it self, considered abstractedly from those Cares that surround it,
alas it is such as rather creates Desire than Satisfaction; for though at a
distance these Terrestrial Goods do promise us fair; and raise in us vast and
boundless Hopes; yet still when we approach nearer to them, we find our selves
miserably deceived. And then our Enjoyment falling so vastly short of our
Expectation, al those swelling Hopes that flattered and tolled us on, fall flat
immediately under the Disappointments of Fruition; and accordingly our Desires
missing their promised Satisfactions, grow more outrageous and violent. And
thus our Enjoyments, as they are compassed with Vexations, so are they mingled
with restless Discontents, as being all too little for our vast Desires; which
are therefore rather enraged than satisfied with them. What infinite Losers
therefore must those Men be, who to compass those sophisticated Goods which
have so many Evils intermixed with them, forfeit their Souls to everlasting
Perdition? which is so vast and so intense an Evil, as will admit no degree of
Good to be intermingled with it; a Misery so pure and unallayed, as that it
totally excludes all Communication with Happiness, and will not admit the least
Hope of Ease or Refreshment. For what Ease can we hope for in the everlasting
Burnings? What Refreshment can we expect in the unquenchable Lake of Fire and
Brimstone? Doubtless we may as soon hope to find a Cordial in the Sting of a
Scorpion, or sprightly Nextar in a Nest of Wasps, as one degree of Ease or
Comfort in Hell. There is not a Gleam of Light in all that Region of Darkness,
not a Drop of Sweet in all that vast Ocean of Gall and Wormwood; but it is all
Misery, sharp and exquisite Misery, without the least Mixture of Ease, or Hope
of Mitigation. Can we then be so stupid as to imagine the enjoying this World's
Goods, which are all such Compositions of Good and Evil, worth the enduring
such pure and abstracted Miseries for ever? Would you for the Pleasure of an
intemperate Draught that will quickly end in a Qualm or an Headache, be
contented to endure the Torment of being impaled? Or provided you might spend
this Night in your lascivious Enjoyment, which after a few Moments will
conclude in Shame and Remorse, would you be willing to roar upon the Rack all
the Might after? doubtless you would not. And yet, God knows, these Plcasures
are not comparably so disproportionate to those Pains, as the Pleasures of this
World are to the Pains of Eternity. How then is it possible that such
Battersweets as the these are, Sweets that are chequered with so many Cares,
and allayed with so many Discontents, and Disappointments, should be sufficient
to countervail those intolerable Miseries which the Loss of our Souls implies?

5thly. The Good that is in the Gain of this World is full of Intermissions;
but the Evil that is in the Loss of a Soul is continual. If I were Lord of all
the World, I should never be able to live in a constant Enjoyment of it. For
such wretched Counterfeits are all the Pleasures of Sense, that they will not
endure the Test of a long Fruition; for at the best they are but Frolicks of
Delight that never serze us but when we are turned up to them in Moods and
Fits, and all the Complacencies we have in them are nothing but the little
Starts of our Appetite, which, as soon as it has done craving, grows a meary
of them, and so injoys and loathes them by Turns; for they can dwell no longer
upon the Appetite than while the Necessities of Nature do continue; and every
fresh Morsel after the Hunger is satisfied, is but a new Labor to a tired
Digestion, and so instead of being a Pleasure becomes an Oppression. So that it
is but a very little while that the Pleasure of any outward Enjoyment
continues; for till it has pleased us it is not a Pleasure, and when it has,
it ceases to be so; and so it dies as soon as it is born, and its Nativity is
only a Prelude to its Funeral. Thus all our Enjoyments are stinted by our
Appetites, which are naturally incapable of a continued Fruition. But then
besides this, our Enjoyments are liable to a thousand other Interruptions,
which are are not in our power to prevent or avoid; for whether we will or no,
we must be some times out of Humor, and then all the Pleasures in the World
are most tedious Impertinencies; and some times we must sleep, and then we are
insensible of them; and sometimes be sick, and then they are as tastless as a
Cork; and sometimes be griped with guilty Thoughts, and ill-aboding
Reflections, and then, instead of Pleasures, they are our Horrors and
Vexations. Thus our Enjoyment, like an Ague, is full of Intermissions; now we
are pleased, and anon we are displeased, and immediately after the hot Fit is
over, the cold One returns; and thus it would be if we had all the World in our
Possession. And indeed the Intervals of our Enjoyment of these Terrestrial
Goods are usually longer than the Enjoyment it self, and the hot Fits of our
Pleasure and Fruition are generally sooner over, than those cold Ones of
Displeasure and Dissatisfaction that succeed them. So that if I could command
all the Goods in the World, they would be so far from yielding me a continued
Happiness, that in all Probability the Interruptions of my Happiness would take
up a greater Part of my Life than the Enjoyment of it; and perhaps for every
one moment of Fruition, I should spend two either in Pain, or in Non-perception
of Pleasure. How then is it possible that such a broken and discontinued
Happiness as this should ever make us amends for those Miseries that are
included in the Loss of our Souls? For to loss our Souls is to be miserable
without any Interruption, to be eternally grieved and tortured without any
Intervals of Ease or Refreshment. For the State of Perdition is a continual
Torment spun out into an endless Duration, wherein there are no Days of Rest,
nor Nights of Sleep, nor intermeditae Pauses of Ease; where the Fire never
ceases burning, nor the Worm gnawing, but Woe succeeds Woe without Intermission,
and Miseries, like the nimble Minutes of Time, follow Miseries, and tread close
upon one another Heels. Hence, Rev. 20.10. those that aee cast into this Lake
of Perdition, are said to be tormented day and night for ever; which plainly
implies that their Miseries are all but one uninterrupted Torment, or continued
Succession of dolorous Perceptions for ever. And if so, O blessed God, what a
poor Compensation for it are the broken Joys of this World? For if the Misery
of Hell were to last no longer than the Happiness of this World, yet if for one
Week's Happiness here I were to endure another Week's Misery there, I should
have a miserable Bargain of it; because the Happiness being so interrupted, and
the Misery so continued, I must in the same space undergo at least double the
Misery that I enjoyed Happiness. And what Man would be contented to live all
the next Week in a Cauldron of boiling Oil, wherein he knows he shall be
continually tormented, provided he may spend this Week in an uninterrupted
Enjoyment of the most grateful Luxuries, which he knows he must be as often and
as long insensible as he can be sensible of?

6thly. And lastly, The Good that is in the Gain of this World is fading and
transitory; but the Evil that is in the Loss of the Soul is eternal. For so
impotent are all this World's Goods, that they cannot insure us of oue moment's
Enjoyment of them. it may be as soon as ever we have filled our Bags and Barns
with the Wages of our Iniquity, and have a plentiful Provision for many Years
Ease and Luxury, we may be snatched away upon the very Brinks of Enjoyment, and
hurried into a woeful Eternity, there to consume those Years in Misery and
Torment, which we promised to spend in Pleasure and Voluptuousness. This you
know was the Case of the rich Epicure in the Gospel; how did the jolly Wretch
congratulate and applaud himself in the golden Purchase of his Frauds and
Oppressions? How did he vaunt of his own Prudence, and good Conduct, and strut
and swell with munificent Conceits of the happy Condition he was now arrived
to, when all of a sudden his unprepared Soul was surprised with a Summons to
Eternity? And then how blank did the Fool look upon the fatal News, that that
Night must put an End to all his Hopes and Pleasures, and deprive him of all
those future Enjoyments with which he had promised to recompense all his past
Toils and Labors? With what Regret and Reluctance was he dragged from the dear
Purchase of his Sweat and Sin? and in what Agonies of Horror did he groan out
his wretched Spirit, when instead of enjoying the Goods he had laid up for many
Years, he felt himself sinking into a woeful Eternity, and lie weltring there in
unquenchable Flames, whilst he hoped to have been wallowing here in Ease and
Voluptuousness? But suppose we should enjoy the many Years Ease which this
vainglorious Fool was disappointed of; alas those Years will quickly expire,
and Threescore and ten, or Fourscore at most, is the utmost Period we can hope
to arrive to; but then from thence commences an Eternity of Misery which
Millions of Millions of Ages can neither shrink nor exhaust, and compared with
the longest Life of Pleasure has not the Proportion of one single moment. So
that if in Exchange for our Souls we could purchase a Lease of Life as long as
Methuselah's, and a Lease of Happiness parallel to that Life, yet in the
Conclusion we should find it a most woeful Bargain; because when both these
Leases are expired, as they must at last though it be long first, we must
remove into a State of intolerable Misery, whose Duration will be always
equally because it will be always infinitely distant from a Period; and when we
are there, all that long Train of Happiness that is past will seem but a
Minute's Dream in Comparison of that Eternity of Misery that is to come. But O
good God, when for thirty or forty Years Pleasure upon Earth, I have suffered a
thousand Years Torment in Hell, and after that have endless Thousands of
Thousands more to suffer, how dearly shall I rue my own Folly and Madness, that
for the sake of a few Moments Pleasure have run my self headlong into such an
endless Misery! Consider therefore, O my Soul! within a little while all these
outward Goods which I have purchased by my Sin, will signify no more to me than
if they had never been, and all their alluring Relishes will be gone and
forgotten for ever; but then for Ten thousand Millions of Ages after I shall be
feeling the Smart, and enduring the Stings of them. When all my ill-gotten
Wealth is shrunk into a Winding Sheet, and my vast Possessions into six foot of
Earth, and I have none of its Pomps or Pleasures left either to go along with,
or to follow after me, then will the Guilt of all stick close to me, and raise
a Cry on me as high as the Tribunal of God; a Cry that will draw down an
everlasting Vengeance on my Head, and ring Peals of Thunder in my Conscience
for ever. Lord! what a poor Amends then is the momentary Enjoyments of the
Goods of this World to me, and that after a few Years must pass into another,
and there languish away a long Eternity under the intolerable Anguish of a
damned Spirit.

And thus you see, upon a just Survey of the Gains of this world, and the Loss
of a Soul, how infinitely short the Happiness of the one is to make us any
tolerable Compensation for the Miseries of the other. And if the Gain of all
the World be too little to countervail this Loss, what miserable Losers are the
Generality of Men that forfeit their Souls upon a far less valuable
Consideration? For no Man was ever yet, or is ever like to be so prosperous in
his Sin, as to gain the whole World by it; that is a Scramble in which Millions
are engaged, and of which every one will be catching a Share. But, alas, for
the Generality, the Purchase of Men's Sin is so small and inconsiderable, that
it is scarce a valuable Consideration for the Soul of a Rat. For what does the
common Swearer get by all his senseless and impertinent Oaths, which are capable
of serving no other Purpose but only to stop the Gaps of his Speech, or to man
his Rage, that he may rave, and play the Fool a little more genteely? What does
the Drunkard gain by all his Intemperances, but only a short Fit of frantic
Mirth, and extravagant Jollity, which, after a few Hours, ends in a sleepless
Night, a sick, and uneasy Stomach, and a sottish Confusion over all his Senses?
What does the envious and malicious Man get by all his studied Mischiefs and
Revenges? When he has plucked out his Enemy's Eye, he cannot put it into his
own Head, nor can he increase the Stock of his own Happiness by diminishing his
Adversaries. When he has made another the worse, he is never the better for
it; nor do his Injuries grow less by being retaliated: So that he vexes and
disquiets himself to no purpose, but to make his Enemy bleed; he keeps his own
Wound green, and consequently multiplies Evils in vain, and prosecutes Mischief
only for Mischief's sake. I confess there are some Vices that are not
altogether so unprofitable as these; in some Vices there is a Prospect of
worldly Gain and Greatness, in others of sensitive Pleasure and Delight; but
alas, when after a few days Enjoyment of those Gains and Pleasures, I am called
away from them, and transported into a woeful Eternity, there to expiate the
Guilts of them with those sharp and everlasting Torments I shall be made to
endure, how shall I be astonished at my own desperate Folly to think what a mad
Bargain I have made? what an Happiness I have sold to purchase those Gains?
what a Misery I have incurred to grasp and enjoy those Pleasures? O! now what
would I give for a Jail-delivery from Hell, or but for the least Mitigation of
my Agonies and Torments! If I had all the Wealth that I purchased by my Sin,
and ten thousand times more, how willingly would I part with it to bribe my
Flames, and corrupt my Tormentors? O! now I shall wish a thousand and a
thousand times that I had rather chosen to famish for want of Bread, than to
enjoy those accursed Profits and Pleasures that were the Fruits and Wages of
mine Iniquities; but now alas it will be too late to Repent. As yet we have the
Opportunity to retrieve our own Folly, and to revoke and cancel this our
desperate Bargain, and by our serious Repentance and hearty Renunciation of the
Temptations of this World, we may release our selves from our Covenant with
Death, and Agreement with Hell. But if we out-stay our Opportunity a few
Moments longer, till Death has put an end to it, the fatal Bargain will be
sealed past all Revocation.

OF THE Divinity and Incarnation OF OUR SAVIOR.
JOHN I. 14. And the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld
his Glory, the Glory as of the only begotten of his Father) full of Grace and
Truth.


THESE Words contain Three distinct Propositions; I. The Word was made Flesh:
II. And dwelt among us full of Grace and Truth: III. And we beheld his Glory,
the Glory as of the only begotten of his Father. Of each of these I intend to
discourse in their order.

I. The first is, That the Word was made Flesh. In handling of which I shall do
these three Things: 1. Show you what we are here to understand by The Word. 2.
Why it is called The Word. 3. What we are to understand by The Word's being
made Flesh.


1. What is meant by the Word? I answer in general, That by the Word here we
are to understand Christ: For in the following Verse you will find that this
Word was He of whom John the Baptist was the Forerunner, and to whom he bare
Witness, saying, This was he of whom I spoke, He that comes after me, is
preferred before me; for he was before me. And in the other Evangelists you
will find that it was Christ whose Forerunner the Baptist was, and to whom he
gave this Testimony, as you may see at your leisure, Matthew. 3.11. and Mark 1.7.
Luke 3.16. where you find John Baptist giving the same Testimony to Christ
which here he gives to the Word, especially v. 27. of this Chapter. Which is a
plain Evidence that Christ and the Word are only different Titles of the same
Person. But that I may more particularly explain to you the Meaning of this
Phrase, I will briefly deliver my Sense of it in these following Propositions:
1. That this Phrase, The Word, as it is by way of Eminence applied to a
particular Subject, is derived into the New Testament from the Theology of the
Jews and Gentiles. 2. That the New Testament giving no distinct Explication of
it, it is most safe and reasonable to fetch the Sense of it from that ancient
Theology whence it was derived. 3. That the Theology from whence it was
derived, uses it to signify a vital and Divine Subsistence. 4. That therefore
our Savior, to whom it is applied in the New Testament, is that vital and
Divine Subsistence.


1. That this Phrase The Word, as it is by way of Eminency applied to a
particular Subject, is derived into the New Testament from the Theology of the
Jews and Gentiles. Which will plainly appear to any one that shall consider the
exact Agreement between those Titles and Characters which are given to our
Savior in the New Testament, and those which the Jews and Gentiles give to the
Word, so often mentioned in their Theology. For as for this Phrase (...), The
Word, it is very anciently used in the Writings both of Jews and Gentiles. For
Rab. Azariel in his Treatise of Holiness, quotes it out of the Book of the
Creation, which was written by Rab. Abraham an ancient Cabalist, who the Jews
say was the Patriarch Abraham himself. The Spirit, says he, meaning the most
High God, brings forth the Word and the Voice, and these Three are one God.
Thus also it is frequently used in the Chaldee Paraphrase as eminently
appropriated to a Divine Person: So in Isa. 45.17. instead of Israel shall be
saved in the Lord, they read it, by the Word of the Lord; and Jerem. 1.8.
instead of I am with thee, they read, because my Word is with thee: and Genesis
15.1. instead of I am thy shield, they read, my Word is thy shield; and so in
sundry other places. And, which is very observable, Psalm. 110.1. instead of The
Lord said unto my Lord, they read, The Lord said unto his Word; which Words our
Savior applies to himself, Matthew. 22.44. as being himself that Eternal Word,
or (...), there mentioned. And in the same Sense also it was very anciently
used in the Writings of the Gentile Philosophy. Thus Zeno, as Tertullian tells
us Tertull. Apologet. c. 36 Pam. Hunc. ( i.e. (...)) Zeno determinat factitorem
qui cuncta in dispositione formaverit, eundemque and fatum vocari and Deum and
animum Jovis.
, speaks of a (...) by which the World was made, and which he calls Fate, and
God, and the Soul of Jupiter. And the ancient Orpheus, as he is quoted by
Clemens Alexandrinus Stromat. L. 5 p. 607. (...).
, exhorts Men to behold and contemplate the Divine Word, who is the immortal
King of Heaven. And Plato Epinomis.
tells us, that the Motions of the Stars were disposed and ordered by the Word.
By which it is plain that this Phrase was used as appropriate to a Divine
Person, both by Jews and Gentiles, long before the Writing of the New
Testament. And that the New Testament derived it from their Writings is
apparent; for that it attributes to Christ the same Titles and Characters which
they were wont to attribute to the (...). Thus as the New Testament calls
Christ the Messiah, The Word, so the Chaldee Paraphrase expressly tells us that
Messiah is called the Word of God, Oseae, cap. 7. Thus as St. Paul calls him
the King immortal, so Orpheus in the aforementioned Place calls him (...), the
King immortal. And whereas Christ is said to be the Image of God, 2 Cor. 4.4.
to be the shining forth of his Glory, and the express Character of his Person,
Heb. 1.3. Philo calls him (...) Lib. 2 de Agricultuta p. 169. Edit. Genev. 1613.
, the (...) and (...) Leg. Allegd. 2. p 60.
; that is, the Character of God, and the Shadow and Image of God: And Plotin,
That it is a Light streaming forth from God, even as Brightness does from the
Sun Enn. 5. l. f. c. 6.
. And as St. John in the first Verse of this Chapter tells us, That the Word
was from the beginning with God, and that it was God; so Philo tells us, that
by Prerogative of Eldership he abides with the Father; and Zeno, in the
aforenamed place, that he is God; and Plotin Ibid.
tells us, That being the Word of God, and the Image of God, he is inseparably
conjoined with him. And whereas Christ tells us, That he is the Light of the
World, John 8.12. the Manna which comes down from Heaven; and the Bread of
Life, John 6.33, 35. The same Philo styles him the Word, the Light Philo de
Opif. mundi. p. 4, 5.
, the Manna Quod det. pot. ins. sol. p. 137.
, the (...) and (...) Leg. Alleg. l. 2. p. 70, and 71.
; that is, the Bread and Food which God has given to the Soul. And whereas it
is said, that the Father is in Christ, that he dwells and abides in him, John
14.10. the same Author says (...) De Migrat. Abrah. p. 304.
; that is, the Word is the House of the Father, in whom he dwells. Whereas
Christ is said to have a Name, Phil. 2.9. and to be advanced above all
Principalities and Powers, Ephesians. 1.21. Philo tells us that this Divine Word is
(...) Leg. Alleg. p. 71.
; that is, above all Worlds, and the most ancient of all things that are.
Whereas Christ is said to be the High Priest over the House of God, Heb. 10.21.
Philo tells us, that the World is the Temple of God, (...) De Somniis, p. 463.
; that is, in which the Firstborn Divine Word is the High Priest. Whereas
Christ is said to be the Son of God, and the Firstborn of every Creature;
Plato calls him, the begotten Son of the Good De Repub. l. 6.
; Plotin, the Son of God Enn. 5. l. 8. c. 12.
; and Philo, the First-begotten Son and Word of God De Somn. p. 463.
. Again, whereas God is said to have created the World by Christ, Heb. 1.2. and
to have committed the Government of it to him; Philo calls the (...), the (...)
De Cherub. p. 88.
; that is, the Governor of all things, and the (...) De Somn. p. 466.
, the Viceroy of God; and also (...) Lib. Cherub. p. 100.
; that is, the Instrument of God by whom he made the World. As in Christ the
Fullness of the Godhead is said to dwell, Colos. 2.9. so Plotin tells us of the
(...), that it is filled with God Ennead. 5. l. 3. c. 12.
. As Christ is called the great Shepherd of our Souls, 1 Pet. 2.25. so Philo
tells us, that God, who is King and Pastor of the World, has appointed the
Word his first-begotten Son, (...) De Agricult. p. 152.
, to undertake the Care of his sacred Flock, as his own Viceroy and
Substitute: and accordingly in the same place he makes The Word to be that
Angel whom God had promised to send before the Camp of Israel to conduct them
through the Wilderness. In short, as the Angels are said to be subject unto
Christ, 1 Pet. 3.22. and as Christ is said to be the Angel or Messenger of God,
Joh. 9.4. so Philo calls the most ancient Word the (...) Quaest Rerum divin.
haer. p. 397.
; that is, the Prince of the Angels, and the (...) De Somn. p. 466.
; the Angel or Messenger of God. And, to name no more, as Christ is called the
Mediator of the new Covenant, Heb. 12.24. and the Intercessor between God and
Man, Heb. 7.25. and the Propitiation and Atonement: So says Philo, (which is
highly worthy of our Observation) the word (...), etc. Quaest. Rerum. Divin.
her. p. 397.
is the Intercessor for Mortals with the immortal God, and also the Ambassador
of that great King to his Subjects; which Office, says he, he willingly
undertook, saying, I will stand in the middle between the Lord and you, as
being neither unborn as God, nor born as you; but being a Medium between those
two Extremes, I will be a Pledge for both; for his Creatures, that they shall
not utterly apostatize from him; for God, that he will not be wanting in his
Fatherly Care toward them. And in another place he tells us, that the (...) is
(...) De Somniis, p. 447.
; that is, the Beginning and the End of God's Good Will to the World; which is
all one with Propitiation.

And these Authorities of Philo I have the rather insisted upon, because he
being a Jew and a Platonic Philosopher, must needs understand the Theology of
Jews and Gentiles; and living about the Time of our Savior, he must be
supposed to have written in Terms that were then in use, and were very well
understood both by Jews and Gentiles: And if so, then it must necessarily
follow that this Phrase The Word, so common in that Author, was very commonly
used both by Jews and Gentiles in our Savior's Time, and consequently that it
was derived from them, and so appropriated to our Savior by the inspired
Writers of the New Testament. And indeed it is not to be imagined how those
inspired Writers should ever have so exactly agreed with the Jews and Gentiles
in the Titles and Characters of the Eternal Word, had not either they
themselves, or the Spirit of God, which dictated to them, purposely derived it
from them.

2. That the New Testament giving no distinct Explication of this Phrase The
Word, it is most safe and reasonable to fetch the Sense of it from that ancient
Theology whence it was derived. I do not deny but it is usual with all Writers
to use Terms and Phrases by way of Accommodation, and to illustrate their Sense
by alluding to something that is like it; and therefore are not always to be
understood in the Sense which those Terms and Phrases do most commonly signify,
but in a Sense that has some Proportion with it, as the Drift and Connection
of their Discourse does plainly intimate. But when Writers use Words in a
literal Sense, without any Note of Allusion, and without explaining themselves
into any different Sense, either they must mean the same Thing which those
Words do commonly signify, or else they must mean to deceive and impose upon
their Readers. And thus stands the Case before us; our Savior is here styled
The Word, a Term of Art which was very common both in the Jewish and Gentile
Philosophy; and neither here, nor any where else, is there the least Intimation
that he is called so, only by way of Allusion; nor is it in all the New
Testament explained into any other Sense than that wherein it was commonly
used; and therefore the Intent of the Sacred Writers in using it must be either
to denote the same thing which it signified before, or to deceive and impose
upon the World. But doubtless if the Holy Spirit, which inspired those Writers,
had meant any thing else by it than what it ordinarily fignifies, he would have
told us of it, and not have given us such an unavoidable Occasion to mistake in
so great a Doctrine, by clothing its Sense in such a Phrase as generally
signifies what he never meant. For when he called Christ by the same Name, and
attributed the same Titles and Characters by which the Jews and Gentiles were
wont to describe their LOGOS, he could not but foresee that all inquisitive
Persons would be apt to conclude that he meant the same thing; and therefore if
he had not meant so, he would doubtless either not have given him that Name,
and those Titles, or else, to prevent our being imposed upon by them, he would
have explained them into some other meaning; which since he has not done, we
may safely and rationally conclude that he has meant the same Thing by this
Name, and those Titles with those from whom he did derive them; and
consequently that the most certain way for us to understand what is the Sense
of Christ's being The Word, is to consider what those Jews and Gentiles meant
by it from whose Philosophy it was first borrowed and derived.

3. That both the Jewish and Gentile Theology used this Phrase The Word, to
signify a Vital and Divine Subsistence. For as for the Jews, it is plain that by
The Word they meant the Messiah; and therefore, Ps. 110. which they say
contains the Mysteries of the Messiah, the Chaldee Paraphrase, instead of the
Lord said unto my Lord, read the Lord said unto his Word, that is consequently
to his Messiah. And Rab. Arama upon Genesis, explaining that Passage in the 107
Ps. 20. The Lord sent forth his Word, and they were healed; expressly tells us,
that by this Word is meant the Messiah. And Rab. Simeon the Son of Johni
expounding those Words of Job 19.26. Yet in my Flesh shall I see God, faith,
that the Mercy which proceeds from the highest Wisdom of God, shall be crowned
by The Word, and take Flesh of a Woman; by which it is plain that by The Word he
understood the Messiah. And that by the Messiah they understood a Divine
Subsistence, is evident from sundry Places in the Chaldee Paraphrase; which
often applies the Name Jehovah to the Messiah; which according to the Opinion
of the Jews, ought not to be imparted to any Creature; as particularly, Isa.
28.5. Jehovah Sabbath (for so it is in the Hebrew) shall be a Crown of Glory
unto the residue of his People; which those Interpreters understand concerning
the Messiah. So also Isa. 18.7. In that time shall the Present be brought unto
the Lord of Hosts; that is, say they, unto the Messiah. So also, Jerem. 33.16.
By Jehovah our Righteousness, they understand the Messiah; and by the Name of
the Everlasting, Moses Hadersan understands the Name of the Messiah, or
Anointed King. And certainly had they not believed the Messiah to be a Divine
Subsistence, they would never have attributed to him this incommunicable Name
of God; of which they had so high a Veneration, that they thought it too sacred
for any Creature to name, and much more to assume. And the Commentary upon the
fourth Psalm expressly says, Because the Gentiles cease not to ask us, Where is
our God, the time will come that God will sit among the Righteous, so as they
shall be able to point him out with the finger; which plainly refers to the
Coming of the Messiah. And so also the Septuagint change Shaddai, the undoubted
Name of the Omnipotent God, into LOGOS, The Word, Ezekiel. 1.24. where, instead of
the Voice of God, (as it is in the Hebrew) they read (...), the Voice of the
Word of God. And so also the aforementioned Paraphrase, as I have already hinted,
does often use the Word of God for God himself, and that more especially with
relation to the Creation of the World. Thus instead of I made the Earth, Isa.
45.12. they read it, I by my Word made the Earth: And instead of God made Man,
Genesis 1.27. the Jerusalem Targum reads, And the Word of the Lord made Man: And
instead of They heard the Voice of the Lord, Genesis 3.8. the Paraphrase reads it,
And they heard the Voice of the Word of the Lord God. And Philo expressly calls
this Word the (...), or Second God next to the (...).

And as the Jews believed The Word to be a Divine Subsistence, so did the
Gentiles also. For so Numenius the Pythagorean, as he is quoted by St. Cyril
Cyril cont. Julian. l. 8.
, calls the Father the First, and the Word the Second God; and Plotin tells us
Enn. 5. l. 1. c. 6.
, that this Word, or Image of God, beholds God, and is inseparably joined
with him; and Porphyry, as he is cited by the forenamed Father Cyril. ibid. l.
1.
, tells us that the Essence of God extends to Three In-beings, viz. the highest
Good, which is the Father, and the Maker of all things, which is the Word, and
the Soul of the World; and these he also calls the First, and Second, and Third
God. And of Pythagoras Proclus the Platonist affirms, that he commended Three
Gods together in ONE, (even as Plato also does) the Second of which was the
Word or Wisdom, whereunto he attributes the Creation of the World. And Plato,
in his 6th Epistle, so far owns the Divinity of the Word, that he earnestly
exhorts his Friends that they should (...); that is, invocate God the Governor
of all things that are and shall be, and also the Lord and Father of that
Prince and Governor; by the first of which he evidently means The Word, since
it is to the Word that he elsewhere Plat. Epinom.
attributes the Government of the Stars and Heavenly Bodies. By all which it is
apparent, that by The Word they understood some Divine Subsistence, whose
Nature is exalted above all finite Beings whatsoever; and therefore,

4. And lastly, Our Savior, to whom this Phrase The Word is applied, must be
that Divine Person or Subsistence. And so we find him styled in the first Verse
of this Chapter; In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God. Which Expressions are so exactly agreeable to the Phrase of
the Gentile Theology, that Amelius the Disciple of Plotin, and a great Enemy to
the Christians, was forced to acknowledge that this is that Word which was from
Everlasting, and by whom all things were made, as Heraclitus supposed: And, per
Jovem, says he, Barbarus iste, meaning St. John, cum nostro Platone consentit,
Verbum Dei in Ordine Principii esse St. Austin. De Civit. Dei. l. 10.
. This Barbarian is of our Plato 's Mind, that the Word of God is ranked among
the Principles. And indeed, unless we understand this Place of the Eeternal
Deity of The Word, I know not how it will be possible to make any tolerable
Sense of it; for if by In the Beginning here, we understand, as the Socinians
would have us, in the beginning of the Gosspel when John: Baptist began to
preach, the Words will imply a gross Tautology, and the Sense of them must be
this; that Christ was when John Baptist preached that he was, or which is all
one, that he was when he was. For how can it be worthy of an Apostle so
solemnly to assert, that the Word had a Being in the Beginning of the Gospel,
when we know the Baptist taught as much himself? who therefore came baptizing
with water, that he should be made manifest to Israel, Joh. 1.31. And when St.
Matthew and St. Luke, who wrote before, taught us more than this, viz. That he
was in being thirty Years before, when we are sure it was as true of any other
then living as of the Word, even of Judas that betrayed him, and Pilate who
condemned him. By in the Beginning, therefore must be meant the Beginning of
the World; and that even then, the Word was with God, and the Word was God. So
Phil. 2.6, 7. Who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal
with God; but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
Servant, and was made in the likeness of Men. From whence these three
Conclusions do most naturally result; First, That Christ was in the form of a
Servant as soon as he was made Man: Secondly, That he was in the form of God
before he was in the form of a Servant: And, Thirdly, That he was in the form
of God; that is, did as really and truly subsist in the Divine Nature, as in
the form of a Servant, or in the Nature of Man. For the Words literally
translated run thus; But emptied himself, taking the Form of a Servant, being
in the Likeness of Men: Which plainly implies, that Christ was full before he
emptied himself, that he emptied himself by taking the form of a Servant, that
he took the form of a Servant by being made in the likeness of Men; which
Emptying presupposes a precedent Plenitude, and which Plenitude consisted in
being so in the form of God as to think it no Robbery to be equal with God. So
Rev. 1.11. he solemnly proclaims his own Divinity; I am Alpha and Omega, the
first and the last; which is the incommunicable Title by which God describes
his own Being, and distinguishes it from all others. And Isa. 44.6. I am the
first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no God. These and many other
plain Assertions there are in the New Testament, of the Eternal Deity of the
Blessed Word. But since the Eternal God was constantly both by the Jews and
Gentiles, signified by this Phrase the Word, there is no Reason to imagine that
St. John should make use of it in any other Notion; since in so doing he would
have imposed upon the World, and taken an effectual Course to make us believe
that he meant what he never intended.

And so I have done with the first Thing proposed, which was to show you what
is here meant by Christ's being the Word; the Design of which, you see is to
express his Eternal Godhead and Divinity.

2. I now proceed to the next Thing proposed, which was to show you for what
Reason it is that he is here called The Word? In answer whereunto, it is to be
considered that the Word LOGOS has a twofold Signification: First, It
signifies Reason, which is the inferring one thing from another, and this is
the Birth and Offspring of the Mind. Secondly, It signifies Speech, which is
an audible Expression of our Thoughts and Reasonings, and this is the Image and
Interpreter of our Minds; and it is also the Executer of the Mind, especially
in those who are in Sovereign Authority, and do rule by their Word and Command.
Now our Blessed Savior is called the Word upon both these Accounts, both as he
is the Reason, and the Speech of God; and accordingly his being the Word
denotes these four Things: 1st. His being generated of the Mind of the Father.
2dly. His being the perfect Image of that Mind. 3dly. His being the Interpreter
of his Father's Mind to us. 4thly. His being the Executer of his Father's Mind.


1st. His being generated of the Mind of the Father, even as our Word or Reason
is the Issue and Offspring of our Minds. For it was the Opinion both of the
Jews and Gentiles, that the Eternal Word is nothing else but that most perfect
Notion, Idea, and Conception which God from the Beginning had formed of
himself, and all other Beings in his own Mind. For thus the Jews tell us, that
every thing below has some Root above; which Roots, say they, are the
Sephiroth, or Seals by which all these inferior Substances are stamped, and
shaped, and fashioned; and these Seals, they tell us, are those most perfect
Ideas of things which God did form in his own Mind, according to which he
fashioned all the Beings that are in the World. For, say they, Vide Dr.
Cudworth of the Union of Christ and the Church.
all the Three Worlds, that is, the Rational, Sensitive, and Inanimate, were
printed with the Print, and sealed with the same Seal; (that is, that great
Seal in the Mind of God, consisting of the Ideas of all things) and that which
is sealed, and receives the Sealing here below, is like to the Shape and Form
of those things above which did seal and stamp the Signature upon them. And
these three Worlds, say they, being one below another, God set upon them the
Seal of Sephiroth so hard that he printed them quite through the Bottom of
them, that is, he stamped them all into an exact Resemblance to those Ideas
which he had formed of them in his own Mind. So that according to them, before
God made the World he framed the Idea and Model of it in his own Understanding,
which, together with that Idea or Notion which from all Eternity he conceived
of himself, they called the nOGOS, or Eternal Word of God. Hence Philo calls
the Word of God, the (...), and also the (...) De Mundi Opif. p. 5.
, and the (...), and the (...) Ibid. p. 3.
: And tells us, that as a City before it was made, existed only in the Mind of
the Builder; so the World had no other Place, (...); that is, than the Divine
Word that made it. And afterward he tells us' that the Intellectual World,
that is, the World which contains the Ideas of all things, (...) Ibid. p. 4.
, is nothing else but the Word of God now making the World. And accordingly the
Jews call The Word the Wisdom of God, and tell us Rab. Isaac Ben Schola on the
last Verses of the 111 and 112 Psalms.
, that this Wisdom is of the most inward Understanding of God, who beholds
himself in himself. From all which it is apparent that the Jews attributed the
Original of this Divine Word to the Mind of the Father, it being, according to
their Divinity nothing else but that most perfect Conception and Idea which God
from Everlasting formed of himself, and all other Beings, in his own Mind. In
which Opinion the most Divine Philosophers of the Gentiles also do most exactly
consent. And hence they generally call The Word the (...), or Understanding of
the Father, he being the perfect Idea or Conception by which the Father
understands himself and all other things. And accordingly Alcinous tells us,
that both Socrates and Plato taught that God is a Mind, Alcin de Doctrina
Platonis.
and that in the same there is a certain Idea which in respect of God, is that
Knowledge which God has of himself, and in respect of the World, is the
Pattern or Mould thereof, and in respect of it self, is very Essence. And
Plotin tells us Plot Enn. 5. l. 6. c. 1.
, that God is both the Party that is conceived in the Mind or Understanding,
and also the Party that conceives him; and he makes The Word to be that which
God does mind in himself, which is Himself, and his own immense Perfections;
and that the Nature of that Idea of himself which he beholds in himself is an
Act that issues from him, which consists in beholding and minding of himself,
and in beholding him becomes the self same thing with him. And this
Understanding or Knowledge which God has of himself, he calls Enn. 5. l. 8. c.
12. and Enn. 5. l. 1. c. 7.
, the Son of the Sovereign Father, that bears the like Resemblance to him, as
the Light does to the Sun in the Firmament. And, to name no more, Porphyry, as
he is quoted by St. Cyril, tells us, That it was the Doctrine of Plato, that of
the Good, (which elsewhere he calls the Father) is begotten an Understanding in
a manner unknown to Men, in which are all things that truly are, and the
Essences of all things that have a Being; that is, the substantial Ideas of
God, and all created things whatsoever. And upon this account it is, that they
call this Divine Subsistence The Word, because it was generated by the Mind of
the Father, even as our Words are generated by our Minds. And accordingly the
ancient Jews, and Christian Fathers, do generally expound that great Elogium of
Wisdom, Prove. 8. concerning the Eternal Word; where it is said, that Wisdom was
set up from everlasting, and possessed by God in the beginning of his way; that
it was brought forth by him before the World; and that when he appointed the
Foundations of the Earth, then was it by him, as one brought up with him, and
was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him, v. 22. -- 31. And this
Notion the New Testament does plainly refer to when it calls Christ the Wisdom
of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. which is the same Title that both Jews and Platonists give
to The Word upon the account of his being that Eternal Knowledge and
Understanding which God has of himself and all other Beings; and in this, John
1.4. the Apostle seems plainly to hint this Notion to us; for speaking there of
The Word, In him, says he, was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men. Now I
think it will be hard to give any natural Account how that Life that was in The
Word should enlighten Men, unless we suppose his very Life and Being to consist
in Knowledge and Understanding; for by the Light of Men here is plainly meant
that Divine Knowledge which is revealed to the World by Christ; and this Divine
Knowledge he tells us is the very Life of The Word, or the Life that was in The
Word: And afterward he expressly calls The Word the Light it self, from whence
all our Knowledge of God and Goodness is derived, v. 9. which is exactly the
same with what Philo says of The Word, viz. that He is the Intellectual Sun
that is altogether Light; and with what Plotin says of the (...), or Divine
Mind, Enn. 5. l. 1.
that he is a Light shed forth every where, streaming from God, and begotten of
him. Which is a plain Evidence of Christ's being the substantial Light,
Knowledge, or Idea of all things which God from Everlasting formed in his own
Mind, and of his being therefore called the Word of God, because he is the
Offspring of God's Understanding, even as our Reason is the Offspring of ours.

2dly. He is called The Word of God, because he is the perfect Image of God,
even as the Word is the Image of the Mind: For thus, as I have already told
you, the Eternal Word is very frequently called the Image of God both by the
Jews and Gentiles. For so Plotin Enn. 5. l. 1. c. 6.
, that this Divine Understanding, being the very Word of God, and Image of God,
everlastingly beholds God, and cannot be separated from him; and Ibid. l. 2.
that it is the begotten Issue, Word, and Image of the Sovereign God. And Plato
himself calls him Plato de Repub. l. 6. p. 478.
the begotten Son of the Good, and most like unto him in all things; the (...),
and afterward, (...); that is, the begotten Son of the Good, who is most like
unto himself. And Rab. Moses the Son of Neheman, as he is quoted by Masius,
proving that that Angel of God's Presence which went before the Camp of Israel
was the Messiah or Eternal Word, tells us, that he is therefore called the
Angel of God's Presence, nimirum quia ille Angelus est facies Dei; because he
is the Face of God, in whom God's Face was to be seen. And so Philo the Jew
also does very frequently call The Word Philo Legis Alleg. l. 2. p. 60.
, the Image and Resemblance of God, and the (...), the most perfect and exact
Representation of God. For they suppose that God being Omniscient he must
necessarily know himself, and that knowing himself, necessarily he must act ad
extremum Virium, to the utmost of his Power, even as all other necessary Agents
do; that acting to the utmost of his Power, he must by knowing himself produce
as perfect an Image, Idea, or Notion of himself in his own Understanding as it
was possible for him to do; that it was possible for him to produce such a
vital and substantial Idea of himself as is vested with all the infinite
Perfections of his Nature; and consequently that such an Idea he has produced,
and that this Idea is the Eternal Word. For God can do whatsoever does not
imply a Contradiction; now there is nothing in God but what he can communicate
without a Contradiction, but only Self-Existence; that implies a Contradiction
indeed, for God to cause another thing to be without any Cause, and to exist of
it self. But as for all his other Perfections he may communicate them; and when
he acts necessarily, as he is supposed to do in the Generation of the Word, he
must, because then he acts to his utmost Possibility. So then The Word must
have the same Nature, Essence, and Perfections with the Father; and the only
imaginable Difference between them must be this; that whereas the Father exists
of himself, the Word exists of the Father; which is exactly agreeable to the
Catholic Notion of Christians. And indeed if it be granted that God, who is
infinitely knowing, must necessarily know himself perfectly, then it will seem
to-follow, that there must be the same Perfections in that Idea or Notion by
which he knows himself, that there are in himself; for else it is not one
perfect Idea of him. And hence it is that our Notions do so imperfectly
resemble things, because we cannot communicate to them that Life and Substance
that is in the things themselves; and therefore if God knows himself perfectly,
as he must needs do being infinitely knowing, he must communicate Life and
Substance to the Notion of himself, or else 'twill be no perfect Notion of his
Life and Substance; and he must communicate to it all the immense Perfections
of his own Nature, or else 'twill be no perfect Notion of his own Perfections.
So then the Eternal Word, which is here supposed to be the most perfect Notion
of the Father, must be a vital and substantial Idea, endued with all the
Perfections of the Divine Nature, which is also very agreeable with the
Christian Notion of the Divine Word: For he is described to be the Image of
God, 2 Cor. 4.4. the Brightness of his Glory, and the express Character of his
Person, Heb. 1.3. and being so he must necessarily be what God is, i.e. God
essential, or else he cannot be the perfect Image, and express Character of
God. And accordingly in the New Testament he is called God over all, blessed
for ever, Romans 9.5. and the Perfections of the Divine Nature are very
frequently attributed to him, as particularly Omniscience, John 16.30.
Eternity, Heb. 1.12. and Rev. 22.13. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and
the end, the first and the last. So that upon this Account also he may very
properly be called The Word of God, because as our Words are the Images of our
Minds, so He is the most perfect Image of God.

3dly. He is called The Word, because he is the Interpreter of the Father's
Mind, even as our Words also are the Interpreters of our Minds to others. And
this Philo the Jew does also take notice of as the proper Work and Office of
The Word to be (...) Quis rer. div. haer. p. 397.
, the Ambassador of the Great King to his Subjects, to communicate his Mind and
Will to them; and also the Angel and Messenger of God to Men to declare his
Will and Pleasure to them: And that in the Execution of this Office he does
(...), etc. De Somn. p. 461.
Some as a King he commands what they shall do, others as a Schoolmaster he
profitably instructs, others as a Counselor he faithfully admonishes; all
which he performs as the Interpreter of the Mind of God. And elsewhere he calls
him the (...) De Charitate, p. 552.
, the Divine Sun that enlightens the Souls of Men; and elsewhere he expressly
calls him the Interpreter of the Mind of God to Men: So that it seems it was
upon this Account as well as others, that He was called by the Ancients, The
Word of God. And the same Account is given of it in the New Testament. So Joh.
1.18. No Man has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the
bosom of the Father, he has declared him. Where there is a particular Reason
assigned, why though other Men interpreted the Mind of God to us, yet Christ
alone is called The Word of God; because he only was the immediate Interpreter
of the Divine Will, even as the Word which we speak is of ours. For he was in
the very Bosom of the Father, and there understood his Mind not by the
Instructions of an Angel, nor by Dreams and Visions, nor only by the Holy
Ghost, but by an immediate Intuition of his Thoughts and Purposes which from
all Eternity were exposed to his View and Prospect. For as St. Gregory
Nazianzen has observed, He had the same Relation to the Father, as the inward
Thought has to the Mind, because of his intimate Conjunction with him, and
Power to declare him to the World. For the Father is known by the Son, who is a
brief and easy Demonstration of the Father, as every thing that is begotten is
(...), the silent Word of that which does beget it.

4thly. And lastly, He is called The Word, because he is the Executor of his
Father's Will, even as the Word and Command of a King is the Executor of his
Will and Pleasure: For according to the Sense of the Ancients, God has from
the very Beginning governed the World by his eternal LOGOS whom they therefore
call the Immortal King, the Governor of all things that are or shall be, and
the Viceroy of the great God, as I have already showed you at large. And 'twas
by this Word that God executed his Will when he made the World; For by his Word
he made the Heavens, and all the Host of them, by the Breath of his Mouth,
Psalm. 33.6. He did but say the Word, Let there be Light, and there was Light;
and to his powerful and efficacious Fiat the whole Frame of Nature was but a
real Echo. For these Expressions, Let there be Light, and let there be a
Firmament, etc. are not perhaps so to be understood as if God did actually
pronounce those Syllables, but they rather seem to be a popular Description of
the infinite Energy of the Eternal Word by which God made the Heavens and the
Earth, to whom it was as easy to give Being to the World as it was to command
it to be; and that Passage of the Psalmist, by the Word of the Lord were the
Heavens made, and of the Author to the Hebrews, Heb. 11.3. that the Worlds were
framed by the Word of God, seem rather to denote that powerful Act of Creation
which was exerted by the vital and substantial Word of God, whereby he
instantly, and as it were with a Words speaking, gave Existence to those Beings
he intended to create, than any articulate Words or Phrases pronounced by God
himself; because in this Chapter, and many other Places of the New Testament,
it is expressly said that God made the World by Christ, who is that living and
substantial Word that was with God from the Beginning. Well therefore may
Christ be called The Word of God, since by him God does as effectually execute
his Will, as if it were done by the Word of his own Mouth. For Christ has such
Power both in Heaven and Earth, that at his Word and Command all things are
presently done according to his Will; and therefore you may observe in that
Vision to St. John, Rev. 19.13. Jesus, being represented as the King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, clothed in a royal Purple Robe, is called by the name of the
Word of God, when he was executing the Divine Vengeance upon the Nations by
that Power which he has at God's Right Hand.

3. I now pass on to the third and last Thing, namely, what we are to
understand by the Word's being made Flesh? of which I shall give you a brief
Account, and then conclude with a few short Inferences from the whole. Which
Words, being made Flesh, we ought not so to understand as if the Eternal Word
was changed or converted into Flesh, as Cerinthus taught; or as if the Flesh
was changed or converted into the Word, as Valentinus ridiculously asserted;
for the Deity is immutable, and as it can be changed into nothing, so nothing
can be changed into it. But by Flesh we are to understand Man, a Part being put
for the Whole; for so the Scripture does very frequently call Man Flesh, that
being one of the Ingredients of his Nature. Thus Ps. 56.4. I will not fear what
flesh can do unto me, Jerem. 17.5. Cursed be the Man that makes flesh his arm,
that is that puts his Confidence in Man: Matthew. 24.22. Except those days be
shortened, no flesh shall be saved; that is, no Man: And Romans 3.20. No flesh
shall be justified in his sight, that is, no Man shall be justified. So here,
The Word was made flesh, that is The Word was made Man. Not that the Divine
Nature was converted into the Nature of Man, but the Meaning is, it was made
one with Man, even as our Soul is not turned into nor confounded with the Body,
yet they two, though distinct in Natures, grow into one Man; so the Manhood of
Christ was assumed, or taken into The Word, both being united into one Person,
the Natures being preserved entire and distinct, without any Mixture or
Confusion. For as the Fourth General Council has defined it, He was so made
Flesh that he ceased not to be the Word, never changing that he was, but
assuming that which he was not. And though our Humanity was advanced by it, yet
his Divinity was not at all diminished; and the Mystery of Godliness, God
manifested in the flesh, was no Detriment to the Godhead, which is always
unchangeably the same: And therefore the seeming Harshness of this Expression
may be easily molified by comparing it with others of the same import; for
elsewhere where it is said, that he was manifest in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16.
which only denotes that the Divinity was made known, and did appear in the
World in a Humane Nature. Elsewhere it is said, that he took on him the Nature
of Man, Heb. 2.16. which only denotes that the Divinity did assume the Humane
Nature to it, and was personally united with it. So here The Word was made
flesh; that is, The Word was made one with the Flesh by assuming the Humane
Nature into a personal Union with it self.

Having thus explained to you the Sense and Meaning of the Words, I shall now
conclude this Argument with three or four short Inferences from the whole.

1. From hence we may infer the Eternal Divinity of our Blessed Savior, even
from this great name The Word, that is here attributed to him. For since it is
so apparent that this Phrase is a Term of Art derived from the Schools of the
Jews and Gentiles, and since by it they did all so generally understand a
Divine Person subsisting from all Eternity, it must necessarily follow that the
Holy Ghost, deriving it from them and applying it to our Blessed Savior, must
use it to the same Sense; for otherwise He were better never to have used it at
all, because by discoursing in the same Language with them, he will give us
just occasion to think that he means the same thing, namely, that Christ, whom
he calls The Word, is a Divine Person subsisting from all Eternity; which if he
does not mean by using that Term, he will almost necessarily betray us into a
false Belief concerning our Savior. As, to instance briefly in a Case of
another Nature; Our Savior in his Sermons does frequently press us to
Meekness, and Patience, Humility and Charity, all which are Terms frequently
used long before in the Moral Philosophy both of the Jews and Gentiles, by
which they signify fuch and fuch particular Virtues. Since therefore our
Savior does use the same Terms with them, we have just Reason to conclude that
he mean the same Virtues by them; and should he mean any thing else, his very
using of these Terms would necessarily impose upon us a false Sense of his
meaning; for how should we understand his Meaning but by his Words, and how
should we understand his Words but by the common Import and Signification of
them? And can we imagine that the Spirit of Truth would have ven described our
Savior by a Term that was so generally used to signify a Divine Person
subsisting from all Eternity, and used it too, as he does, without any
Restraint or Limitation, nay and so seemingly at least to the same Purpose, as
he does in the three first Verses of his Chapter, where he describes the Divine
Nature and Operations of Christ The Word, in the same terms in which the Jews
and Gentiles were wont to describe the Divinity of their LOGOS can we imagine,
I say, that the Holy Spirit would have done thus, had he known Christ to be
nothing but a mere Man that never was before he was born of his Mother? Far be
it from us to charge that Blessed Spirit with imposing such a Delusion upon
Mankind.

2. Hence I infer the astonishing Love of our Blesed Savior in condescending
so low as to be made Flesh for us, and assume our Nature. For what he was
before he took our Nature, you have heard already: He was no less than the
Eternal Word of the Father; in whose Bosom he enjoyed the supremest Degree of
Bliss and Happiness, being crowned with Glory, and incircled about with the
Essential Rays of the Divinity. And yet such was his Love to poor Mortals, so
infinite was his Zeal and Concern for our Happiness, that, seeing the Misery we
were plunged into, he could not rest, no not in the blessed Arms of his Father,
but strip himself of all his Majesty and Bliss, and comes down among us, and
assumes our Nature to save and rescue us, and invite and lead us to those
Heavenly Mansions from whence he descended to us. Lord, what a Prodigy of Love
was here, as does not only puzzle my Conceit, but out-reach my Wonder and
Admiration! For when I seriously consider it, though it be a Blessing beyond
all my Hopes, and such as I could never have had the Impudence to desire; yet
it fills my Mind with an awful Horror to think that there was a Time when the
great God was here upon the Earth in my Form and Nature, and conversed
familiarly with such mortal Wights as my self, and for my sake, and such poor
Worms as I, patiently under-went the common Infirmities of Men, and willingly
exposed himself to the Contempt and Scorn of a malevolent World, and the Malice
and Cruelty of those barbarous Men to whom he gave Being, and could with the
Breath of his Nostrils have scattered into Atoms, and all this in mere
Compassion to a Company of apostatized Natures, who had so highly deserved to
be thrown from his Care and Mercy for ever. O my Soul, how am I astonished at
this Miracle of Love! Methinks when I consider it I am looking down from a
stupendous Precipice, whose Height fills me with a trembling Horror, and even
oversetting Reason.

3. From hence I infer what might Obligations we have for ever to love and
serve our Blessed Redeemer. If our Hearts are capable of being warmed into any
degree of Affection, sure it is impossible but we must be affected at such an
unheard of Instance of Love. For the Son of God to leave his Father's Bosom,
where he was infinitely more happy then we can express and think of, and
disguise himself in mortal Flesh, and become a Man of Sorrows that the might
make me a Man of endless Joys: can my Heart hold when I think of this? Is it
possible I should reflect upon such a prodigious Instance of Affection without
being wrapped into an Ecstasy of Love? Blessed Jesus, what barbarous Hearts do we
carry about with us, that will not melt before the Flames of thy Love! Flames
that are sufficient to kindle Seraphims, and to fill all reasonable Breasts
with burning Affections toward thee! For how is it Possible that any Man, I
had almost said that any Devil, should be so disingenuous and ill-natured as
not to be affected with such stupendous Kindness? When we see a Child slight
his careful and indulgent Parents, we are ready to account him an unnatural
Monster; when we see a Man neglect his Friend, or disregard his Benefactor, we
presently call him base and ungrateful; nay when we see one abuse a poor brute
Creature that fawns upon him, and expresses its Kindness to him, we look upon
it as an undoubted Sign of a very hard Heart, and an ill Nature: What Term then
can we find in all the World of Words that is odious enough to express our
Disaffection to our Blessed Redeemer, to whom we are so infinitely obliged?
Base, Disingenuous, Ill-natured, and Ungrateful, are all too soft; it is
something beyond Barbarous and Devilish. For one would think that neither the
most inhumane Canibal on Earth, nor the blackest Devil in Hell, could ever be
guilty of so foul a Crime, which has something in it too monstrous for any
Words to express. Well therefore may the Heavens be astonished, and the Earth
tremble, and all the Creation of God stand amazed at us, to see how insentible
we are of this most ravishing and endearing Love. Well may we be amazed at our
selves, and wonder at our own Stupidity to think that the Son of God should be
so kind as to come down from Heaven to visit us, to leave the Habitation of his
Glory, and shroud his Divinity in mortal Flesh, and make himself a miserable
Wight, merely that he might make us happy, and advance us to that Glory and
Bliss which for our sakes he willingly abandoned; and yet that we are no more
touched and affected with it, than with the most indifferent Thing in the
World. Blessed God, what are we made of? What kind of Souls do we carry about
with us, that no Kindness will oblige us, no not the most endearing that ever
was known or heard of? Doubtless should any Man have shown us but half this
Kindness, should a Friend but offer to die for us, or a Prince to descend from
his Throne, and put himself into the State of a Beggar to enrich and advance us
in the World, we should have thought our selves bound to him as long as we
lived; and should we have thought any Services too much, any Requitals too dear
for him, we should have been looked upon as Monsters of Ingratitude, as the
Peproaches and Scandals of humane Nature, and been hissed out of all Society
for a Company of infamous Villains, unworthy of the least Repsect or Favor
from Mankind. But for a Friend to die, or a Prince to become a Beggar for our
sakes, alas what poor inconsiderable Things are they, compared with the
Condescentions of the Son of God, who humbled himself much lower in becoming a
Man than the most glorious Angel in Heaven could have done in assuming the
Nature of a Worm. And can we be so inhumane as not to be moved by such a
Miracle of condescending Love? Is it the less, because it is the Lore of God,
or does it less deserve our Requital? What Excuse then can we make for our
wretched Insensibility? O ungrateful that we are! with that Confidence can we
show our Heads among reasonable Beings after we have so barbarously slighted
our best Friend, and behaved our selves so disingenuously toward our greatest
Benefactor? How can we pretend to any thing that is modest or ingenuous, tender
or apprehensive in humant Nature, when nothing will oblige us, no not that
astonishing Love that made the Son of God leave all his Glory, and become a
poor miserable Mortal for our sakes? O blessed Jesus! what do thy holy Angels
think of us! how do thy blessed Saints resent our Unkindness toward thee! yea,
how justly will the Devils themselves reproach and upbraid our Baseness, who,
had as they are, were never so much Devils yet as to spurn the Love of a
Redeemer, coming down from Heaven to die and suffer for their sakes! Wherefore
as we would not be hissed at by all the reasonable World, and become Spectacles
of Horror to God, and Angels, and Devils, let us endeavoun to affect our selves
with the Love of our Redeemer, and to inflame our own Souls with the Sense of
his Kindness, who has done such mighty things to endear and oblige us.

4. From hence I infer what monstrous Disingenuity it would be in us to think
much of parting with any thing, or doing any thing for the sake of Christ, who
for our sakes parted with his Father's Bosom, and all those infinite Delights
which he there enjoyed, and united himself to our miserable Nature that he
might make us good and happy for ever. And now after all this, with what
Conscience or Modesty can we grudge to do any thing which he shall require at
our hands? Should he command me to descend into the lowest Form of Beings, and
to become the most wretched and contemptible of all Animals, could I be such a
Caitif as to deny him, who descended much lower for the sake of me? Should he
remand me back into Nonentity, and bid me cease to be for ever; alas! the
Distance is nothing so great between me and nothing, as 'twas betwixt him, and
that humane Nature which he assumed for my sake. Should he require me to die
for him under all those lingering and exquisite Tortures which the blessed
Martyrs suffered for his Name, what Proportion were there between what he
requires of me, and what he has done for me? He only requires that I should
pass through Death to Heaven for him, but he came from Heaven to pass through
Death for me; so that for his sake I should only put off a wretched Garment of
Flesh, that I may be inrobed with Glory and Immortality; but for my sake he put
off his Robes of Glory and Majesty, that he might wear my frail and mortal
Flesh, and therein reconcile me to God, and make me everlastingly happy: And
when I may advance my self into an Equality with Angels by suffering the
Agonies of a miserable Death for him, shall I refuse, or thing much of it; when
he who was equal with God in Glory and Happiness, was so ready to be born a
wretched miserable Man for me? Should he require me to give my Substance to the
Poor, and leave my self destitute of all Supplies and Comforts; could I deny so
poor a Request to him, who forsook a Heaven of Infinite Pleasures for my sake,
and exposed himself naked to the Mercy of a wretched, wicked, and ill-natured
World, from whom he could expect nothing but the most barbarous Contempt and
Cruelty? Sure, one would thing 'twere impossible for any reasonable Being to
deny such poor, such inconsider able Boons to such a great and deserving
Benefactor; and yet these are much more then what he ordinarily requires at our
hands. For that which he ordinarily requires of us is, that we would forsake
those Vices which are as injurious to us as they are hateful to him, and which
are therefore hateful to him, because they are our Enemies; and that we would
practice those Virtues in which the Perfection and Happiness of our Nature is
involved, and which we can no more be happy without, then we can be without
Being. And can I think much to part with those Lusts for his sake, which are my
Shames and Infelicities, who never grudged to part with Heaven for mine? Can
they be as dear to me as his Father's Bosom was to him? and yet he left that
for Love of me; and shall not I leave these for Love of him? Methinks if we
will not part with them for our own sakes, as being destructive to our Peace
and Happiness; yet had we the least spark of Ingenuity in us, we should gladly
part with them for the sake of our Savior, who for ours was so ready to part
with all that was dear to him. Can we be such Wretches as to refuse to serve
him, when he requires nothing of us but what we are obliged to by our own
Interest? Are we so lost to all that is ingenuous and modest, that we will not
obey him when he only requires us to be kind to our selves? O wretched Mortals!
does his Coming down from Heaven to save you, deserve this barbarous Treatment
at your hands, that to spite him you should injure your selves, and wound his
Authority through your own Sides? Had he been wholly indifferent to you, it had
been very unreasonable to reject his Service when it altogether consists in
serving your selves; but to disobey so dear a Friend, to whom we are obliged by
such stupendous Favors, when he enjoins us nothing but the Means of our own
Happiness, is such a Piece of monstrous and unnatural Baseness, as the Devil
himself can hardly parallel. O unkind that we are! that we will not be good to
our selves for our Savior's sake, and that when he conjures us to it, as he
does, even by all the Love that we owe him! For so John 14.15. If ye love me,
says he, keep my Commandments; Consider what mighty things I have done for
you; how I left my Throne in Heaven for your sakes, and became a miserable
mortal Man: And now that I am going from you, and am offering up my Life to
redeem you, if ever I have merited any Love at your hands, express it in
keeping my Commandments. It Is no great matter that I require of you, it is only
that you would be kind to your selves, that you would let Misery alone, and
endeavor to be as happy as Heaven can make you. This is all the Requital that
I expect at your hands, that you would be as good and happy as I would have
you; and this, which is the sum of all my Commands, I conjure you strictly to
observe, even by all the Love that you owe me. O blessed Jesus! one would have
thought thou had been requiring some mighty Trial of our Love to thee, that
we should do some great Thing for thee to which nothing could prompt us but
only our Gratitude and Kindness: But when thou only requirest us to express our
Love to thee in doing that which is the highest Expression of our Love to our
selves, can we be so disingenuous as not to do that for thy sake to whom we are
so insinitely obliged, which we are bound to do for our own sakes as well as
thine?

5. And lastly; Hence I infer what a glorious Thing it is to do Good, since the
Son of God, having so great an Opportunity of doing Good to the World, thought
it worth his While to come down from Heaven, and assume our Natures, and
undergo our Miseries, as if he esteemed it more glorious and becoming the
Majesty and Divinity of his Person to dwell upon Earth with poor miserable
Mortals, among whom he might do the greatest Good, than to sit above upon the
Throne of Heaven, and receive the most humble Adorations of Angels; for 'twas
only for an Opportunity of doing the greatest Good that he exchanged the Glory
and Happiness of Heaven, choosing rather to become a miserable Man to make
others good and happy, than to continue among those infinite Delights with
which the Heavenly State abounds. What a most glorious Thing then is it to do
Good, when our most wise Redeemer chose it before Heaven it self, when he
thought it more eligible to come down upon Earth and make us happily, than to
dwell in the Bosom of his Father, and shine in Heaven with the Brightness and
Glory of his Divinity. And if there be nothing in Heaven so glorious as doing
Good, what is there upon Earth that may be compared unto it? What dim, what
sullied Things are all the Pomps and Splendors of this World compared with the
Glory of doing Good to others, when God preferred it before Heaven it self? To
conquer Kingdoms, to lead the World in Triumph after us, how mean and
inconsiderable are they compared with that Glory which the Son of God forsook
merely to do Good to the World? A Thing which he esteemed so great and
illustrious, that he did not only leave Heaven for it, but scorned and despised
the Kingdoms of the Earth, finding nothing below that was worthy of him but
only to go about doing Good! For this was his constant Employment, as you may
see Acts 10.21. And now is it possible that after this great Example, we should
think Beneficence a cheap or vulgar Thing? Can we think it a Dishonor to stoop
to the meanest Offices, whereby we may serve the Souls or Bodies of our
Brethren, when the Son of God came down from Heaven, and veiled his Glory in
mortal Flesh for no other End but to do Good? O foolish Creatures that we are!
did we but understand and consider what a magnificent Thing it is to supply the
Necessities of Men, and contribute to their Happiness, we should doubtless
embrace it as our greatest Preferment, and think our selves bound to bless God
for ever for furnishing us with Occasions of doing Good, that he does deem us
worthy of such an illustrious Employment, to have some share with himself in
the Glory of it, that he will vouchsafe to us an Opportunity to honor and
magnify our selves by acting this Divine, this Godlike Part in the World. Never
then let us think that we dishonor our selves, though we stoop never so low,
when it is to do Good; no, though it be to visit a Beggar, to dress the Sores
of a poor Lazar, to instruct or comfort the meanest Wretch in all thy
Neighborhood. For now thou actest the Part of God in doing the most glorious
Thing in all the World; a Thing for which the greatest Princes may envy thee,
and the blessed God for ever applaud thee! Now thou art doing that which the
Son of God came down from Heaven to do, and which he thought more worthy of his
Choice than to reign over Angels in Heaven: So that either we must say, that He
was unwise for preferring it before Heaven, or else we must acknowledge that we
are infinitely foolish in preferring any Thing in the World before it.

II. I now proceed to the Second Proposition, And dwelt among us full of Grace
and Truth. For that these later Words [full of Grace and Truth] belong to the
former, [And dwelt among us] you may plainly see by the Parenthesis in your
Bible, by which they are interrupted and broken off from one another. In the
Explication of these Words, I shall do these Two Things: 1. Enquire what is
here meant by the Word's dwelling among us. 2. What we are to understand by his
being full of Grace and Truth.


1. What is here meant by the Word's dwelling among us? In the Greek it is
(...); that is, he pitched his Tabernacle among us; which seems plainly to
refer to God's dwelling in the Tabernacle under the Mosaic Law. For the Greek
word (...) comes immediately from the Hebrew Shacan, and differs from it only
by the Greek Termination; and from Shacan comes the word Shechinah, by which
the Hebrews were wont to express God's glorious Presence upon Earth, and
especially his Habitation in the holy Tabernacle between the two Cherubims,
where he is said to dwell, 1 Samuel 4.4. and 2 Samuel 6.2. because from thence God
was wont to speak, and discover himself by a visible Brightness and Glory: And
accordingly this Presence, or Habitation of God, is called in the Greek (...)
and (...), Glory and Appearing. Thus Numb. 16.19. it is said, that when the
Congregation drew near to the Tabernacle, the Glory of the Lord appeared unto
them; and v. 42. it is said, that a Cloud covered the Tabernacle, and the Glory
of the Lord appeared. So when the Glory is said to be departed from Israel, 1 Samuel 4.21. it is plain that by that Glory is meant this visible Appearance of
God in a glorious Brightness from between the Cherubims. So Rev. 21. when it
had been said of the New Jerusalem, that it was (...), the Tabernacle of God
with us, v. 3. that being repeated again, v. 11. is said to have the Glory of
God in it, and the Glory of God to enlighten it, v. 23. Now it seems most
probable that this glorious Shechinah, Presence, or Habitation of God,
consisted in the Presence of Angels; who being the Courtiers of Heaven, where
they appear there God is said to be peculiarly present. And hence it is that
the Well Lahi-roi, where the Angel appeared to Hagar, Genesis 16.7, 14. is by the
Jerusalem Targum, styled the Well ubi manifestata illi fuit Praesentia Domini
Majestatica, where the Presence of God in Majesty was manifested to her: And
that visible Glory which appeared from between the Cherubims, is called by the
same name viz, the Gloria Majestaticae praesentiae Domini, the Glory of the
Majestatick Presence of God; which is a plain Evidence that the Jews believed
the Majestatick Presence of God to be nothing else but the Appearance of
Angels. And of the same Mind was the Author to the Hebrews, Heb. 2.2. For the
Law, says he was spoken by Angels; and so St. Stephen, Acts 7.53. The Law was
received by the Disposition of Angels; and St. Paul, that the Law was ordained
by Angels in the hand of a Mediator, Galat. 3.19. Whereas Exodus 19.11. compared
with 20. v. 22. it is said, that the Lord came down in the sight of all the
People, and talked with them; that is, as you will there find, he spoke the Law
to them. Which is a plain Evidence that that glorious Descent of God's Presence
upon Mount Sinai, where the Law was spoken, was in the Opinion of the Author to
the Hebrews, nothing but the Presence of Angels; who when they were to
represent the Divine Presence, were wont to appear in bright and radiant
Bodies; and therefore where it is said in Isaiah's Vision, Isa. 6.1. that he
saw the Lord sitting upon a Throne, and that his Train filled the Temple; that
is, his Train of Angels; and this Train of Angels our Savior calls the Glory
of the Lord, Joh. 12.41. which is the same with the Shechinah, or Majestic
Presence: And therefore perhaps they are called Angels of Light in reference to
that lucid, shining, flaming Appearance which they were wont to make: And in
Ps. 104.4. God is said to make his Ministers a flaming fire, that is, when they
are to make a visible Representation of his Majestic Presence to Mankind. But
besides this, Isa. 63.9. you have mention made of the Angel of God's Presence
which saved Israel; which seems to denote the Head and Chief of those Angels,
which by their glorious Appearances did represent God to Mankind. By which
Angel the Jews did generally understand the Messiah, or Eternal Word: For so
Philo, De Agricul. p. 152.
speaking of God's committing the Care of his Flock to his first born Son, The
Word, tells us, That this is that Angel whom God promised to send before the
Camp of Israel, even the Angel of his Presence. And so also Rab. Menahem upon
the 14th of Exodus 19. tells us, that the Angel which went before the Camp of
Israel was Shechinah, the Presence, or Majesty of God, and that he is called
the Angel or Prince of the World, because the Government of the World is in his
hands. And to the same Purpose Moses the Son of Neheman, Praeterea Scriptum
est, says he, and Angelus faciei ejus salvos fecit ipsos, etc. that is, It is
written, the Angel of his Presence shall save them, viz. that Angel which is
the Presence of God, of whom it is said, My Presence shall go before thee, and
I will cause thee to rest. Moreover, says he, this is that Angel of whom the
Prophets foretold, The Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his Temple, the
Angel of the Covenant whom ye desire; which both the Ancient Jews and
Christians interpret to be the Messiah; and this, says he, is He who governs
the World, that brought the Children of Israelout of Egypt, and to whom the
most High God communicates his own Name. And this without doubt was he whom God
calls his Presence when he promised Moses, that his Presence should go along
with him, Exodus 33.14. for this Presence is there said to be the Angel of God;
both which put together make him to be the Angel of God's Presence, Exodus
23.20. And accordingly instead of, Say not before the Angel of the Lord,
Eccles. 5.6. the Septuagint render it, Say not before the Presence of God, that
is, before the Angel of his Presence. And since to this Angel of his Presence,
God does attribute not only his Prerogative of Forgiving Sins, but also his own
Name, as you may see he does, Exodus 23.21. it seems very probable, what not
only the Jews, but many very Learned Christians do assert, that it was no
created Angel, but the Eternal Word or Messiah: For says God to Mases, Behold
I send an Angel before thee, etc. beware of him, and obey his Voice; provoke
him not, for he will not pardon your Transgressions, for my Name is in him;
that is, my Name Jehovah, which is the proper and incommunicable Name of God.
And accordingly you frequently read of an Angel that is called by the Name
Jehovah, which I doubt not was the same with this Angel of God's Presence. Thus
that Angel of the Lord which appeared to Moses in the burning Bush, is called
by the Name Jehovah, and styled the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Exodus
3.2. comp. 4.5. And one of those Angels that appeared to Abraham in the Plains
of Mamre, is called the Lord, and the Judge of all the Earth, Genesis 18.1, 25. So
also he that stood on the top of the Ladder in Jacob's Vision, is in Genesis
28.13. called the Lord God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac; whereas in Genesis
31.11. he is called the Angel of the Lord, and afterward, v. 13. the God of
Bethel. Which seems to me a plain Evidence that that Angel of God was God,
since both those Titles were attributed to the same Person; and that he was
also that very Angel of his Presence whom God promised to send before the Camp
of Israel, since in him it is apparent the Name of God was, i. e. the Name
Jehovah. And it is very observable, that this very Angel both Philo and the
Chaldee Paraphrase styles the Word of God; and therefore those Words of God to
Joshua, Jos. 1.5. As I was with Moses, so I will be with thee, the Paraphrase
renders thus, As my Word was assisting to Moses, so it shall be assisting to
thee: And it is the Observation of the Learned Masius, that generally where the
Hebrew Text speaks of God either conversing with Men, or managing their
Affairs, that Paraphrase, instead of God, uses this Phrase the Word of God.
From whence it is evident, that it was the received Doctrine of the Jews that
God was always present with Mankind by his Eternal Word; which is therefore the
more considerable, because it so exactly agrees with the Doctrine of the
Primitive Fathers. For so Tertullian, Christus semper egit in Dei Patris
nomine; ipse ad initio conversatus est cum Patriarchis and Prophetis. And in
his Book against Praxian he tells us, That from Adam to the Patriarchs and
Prophets, Christ always descended to discourse with Men; and that that God who
conversed upon Earth with Men, was no other than that Eternal Word that was to
be made Flesh. And the same Thing is strenuously asserted also by Justin Martyr
in his Discourses with Trypho the Jew. Nor can I see any Reason why he should
not be the Angel of God's Presence, since elsewhere he is expressly called the
Angel of that Covenant by which God has obliged himself to be present with his
Church for ever, Mal. 3.1. And the New Testament so often declares him to be
the Image, and Character, and Representative of God; and himself tells Philip
that he did so perfectly represent the Father, that whosoever had seen him had
seen the Father, Joh. 14.9. And if this be so, as it seems highly probable,
that The Word was the Angel of God's Presence, that is, the Chief or Prince of
those Angels that represented God in the World, then it will follow that the
Shechinah, or Majestic Presence of God, consisted in a glorious and visible
Appearance of the Word with a Troop of blessed Angels attending him in bright
and luminous Forms. And this I conceive was the glorious Presence of God which
came down first upon Mount Sinai, and afterward removed into the Tabernacle,
and abode between the two Cherubims. And this I am rather induced to believe,
because I find the Descent of God's Presence upon Mount Sinai, is described in
the same manner as Christ's coming to Judgment; for so, Matthew. 16.27. it is
said, that he shall come in the Glory of his Father, with his Angels; and St.
Jude tells us, that he shall come with his holy Myriads, or Ten Thousands, v.
14. for so it ought to be rendered: And the Lord in the same manner is said to
come from Sinai with his holy Ten Thousands, or Myriads; for so it is in the
Hebrew, Deuteronomy. 33.2. And since they are both described in the same manner, it
seems to follow, that they were both the same Majestic Presence of God, even
the Eternal Word assuming a glorious Form, and attended with Myriads of bright
and shining Angels. And this same Presence it was that was afterward displayed
in the Tabernacle, which was said to be filled with the Glory of the Lord,
which shone from between the Cherubims with a bright and visible Splendor,
that is, with the illustrious Appearances of the Eternal Word, and those
glorious Angels that attended him. And upon that Mount, and in that Tabernacle,
did this blessed Word represent his Father, even as the Viceroy does the
Sovereign Prince; for there in his Father's Person, and by his Authority, he
gave forth his Laws and Oracles to the Seed of Abraham, and as the Vicegerent
of the most High God governed the House of Israel, and distributed to them
Rewards and Punishments, according as they behaved themselves toward him: For
upon all the forenamed Reasons it seems highly probable, that he was the Lord
who spoke to Moses, and from between the Cherubims, and that thence delivered
the Law to him. So that as he was the Shechinah, or glorious Presence of the
most High God in the Tabernacle, he did there represent his Person by bearing
his Authority, and ruling the House of Israel as his Substitute and Viceroy.

And that the Words of my Text do refer to this glorious Appearance of the Word
in the Tabernacle, and to his representing of the most High God there, is very
evident, in that it is not only said that he tabernacled among them, which
evidently alludes to his dwelling in the old Tabernacle, but that they saw his
Glory too, which is a plain Allusion to that Glory of his which filled the
Tabernacle. So that the Meaning of these Words, He dwelt among us, seems to be
this, that as Christ who is the Eternal Word, was the Shechinah, the Divine
Presence, or Angel of God's Presence, which in the Tabernacle of old
represented the most High to the Jews; so he also abode or tabernacled in our
Flesh as the Representative of his Father to Mankind. In the Tabernacle of our
Flesh he displayed the Glory of his Father to us; he openly manifested and
represented him to the World, even as of old he was wont to do in the
Tabernacle of Moses. For, The Word to Tabernacle among us must necessarily
signify more then barely to dwell or live among us; for it must signify to
dwell as the Shechinah in the Tabernacle, that is, as the most glorious
Presence or Representative of the most High God, as one that was vested with
the Divine Authority, and that was the Vicegerent of the Father of all things.
So that, He dwelt among us, seems to signify the same with, He reigned among us
in his Father's stead, as one who bore his Authority, and represented his
Person, and to whom for the future we were to pay the same Homage and Reverence
that we were bound to render to the most High himself, who under himself has
authorized him to be our Prince and Governor to declare his Divine Will to us,
and exact our Obedience thereunto by rewarding and punishing us according to
the Tenor of those Laws which he has established in his blessed Gospel; for
this is plainly implied in his Shechanizing or Tabernacling, viz. his being the
glorious Representative of God in the World. He tabernacled among us, that is,
he acted in God's stead, as one that represented his Father; and this he did in
our Flesh in a far more glorious manner than ever he did in the Mosaic
Tabernacle: For in our Flesh and Nature he tabernacled full of Grace and Truth;
which brings me to the next Enquiry, viz.

2. What is here meant by his dwelling among us full of Grace and Truth? By
these two Phrases the Design of the holy Penman is doubtless to distinguish the
Manner of his dwelling among us from that of his dwelling among the Jews in the
Tabernacle: For a little after he uses the same Phrases in Contradistinction to
the Law of Moses: The Law, says he, was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth by
Jesus Christ, v. 17. God the Eternal Word gave the Law to Moses, and Moses gave
it to the People of Israel; but Jesus Christ, that is, the Eternal Word
incarnate, gave not the Law, but Grace and Truth. So in the Text, The Word
incarnate, or tabernacled in our Flesh, did Shechanize, or perform the Part of
his Father's supreme Representative among us full of Grace and Truth; which
implies something beyond what he did when he dwelt in the Tabernacle of Moses,
and there as the Viceroy of God reigned over the House of Jacob. That I may
therefore more fully explain this Matter to you, I will briefly consider these
two Phrases apart, and show you in what Particulars they each of them
distinguish his dwelling among us from his dwelling in the Mosaic Tabernacle.

1. He dwelt among us full of Grace, which distinguishes his dwelling among us
from that more severe and rigorous manner in the former Tabernacle; and that is
these following Particulars:

1st. He dwelt among us full of Grace in respect of the Sweetness and
Obligingness of his Behavior, in Contradistinciton to that more dreadful and
terrible manner of his conversing with the Jews, when he tabernacled among
them. The Jews being a most stubborn and stiff-necked Generation, (as they are
often called in the Old Testament) the Eternal Word thought fit to converse
among them in such a way as was most suitable to their Genius and Temper, to
break their Stubbornness with the Dread of his Power, and awe them with the
Terror of his Majesty. And accordingly you find that when he came down first
upon Mount Sinal, he was attended with a loud sounding Trumpet, with Thunders
and Lightings, with Fire and Smoke, and all the Equipage of a most dreadful
Majesty, such as caused the Mountain and the People to tremble, Exodus 19.16,
20. And afterward it is said that the Glory in which he appeared, when the
People saw him upon the Mount, was like a devouring Fire, in which glorious
Appearance he afterward removed into the Tabernacle, and there abode between
the Cherubims, Exodus 40.34, 35. And when in all this dreadful Majesty he
appeared unto them, they are kept at a great Distance from him, and were
severely forbid to approach him lest he should break forth upon them, and
destroy them, Exodus 19.24. And whenever they provoked him by their Murmurings
and Rebellions, his Wrath broke forth like Lightning upon them, and consumed
the ring-leading Rebels, that by their Example the rest might be warned to do
no more wickedly. Thus in all his Converses with them he clothed himself in a
formidable Majesty to break, and awe their sturdy Spirits, and force their
stiff Necks to yield to the Yoke of his Sovereign Authority. But when he
assumed our Nature, and tabernacled among us in our Flesh, he laid by that
astonishing Majesty that was wont to render him so dreadful to the Israelites,
and put on all the Condescentions and Sweetnesses of a most familiar and
endearing Conversation, and conversed amongst Men in such a generous, friendly,
and courteous Manner as was most apt to charm and inamour the World. He was
free without being vain or trifling, serious without being sour and morose; his
Humor always cheerful and uniform, and his Gravity was equally distant from
Moroseness and Vanity; and in a word, his Deportment was made up of all the
Accomplishments that can command either Love or Honor. And though now and thn
he falls into high Expressions of Indignation, yet 'twas only against those
base Fellows the Pharisees, who under a Pretense of being Saints and the Godly
Party, were bloted up with Pride and Arrogance, and cankered with Malice and
ill Nature; for which they were so abominable in his Eyes, whose Temper was
altogether so loving and divine that he could not mention them without calling
them Hypocrites, and the Children of the Devil. And if to all this you add his
profound Humility and Condescension, his Meekness under Reproaches, and his
Constancy and Patience under the greatest Sufferings, how much more sweet,
grateful, and charming, was this than when he appeared in such a dreadful and
astonishing Majesty upon Mount Sinai, and in the Tabernacle of Moses? It Is
true, the Innoccncy and Purity of his Life, the Divinity of his Doctrine, and
the many mighty Miracles that he wrought, could not but imprint an awful
Majesty upon his Person; ubt yet 'twas a graceful Majesty, a Majesty full of
Grace and Sweetness, and such as was much more apt to endear than to affright
Men! For, as for the Virtue of his Life, and the Divinity of his Doctrine, it
could not but attract all those who had any Love and Esteem for Virtue and
Goodness. And as for his Miracles, they were vastly different from those which
he wrought in the Wilderness, which had little else in them but Matter of
Terror and Astonishment; but these were all such as did express his Kindness to
the World, and so were much more apt to oblige than to terrify those that
beheld them: For he went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed
with the Devil, Acts 10.38. and healing all manner of Sickness, and all manner
of Diseases among the People, Matthew. 4.23. So that in respect of the Sweetness
and Obligingness of his Conversation, he tabernacled among us full of Grace, in
Contradistinction to that terrible Majesty in which he tabernacled among the
Jews.

2dly. He tabernacled among us full of Grace in regard of the Sweetness and
Gentleness of his Laws, in Contradistinction to those many burthensom Precepts
which he gave when he tabernacled among the Jews. It Is apparent by the History
of that People that they were obstinately addicted to the Customs of Egypt,
from whence they were brought, and of the Neighboring Nations round about
them; and thence it was that notwithstanding those manifest Discoveries that
God had made of himself to them, and of his being the only true God, such as
one would have thought had been sufficient to have convinced the most obstinate
Gainsayers; yet ever and anon we find them starting aside to the Idolatrous
Customs of the Gentiles, and revolting from that God who had so gloriously
manifested himself among them. The Eternal Word therefore, when he came to
tabernacle among them, he gave them abundance of Laws, the Matter of which was
in its own Nature perfectly indifferent, that by those as by so many Bounds and
Fences he might keep them from breaking out of God's Enclosure into the wild
Common of Gentilism; and such were the greatest Part of their Ceremonial Laws,
some of which were instituted in Compliance with the more innocent Rites of the
Heathen, and others in opposition to those which were purely magical and
idolatrous. And hence it is that in the Law of their Ceremonies, there are so
many things enjoined them of which we can give no tolerable Account, they being
either innocent Customs derived from the Heathens in Compliance with the Jews,
or Prohibitions of those magical and idolatrous Customs in which the Jews had
been educated in Egypt, and to which they were always very prone and
inclinable. So that merely to comply with the Jews in what was innocent, and to
restrain them in what was hurtful and idolatrous, the Eternal Word was fain to
impose a vast number of Positive Laws upon them, which contained nothing but
what was purely indifferent, and might have been done or undone without any
Prejudice to the Eternal Rules of Goodness. And accordingly, Ezekiel. 20.24, 25.
it is said, that because their Eyes were after their Fathers Idols, therefore
God gave them Statutes that were not good, that is had no intrinsic Goodness
in them; and Judgments whereby they should not live. And that God imposed,
these Things, not as good in themselves, but as accommodated to the present
State and Temper of the Israelites, is evident from what the Psalmist says, Ps.
51.16. Thou desire not Sacrifice; thou delightest not in Burnt-offerings;
though it is evident he had a farther End in imposing very many of these sacred
Rites, namely to shadow out by them the Mysteries of the Gospel, and give them
some preludious Hints of that glorious Kingdom of Christ that was afterward to
be established in the World: But by this means the Jewish Law was multiplied
into so many Precepts, and those many of them so expensive and burthensom, that
the Apostle calls it a Yoke which neither they, nor their Fathers were able to
bear, Acts 15.10. and else where a Yoke of Bandage Gal. 5.1. Thus while the
Eternal Work tabernacled among the Jews, his Laws were very rigid and
cumbersom, being clogged with so vast a number of positive Rites and
Observances; But when he came to tabernacle in our Flesh, he abolished all
these numerous Ceremonies, and imposed nothing upon the World but what is
sweet, and easy, and full of Grace. And hence himself tells us, Matthew. 11.30.
(...), My Yoke is gracious, (for so it is in the Greek) and my Burden is
light; for it imposes nothing upon us but what is most agreeable to our
rational Natures, nithing but what we our selves, if we were wise and good,
should reckon our selves obliged to, though he had never enjoined it. For all
the Duty he requires of us results immediately from the Frame of our Natures,
and the unalterable Relations we stand in to God and the World. For the Sum of
all Christian Duty is contained in those three Generals, to live soberly, and
righteously, and godly in this present World; and these must necessarily oblige
us so long as we carry such Beings about us, and continue in such Relations.
Whilst God is our God and Creator, we cannot be disobliged from living godly,
that is, from honoring and loving him, from fearing and trusting in him, from
serving and adoring him; for unless we could destroy our Relation to him, and
caese to be his Creatures, the Dueness of these Acts of Homage and Worship frm
us to him, must necessarily abide for ever: Whilst we continue to be reasonable
Animals we cannot be freed from the Obligation of Sobriety, which consists in
governing our Passions and Appetites by our Reason; for till we can lay by our
Reason, which is the superior Principle of our Nature, and step into another
Form of Beings, it will be always fit that our inferior Powers should be
subject to its Conduct and Government. Whilst we continue in the Society of
Men, and are Members of the Body of Mankind, we cannot be released from the
Ties of Righteousness, which contains in it Charity and all other sociable
Virtues; and till we cease to be related to Mankind, it can never cease to be
reasonable for us to do what becomes our Relation, that is, to be just, benign,
and charitable to one another. So that all that the Word incarnate has
enjoined us, is to do what we our selves must needs acknowledge is most just
and reasonable, and what we should choose to do before any thing in the World,
were we not prejudiced against it by our own base Lusts and unreasonable
Passions. So that in respect of those gracious Laws he gave us whilst he dwelt
among us, he may well be said to dwell among us full of Grace.

3dly. He dwelt among us full of Grace in respect of that full Pardon and
Remission which he has granted to Sinners in his Gospel, in Contradistinction
to that partial and incomplete Pardon which he gave when he tabernacled among
the Jews. For whilst the Eternal Word as his Father's Representative reigned
over the Nation of Israel, he gave no other Pardon but temporal by the Law of
Moses, which was the Rule and Instrument of his Government. And I Am sure that
from the 20th of Exodus to the 27th of Deuteronomy. in which compass that whole Law is
comprised, there is not the least mention of any other Pardon or Forgiveness
allowed to Offenders, but only what respects their temporal Punishment; nay in
some Cases this was not allowed, as particularly in the Cases of Blasphemy,
Idolatry, and Murder, no not though they heartily repented of it. For all that
Pardon which the Mosaic Law allowed, was indulged to them upon their offering
up Propitiatory Sacrifices, which in these exempted Cases were not allowed of,
but yet the Apostle tells us of all these Sacrifices in general, that the Blood
of Bulls and of Goats could not take away Sin Heb. 10.4. that they did sanctify
only to the purifying of the flesh, Heb. 7.13. that they could not make him
that did the Service perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience, Heb. 9.9. that
is, that they only released Offenders from the Obligation to Civil and
Ecclesiastical Punishments, but could by no means free them from the eternal
Punishments of the other Life. Not that I make the least Doubt but that truly
penitent Offenders were forgiven the eternal Punishment then as well as now,
and forgives too for the sake of Jesus Christ, the Lamb that was intentionally
slain from the Beginning of the World; but by what has been said it is plain
they were not forgiven by Virtue of that Law whereby the Eternal Word reigned
over the House of Israel, but rather by Virtue of that Gospel which was first
preached to Adam, and afterward to the Patriarchs; wherein Christ the Seed of
the Woman, and the Seed of Abraham, is promised, in whom all Nations of the
Earth should be blessed. It Is true, the Sacrifices of the Law were typical of
the Sacrifice of Christ, and so consequently was that temporal Pardon obtained
by them typical of that eternal Pardon which we do obtain by the great
Propitiation of our Savior; for so the Apostle tells us, that the Law had in
it a shadow of good things to come, Heb. 10.1. But we must not imagine that
eternal Remission, which is the Effect of Christ's real Sacrifice, could ever
be obtained by those Sacrifices which were only the Shadows and Resemblances of
it. So that that Remission of Sins which the Eternal Word gave whilst he
tabernacled among the Jews, was nothing near so perfect and complete as that
which he afterward proclaimed in the Tabernacle of our Flesh, because it
neither extended to all Kinds of Sins, nor yet to all Kinds of Punishments; it
left some unforgiven as to the Punishments of this Life, and it left all
unforgiven as to the Punishments of the Life to come. But having pitched his
Tabernacle in our Flesh, he did by the meritorious Sacrifice of himself obtain
of his Father this public Act of Grace, this free Charter of Mercy for all
Mankind, That whosoever would repent and amend, whatsoever Sins he is guilty
of, whatsoever Punishments he is obliged to, he shall certainly be forgiven
them all, and be as freely received into God's Grace and Favor, as if he never
had offended him; for he is the Propitiation for the Sins of the World; And by
him, says the Apostle, all that believe are justified from all things, from
which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Acts 13.39. In this
respect therefore the Eternal Word dwelt among us full of Grace, in that he
proclaimed such a full and perfect Pardon of all Sins, and of all Punishments
to all that with a true Faith and hearty Repentance, should turn unto him; and
accordingly this Pardon is frequently called by the Name of Grace, or of the
Grace of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, Act. 15.11. Heb. 12.15. and Romans
3.24.

4thly. He dwelt among us full of Grace in respect of the internal Grace and
Assistance, which he so abundantly afforded us above what he did to the Jews
under the Law of Moses when he tabernacled among them. I make no doubt but God
in all Ages has been always ready to assist good Men in their Duty. This the
very Heathens themselves believed, that (...), that God did concur with all
good Men, and that no Man did ever arrive to any eminent Degree of Virtue
without a Divine Afflatus, or Assistance. And had the good Men among the Jews
been ignorant of this, what should move them to pray, as we find they often do,
that God would wash and cleanse, and quicken and strengthen, and inliven them?
For so, in the Book of the Psalms, you find good David very often praying that
God would teach him his Commandments, and incline his Heart to keep them, and
keep him back from presumptuous Sin. By which Prayers it is evident they had
good Encouragement to hope that God would be ready to concur with them, and to
bless their pious Endeavors with the internal Assistance of his Grace and
Spirit. And this Encouragement I suppose they might have partly from their
natural Notions of God, which must needs suggest to them that He being
infinitely good as he is, will never be wanting to his Creatures in any think
that is necessary to the obtaining those noble Ends for which he created them,
and consequently that he will be assistant to them in their Duty, which is the
way to that End, and not leave them to contend with Difficulties which are
insuperable to their natural Power and Ability; and partly from those general
Evangelical Promises which God made to them by the Patriarchs and Prophets,
from whence they might fairly infer that he who had promised to do so much for
them, upon Condition they persisted in their Duty and Allegiance to him, would
never be wanting on his Part to strengthen and enable them to it. But I can by
no means allow that they were encouraged to hope for any such Assistance from
any Promise of that Law which the Eternal Word gave them when he tabernacled
among them, and by which in his Father's stead he ruled and governed them; and
that both because there is no such Promise found in all that Law, and because
the Apostle tells us, that the Law was weak through the flesh, Romans 8.3. and
calls it the Ministration of Death written and engraven in stones, in
opposition to the Ministration of the Spirit that is not written in Tables of
stone, but in fleshly Tables of the heart, 2 Cor. 3.7, 8. comp. with v. 3. And,
Galat. 3.13, 14. you find the Apostle opposes to the Curse of the Law, the
Blessing of Abraham, and the Blessing of Abraham he tells us is the Promise of
the Spirit through Faith, that is, by the Gospel. And thus under the Law there
was doubtless an internal Grace and Assistance vouchsafed to good Men, though
not promised by it; yet after the Eternal Word forsook the Tabernacle of Moses,
and came to tabernacle in our Flesh, it is evident that then he did more
plentifully communicate this his Grace to the World than ever; for then the
Spirit was said to be shed upon us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Lord;
and in the 16th ver. of this 1st of John, we are said of his fullness to receive
(...), Grace upon Grace, that is, Grace heaped upon Grace, and a vast
overflowing Abundance; according to that of Theognis, (...), that is, thou
give me Calamities upon Calamities. So that unless we will our selves it is
now impossible we should fall short either of our Duty, or the blessed Reward
of it, since our Savior is become such an overflowing Fountain of Grace to us,
and has promised to communicate it to us in such plentiful Effusions if we
will sincerely ask, and honestly endeavor after it; and therefore in this
respect also he may well be said to dwell among us full of Grace, in that while
he dwelt among us he obtained for, and promised to us such an accumulated
Plenty of inward Grace and Assistance to encourage and enable us to do his
Commandments.

5thly. He dwelt among us full of Grace in respect of the Vastness of the
Recompense which he promised to us, and which infinitely exceeds whatsover he
promised when he dwelt in the Tabernacle of Moses. For when the Eternal Word
reigned over Israel as the Viceroy and Substitute of his Father, he only acted
the Part of their Civil Sovereign or Governor; which Part he continued till
they chose another King, and then he resigned his Title to the succeeding Heirs
of David. And accordingly we find, that when the Israelites first desired a
King of Samuel God bids him hearken to their Cry; For, says he, they have not
rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them, 1 Samuel 8.7. Which is a plain Argument that before he only acted as their Political
Prince in that he interprets their desiring another King, to be a rejecting of
him from reigning over them. For had he been no otherwise King over Israel,
then as he is over other Nations where the true Religion is owned and
professed, his Dominion might have fairly consisted with that of another King
or Sovereign; and it would have been no more a rejecting God's Rule for Israel
to desire a King, then it is for France, or Spain, or England. For it is plain
the Israelites did not reject God's Divine Dominion, which he claims over the
World as the Omnipotent Creator of all things; for then their Desire of a King
had been Idolatry, and the Kings whom they desired had been Idols, or false
Gods. It is plain therefore, that it was his Political Dominion only which they
rejected by desiring another King to reign in his stead, which he interprets as
their Intention to rob and divest him of that Civil Authority which till then
he had claimed and exercised among them. So that the plain Sense of their
Desire was this, God shall no longer be our Civil Sovereign, but for the future
we are resolved to have a King from among our selves, even as other Nations
round about us, whom we will invest with the same Civil Authority which
hitherto he has challenged and exercised among us. God the Eternal Word
therefore being their Civil Prince or Ruler, as such he gave them the Mosaic
Law, which he only designed to be the Rule or Instrument of his Civil
Government and Dominion; which is the Reason why in that Law he only promised
civil or temporal Blessings, because it was only a Law of Civil Government, and
as such could design no further then the civil or temporal Happiness of those
who were to be ruled and governed by it. And accordingly if you peruse the
Promises of that Law, you will find that they all consist of outward and
temporal Blessings; such as Health of Body and Victory over their Enemies,
Peace among themselves, and with their Neighboring Nations, Plenty of Bread,
and the Conveniences of Life, and Success and Prosperity in all their Affairs;
and therefore the Author to the Hebrews calls the Gospel the bringing in of a
better Hope, and upon this Account opposes it to the Law of Moses, Heb. 7.19.
which plainly implies that that Law brought in no better Hope then that of a
temporal Happinss; and those Words of the Apostle, Gal. 3.12. The Law is not of
Faith; but The Man that does them, shall live in them, do plainly seem to imply
this Sense. The Law proposing only present and sensible Blessings to such as do
it, such as that Thou shall live a happy and prosperous Life in this World,
does not require Faith properly so called, which is the Evidence of things not
seen; that is, of the invisible Blessings of the other Life; and v. 21. he
plainly asserts, that if there had been any other Law besides the Gospel that
could have given that promised Life Rightousness would have been by that Law;
and therefore since, as he asserts, Righteousness was by no other Law but the
Gospel, it follows that no other Law, no not that of Moses, could give or
promise Life eternal. Not that I make the least Doubt, but Good Men under the
Law of Moses did firmly believe a future Happiness; for this the very Heathens
themselves had very great Hopes and Expectations of, though they never had so
much Reason as the Jews to induce them to believe: For, besides all those
weighty Arguments which were common to them with the Heathens, they had those
general Evangelical Promises which God made to the Patriarchs of being their
God, and their exceeding great Reward; the Histories of the Translations of
Enoch and Elijah, and of sundry most eminent Examples of God's exceeding Love
to Goodness and good Men, from whence they might easily infer, that sure he had
better Rewards in store for them than any of the transitory Blessings of this
Life, especially when they saw how many good Men were deprived of these, and
left naked and destitute of all worldly Comforts: Besides all which, in every
Age they had Prophets that were divinely inspired, and who, among all the
Secrets that were revealed to them, cannot be supposed to have been wholly
unacquainted with the typical Meaning of their Ceremonies and Polity, which
among other things presignified the glorious Recompenses of the Life to come.
But however they came by it, I think it is very apparent from sundry Passages
in the Book of the Psalms, Ezekiel and Daniel, that they were far from being
Strangers to the Doctrine of a blessed Immortality hereafter; though I think it
is very apparent from what has been said, that they did not derive their
Belief of this Doctrine from any express Promise of their Law. But yet it is
very apparent, that though they were not altogether unacquainted with it, yet
'twas never so clearly discovered to them by the Eternal Word as it was
afterward to us by the Word Incarnate, since, as the Apostle tells us, He
brought Life and Immortality to light by the Gospel: For therein he has most
clearly promised it to us, and as far as humane Language can express, explained
and unfolded its Nature; and by his own Resurrection, and Ascension into
Heaven, has given us a clear and visible Demonstration of its Truth and
Reality; so that now the Existence of it is become as certain to us, as it is
possible for a Matter of Fact to be; and we cannot be more infallibly assured
of it than we are, unless we had been personally in Heaven, and had there
surveyed its Glories with our own Eyes. Well therefore may He be said to have
dwelt among us full of Grace, since he was graciously pleased to make us such
express Promises of future Happiness, and give us such ample Assurance of its
Reality and Existence. And so I have done with the first Note of Distinction
between Christ's dwelling among us, and his dwelling in the Mosaic Tabernacle:
He dwelt among us full of Grace.

2. The other Character by which his dwelling among us is distinguished from
his dwelling in the Mosaic Tabernacle, is this, that he dwelt among us full of
Truth. It Is plain that Truth here is not to be understood as opposed to
Falsehood, because in that Sense it is no Note of Distinction between these two
Dwellings or Tabernaclings of Christ, unless we suppose that he did falsely
dwell, or act, and represent God in the Tabernacle of Moses, which would be to
blaspheme his Truth and Veracity. Truth therefore must here be understood as
opposed to Obscurity and Shadow, and so must denote Clearness and Reality, as
it very commonly does. As when we say a Picture is not a true Man, we do not
charge the Picture with a Lie; if it could speak indeed, and should call it
self a Man, we should then say it were a lying Picture for pretending to be
what it is not, being only a silent Resemblance of him. Thus when the Apostle
says, He dwelt among us full of Truth, and thereby distinguishes his
tabernacling among us from the manner of his dwelling among the Jews, it is not
so to be understood as if he had dwelt among them in a false or lying manner,
or that that Representation which he made to them of God and Divine Things were
false and imposturous; no, God forbid: But thus, whereas when He inhabited the
Tabernacle, he was full of Hieroglyphics, or mystical Representations, which
though they were true Pictures or Shadows of Divine Things, yet have not the
Truth and Reality of the Things themselves in them, and consequently would be
Lies and Cheats should they pretend to be what they only represent; but now he
is come to dwell among us, he is full of the Things themselves, of those
Realities which formerly he only gave us the Types and Shadows of; now he has
removed all that Scene of Pictures and mystical Representations, and brought
the Things themselves upon the Stage, and exposed them naked to the View of the
World. So that now he does not entertain us, as heretofore he did the Jews,
with Emblems and Shadows, but with Truth, and the real Substances of Things.
And thus the Word is very frequently taken in the New Testament: Thus, Heb.
8.2. the Christian Church is called the true Tabernacle, in Contradistinction
to the Tabernacle of Moses; not as if that were a false Tabernacle, but a
typical one, it being designed only as a Shadow of the Christian Church, which
is the true Reality and Substance which was pictured and represented in it; for
so the Apostle himself explains it, Heb. 9.24. For Christ, says he, is not
entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true,
but into Heaven it self: From whence it is plain, that therefore those Holy
Places are opposed to true Places, because they were only Figures, or mystical
Representations of something that is real and substantial. So, Dan. 7.16. when
Daniel desired to know the Truth of that Prophetic Scene, it is said, that One
stood by, and made him know the Interpretation of the things; that is, what was
the Reality and Substance that was represented in those Types and Figures. So
here, He dwelt among us full of Truth, that is, when he dwelt among us he was
full of the Substance and Reality of those Things which before he was wont to
represent by obscure Emblems and Shadows; now he presents to us the Things
themselves, and not the mystical Types and Figures of them as formerly he was
wont to do. For I think it is very evident, that the whole Model of the Jewish
Polity was purposely contrived to be an Emblem and Representation of the
Gospel, and that the main Reason of those numerous Rites and Ceremonies, was to
delineate and shadow out the glorious Mysteries of Christianity: For the
Apostle plainly tells us, that they were all a shadow of things to come, and
that the Body, or Substance of that Shadow, was Jesus Christ, Col. 2.17. And
the Author to the Hebrews calls them the Patterns of the things in Heaven, or
the heavenly Things; by which it is plain he means Christ, or the Subjects of
the Kingdom of Christ, since he tells us that as it was necessary that those
Patterns should be purified with Blood, so it was necessary that those Heavenly
Things represented by them, should be purified by a better Sacrifice, Heb.
9.23. And what other Heavenly Things are there but only Christians that are
purified with this better Sacrifice of Christ? And in another place the same
Author tells us, that the Law has in it a Shadow of good things to come, Heb.
10.1. And thus very frequently in the New Testament, the sacred Rites of the
Mosaic Law are declared to be Types and Shadows of the Mysteries of the
Gospel, as particlarly in the Epistle to the Hebrews, which is almost wholly
spent upon this Argument, And this the Jews themselves seem to be acquainted
with long before the Publication of the Gospel: For so the most ancient Jews
looked upon the Temple as a Type and Figure of the Heavenly State; and Philo
the Jew, in his Allegories of the Law, and almost in all his other Writings,
makes the Rites and Ceremonies of the Mosaic Law to be Types and Figures of
some Divine or Moral Truth, and particularly the High Priest to be an Emblem of
the Eternal Word, and his Crown and Vestments to be Representations of his
Authority and Divine Perfections, wherein he exactly agrees with the Author to
the Hebrews. And from sundry Passages in the Book of Psalms it seems evident,
that the good Jews had a Prospect beyond the Outside and Letter of the Law,
even into the typical Sense and Meaning of it; and that through its glimmering
Shadows and Resemblances, they beheld very much of the Substance and Realities
of the Gospel: For hence probably was that of David, Ps. 25.14. The Secret of
the Lord is with them that fear him; for certainly the Secret of the Lord here
cannot be meant the Foreknowledge of future Events, since under the Old
Testament that was neither restrained to good Men, nor much less was it
universally with them that feared God; and therefore it seems more probable,
that by it we are to understand those then secret Mysteries of the Gospel,
which were so obscurely represented in the Types and Figures of the Law;
especially if we compare this with that Prayer of David, Psalm 119.18. Open
thou mine Eyes that I may behold the wondrous things out of thy Law; which
methinks plainly intimates that the good Man did believe there were some
wondrous Mysteries contained under those dark and typical Representations: And
afterward, v. 27. make me to understand the way of thy Precepts, so shall I
talk of thy wondrous Works; which implies that he believed that there were some
Things very mystical and hard to be understood contained within the Precepts of
their Law, which in their literal Sense were easy and obvious, and had nothing
of Depths or Mystery in them; and therefore certainly had he not seen something
within them beyond their Rine and Outside, he would never have prayed so
earnestly as he does, that God would teach him his Laws, and that he would not
hide from him his Commandments, as he does, v. 19. much less would he have
imagined that by understanding of them he should be enabled to talk of such
wondrous Things. Afterward, v. 69. he tells us, that he had seen an end of all
Perfection, but God's Commandments are exceeding broad; which denotes that he
who had seen an End of all Things else, had discovered so vast and boundless a
Depth in the Commands of God, that he could see no End of it; whereas it is
plain, that the literal Meaning of them was very narrow and contracted, and far
from being so exceeding broad; which argues that the good Man had discovered
under the Letter and Surface of them, a Mine of mystical Sense which he could
not reach the Bottom of, and that God had given him a Glimps of those glorious
Secrets of the Gospel which he had wrapped up, and involved in the typical
Precepts of the Law. Thus the Eternal Word while he tabernacled among the Jews,
revealed his Gospel to them by Types and Shadows, and mystical Representations
of it, which, though it was very obscure and imperfect, yet seems to have been
the best and clearest that the present State of the People could admit of. For
it seems plain by the History of the Jews, that they were naturally a very rude
and untractable People, and doubtless they were never worse than when they came
out of the Land of Egypt, where their bad Temper was doubtless very much
improved by those gross Idolatries in which they had been educated; so that
being bad themselves, and also extremely debanched by the wicked Manners of the
Egyptians, it is not to be supposed that they were Subjects capable of the
Heights and Purities of Religion; for if from the Depth of Immorality,
whereinto they were sunk, God should have immediately strained them up to the
highest Pitch of Gospel-Purity, in all Probability they would never have born
it; but like the Strings of a Musical Instrument, being wound too high, would
have been apt to crack and fly in pieces, and wholly to revolt from God into
those gross Idolatries which yet they were hardly weaned from, and which were
still so suitable to their Genius and Temper. So that as yet there was so great
a Gulf between them and the Gospel, that 'twas hardly possible either for them
to go to that, or for that to come to them. And therefore as God in his own
high Wisdom has placed a Twilight between the Night and the Morning to secure
our Sight lest our weak Eyes should be dazzled by a too sudden Irruption of the
Broad-day's Glory; so did he deal with the Jews: He thought it not convenient
immediately to post them out of utter Darkness into perfect Light, but first
interposes a less pure Religion as a Medium or Twilight between the Heathen
and the Gospel State, that so by that he might prepare their Sight for
Reception of a more perfect Splendour, and make them fit to entertain the
severer Purities of the Gospel without being offended or dazzled with it is
Glory. But yet in Wisdom he has so contrived and modeled this less perfect
Religion, as to make it most instructive and useful, having so ordered its
sacred Rites and Ceremonies as to make them Representative of the whole Method
and Economy of the Gospel; and though those typical Representations were very
obscure and dark, so that the Gospel seemed to run under ground in the midst of
those Ceremonial Observances, yet it frequently broke forth, and opened it self
in the midst of them, and by degrees in the Prophetic Age did make it a larger
Channel, till by its Force and Violence it did overthrow these Banks, that
stood in its way, and overspread the Face of the whole Earth. So that it is
plain that the Obscurity of those typical Representations did not render them
wholly useless, since they were not so obscure, but those who were good, and
diligent, and serious in the Study of them might be, and were instructed by
them in whatsoever was necessary to make them good and happy. For though those
Types had not a Mouth to speak out the Gospel, yet they had a Hand to point to
it, they being as it were rude Draughts of that which was afterward to be
drawn to the greatest Life and Exactness; and this it is plain was understood by
all good Men whose Hearts were carried beyond the outward Letter of the Law, to
the more inward and spiritual Meaning of it; wherein they discovered those
Evangelical Mysteries that were veiled and hidden under the outward Ceremonies,
which made up that true spiritual Cabala which seems constantly to have been
preserved among the true Israelites, and which afterward was more largely
commented on by the Prophets of the succeeding Ages, whose Care it was to
unlock this Cabala, or spiritual Sense of the Law, and to raise up the Hearts
of that People to a higher Expectation of the great Things which were to come.
So that you see the State and Condition of the Jews would not admit of a plain
Discovery of the Gospel to them, but required an outward Ceremonial Religion,
that being most accommodate to their Genius and Temper; and therefore though
the Eternal Word for the present Exigence established such a Religion among
them, yet He wisely framed and modelled it into a typical Representation of the
Gospel, that so thereby he might prepare them for it, and so far instruct them
in the Knowledge of it as was necessary to their Welfare and Happiness. And
hence the Apostle tells the Jews, that the Law was their Schoolmaster to bring
them unto Christ, that they might be justified by Faith, and that now after
Faith was come, they were no longer under their Schoolmaster, Gal. 3.4, 25.
that is, while they were in their Infantine, Childish State, and incapable of a
more perfect Institution, God set the Law as a Schoolmaster over them, that
that by its Types, and Pictures, and Emblems, might gradually instruct them in
the Mysteries of Christ, and the Gospel. that so when it was openly revealed
they might be justified by the Belief of it; and therefore now since the Gospel
was come, they were no longer under the Tutorage of that Schoolmaster, now
they were no longer to learn Christ by Types and mystical Representations,
since he himself was present with them, and had openly revealed those Divine
Mysteries which under those Types were so obscurely adumbrated. So that you see
the Eternal Word tabernacled among the Jews in a far different manner from what
he did when he pitched his Tabernacle in our Natures; for when he tabernalced
among them he was full of Types, and Shadows, and mystical Emblems; He
instructed them in Divine Things by Symbols, and obscure Representations; but
when he came to tabernacle among us, and our Natures, he was full of Truth,
that is, of Substance and Reality: For then instead of the Shadows and Pictures
of them, he exhibited to us the Things themselves; then he brought down the
Mysteries of the Gospel out of that Cloud of Types in which they were before
involved, and set them before us in a clear and open Light.

But that I may more fully demonstrate this to you, I shall briefly give you
some particular Instances of his dwelling, or conversing among us full of
Truth, in Contradistinction to that obscure typical Way of his conversing or
tabernacling aomg the Jews; which I shall rank under these four Heads: 1. His
Personal Transactions. 2. The Purity and Spirituality of his Laws. 3. The
Condition and Quality of his Kingdom. 4. The Rewards and Recompenses which he
promises to his Subjects.


1. One great Instance of his conversing among us full of Truth, in
Contradistinction to that obscure and typical Way of his conversing among the
Jews, is his own Personal Transactions. The Eternal Word being to assume our
Natures, thoguht fit to give the Jews whilst he tabernacled among them, a
Specimen or Pattern of those glorious Things he was to transact in his
Incarnate State; and this he did chiefly by the High Priest, and those
Expiatory Sacrifices which he ordained and instituted among them, as you may
find it demonstrated at large in the Epistle to the Hebrews. For as to the High
Priest, he was to be called, and ordained of God, Heb. 5.4. in which the
Eternal Word represented to them his Commission from the Father, to descend
into the World as his Ambassador to Men. Secondly, He was to be born of a Woman
that came a pure Virgin into the Arms of his Father, Levit. 21.14. in which he
seems to represent to them his own pure Nativity of a Virgin Mother. Thirdly,
He was to be washed with Water, and his Flesh and Loins were to be covered with
the whitest and the cleanest linen, Exodus 29.7. and 28.42. by which Christ
typified to them the IMMACVLATE Sanctity and Innocence of his humane Life.
Fourthly, He was to be clothed in the most glorious Garments that could
possibly be made by the most excellent Workmen, Exodus 28.2, 3. which seems to
denote the Majesty of Christ's Person, and those glorious Works by which he
rendered himself so illustrious in the World. Fifthly, The Colors of the
Embroideries of his Garment being blue, purple, scarlet, and white, seem to
denote the Truth of his Prophetic Office, the Majesty of his Royal, the
Perfection of his Priestly, and his Innocence and Sanctity in the Execution of
them all. Sixthly, He wore a holy Crown on his Head, and a Plate on his
Forehead engraven with Holiness; which denotes the Divine Authority of Christ,
and the Sacredness and Divinity of his Person. And, Seventhly, Upon his Breast
he wore the Vrim and Thummim, in which was prefigured the Height and Purity of
Christ's Doctrine, and the Holiness and Perfection of his Laws. In a word, the
High Priest was to offer Sacrifice for the Sins of the People, on the great day
of Expiation, which Sacrifice was to be a Beast without blemish voluntarily
presented at the Door of the Tabernacle, whither the High Priest being come, he
was to strip off his glorious Garment, to lay his Hand on the Head of the
Beast, and to confess the Peoples Sins over it, and then to slay the Beast, and
carry some of the Blood of it within the Vail, and sprinkle it upon, and before
the Mercy-Seat, by which he is said to make an Atonement for their Sins; that
is, to obtain Authority from God to bless and pardon: In which the Eternal Word
gives us a plain Representation of his future Sacrifice upon Earth, and
Intercession in Heaven; for he being both our Sacrifice and High Priest, did
freely divest himself of the Glory and Dignity of his Humane Nature, and offer
up himself to die for us; by which he laid his Hand as it were upon his own
spotless and immaculate Head, did as our Representative acknowledge what we had
deserved, that for our Sins we have justly merited to die for ever by the Hand
of God, even as He for our sakes did submit to die by the Hand of Man: And
having performed this bloody Sacrifice, he enters into Heaven, which is the
true Holy of Holies, and there by the Oblation of his Blood and Obedience,
makes an Atonement for our Sins, and obtains Authority from his Father to
pardon and receive into Favor every truly penitent Offender in the World. Thus
you see how the Personal Transactions of our Savior were under the Law of
Moses represented in mystical Types and Figures; but when he came to tabernacle
among us, he did all that which before he only represented; He actually came
down from the Father to us, was born of the Holy Virgin, lived a most holy and
innocent Life, died a Sacrifice for our Sins, and is gone into Heaven to
intercede for us: So that now instead of Types and Figures, we have the
Substances and Realities that were obscurely shadowed and represented in them.

2. Another great Instance of his conversing among us full of Truth, is the
Purity and Spirituality of his Laws. It Is apparent that those which he gave to
the Jews, according to the literal Sense of them, did only oblige them to an
External Obedience; and therefore St. Paul calls the whole Law a carnal
Commandment, Heb. 7.16. and the Precepts of it he calls carnal Ordinances
imposed upon them till the time of Reformation, Heb. 9.10. But yet it is
apparent that by these carnal Ordinances the Eternal Word did designedly typify
and represent that internal Purity of Soul which the Evangelical Law does
exact: For he seeing that the Jews were not only a perverse, but also a dull
and sottish People, as those generally are who are born and bred in Slavery,
and that therefore they were incapable of sublime and spiritual Precepts, and
would be apt to forget plain ones, He therefore thought it most proper and
suitable to their Capacity and Genius to instruct them by sensible and material
Signs, even as Parents do sometimes teach their Children by Pictures; for of
this his Condescension to their Dullness and Capacity, the Prophet Isaiah takes
notice, Chap. 28.10, 11. where he says, that he gave them precept upon
precept, line upon line, here a little and there a little with a stammering
tongue; that is, he looked upon them as Children, and so condescended to their
Weakness, and spoke to them in their own Dialect. And this Way of instructing
them by outward and visible Signs was the most probable to take effect, because
it was much in use in the Eastern Countries, but more especially in Egypt,
whose Manners they were infinitely fond of, to wrap up their most excellent
Precepts in Hieroglyphics, which were nothing but Pictures and material Sings,
by which they represented their Divine and Moral Institutions. Thus therefore
by such visible Signs and Pictures, the Eternal Word instructed them in the
Rules of internal Purity and Goodness; so by Circumcision he signified to them
the Circumcision of their Hearts; and by their several Washings, Purity from
Hypocrisy and Sensuality; yea this was probably the Intent of that Difference
of Meats, as St. Barnabas in his Epistle tells us, that Swines Flesh was
pronounced unclean, to instruct them not to live like Hoggs that clamor when
they are hungry, and forget their Masters when they are full; that Eagles, and
such ravenous Birds were forbidden to be eat, to teach them that those who live
not by Industry, but Rapine, are abominable; that Fish without Scales, which
generally dwell in the Mud, were all pronounced unclean; to teach them the Evil
of Sensuality, and Earthly-mindedness! Thus by these outward Signs his Intent
was to insinuate into them internal Purity of Mind; and this was very well
understood by those who were good and wise among them: Hence we find David
gives very high Encomiums of the Law, Psalm. 19.7, 8. The Law of the Lord is
perfect, converting the Soul, making wise the simple; rejoicing the Heart,
enlightening the Eyes, etc. which Characters are proper only to that inward and
spiritual Sense of the Law that was decyphered upon those outward Signs and
Ceremonies. Which Sense seems to have been very little taken notice of by the
sottish Vulgar; for only the Ceremony it self was Matter of Law to them, which
if they observed they were not punishable by that Law, though they never took
notice of its spiritual Sense and Meaning, which made them neglect that inward
Purity which was pictured on those outward Signs, and place the whole of their
Righteousness in an outside ceremonious Pageantry. Hence is that of St. Paul, 2
Cor 3.13, 14, 15. I used, says he, great plainness of Speech: And not as
Moses, which put a Vail over his Face, that the Children of Israel could not
steadfastly look unto the end of that which is abolished. But their Minds were
blinded; for until this day remains the same Vail untaken away, in the
reading the Old Testament; whieh Vail is done away in Christ: By which Vail he
means those outward Shadows and Types in which the mystical Sense of the Law
was wrapped and involved; and it seems they were so taken with the Pomp and Gaity
of the outside, that they never minded that rich Treasure of Sense that was
contained within it, and which the Apostle here calls the end of that which is
abolished; yea, to this day, says he, the Vail of outward Ceremonies stands so
much in their Light that they cannot discern the internal Sense of the Old
Testament; but now, says he, it is done away by Christ. Now that the Eternal
Word has pitched his Tabernacle is our Nature, those outward Types wherein
this inward Purity of Soul was so obscurely intimated, are vanished like Clouds
before the Sun, and in their room are introduced the most pure and spiritual
Laws of the Gospel, which are no longer couched in Types and Ceremonial
Shadows, but in plain and naked Propositions. Now internal Holiness is palpably
declared to be the great Design of Religion, that we should cleanse our selves
from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and perfect Holiness in the fear of
God. This therefore is another Instance of Christ's tabernacling among us full
of Truth, viz. the Purity and Spirituality of his Laws, which heretofore he
mystically represented to the Jews by outward Rites and Ceremonies.

3. Another Instance of his tabernacling among us full of Truth, in
Contradistinction to that obscure typical Way of his conversing among the Jews,
is the Condition and Quality of his Church and Kingdom. The Eternal Word,
designing to erect a glorious Kingdom in the World, drew as it were a rude
Scheme or Draught of it in the Form and Model of the Jewish Polity. For first
he erects a Kingdom among them of which himself was King, to typify the
Spiritual Kingdom which afterward he meant to establish in the World; then he
adopts the Jews to be his Children by the external Sign of Circumcision, who
are therefore called a Holy Seed, which was an Emblem of that Holy Seed which
afterward he designed to beget to himself by spiritual Regeneration, which is
therefore called the Circumcision of the Heart, whose Praise is not of Men, but
of God. His delivering them from the Bondage of Egypt, and leading them through
the Red Sea and the Wilderness into Canaan, typified his delivering of his
future Church from the Bondage of Sin and Satan, and leading it by his own
gacious Presence through the Red Sea of Blood, and Persecutions, and the
Wilderness of the World to the Canaan of eternal Rest. His giving the Law on
Mount Sinai in Fire, was a Figure of his delivering the Gospel by the Spirit,
which came down in fiery cloven Tongues at the Feast of Pentecost. Thus his
erecting the Ark in the Wilderness was also another Type of that Spiritual
Kingdom which afwards he meant to erect in the World. The diverse Ornaments and
Instruments of that Tabernacle represented the Diversity of spiritual Gifts and
Functions in the Christian Church; its being covered with Skins without, and
adorned with Gold within, shadowed the mean and contemptible Form wherein the
Christian Church first appeared to the World, notwithstanding the inward Glory
and Purity with which it was adorned and embellished. The Glory of God
appearing in the Tabernacle, denoted the Presence of Christ in his Church,
which he has promised to continue to the end of the World; its being removed
from Place to Place, and finding no Rest till it was lodged in the Temple,
prefigured the persecuted State of the Primitive Church, which was hunted up
and down the World by the mighty Nimrods of the Earth, and could find no Rest
till it was transported to the Heavenly Temple. By these and such like Types
and Shadows did the Eternal Word prefigure the State and Condition of his
future Church, that so when it came to be erected in the World, the Jews might
know and own it, having seen it beforehand so exactly decyphered and adumbrated
in the very Frame and Model of their own Polity. But when he came to tabernacle
in our Nature he gave actual Being to those Things which before he only
shadowed and represented; for then he erected this glorious Church, of which
the Jewish was only a Model and Platform, delivered it from the Egyptian
Bondage of Wickedness and Idolatry, and by his own glorious Presence conducted
the Members of it through all the Persecutions of an enraged World, to the
Canaan of eternal Rest; and therefore this also is another plain Instance of
his tabernacling among us full of Truth, the State and Condition of his Church,
which before was so obscurely represented.

4. And lastly, Another Instance of his tabernacling among us full of Truth, in
Contradistinction to that obscure and typical Way of his conversing among the
Jews, is the glorious Recompenses which he has so plainly and clearly promised
to his Subjects. For this he also obscurely typified to the Jews; for, as I
have already hinted, by that Canaan which he bestowed upon them after their
tedious Travel through the Wilderness, he did darkly represent to them that
Canaan above flowing with infinite Delights, which he has promised to bestow
upon his faithful Servants after they have passed through the Wilderness of
this World. So also by their Sabbaoths, and especially their Year of Jubilee,
wherein they were to rest from all their Labors, and keep a perpetual
Festivity, He did obscurely decypher to them that Sabbath of Rest, and Jubilee
of endless Pleasure which virtuous Souls shall enjoy in Heaven after they have
finished their Labors here on Earth, as you may see at large Heb. 4. Now by
these and such like Shadows of their Law, which possibly the Prophets by Divine
Inspiration might expound to them, those who were wise and good among them, it
is very probable, were instructed in the Article of eternal Life. Hence it may
be might arise that famous Controversy among the Jews concerning the Written
and Oral Law, which they call the Cabala, or the Law by Tradition; not that
this traditional contained any thing that was not in the written Law, but
because those things which were obscurely contained in the Types of the written
Law were explained and interpreted in this their Traditional Law But it is
apparent that the Types of eternal Life were not fully explained in this
traditional Law till after the Babylonish Captivity, after which the Prophet
Daniel, and after him Ezekiel began to speak more plainly of the Resurrection
of the Dead; and from that Time forwards the Doctrine of the Resurrection and
eternal Life, began to be more openly taught among the Common People till about
the Time of the Maccabees, when it was brought forth into the Light from under
those Types in which it was so obscurely represented, and became a Principle
even of the Popular Religion, and an Article of the Jewish Faith, as plainly
appears from the Records of those Times, particularly 2 Macc. 7.23, 26.
compared with Heb. 11.35. And indeed it was very necessary that then this
Article should be more clearly revealed to fortify the Jews against those many
Persecutions whereunto they were exposed for the sake of their Religion, that
they might not be terrified to apostatize from it by those cruel Martyrdoms
which in the Time of the Maccabees they many of them endured; and besides, now
the Time of the Gospel was approaching, and consequently its Mysteries, like
the Light of the rising Sun, began to break forth clearer and clearer from
under that Cloud of Types wherein it was wrapped and involved, till at last the
Sun of Righteousness himself arose and dispersed those Clouds, and brought Life
and Immortality to light by the Gospel. But as for the Sadducees, who give no
heed to the Cabala, or Traditional Law, in which this Doctrine was first
discovered, and adhered only to the written Law of Moses, they still continued
Infidels in this Point, and believed neither Angels nor Spirits, nor the Life
to come: So very obscurely was it represented in the Types and Shadows of the
Written Law. But when once the Eternal Word came to tabernacle in our Flesh, he
revealed this great Article so plainly and clearly to the World, that it is
impossible for any one not to believe it that believes him to be the Messiah,
or Incarnate Word.

And thus you see by all these Instances what a vast Difference there was in
respect of Truth, between Christ's tabernacling in our Nature, and in the
Tabernacle of Moses. And now I shall conclude this Argument with two or three
practical Inferences.

1st. He dwelt or tabernacled among us.] From hence I infer the high Authority
of Christ, and that holy Religion which he has revealed to us. For to
tabernacle among us, as I have already showed you, signifies to dwell in the
midst of, as the Shechinah, Presence, or Representative of the most High God,
as one that acted in his Father's Person, and was vested with his Authority,
and consequently as one who has as great a Right to exact our Obedience as the
Eternal Father himself, should he have come down from Heaven in his own Person
to give Laws to Mankind. For so when the Eternal Word went before the Camp of
Israel as the Shechinah, or Angel of God's Presence, God requires them that
they should obey him as himself; Beware of him, and obey his Voice, says God;
provoke him not, for he will not pardon your Transgression, for my Name is in
him, Exodus 23.21. and v. 22. To obey the Voice of this Angel is interpreted to
be the same thing, as to obey the Voice of the most High God himself; But if
thou shall indeed obey his Voice, says God, and do all that I speak, then I
will be an Enemy to thy Enemies, etc. So that for the Israelites to disobey
this Angel (who, as I have proved to you, was the Eternal Word, or
Representative of the most High God to them) was to all Intents and Purposes
the same Thing as if they had disobeyed the most High himself. And accordingly
our Savior tells the Jews, He that believes on me, believes not on me but on
the Father that sent me; that is, he does not merely believe on me, but on the
Father too, whose Authority I have, and whose Person I reprefent; for so he
explains himself in the following Verse, He that sees me, sees him that sent
me; that is, I being my Father's Shechinah, or Representative, Joh. 12.44, 45.
And therefore as every Contempt of the Deputy, or Vice-Governor, is an Affront
to the Sovereign Prince whose Person he bears, and by whose Authority he acts;
so every Rebellion against Christ is an open Defiance to the Sovereign God
whose Person he represents, and by whose Authority he reigns. Hence our Savior
tells the Jews, Job. 5. 23. that He that honors not the Son, honors not
the Father which has sent him; which plainly intimates that God the Father
resents those Indignities which we offer to Christ and his Laws, as if they
were done to his own Person, and that if himself should speak to us from the
Battlements of Heaven, or proclaim his Law to us in a Voice of Thunder, he
would not be more displeased to hear us openly declarethat we will not obey
him, than he is to see us trample upon the Laws of his Son which he has
stamped with his own Sovereign Authority. So that if we were not infinitely
foolhardy, methinks we should never dare to violate our Religion, in which the
Authority of the most High God is so immediately concerned. For whatsoever our
Religion requires of us, it requires in his Name who has an undoubted Right
and Authority to command us; for from all Eternity he was invested with an
absolute and unlimited Power of doing any thing that is not unbecoming his
Divine Perfections, and in this the Right of his Dominion over us is originally
founded. For he that has Power must needs have a Right to exercise it so far
as it is just and becoming his Nature, otherwise his Power would be altogether
in vain; and therefore since God from all Eternity has a Power of doing
whatsoever he pleases so far as is consistent with his Holiness and Goodness,
there is nothing can be pretended against the Right of his Dominion and
Authority over us: For God cannot but have an eternal Right to exercise his own
Power, and he cannot but have an immutable Right to exercise it over his own
Creatures. And as from all Eternity he had Power to do whatsoever was just and
becoming him, so from his creating of us it became most just and becoming that
he should rule and govern us; for we became his as soon as we were created by
him; all our Powers of Action were from him, and by that he has acquired an
unalienable Right in whatsoever we are able to do. We have nothing but what is
his Gift, and therefore can do nothing but what is his Debt; we received all
from him, and therefore must owe all to him; for by Right of Creation he is the
supreme Proprietor of all our Powers and Faculties, and as such has a just
Claim to all the Homage and Obedience that we are able to render him. So that
as God's Dominion over us is originally founded in his most absolute Power to
do whatsoever is just and becoming him; so the Justice and Becomingness of his
Dominion over us does immediately result from his creating of us, by which he
has for ever entitled himself to all the Obedience we can render him. And by
Virtue of this immutable Title does he claim our Obedience to the Laws of Jesus
Christ, whom next to himself he has made our Prince and Ruler, having vested
him with his own Sovereign Authority, and constituted him his supreme
Representative in the Church. So that by disobeying his Laws we incur the Guilt
of the most monstrous Injustice in the World; we resume our selves from him to
whom we owe our Being, and refuse to own our selves to be his Creatures from
whose Bounty we receive even the Power of rebelling against him; we alienate
our Faculties from those sacred Uses whereunto they were designed and
consecrated, and turn these living Temples of God into Dens of impure Thoughts
and filthy Lusts; In a word, we fight against God with his own Gifts, and arm
the Effects of his Bounty against his Sovereign Authority. And what do we think
will be the Consequence of these Things? Can we be so sottish as to imagine
that the Almighty Father will sit above in the Heavens, and see how his Laws
are trampled upon, his Authority contemned, and exposed to Scorn and Derision
by a Company of impious Wretches that owe their very Beings to him, and never
be concerned at it? Do we think him so stupid a Being as that no Provocations
will awake his Vengeance, that he will for even sit unconcerned with his Hands
in his Bosom whilst his violated Laws, like the Souls under the Altar, are
continually crying out to him, How long, O Lord, holy and true! do thou not
avenge our Quarrel upon the Heads of these audacious Rebels that every day
trample us under foot, and have no more regard for our Authority than they have
for the Whistling of the Wind! For God's sake, Sirs, let us consider before it
be too late what is like to become of us, what probable Hopes of Security we
can propose to our selves if we persist in this unjust Rebellion. Gird up your
Loins like Men, and I will demand of you in the Name of God, do you think that
the wise Governor of the World will be for ever insensible of all the rude
Affronts and Provocations you offer him? If so, pray where is his Wisdom, or in
what sense does he govern the World, if he takes no care to secure his Laws by
punishing Offenders, and lets his Subjects alone to do as they list? Or have
you an Arm as strong as God's? Can you grapple with his Almighty Vengeance, or
withstand the Stroke of his Thunderbolts? Sure such a ridiculous Conceit can
never enter into any reasonable Breast? and if not, in the Name of God what do
you propose to your selves when you can neither hope for Favor from God, nor
Security from your selves? Are you so abandoned of all your Reason as wilfully
to shut your Eyes against your Danger, and run the desperate Venture of falling
into the Hands of the living God? Has not our blessed Lord most fairly warned
us what we are to trust to? Has he not told us how he values his Laws, and how
dreadfully he will punish the Transgression of them? Has he not most seriously
protested to us that unless we do repent and amend, he will never forgive us
either in this Life, or that to come; and that if we still persist in our
Rebellions, he will at last banish us from his Presence for ever, and assign us
our Portion with Devils and damned Ghosts in that Lake that burns with Fire and
Brimstone? And has he not taken it upon his Death that all this is true, when
he so freely sealed his Doctrines with his Blood? And now after all this, is it
possible we should be so senseless as to think we can be safe in our Wickedness,
when God the Father is enraged both in Wisdom and Honor to avenge it as an
Affront to his Authority, and God the Son has revealed his Father's Wrath from
Heaven against all Unrighteousness and Ungodliness of Men? and therefore as we
value our own Safety, it concerns us either to submit to that Divine Authority
which is stamped upon the Laws of our Savior, or else to secure our selves of
some Retreat of Sanctuary from that Almighty Vengeance which our Rebellion will
certainly arm against us.

2dly. He dwelt among us full of Grace.] Hence I infer what mighty
Encouragement we have to serve and obey our blessed Master who in his dwelling
among us was full of every thing that can render his Service lovely or
desirable, and abounded in all those amiable Graces that can oblige us to love
and obey him. For what was there wanting in our blessed Master that any
reasonable Subject can desire in his Prince and Sovereign? Would he desire a
Prince of a sweet and gracious Temper, one that is full of Love and Tenderness
to his Subjects? Such a one in the most eminent degree is our blessed Lord; for
how does the History of his Conversation upon Earth abound with the Expressions
of a most sweet and loving Temper? For Love was the Principle of all his
Actions, the Life and Soul of his Conversation, and in all that he did or spoke
he made some new Discovery of his unfeigned Affection to the World; for he went
about doing good, and his whole Life was nothing but one continued Act of
Charity to Mankind. For still you find him either instructing the Ignorant, or
reproving the Erroneous, or comforting the Dejected, or feeding the Hungry, or
curing the Sick and Diseased. From Morning to Night he was constantly engaged
in one good Action or other, and the whole Race of his Life, like that of the
Sun, was spent in enlivening or inlightning the World. So endearing was his
Behavior that he obliged his very Enemies, and, when he had won them, treated
them with all the Tenderness and Affection of a most loving Father toward his
dearest Children. From all he conversed with he extorted Respect and
Veneration, and none were able to resist the Charms of his victorious Love, but
those whose Hearts were harder than the nether Millstone. But that I may
convince you of the infinite Goodness and Tenderness of his Nature, I will give
you but that one Instance Luke 19.41. And when he was come near, he beheld the
City, and wept over it; which, as you will see afterward, was occasioned by
the Foresight of its approaching Ruin and Destruction; and yet at the same
time he foresaw the Cruelties which those barbarous Villains were about to
practice upon him, how they would scourge his Body with knotty Whips, and nail
his Hands and Feet to the Cross, and thrust a Spear into his Heart; he saw how
they would triumph over his Misery, mock at his Calamity, and dance to the
Music of his dying Groans. And now one would have thought such a Prospect as
this would have for ever enraged his Soul against them, and made him rejoice to
see that sweeping Destruction that was coming upon them; but such was the
incomparable Sweetness of his Temper, that while he foresaw them plotting his
Ruin, he could not but sigh over theirs, and while he beheld their Malice all
reeking in his Blood, and sporting it self with his Torments and Agonies, yet
at the Sense of their approaching Destruction his very Bowels earned, and his
Heart melted with Commiseration, and he could not forbear weeping to think that
those cursed Instruments of all his Miseries must e're long be so wretched and
miserable themselves, earnestly wishing that they who so greedily thirsted for
his Blood had known in that their day the things which belong to their Peace.
And though one would have thought the barbarous Entertainment he met with here
upon Earth would have for ever quenched all his Affection to Mankind, yet still
it lives, and in despite of all the Affronts and Outrages he endured, burns as
vigorously in his Breast as ever. So unconquerable was his Love to his
Subjects, that all the bloody Cruelties they practiced upon him, when they
chased him out of the World, were never able to alienate his Heart and
Affections from them; but after all their Cruelties he still retained his
Fatherly Bowels toward them, and when he could endure their Torments no
longer, breathed out his loving Soul in an earnest Prayer for their Pardon,
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. And now that he is in
Heaven among Angels and glorified Spirits, where he cannot but remember how
unkindly we treated him when he was upon Earth, and perhaps does still bear
upon his glorified Body those very Wounds which he received from our Hands,
which one would think were sufficient to incense him against us for ever; yet
his Heart is the same toward us, full of all those kind and tender Resentments
that first brought him down from Heaven, and rendered his Conversation among us
so full of Sweetness and Endearments. And now being so infinitely kind as he
is, why should we be disheartened from serving him? Methinks the Sense of his
Love to us, if there were no other Argument in the World, should be sufficient
to bind us to his Service for ever. For, O my Soul, how can I do too much for
so kind a Friend! How can I be too submissive to so good a Master! That is so
infinitely tender of all his Servants, and loves them a thousand times more
than they love themselves! Sure if we had any Spark of Ingenuity in us, the
Sense of his matchless Kindness toward us, would be sufficient to turn all our
Duty to him into Recreation, to make us thirst after his Service, and catch at
all Opportunities of expressing our Loyalty and Obedience to him: We should
embrace his Commands as Preferments to us, and wear them as the greatest
Favors, and think our selves more honored in being the Servants of Jesus
Christ, than in being made mighty Kings and Potentates.

2. Consider, as he is full of Grace, in Respect of his own Personal
Disposition, so he is also in Respect of his Laws, in which, as I have already
showed you, he requires nothing of us but what is for our Good, nothing but
what tends to the Perfection of our Natures, and the Consummation of our
Happiness. All that our Savior requires at our Hands, is only that we should
act according to the Laws of a Reasonable Nature, and constantly pursue the
great End of our Creation, which can never be obtained by us, unless we
regulate our Actions by those wise and excellent Rules which he has prescribed
us, and which he has prescribed us upon no other Inducement, but only to
oblige us to be happy. For as to any Advantage that will accrue to him from our
Actions, it is altogether indifferent to him whether we obey him or no; for he
was always infinitely happy within himself, and would have always been so,
though we had never had a Being; so that his Felicity depends not upon us; and
were it not that the super abundant Goodness of his Nature does for ever
incline him to make us happy as well as himself, he would never have concerned
himself about us, but would have let us alone to do as we list, and abandoned
us to the Fate of our own Actions. He therefore being infinitely happy within
himself, can have no Self Ends to serve upon his Creatures; because within the
Circle of his own divine Being, he has all that he needs, and all that he
desires; but being infinitely good, as he is infinitely happy, we are sure that
our Good must be the only End of his intermedling with our Actions, and his
giving Laws to direct them. And if we consult the particular Laws which he has
given us, we shall find they all of them most naturally tend to perfect and
rectify our disordered Natures, to exalt and spiritualize our Affections, and
inspire us with all those divine Dispositions that are requisite to qualify us
for the Happiness of the World to come. And now methinks, if we had any Sense
of our own Interest, this Consideration should mightily encourage us to
Obedience, to think that while we are serving our blessed Master, we are
serving our selves to the best Purposes, and that his Service, and our Interest
are so combined and united, that by the same Actions we may gratify him, and do
our selves the greatest Kindness in the World; that he exacts nothing from us,
but what he was obliged to do by the infinite Care and Concern he has for us;
and that he had been less kind, should he have required less, and must
necessarily have subtracted from us some Degree of our Happiness, should he
have abated us any Part of our Duty. O Blessed Jesus, who can complain of thy
Service, when thy very Commands are Tokens of thy Love; when all the Duty thou
requirest of us, is only to be kind to our selves in doing those things, which
if thou had never commanded, our own Interest would have obliged us to, had
we but understood it as well, or regarded it as much as thou do?

3. But then consider again, as He is full of Grace to us in his own personal
Temper, and in those mild and gentle Laws which he has given us; so Thirdly,
He is full of Grace to us also in respect of that gracious Pardon and
Forgiveness which he has procured for, and promised to us if we will heartily
repent and amend. I confess, though his Personal Temper should be never so
sweet, and his Laws never so gentle, yet if he should, upon every wilful
Offense, exclude us from all Hope of Pardon, it might justly discourage the
Generality of Men from engaging any farther in his Service; because more or
less, we have all finned, and fallen short of the Glory of God. So that if upon
every wilful Act of Rebellion, we should stand for ever excluded from his
Favor; we should generally be left in a desperate Condition, and then to what
Purpose should we serve him any longer, when by all our future Loyalty and
Submissions, we must never hope to be readmitted into his Grace and Favor? To
remove this great Discouragement therefore, the blessed Jesus has obtained for
us this public Grant and Charter of Mercy from his Father, that if now at last
we will repent and amend our Ways, notwithstanding all our past Rebellions, we
shall find Mercy, and be as freely received into his Grace and Favor, as if we
never had offended him; and this merciful Grant he has published to us in the
Promises of his Gospel: So that now we cannot make the least Doubt of our
Pardon and Acceptance with him, upon our unfeigned Repentance, without calling
his Truth and Veracity into Question. And now what reasonable Cause of
Discouragement have we from returning to the Service of our blessed Master,
when we are so amply assured that our past Disobediences to him shall, upon our
Return, be forgotten for ever? For, in the Name of God, what can we desire
more? Is it reasonable that the wise Governor of the World should pardon
Offenders, whether they repent or no; that he should let them take their Swing
in Wickedness, and never take any Cognizance of their Actions? Let us speak
plainly; would we have him govern us or no? If not, we are infinitely besotted,
that for the Sake of a few paltry Lusts that are our Plague and Shame would
deprive our selves of all the Blessings and Benefits of his Government. But
whatsoever we would have, it is by no means fit that he should surrender up his
just Authority over us, because we are Fools and Madmen; and if we think it
fit that he should govern us, we cannot be so senseless as to think it
reasonable that he should pardon our Sins till we repent of them; because by so
doing he would give up all, and leave us absolute Masters of our selves. So
that if we our selves had been called to the Privy Council of Heaven, to give
our Vote to those Laws by which we were to be ruled and governed, doubtless we
could not have had the Confidence to aks either gentler Laws or greater
Indulgences than the blessed Jesus has freely granted us in his Gospel. If God
should have told us, that he would impose nothing on us without our own
Consent, and bid us ask for our selves any thing that is fit and modest,
doubtless the utmost that any modest Man could have craved, would have been
only this; Lord, if thou will be but so merciful as to give us such Laws as are
suited to our Natures, and are conducive to our Happiness, and so far to
consider our Weakness and Instability, as not to cast us away from thy Favor
for ever upon every Wilful Transgression, but to pardon and receive us again
upon our unfeigned Repentance, this is all the Favor we would ask, and for
this we would praise and adore they Goodness for ever and ever. Since God
therefore out of his own Grace and Goodness, has granted this Indulgence to
us, why should we be discouraged from returning to our Duty, though we have
never so notoriously violated and neglected it? For now we are fully assured
that we can never be excluded from all Hope of Pardon, till we are past all
Possibility of Repentance.

4. He is full of Grace to us also, in respect of that abundant Assistance
which he has promised and vouchsafed to us. I do confess, though
notwithstanding our former Rebellions, he should be never so ready to receive
us into Favor again upon our unfeigned Repentance; yet unless he will also
assist us in our Repentance, and enable us to conquer the Difficulties of it,
we have still very great Reason to be discouraged from his Service: For, by our
own evil Habits, we have so disabled our felves from returning to our Duty,
that without the Concurrence of a supernatural Grace, it will be in vain for us
to attempt it: For he that from a State of habitual Sin, enters into a Course
of Repentance, must strive all along against the Current of his Nature, which
at first especially, and when he is weakest, will be so swift and impetuous,
that by his own single Strength, it will be impossible for him to stem or
conquer it, and unless he be assisted by a greater Strength than his own, he
will be inevitably born down and carried away with it, though he struggle never
so vigorously against it; so that it is no Encouragement at all to the Service
of Christ, that he will receive us to Pardon when we heartily repent, unless he
will also enable us to repent by the Concurrence of his Grace with our honest
Endeavors. But this Discouragement also he has removed out of our Way, by
making us a public Grant and Promise of his Grace and Assistance; for he has
assured us that he will give his holy Spirit to every one that asks it, Luke
11.13. that if we will work out our own Salvation, he will work in us to will
and to do, Phil. 2.12, 13. and that to him that has, that is, improves that
Grace which he has, it shall be given more abundantly, Mat. 13.12. so that
though we cannot do all by our own single Strength, yet we can do so much as
will oblige our blessed Master to enable us to do all; and therefore that we do
not do all, is as much our Fault as if we could, because we are able to do all
through Christ, who will strengthen us if we will but do what we can; so that
this, methinks, should be sufficient to encourage any reasonable Man in the
World to undertake his Service, to consider that he who is my Master, will
cooperate with me, and proportion my Strength to the Work he enjoins me; that
he will not stand still with his Arms in his Bosom, and see me struggle in vain
under an insupportable But then of Duties, but that he will set too his own
Shoulders, and contribute his own Strength, and enable me, by degrees, to
undergo it with Ease and Alacrity; so that though through the Weakness and
Importency which I have voluntarily contracted, my Duty is become too heavy for
my Shoulders, yet I will never be disheartened so long as I am sure it is not
too heavy for my Savior's, for if I heartily endeavor, I am confident I shall
undergo it, if it be in the Power of an Almighty Grace to enable me.

5. And lastly, He was full of Grace to us also, in Respect of that glorious
Recompense which he has promised to us, and prepared for us. I confess, were
his Service all Work, and no Wages, there were some Reason to be disheartened;
but when he has promised, and so amply assured us, that after we have spent a
few Days or Years in his Service upon Earth, he will receive us into the
Participation of his own Joys, where we shall commence as happy as it is
possible for an everlasting Heaven to make us, methinks we should kiss his
Yoke, and court his Service, and think we can never do too much for such a
bountiful Master, who rewards all his Servants with such immortal Preferments:
For what is the Labor of a few Moments, compared with that everlasting Rest
and Pleasure wherein it shall shortly terminate? And when once we are arrived
to the Heavenly Canaan, and have tasted those ravishing Delights with which it
flows and abounds, how light and inconsiderable will all these Difficulties in
our Voyage appear to us, which now do so startle and affright us? How shall we
wonder at our own Sloth and Faint-heartedness, to think that ever we should be
such wretched Cowards as to be afraid of any thing that has Heaven at the End
of it, which is a Happiness so vast and unspeakable, that the Hope of it is
sufficient to turn Torments into Recreations; How shall we be astonished at our
selves, to think that we could ever be such wretched Fools as to deliberate one
Moment, whether Heaven were preferable before all the Pleasures of Sin, or
whether it were more eligible to dwell with Harlots and Drunkards for a Moment,
and wallow in their beastly Pleasures, than to enjoy the Society of God, and
Saints, and Angels, to all Eternity? The Odds will then appear so vast, and the
Disproportion so unspeakable, that we shall wonder how we could ever be so
senseless as to make a Comparison between them. Sure Sirs we do not believe that
Heaven is the Recompense of Christ's Service; for if we did, methinks we should
more heartily engage in it. For could we stand thus deliberating upon the
Shore, whether we shall bid adieu to our Lusts, take Leave of all their fulsom
Pleasures, and imbark our selves in the Service of our Savior? Could we stand
pausing thus as we do, whether we shall venture into those petty Storms that
are like to attend us in our spiritual Voyage, did we verily believe that a few
Leagues Distance lies that blessed Shore where we shall be crowned as soon as
we are landed with all the Joys than an everlasting Heaven means? Certainly the
Belief of this is sufficient to put Life and Courage into the most
crest-fallen-Soul in the World, and to give her Spirit and Vigor enough to
carry her triumphantly through all the weary Stages of her Duty. So that
considering how, in all Respects, our blessed Lord abounds in Grace and
Goodness to us, we have the greatest Encouragement imaginable to engage us to
his Service.

3dly. He was full of Truth.] From whence I infer, that the Christian Religion
is a very plain and intelligible thing. For this, as I have showed you at
large, is one of the great Notes of Distinction between Christ's tabernacling
among the Jews and among Christians, that whereas among the Jews, he was full
of obscure Types and mystical Representations; among us Christians, he is full
of Truth; that is, he is plain, and open, and clear, without any dark Reserves
or Mysteries; now he has plainly revealed that which before he did so
obscurely decypher; now he has unriddled all those mystical Types, and turned
them as it were inside outward, and given us their hidden Sense and Meaning in
plain and naked Propositions; and of these our holy Religion is composed. So
that those Doctrines which before were all Mystery, whilst they lay obscurely
couched under the Types and Figures of the Law, are now brought forth from
behind the Curtain into the open View of the World, and presented barefaced to
our Understandings in the most plain, and easy, and familiar Senfe: Not but
that Christianity has some Mysteries in it still, whose Depths we are not able
to fathom; but it is not because Christ has not revealed them, but because our
Understandings are incapable of comprehending them; such are the Doctrines of
the Holy Trinity, the Incarnation of our blessed Savior, and the Hypostatical
Union of the Divine and Humane Nature in him: Nor indeed is it much to be
wondered at, that we, who with all our Wit and Reason, are not able to
explicate the Mysteries of a Mite, or Flea, of a Plant or a Stone, or any of
those innumerable things that are before us, should not be able to understand
such incomprehensible, to order such infinite, or define such ineffable things;
but though we cannot comprehend the Modes, nor understand the strict Philosophy
of them, yet if we would but strip them out of their false Disguises into their
original Plainness and Simplicity, we might doubtless easily disintangle them
from all Repugnancy and Contradiction, which is sufficient to render them
rationally credible, they being contained in that excellent Religion, whose
Truth is demonstrated by such abundant Evidence. But perhaps, as God continued
all the Doctrines of Christianity in a Mystery among the Jews, and reserved the
clear Revelation of them to the coming of the Messiah; so for the same Reason
he has still reserved the clear Discovery of those Doctrines which are still
Mysteries to us Christians, for the future State, and then it may be we may as
fully understand these, as the believing Jews (after the Coming of Christ did
those other Doctrines of the Gospel, which before were all Mysteries to them.
But, God be praised, whatsoever is necessary to make us good and happy, is now
so plainly discovered to us, that we cannot be ignorant of it unless we
wilfully shut our own Eyes. We need not dive into mystical Senses, or grope
after Truth among Shadows and Vmbrages, as the good Jews were fain to do under
the Mosaic Dispensation, all that is necessary to our Salvation being written
as it were upon the very Surface of our Religion, and openly exposed to our
View in plain and literal Proposals. And yet notwithstanding the Plainness and
Simplicity of the Christian Religion, there are too many' both among our
selves, and in the Church of Rome, who have industriously set themselves to
resolve all its Doctrines again into Darkness and unintelligible Mysteries,
having, instead of the plain Propositions of our Savior, introduced a
new-fashioned Mystical Divinity, made up of nothing but certain empty Schemes
of effeminate Follies and wild Enthusiasms, which are impossible for any Man to
understand that cannot conjure for the Meaning of them. And those Doctrines
which our Savior purposely delivered in the most plain and literal Sense, that
so the meanest Understanding might be instructed by them; these Men have blown
up like so many Bubbles into swelling Mysteries, which, being Stripped of those
glittering Allusions, and pompous Metaphors, wherein they are clothed, vanish
immediately into Air, or sink into flat and empty Nonsense. For thus the
Doctrine of Faith, and Repentance, and Justification, which lie as plain in the
Scripture as Words can make them, are by their Divinity rendered more obscure
and mysterious than ever they were whilst they were couched under the Types and
Figures of the Law, more of the true Nature being discovered in Circumcision,
and the legal Washings and Attonements, than in a hundred Volumes of modern
Systems of Divinity. For, whatsoever is intelligible, they look upon as carnal,
and till they have subtilized it into some unaccountable Mystery, it is not
spiritual enough to be admitted into their System of Divinity, as if they
thought it below the Majesty of Religion to expose it self to the View of the
World, and there was no Way to secure it from Contempt, but to lock it up in
Mysteries and Obscurities; for else to what Purpose should they wrap it round
with Clouds as they do, unless they design to make a Trade of it, and so draw a
Curtain before it, as Men do before their Puppet-Plays, that so they may get
Money by showing it: For it is apparent that Religion it self suffers extremely
by it; for whilst they thus spiritualize it into Air, and do, as it were,
juggle it out of Sight in the Clouds of their mystical Nonsense, they render it
extremely suspicious to all that are wise and inquisitive, and will not suffer
themselves to be imposed upon by the Trains of their mysterious Gibberish. And
as for their more credulous Followers, whilst they thus lead them by the Nose
through a Valley of Shades and Darkness, they utterly deprive them of the
vigorous Warmth and Comforts of Religion, for how should they know how to make
use of the Arguments and Motives of Christianity, when those excellent
Doctrines from whence they are deduced, are wrapped in unintelligible Mysteriws?
For how should they draw forth from the Articles of their Faith, those
Practical Principles that are lodged in them, when those Articles are converted
into Riddles, which they do not, nor cannot understand? Thus, by turning
Christianity into a Mystery, they do not only thwart the Design of our Savior,
which was to bring it forth from under the mysterious Representations of the
Law, and propose it to the World in the most plain and intelligible manner; but
they also dispirit Religion it self, whose Life and Energy consists in being
understood, and expose it to the Contempt and Scorn of those that have Wit
enough to detect the Follies of their Enthusiastical Mysteries.

4thly. And lastly, He dwelt among us full of Grace and Truth.] From hence I
infer the Inexcusabeness of those Men that persist in their Disobedience to the
Gospel now that our blessed Lord has expressed so much Grace toward, and so
clearly made known his Mind and Will to us. What Excuse can we urge to palliate
our wretched Disobedience? If you will but imagine your selves for a little
while to be standing before the Tribunal of your Savior, where e're it be long
you must all appear, I will briefly draw up what in Probability will be your
Plea, and what may be reasonably presumed will be his Answer. In the Name of
Jesus then let me demand of you, what can you plead for your selves why that
fearful Doom which he has pronounced against you, should not be passed upon
you? Why, Lord, we know that thou were an austere Man, that thou would
exact of us to the utmost Punctilio, and that if ever we failed in the least
Circumstance of our Duty thou would immediately let loose thy implacable
Vengeance upon us, and this utterly disheartened us from thy Service considering
how impossible it was for us to please thee. Ah wretched Creatures! can you
have the Face to charge me with Rigor and Severity, who have had so many
notorious Experiments of the Sweetness of my Nature, and Tenderness of my
Affections toward you? What one Action was I ever guilty of in all my
Conversation among you that could give you the least Suspicion that ever I
would prove an austere Master to you, or that I would not be ready to construe
you in the most favorable Sense, and to pity and pardon you wheresoever you
were excusable? Did I ever give you any Occasion to think that I was of a
peevish or captious Nature, apt to be provoked with Trifles? Yea, had you not
all the Reason in the World to conclude from the Sweetness of my Temper that I
would be always ready to consider your Infirmities, and pity your Weaknesses,
and judge you by the Measures of a Friend? And do you now pretend that it was
the Dread of my Severity that disheartened you from my Service? But, Lord, the
Laws which thou gave us were so intolerably burden, some that neither we nor
our Forefathers were able to bear them: We would willingly have obeyed thee if
it had been possible, but when we saw thy Burden exceeded our Strength, we
concluded it was in vain for us to attempt the bearing it. O ungrateful Rebels!
dare ye accuse me of Tyranny when you know in your own Consciences I never
imposed any Law upon you but what had a necessary Tendency to your Happiness,
and was so far in its own Nature from being a Burden to you, that it commanded
nothing but what would have been an Ease and Refreshment? and if you can
produce any one of my Commands that obliged you to any thing but to be kind to
your selves, or convince me that I could have enjoined less upon you without
being less kind or merciful to you, I will freely admit of your Plea as just,
and immediately pardon all your Disobediences against me. But when all my Laws
are Instances of my Love to you, and Expressions of my Zeal for your Welfare,
who but such Monsters of Ingratitude as your selves would ever have charged me
with Tyranny and Oppression? But, Lord, thou know we are fickle and mutable
Creatures; and though we did heartily resolve that we would never rovolt from
thy Service, yet through the many Temptations that perpetually solicited us,
we were at last seduced into a Rebellion against thee: And though when we
reflected upon what we had done, we were full of Sorrow and Remorse, and wished
from our Souls that we had never done it; yet then, being desperate of Mercy,
and past all Hopes of Pardon, we concluded that it was too late to repent, or
to think of returning to our Duty again. Ah unworthy Wretches! with what
Confidence can you impute the Continuation of your Rebellion against me to your
Despair of ever finding Mercy at my hands, when you know in your own
Consciences that I died to procure Forgiveness for you, and that by my Death I
obtained an Act of Indemnity and Oblivion for all that would come in, and
return to their Duty upon the Proclamation of my Gospel? When you cannot but
know that I tendered you your Pardon sealed with my own Blood, and courted you
to accept of it; and though time after time you scornfully refused and rejected
it, yet in hope that at last you might be prevailed with, you know how long I
waited upon you even till you had tired out my Patience, and I saw there was no
Remedy? And do you now charge your not returning to your Duty upon your
Hopelesness of Pardon for your former Rebellions? It Is true, Lord, we cannot
deny but thou did offer us Pardon; but, alas, it was upon an impossible
Condition, even upon a hearty Repentance, and a thorough Reformation, which
thou knew we were not then able to perform. For by a long Custom of
Rebellion against thee, we had contracted so many inveterate evil Habits, which
had so weakened and debilitated our Powers, that we were no more able to reform
and amend our selves than the Leopard is to change his Spots, or the Ethiopian
his Skin: To what Purpose then should we attempt Impossibilities, or set our
selves to wrestle with Difficulties which we knew we wre never able to
surmount? But pray, how did you know that it was impossible for you to repent
when by all the Arguments I used with you, I could never persuade you to make
Trail of it? You know in your own Consciences that there are many things that
you could do; you could have betaken your selves to a serious Consideration of
the Duties and Motives of Religion; you could have attended, and abstained at
least from the outward Acts of Sin, and humbly implored my Grace and
Assistance; and that to encourage you to do this, and what else was in your
Power, I gave you the most ample Assurance in the World that I would back and
enforce your Endeavors with the Aids of my Grace, and in despite of all
opposition crown them with Success. So that though by your own single Strength
indeed you could never have effected your Repentance, yet it was far from being
impossible to you, since you knew that by doing what was in your power, you
should infallibly oblige me to enable you to do all the rest. But, blessed
Lord, what Encouragement had we to repent and return to our Duty? for if we had
done it, we must have bid adieu for ever to all those Pleasures and Delights by
which we were invited and detained in the Service of our Lusts; and Thou
offered'st us nothing in exchange for them, but only Sighs and Tears, with
other ungrateful Rigours of a bitter and severe Repentance. How then can thou
blame our Disobedience against thee, when we had so many inviting Temptations
to it, and so little Encouragement to the contrary? O prodigious Impudence!
with what Face can you assert such a notorious Falsehood when you know in your
own Consciences that besides all those Pleasures that are connatural to my
Service, and which do vastly exceed all the Pleasures of Sin, I laid an
immortal Crown at your Feet, and faithfully promised you that if you would but
spend a short Life in my Service, I would at the End of it receive you into
that blissful State where you should be happy beyond all your Wishes, and to
the utmost Capacity of your Nature; where you should live with God and Angels
in the most rapturous Exercise of everlasting Love and Joy, which one would
have thought had been sufficient to recompense you for those silly Pleasures
for whose sake you deserted me and my Service. But since you have trampled upon
all my Offers, and would by no means be persuaded by all those mighty Tenders I
have made you, Go ye deservedly cursed into ever -- Hold, Lord, we beseech
thee, and before thou passest thy irrevocable Doom upon us, hear this last
Petition we shall make for our selves: We now confess that we are fully
convinced (and O that we had understood it sooner!) what infinite Reason we had
to adhere to thee and thy Service. It is our Misery that these things were not
sooner discovered to us, or at least that they were not so clearly discovered
as to convince and persuade us. Had we but known what we now know, we would
never have deserted thee as we did; and therefore we beseech thee have Pity
upon our Ignorance, and impute not to our Wills the Faults of our
Understandings, which are not in our Power to remedy. Why, is this the utmost
that you can plead for your selves? Have I not told you all these things
beforehand as plainly as Words could express them? Have I not instituted an
Order of Men in my Church to explain these things to you, and to put you in
mind of them? So that whatever you pretend, you could not but know and
understand them; or if you did not, it was because you would not. And if you
would wilfully shut your Eyes against the Light, it was your own Fault that you
did not see, and you may thank your selves for the Consequents of it. I plainly
told you where your Wickedness would end, and unless you were wilfully blind
you could not but see what the Event of your Sin would prove, even while you
were committing it; and you know in your own Consciences that this fearful
Doom, which now you deprecate, you were fairly warned of when you might have
easily avoided it by a timely Submission but you would not. And seeing you
would be so mad as to reject Heaven when it lay before you, and leap into Hell
with your Eyes open, your Blood be upon your own Heads. For I have tried all
the Arts of Love, and Methods of Kindness to reclaim you; and since you have
rendered them all ineffectual, what remains but that you depart from me, like
accursed Wretches as you are, into that everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil
and his Angels.

And now, I beseech you, do not your own Consciences consent to the Justice and
Righteousness of this Procedure? Is there any tolerable Plea you can urge at
the Judgment Seat of Jesus Christ which here has not been fully answered? And
if so, how inexcusable shall we be when we come to plead our own Cause in the
great Assembly of Spirits? For when these Aggravations of our Disobedience
shall be laid open, our Guilt will apear so foul and monstrous that we shall
doubtless be condemned by the unanimous Vote of all the Reasonable World; and
as soon as the great Judge has passed his Sentence upon us, our own
Consciences will be forced to echo, Just and righteous art thou, O Lord, in
all thy Ways. Wherefore as we would not be found inexcusably guilty when we
come to plead for our Lives before the Tribunal of our Savior, let us all be
persuaded to return to his Service, and faithfully to continue in it, that so
instead of Goye cursed, we may hear from his Mouth that welcome Approbation,
Well done good and profitable Servants, enter into the Joy of your Master.

III. I come now the last Proposition in the Text, viz. And we beheld his
Glory, the Glory as of the only Son of the Father. In handling of which I shall
do these two Things: 1. Explain to you what this Glory of the Word was which
the Apostle tells us they beheld. 2. Show you that it was the Glory as of the
only begotten Son of the Father.


1. What was the Glory of the Word, which the Apostle tells us they beheld? I
answer in general, By this Glory here must be understood something that is
resemblant to the Glory of his dwelling in the Tabernacle; because, as I have
already showed you, the Apostle seems plainly to refer it, in that he does not
only tell us that the Word tabernacled among us, which alludes to his
Tabernacling among the Jews; but he also tells us, that they saw his Glory,
which alludes to that Glory of the Lord which the Jews beheld in that ancient
Tabernacle. Since therefore the Apostle mentions this Glory of the Word
Incarnate, by way of Allusion to the Glory of his Divine Presence in the
Tabernacle, it must necessarily bear some Resemblance or Proportion to it;
because else it would be no proper Allusion. The best Way therefore for us to
discover what this Glory of Christ was which they beheld, is to consider
wherein the Glory of the Divine Presence in the Tabernacle did chiefly discover
it self; and that, you shall find was in these four Things: First, In a bright
and luminous. Appearance. Secondly, In exerting of an extraordinary Power.
Thirdly, In giving Laws and Oracles. Fourthly, In sensible Significations of
its own immaculate Sanctity and Purity. And in Proportion and Correspondence to
these, the Glory of the Word Incarnate also must consist in these four Things:
1st. In the visible Splendour and Brightness with which his Person was arrayed
at his Baptism, and more especially at his Transfiguration. 2dly. In Those
great and stupendous Miracles that he wrought in the Course of his Ministry.
3dly. In the incomparable Purity and Goodness of his Life. 4thly. In the
surpassing Excellency, and Divinity of his Doctrine.


1st. That Glory of the Word which St. John and the Apostles beheld, consisted
in that visible Splendour and Brightness with which his Person was arrayed at
his Baptism, and more especially at his Tranfiguration; in Resemblance to that
visible Splendour and Brightness in which he appeared in the Mosaic Tabernacle,
where it is frequently said that the Glory of the Lord abode and appeared; as
you may see Exodus 24.16. and 40.34. Which Glory t's evident discovered its self
in an extraordinary visible Splendour that shone from between the Cherubims, and
diffused it self thence all over that sacred Habitation. And accordingly in
Ezekiel. 43.2. it is said, that the Glory of the God of Israel came from the Way
of the East, and the Earth shone with his Glory; which denotes that it was
extraordinary bright and luminous since the Earth shone with the very
Reflection of it. And in this same glorious Splendour was Christ arrayed first
at his Baptism, and afterward at his Transfiguration. For at his Baptism it is
said, that the Heavens were opened unto him, and that he saw the Spirit of God
descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him, Matthew. 3.16. where by the Holy
Ghost's descending like a Dove, it is not necessary we should understand his
descending in the Shape or Form of a Dove, but that in some glorious Form or
Appearance he descended in the same manner as a Dove descends; and therefore
St. Luke expresses it thus, And the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily Shape like
a Dove upon him, Luke 3.22. that is, he descended in some very glorious and
visible Appearance, in the same Manner as Doves are wont to descend when they
come down from the Skes, and pitch upon the Earth. But what that Shape was in
which he appeared, is not here expressed; but that which seems to be most
probable is this, that the Holy Ghost assuming a Body of Light, or surrounded
as it were with a Guard of Angels appearing in luminous Forms, came down from
above just as a Dove with his Wings Spread forth is observed to do, and lighted
upon our Savior's Head; and the Reason why I think so, is this, both because
wherever any mention is made of God's, or the Holy Ghost's appearing in an
indefinite Form, it is always in a Body of Light and visible Splendour, of which
I have given you sundry Instances; and also because it seems to have been a
very early Tradition in the Church that it was in a very glorious Appearance of
Light that the Holy Ghost came down upon our Savior: And therefore in the
Gospel of the Nazarens, as Grotius observes, it is said that upon the Holy
Ghosts Descent, (...), immediately a great Light shone round about the Place;
and Justin Martyr, speaking of our Savior's Baptism, says expressly, (...),
that there was a Fire lighted in the River Jordan; that is, the Water,
immediately after he was baptized in it, seemed to be all on Fire by the
Reflection of that bright and flaming Appearance in which the Holy Ghost
descended upon him; so that while he wore this Crown of visible Light, his
Head, as the Painters are wont to express it, was circled round with the Rays
of that Glory in which he was wont to appear from between the Cherubims. And
this Glory of his was questionless seen by many of the Apostles, who were
sundry of them Disciples to John the Baptist, and so may reasonably be supposed
to be present at the Baptism of our Savior.

And as for his Transfiguration upon Mount Tabor, it is said, that upon it his
Face did shine as the Sun, and that his Raiment was white as the Light; or as
St. Luke expresses it, (...); that is, his Raiment was like the Whiteness of a
Flash of Lightning, Luke 9.29. So that from Head to Foot he was all inrobed in
a visible Glory, and covered with all that Brightness, and dazzling Splendour in
which he was wont to appear in the Tabernacle of Moses. And accordingly you
have mention made of a Cloud that over-shadowed the three Disciples, whilst
Jesus remained in his Transfiguration, which is exactly agreeable with that
Cloud that covered the Tabernacle of Moses, whilst the Glory of the Lord filled
it, as you may fee Exodus 40.34. And that this glorious Transfiguration was a
Part of that Glory of the Word which St. John here says they beheld, is
evident, because himself was one of the three Disciples that were Eyewitnesses
of this glorious Scene, and it is expressly said of him and his Brethren, that
they saw his Glory, and the two Men that stood with him. Luke 9.32.

2dly. This Glory which they saw consisted in those great and stupendous
Miracles that He wrought in the Course of his Ministry, in Proportion to that
extraordinary Power in which the Glory of the Divine Presence discovered it
self in the Tabernacle of Moses. For thus we find that it was from the
Tabernacle that God exerted all the miraculous Power by which he punished the
Rebellions of the Jews, and wrought those miraculous Deliverances from them.
'Twas fromthe Tabernacle that he commanded the Earth to open, and swallow up
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and that he sent forth that devouring Fire which
consumed their Two hundred and fifty Accomplices. 'Twas from the Tabernacle
that he smote the false Spies with the Plague, and sent forth an Army of fiery
Serpents to destroy the murmuring Israelites. 'Twas by his Presence in the
Tabernacle that he conducted them through the Wilderness, and drove their
Enemies before them; that he divided the River Jordan to open them a Passage
into Canaan, and made the Wall of Jericho to fall flat at the Blasts of a few
Rams-horns. And upon the Account of this Miraculous Power which he exerted from
the Tabernacle, the Ark that was contained in it, and was the special Seat of
his Presence, is called the Ark of his strength, Psalm. 132.8. and God is said
to send them help from his Sanctuary, and to strengthem them out of Sion, where
the Ark was reposited in the Sanctuary of the temple, Psalm. 20.2. Thus also
those Words are to be understood, Psalm. 80.2. Before Ephraim, Benjamin, and
Manasseh, stir up thy strength, and come and help us; because the Ark, from
whence God was wont to put forth his Strength in saving of that People, marched
immediately before these three Tribes. And this was very well understood both
by the Israelites and the Philistines; for when the Philistines had overthrown
them, they desired that the Ark of the Lord might be fetched out of Shiloh,
that so when it came among them it might save them out of the Hands of their
Enemies, 1 Samuel 4.3. And when the Philistines understood that the Ark was
brought into their Camp, they were fore afraid, and cried out, God is come into
the Camp: Woe unto us; who shall deliver us out of the hands of these mighty
Gods? These are the Gods that smote the Egyptians with all the Plagues in the
Wilderness, v. 7, 8. From whence it is evident that they both looked upon the
Tabernacle as the Seat of God's miraculous Power, and this miraculous Power is
called the Glory of God; for thus when the Ark was taken by the Philistines, it
is said that God delivered his Strength into Captivity, and his Glory into the
Enemies hand, Ps. 78.61. and his Glory, and the Miracles that he wrought from
the Tabernacle in the Wilderness, are mentioned as Synonimous Terms, Numb.
14.22. Because all these Men have seen my Glory, and my Miracles which I did in
Egypt, and in the Wilderness, etc. So that it is evident, that he exerted his
miraculous Power from the Tabernacle, and that this miraculous Power was his
Glory.

And consonantly hereunto it was from the Tabernacle of Humane Nature wherein
he dwelt, that the Eternal Word exerted that miraculous Power whereby he cured
the Sick, calmed the Sea, and raised the Dead, vanquished the Devils, and
wrought all his miraculous Works, which were so many and so great that they
ravished his Friends with Joy to behold them, and struck Terror and Amazement
into his Enemies; for so it is said, that they were all amazed at the mighty
Power of God that was in him, Luke 9.43. And that when they saw how the Devils
trembled, and fled before him, they marvelled, saying, It was never so seen in
Israel, Matthew. 9.33. So that by their own Confession, that miraculous Power
which he exerted in the Tabernacle of Humane Nature did far exceed that
miraculous Power which he exercised in the Tabernacle of Moses. And this
miraculous Power of his is also expressly called his Glory, Joh. 2.11. This
beginning of Miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested forth his
Glory, and his Disciples believed on him. So that as his miraculous Power was
called his Glory when he tabernacled among the Jews, so it was also when he
tabernacled in Humane Nature, and so by consequence this also was a Part of
that Glory of his which his Apostles saw while he dwelt among them.

3dly. This Glory which they saw consisted also in the surpassing Excellency
and Divinity of his Doctrine, agreeably to that Expression of his glorious
Presence in the Old Tabernacle, viz. his giving Laws and Oracles to the
Israelites. For thus we find that God told Moses, that he would meet him in the
Tabernacle, and commune with him of all things, which he would give him in
Commandment to the Children of Israel, Exodus 25.22. And, Numb. 7.89. you have
the manner of his Communing with them described; for when Moses, says he, went
into the Tabernacle, he heard the Voice of one speaking unto him from off the
Mercy-Seat that was upon the Ark, from between the two Cherubims. For Christ,
as I have formerly showed you, being the civil Prince or Sovereign of the Jews,
the Cherubims were the Throne upon which he sat, and from whence he gave Laws
and Directions for the Administration of the Affairs of his Kingdom: And
accordingly he is said to dwell between the Cherubims, Ps. 99.1. and to ride
upon the Cherubims, 2 Samuel 22.11. and the Sanctuary wherein the Cherubims were
seated, is expressly called the Throne of the Lord, Jerem. 17.12. because here
it was that he sat in all his Majesty, and gave forth his Laws and Ordinances
to the Kingdom of israel. And this was an eminent Expression of the Glory of
his Presence among them, because hereby he asserted his Sovereign Authority,
and did publicly challenge to himself that Right to his glorious Power which
from all Eternity was inherent in him. And hence the Apostle calls the giving
those Divine Laws and Oracle a glorious Ministration, and plainly asserts it to
be an Instance of the Glory of the Divine Shechinah, or Presence in the
Tabernacle, when he grants that the Ministration of Death written and engraven
in stone, was glorious, yea and that Ministration to be Glory in the Abstract,
2 Cor. 3.7, 9.

And in Correspondence hereunto did the Divine Word, when he tabernacled in our
Natures, give forth Divine Laws and Oracles to the World; all which are yet
remaining among us, and do contain in them the Substance of our Holy Religion;
which being so divine and godlike, and altogether composed of the purest Laws,
and most Heavenly Doctrines, is a most proper Instance of that Glory of the
Eternal Word which the Apostles beheld, though not with the Eyes of their Bodies,
yet with those of their Minds. For what can be more glorious in the Eye of
Reason than those illustrious Discoveries which he has made to us in his
Gospel of the Nature of God, and the Duty of Man, and the immortal Recompenses
of the World to come, in which he has so far exceeded whatsoever Humane Wisdom
was able to discover of them, that all the Philosophy that ever was before him
must confess it self eclipsed and out-shone by him, and all the Philosophy that
ever succeeded him, has been forced to derive and borrow Light from him: And
accordingly we find his Gospel, in which his Doctrines are contained, styled by
the Name of the glorious Gospel, 2 Cor. 4.4. which in Comparison with those
dark and confused Discoveries which the World had formerly made, the Apostle
resembles to the first breaking forth of the Light out of the rude and obscure
Chaos, 2 Cor. 4.6. For God, says he, who commanded the Light to shine out of
Darkness, has shined into our Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of
the Glory of God, in the Face of Jesus Christ: where, by the Face of Jesus
Christ: the Apostle seems plainly to allude to that Divine Glory and Luster
with which Moses's Face shone when he came down from seeing the Glory of God,
Exodus 33.29. So that his Meaning is this, that as the Children of Israel with
their bodily Eyes saw the Glory of God shining upon the Face of Moses, so they,
the Disciples and Apostles of our Savior, had far more clearly beheld with the
Eyes of their Minds the Divine Glory displayed in his Doctrine and Ministry.

4thly. And lastly, This Glory of the Eternal Word which they saw, consisted
also in the incomparable Sanctity and Purity of his Life, semblably to that
Expression of his glorious Presence in the Old Tabernacle, viz. the sensible
Significations he gave of the immaculate Purity and Holiness of his Nature. For
by those outward Cleansings of all Things and Persons that did any ways belong
to the Tabernacle, or did at any time approach it, he did openly represent and
signify the Purity and Sanctity of his own Nature, which being infinitely
separated from all manner of Impurity and Uncleanness, cannot endure that any
thing that is filthy or impure should approach it. For thus we read that the
Tabernacle it self, and all the Vtensils of it, were to be purified and
sanctified with Oil before the Entrance of the Shechinah, or Divine Presence:
So also the High Priest, the Priests, and the People were to be cleansed and
purified before they were suffered to approach the Holy Habitation; and if at
any time they had contracted any of those legal Uncleanness that are
specified in the Law of Moses, they were to be excluded from the Communion of
the Congregation, and from all the Exercises of Public Worship and Devotion,
till they were cleansed and purified again: The Intent of all which was to
signify to that People how irreconcilable his Nature was to all Impurity and
Wickedness, that it could not admit of the Neighborhood of any Evil, nor dwell
within any Lines of Communication with it; for this is expressed in the very
Reason why these Legal Purifications are so strictly required: For I the Lord
your God, am holy, Levit. 19.2. For I the Lord which sanctify you, am holy,
Levit. 21.8. Plainly intimating that the Intent and Reason of all those
Ceremonial Purifications, was to signify to that dull and stupid People the
immaculate Holiness and Purity of his own Nature, which is so infinitely
removed from any thing that is impure and unholy, that he could neither
communicate with, nor endure the Approaches of it. And in this it is evident he
placed a great Part of the Glory of his Majestatical Presence in the
Tabernacle, since a great part of that Religion which he there instituted was
intended to signify the Glory of his Holiness to them; and accordingly he is
described to be glorious in Holiness, Exodus 15.11.

And agreeably hereunto did the Eternal Word, when he tabernacled in our
Natures, signify to the World the unspotted Purity of his Nature by that
incomparable Example of Holiness which he gave in his Life and Conversation
among us. For whereas before he expressed his HOliness by Mystical Types and
Ceremonial Observances, he has now signified it by a Life full of Virtue and
Goodness, and a Conversation exactly conformable to the eternal Rules of
Righteousness. For, as a Creature in respect of his Humanity, he never failed
in the least Punctilio of that Duty, Homage, and Devotion which he owed to the
most High God his Creator; as a Man, he never swerved either in his Passions or
Appetites from the strictest Rules of Sobriety and Temperance; as a Member of
Humane Society, he never was guilty of an unrighteous Action either toward his
Superiors, Inferiors, or Equals; but all his Life was a walking Monument of
Goodness, and his whole Conversation a most perfect Transcript of those Divine
and Heavenly Laws which he gave to the World. So that he was all glorious
without as well as within, his Practice being a living Comment and Paraphrase
upon that immaculate Purity and Holiness which is the Glory of his Divine
Nature. This therefore was doubtless a Part of that Glory which the Apostles
beheld in the Eternal Word, even that immaculate Sanctity and Holiness of which
he gave so many glorious Significations in the whole Course of his
Conversation: And accodingly we find this his Purity and Holiness described by
the Name of the Glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. But we all with open face,
beholding as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image,
from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord: Where it is plain that
by the Glory of the Lord, must be meant his Holiness; because it is into the
Image of that that we are transformed. So that the meaning of the Words is
this, we all beholding the Holiness of Christ, which is his Glory, in the Glass
of his Doctrine and incomparable Example, are transformed into the Likeness of
it; and do gradually pass on from one Degree of this Glory of his Holiness to
another, under the Conduct and Assistance of the Spirit of Christ.

And so I have done with the first thing proposed, which was to show you what
that Glory of Christ was which the Aopostle here tells us they beheld.

2. I now proceed to the second Branch of my Discourse, which was to show you
that this was the Glory as of the only begotten Son of the Father; But before
we proceed to the Proof of it, it will be necessary to explain this Phrase,
(...) the Glory as of the only begotten Son. Which Word, (...), or as, is in
Scripture taken two Ways, sometimes as a Note of Similitude or Comparison; so
Mat. 6.10, Thy Will be done in Earth, (...), as it is in Heaven; that is, like
as it is in Heaven; and if we take it in this Sense, then the Meaning of the
Words must be this, And we beheld his Glory which was like unto the Glory of
the only begotten Son of the Father; that is, like unto that Glory in which the
only begotten Son was wont to appear when he dwelt in the Tabernacle, and
conversed with the ancient Patriarchs. And in this Sense I have showed you
already how it was as the Glory of the only begotten Son, by showing you the
great Agreement and Similitude there was between the Glory of Christ when he
dwelt in the Tabernacle of Moses, and in the Tabernacle of our Nature. And when
I consider how plainly this Text does allude to the Shechinah or Divine
Presence of the Word in that ancient Tabernacle, I am very much induced to
think that we ought not to exclude this Sense of it, namely, that as he dwelt
in the Tabernacle of our Nature, like as he dwelt in the Tabernacle of Moses;
so that Glory of his which they beheld in the Tabernacle of our Nature, was
like unto that Glory in which he appeared in the ancient Tabernacle.

But then this Word (...), is sometimes also taken for a Note of Confirmation.
So Psalm. 73.1. (...), Truly God is good to Israel. And thus St. Chrysostom
understands it here, (...), etc. It is not a Note of Similitude and Comparison,
but of Confirmation and unquestionable Distinction; as if the Evangelist had
said, we saw his Glory, such as became and was fit for the only begotten and
truly natural Son of God. For my Part, I see no Reason why the Words may not be
fairly understood in both Senses, since they are no Ways opposite to, nor
inconsistent with one another; and if so, then this must be the Meaning of the
Words; We behold his Glory which was like unto that Glory in which the only
begotten Son appeared in the old Tabernacle, and which was such as was every
Way becoming the only begotten Son to appear in. The first of which Senses I
have proved to you already, that the Glory of Christ in the Tabernacle of our
Natures was like unto his Glory in the Tabernacle of Moses; and therefore now I
shall only prove the second, that it was such as became and was every Way
worthy of the only begotten Son of the Father; and this I doubt not will
plainly appear by considering the several Particulars of it.

1st. That visible Splendour and Brightness in which he appeared at his Baptism
and Transfiguration, was such as became him, and was worthy of him. For in all
Probability, that Splendour consisted of Angelical Beings, clothed in bright and
luminous Bodies; because, as I have formerly proveed to you, that Brightness in
which he appeared upon the Mount, and which he displayed from between the
Cherubims, was nothing else but those Angels of Light, or ministering Spirits
which he made to appear as Flames of Fire round about him; and therefore that
Train of Angels whom Esaias saw filling the Temple, Esaias 6.1. our Savior calls
the Glory of the Lord, Jo. 12.41. that is, that visible Glory in which the Lord
appeared from between the Cherubims. And if that visible Glory consisted in a
Train of Angels appearing in glorious Forms, then there is no doubt but that
visible Glory of our Savior at his Baptism and Transfiguration was the same;
since, as I have already showed you, it is described by the same Name, and in
the same Manner of Appearance; and if so, how well did it become the only
begotten Son to be surrounded with the illustrious Guards of his Father's
Court, and attended on with those highborn Spirits, whose Office it is to
minister before the Throne of the most High? For never was the most glorious
Potentate upon Earth, attended with such a splendid Train and Retinue, the
meanest of which was far more illustrious than the greatest and most highborn
Monarch in the World. So that as the most High God did, by a Voice from Heaven,
both at his Baptism and Transfiguration, declare him to be his beloved Son; so
by the glorious Train of Attendants he sent in him, he manifested the Truth of
his Declaration; for we must needs suppose him to be the Son of the most High,
when we see the most glorious Beings in all the Creation, so willingly submit
themselves to his Service and Attendance: And when we see the most High
adorning his Outside with the luminous Bodies of Angels, we may reasonably
conclude that there was a Divinity within, and that the Jewel was God, because
the Casket was Angels. But whatsoever this glorious Splendour was in which he
was clothed at his Baptism and Transfiguration, it was apparently such as very
well became the only begotten Son, not only because, as the Philosopher says,
that if God would ever take upon him a Body, it would be certainly Light, which
is a Vestment most suitable to his Glory and Majesty; but also because that
miraculous Splendour was an infallible Token of the Presence of the Divinity in
him; for it never was but where God was present; and therefore it is called the
Glory of God, it being the inseparable Concomitant of his more peculiar
Residence. For thus, as I have showed you upon the Mount and in the Tabernacle,
it was a visible Demonstration of the special Presence of the invisible God,
and wheresoever in all the Old Testament, any Mention is made of its
Appearance, you shall find that there God himself did peculiarly reside: And
therefore it is not to be imagined that God would have communicated to our
Savior, this inseparable Token of his own Presence, unless the Divinity had
resided in him. For Jesus Christ was the only Person upon whom this visible
Glory descended; never did the Hand of Heaven put forth such a Robe and Diadem
of Glory upon any person in the World, as this which our Savior wore at his
Baptism and Transfiguration, which plainly denotes that he was the only Person
in whom the Divinity was substantially united, and did essentially dwell. So
that as this visible Glory was a certain Token of God's peculiar Residence in
the Tabernacle and Temple, so it was also of his special Presence in Christ;
for the History of his Baptism tells us, that it did not only make a transient
Appearance, but that it remained on him, signifying that the Divinity, whose
Presence was denoted by it, had made him his Habitation and Place of constant
Abode. For though that visible Glory after some Time disappeared and went off
from him, yet the Thing signified by it, viz. the Divine Presence, always
remained in him; for by that outward Glory he was clearly manifested to be the
Holy One of God, the Tabernacle and Sanctuary in which God was, and where he
had taken up his Residence for ever, that his Humane Nature was that sacred
TEmple where the Divinity intended to dwell, and from whence for the the future
he would deliver all his Oracles, and communicate all his Blessings to Mankind.
So that in this Respect this visible Glory was such as highly became the only
begotten Son, because it plainly denoted that the Fullness of the Godhead dwelt
bodily in him, and had chosen him for his Habitation for ever; and therefore
John Baptist tells us, that though he knew him not, yet this God had revealed
to him, Upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending and remaining on him,
the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. And I saw and bear Record
that it was the Son of God, Joh. 1.33, 34. where you may observe, that though
it was revealed to him only that he was the Person that should baptize with the
Holy Ghost, upon whom the Spirit descended, yet he bare Record also that this
Person was the Son of God, rationally concluding that this visible Glory, which
was such an infallible Token of the special Presence of the Divinity, was never
to be communicated to any but the Son of God. And it is very observable, that
at both these Times, when our Savior was arrayed in this glorious Splendour, he
is declared by a Voice from Heaven to be the Son of God, it being the Father's
Intention at once to manifest him to be his Son both by Word and Deed; and at
the same time, when he declared him to be his Son, to array him in such a Glory
as became the Dignity of his Person.

2dly. The great and stupendous Miracles that he wrought were such as became
his only begotten Son. It Is true, it cannot be denied but several Miracles have
been wrought by mere Men, they being authorized by God, and assisted by his
Almighty Power; but so many and so great as our Savior wrought were never
performed by any Mortal. For as to the Number of them, they were more than ever
were wrought by Moses and all the Prophets together; for, besides those that
are recorded, which were all performed within the Space of four Years at most,
St. John tells us, that he wrought so many that the World could not contain the
Records of them, Joh. 21.25. which though it be an Hyperbolical Expression, yet
denotes thus much at least, that the Number of them was so great that they were
almost innumerable. And as to the GReatness of them, they did apparently exceed
all that ever were wrought before in the World. For he did not only raise the
Dead, but he raised himself also after he had been barbarously murdered by his
Enemies. He made the Winds and Sea obey him, and with the Word of his Mouth
vanquished the Devils, and drove them from their Habitations, and forced them
against their Wills, and their Interest to acknowledge him to be the Son of
God. And whereas the Miracles of Moses and the Prophets were most of them
noxious, they being Acts of Divine Vengeance upon the Wicked and Ungodly, and
consequently more apt to terrify than to oblige those that beheld them; the
Miracles of our Savior were all of them Expressions of his unfeigned Love and
Good Will to the World. For among all that vast Number of wondrous Works that
he wrought, there is not one to be found by which any Man was ever prejudiced,
unless it was his dismissing the Devils into the Swine of the Gadarens, which
without all doubt he did in Kindness and Good Will to the Owners; who being so
cruel to themselves as to prefer their Swine before their Savior, it was great
Charity and Mercy to deprive them of that which was so apparent a Hindrance to
their Enjoyment of a far greater Good. So that all his wondrous Works were
nothing but Acts of Kindness and Beneficence; for he went about doing Good,
curing all that were possessed with the Devil, and healing all manner of
Diseases. And whereas none of those that wrought Miracles before him could ever
pretend to perform them by any immanent Power of their own, but had only a
transient Power given them for the present Miracle, which they either obtained
from God upon their Prayers and Supplications, or was given by God for the
Execution of his own Will and Command; the blessed Jesus had this Power
subjected and abiding in him, so that he could exert it when, and where, and as
often as he pleased; and whether he were absent or present, with the Word of
his Mouth he could do what he would; yea, and many times he performed his
wondrous Works without any Word or Sign intervening, even by a silent Virtue
proceeding from that miraculous Power with which he was endued; and of all his
Miracles there is only one which he performed upon Prayer and Supplication to
his Father, and that was his raising Lazarus from the Dead, the Reason of which
he himself gives, Joh. 11.42. Because of the People which stand by, that they
may believe that thou have sent me: Intimating that he did not offer up this
Prayer to his Father with design to obtain of him a new Power of working
Miracles, which he was already endued with in an abundant measure; but that
hereby I might signify to the People how acceptable I am to thee, and let them
see that I do all my Works in thy Name. And that he had this Power, is evident
in that he did so plentifully communicate it to his Apostles and Followers,
which neither Moses or the Prophets were ever able to do. For thus, Luke 10.19.
he expressly tells his Seventy Disciples, Behold, I give you power to tread on
Serpents and Scorpions; and so also when he dismissed his Twelve Apostles into
Judea, Matthew. 10.8. he bids them, Go, heal the Sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise
the Dead, cast out Devils; for freely ye have received, says he, and therefore
freely give. From all which it is apparent how far the miraculous Works of our
Savior did exceed all those that ever were done before him; and being so great
and excellent, so far transcending all that ever was done by any Mortal, they
plainly demonstrated him to be the Son of God, and very well became the Dignity
of his Person. For how could he have done all these mighty Things by a Power
immanent in himself, had he not been the Son of an Omnipotent Father? And in
what more becoming Way could he have expressed that Omnipotent Power which he
derived from his Father, than in those astonishing Miracles of Love which he
wrought in the World?

3dly. The excellent and divine Doctrine which he taught was such as became the
only begotten Son. For certainly if we consider the excellent Frame and
Contrivance of the Christian Religion, we cannot but confess it to be most
Divine and Godlike, most worthy of that infinite Wisdom and Goodness from
whence it was derived. For Religion in general is the means of advancing
Rational Beings to that Perfection and Happiness for which the great Creator
has designed and intended them; and certainly never was there any Religion in
the World more adapted to advance this noble Design of God than that which our
Savior has taught: For as for its Agenda, what it requires to be done' they
all consist in acting reasonably, and according to the Dignity of our Nature,
in thinking, speaking, and practicing; in loving and hating, disiring and
delighting, hoping and fearing, as becomes Reasonable Beings placed in our
Condition and Circumstances; and do require nothing of us but that we should
regulate our Practice by the Rules of Right Reason, and direct all our
Faculties and Affections to their proper Ends and Objects; and when we come to
this Pitch, always to think that which is most reasonable, and always to
practice what we think so, then we are advanced to the topmost Round of our
Perfection, in which is founded the utmost Happiness we are capable of: So that
in all the Course of our Christian Practice we are in a direct Progression and
Tendency toward our Perfection and Happiness. And as for the Credenda of
Christianity, the Doctrines it requires us to believe, they are all of them
pregnant with the most strong and vehement Motives to engage us to the Practice
of what it enjoins; Motives that have such a Potent, I had almost said
Omnipotent Force in them, that it is impossible for any Man heartily to believe,
and thoroughly to weigh and consider them, and not be effectually persuaded by
them! Since therefore it was so highly convenient that the Son of God in Person
should come down from Heaven among us, that so the Dignity of his Person might
give Authority to that Religion by which the World was to be governed; and
since he did come down upon this honorable Errand, it was impossible for him
to have taught any Doctrine that could more effectually have promoted the great
End of Religion, or more fully expressed his infinite Wisdom, and Goodness, and
Zeal for the Welfare of the Souls of Men, htan that which is contained in the
Christian Religion, which is every way so adapted to make Men good and happy,
so accommodated to the Nature and Condition of Mankind, that there is nothing
could better become the only begotten Son to teach in the World, or that could
be more worthy of all those infinite Perfections that are lodged in his Nature,
and do speak him to be the most genuine Offspring of the most High. For so
excellent was his Doctrine, that his very Enemies were astonished at the Wisdom
that was given him, Mark 6.2, 3. and wondered at the gracious Words that
proceeded out of his Mouth, Luke 4.22. Well therefore might he say of himself,
I am the Light of the World, he that follows me shall not walk in Darkness,
but shall have the Light of Life, Joh. 8.12.

4thly. And lastly, The incomparable Sanctity and Purity of his Life was such
as very well became the only begotten Son. For as it was highly convenient that
he should come down into the World, and in his own Person teach us that
Religion by which he intended to govern us, that thereby he might stamp it with
a more awful Authority; so to render it more fuccessful, it was no less
convenient that he should come down in our Natures, that therein he might be
capable of practicing what he taught us, and setting us an Example of what he
would have us to do, that so we might see that he enjoined nothing upon us but
what was practicable, and what did become the most glorious Person that ever
did assume our Natures; that thereby we might be encouraged to our Duty, and
animated with a noble Emulation of treading in his blessed Footsteps. Since
therefore all this was so highly convenient, and the Son of God in Compliance
with this Convenience did actually assume our Nature, it was impossible for him
to lead a Life that better comported with this Design of his Incarnation, or
better became the Dignity and Excellency of his Person than he did. For now
that he was become a Man, he was obliged to act suitably to his Nature; and
should he have done any thing that was unsuitable to the State and
Circumstances of his Nature, he would not have acted becoming himself. So that
it was highly convenient that he should become a Man, and being a Man it was
indispensably necessary that he should live like a wise and a good Man in the
Condition and Relations wherein he was placed, and nothing could be more worthy
of or becoming him, then so to do, though he was still the only begotten Son of
the Father. For it is the Glory of God himself that he always acts most
reasonably according to the State and Relations of a God; and therefore when
God becomes Man by assuming our Nature to his own, it is his Glory to act most
reasonably in the State and Relations of a Man. And thus did the blessed Jesus
do in the whole Course of his Conversation upon Earth; for his Life was a most
exact Pattern of all humane Virtues, in which all that is ornamental to humane
Nature was represented in its fairest Colors: There you may see a fair Example
of the most ardent Love to, and constant Dependence upon God, of the most
profound Humility, and perfect Resignation to his Heavenly Will. There you may
behold the Moderation of Humane Passions and Appetites set forth to the Life,
and fairly delineated in its most exquisite Perfections; in a word, there you
will find Loyalty and Submission to Superiors, Fidelity and Justice to Equals,
Courtesy and Candor, and Condescension to Inferiors, universal Love, and an
unbounded Charity to all practiced to the Height and Exactness; and which way
soever you turn your Eyes on this fair Monument of Virtues, you can discover
nothing but what is lovely and adorable, and infinitely becoming the only
begotten Son of the Father.

Having thus explained and demonstrated the Proposition to you, I shall
conclude with these four Inferences from this fourfold Glory of the Word which
they saw.

1. They saw the glorious Splendour which invested his Person at his Baptison
and Transfiguration: From whence I infer his Deputation from the most High God,
and Father of all Things, to be his Representative and Viceroy in the
Christian Church. For this visible Glory with which he was invested, was always
the peculiar Character of the immediate Representative of God; and therefore by
way of Appropriation it is called the Glory of God, and the Glory of the Lord;
and wheresover God, as Supreme Monarch and Governor, is represented as residing
and taking up his Royal Habitation, there you always find him displaying
himself in this visible Glory and Splendour. Thus when by the Eternal Word he
was represented among the Jews as their supreme Lord and Governor, he always
manifested his Majestic Presence among them by some bright and shining
Appearance; the first Instance of which was his Appearance to Moses from out of
the burning Bush upon Mount Sinai, where he first acted under God the Father as
Sovereign King of Israel in commissioning Moses to be their Captain and Leader
out of Egypt; for here it is said, that he appeared in a flame of fire, Exodus
3.2. that is, in a visible Glory that resembled the Brightness of a Flame of
Fire. For this Mountain he had chosen for the Seat and Throne fo his Majestical
Residence, from whence he intended to give Laws to Israel, and to exert his
Royal Dominion over them; and therefore here he appears in that visible Glory
which was always the Character of the divine King, and immediate Representative
of God to that People. And indeed if that be true which Josephus tells us, this
Mountain was looked upon as the Habitation of God long before ever Moses came
thither; for therefore, says Josephus, did Moses drive his Father Jethro's
Flock thither to feed, because of all other Places it most abounded with
Pasture, Jos. Antiq l. 2. p. 60.
(...); that is, because it was famed that God dwelt there, which was the
Reason that the Shepherds never durst to drive their Flocks thither, because of
the Sacredness of the Place. And if this Report were true, then it seems this
Mountain was the Seat of the Royal Residence of the Eternal Word before ever
Moses came thither, and consequently the Glory and Brightness in which Moses
saw him appear, was nothing but the Display of his Majestic Presence which did
there make its ordinary Abode. But whether that he true or false, it is most
plain and apparent that wheresoever he appeared as the King of Israel, or
Representative of God to them, he always clothed himself in a visible Glory and
Splendour. Thus he appeared to them in a Pillar of Fire, that is, in a most
bright and luminous Form, when he conducted them through the Red Sea, and the
Wilderness; and when he came down upon Mount Sinai to give the Law to them,
it is said that the Glory in which they beheld him was like devouring fire,
Exodus 24.17. that is, it was unspeakably bright and refulgent, even like that
of a most intense and vehement Fire; and in all this radiant Glory did he
display himself from between the Cherubims when he removed from the Mountain,
and chose the Tabernacle for the Seat of his future Residence and Royal Abode.
Thus wheresoever he appeared in his Kingly Majesty as the public
Representative of his Father, this visible Glory is always made mention of, as
that which was the peculiar Character of his Presence and Person. It Is true,
it is recorded of Moses that when he came down from the Vision upon the Mount,
his Face shone so brightly that the Isralites were not able to approach him;
which seems to argue that this visible Glory was not so peculiar to the Eternal
Word as his Father's Representative, as we would have it, since we plainly see
it was common to Moses with him. But this does no ways destroy our Assertion;
because it is plain that that Glory which covered the Face of Moses, was all
derived from the Glory of the Eternal Word, with whom for forty Days he had
conversed in the Mount. For Moses being sent down as an Apostle to the Jews to
promulgate those Laws to them which he had received upon the Mount, the Eternal
Word, to convince the unbelieving Jews that he had sent him, reflects upon his
Face some Rays of Glory from that Sphere of Light in which he appeared to and
conversed with him, that that might be an ocular Demonstration to them that
Moses came from him, and was commissioned by him to preach and promulgate his
Laws to them. So that Moses his Glory being derived from the Word, declared him
to be his Apostle and Minister; even as the Glory of the Word being derived
from the Father, declared him to be his Representative and Viceroy; so that
from its shining upon the Face of Moses, it by no means follows that this
visible Glory is not the peculiar Character of God's immediate Representative;
because that which shone upon his Face was only the Parhelius or Reflection of
the visible Glory of him who was God's immediate Representative. For so the
Earth also is said to shine with the Glory of the God of Israel, Ezekiel. 43.2.
and as the Glory with which it shone was not the Glory of the Earth, but the
Glory of the God of Israel; so neither was that glory upon the Face of Moses
the Glory of Moses, but the Glory of that divine Person, with whom he had
conversed, derived to, and reflected upon him; and it being still the proper
Glory of that divine Person, may very well be said to be the peculiar Character
of his being the immediate Representative of God, notwithstanding it reflected
from him upon Moses; especially considering that this reflected Glory upon
Moses his Face was to be an Evidence to the Jews that he came down to them as
an Apostle from the Eternal Word with Authority to publish, and declare his
Laws to them. For if this derivative Spendor was an Evidence that Moses came
down as an Apostle from that divine Person on the Mount, then the original
Splendour of that divine Person whence it was derived and reflected, was at
least an equal Evidence that he came down upon the Mount as the Apostle, and
immediate Representative of the most High God himself.

And in the same manner we find that the Word INcarnate did give Evidence to
the Commission of his Christian Apostles; for upon the Day of Pentecost, when
they were assembled together, it is said that there appeared unto them cloven
Tongues like as of fire, and sat upon every one of them, Acts 2.3. that is,
there were several Flashes or Beams of Glory which like bright Flames of Fire,
did cleave asunder in many Places according to the natural Motion of Flames, of
which every Part as it extends it self in Length grows more Spire-like or
Pyramidal, and so divides from the part next to it; and upon the Head of every
one of the Apostles, did one of these divided Flames of Glory rest in the Form
of a Tongue, which like a Flame grows sharper and sharper toward the Top: For
thus the Hebrew Idiom for a Flame of Fire uses the Tongue of Fire, because o
fthe Resemblance that is between them, Isa. 5.24. So that as the Eternal Word
did evidence to the Jews the Apostleship of Moses by that visible Glory which
he reflected on his Face, so did the Word Incarnate evidence to the Christian
Church the Apostleship of the Twelve by this visible Glory which he derived
upon them. For now, according to John the Baptist's Prediction of him, he
baptized them with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire, Luke 3.16. that is, by the
outward Sign of that visible Glory which rested like Fire upon them, he
solemnly initiated them into their Apostleship, and declared them to be the
Heralds of his Will to the World. And as this visible Glory with which he
baptized them, was an Evidence of their being sent from, and commissionated by
him to bear his Authority, and represent his Person; so that visible Glory with
which he was baptized from Heaven, first in the River Jordan, and afterward
upon Mount Tabor, was an undoubted Evidence that he was sent from above to be
his Father's Representative in the Church: For if their shining wiht his Glory
was an Evidence of their being invested with his Authority, then his shining
with his Father's Glory must be an equal Evidence of his being invested with
the Authority of his Father. And as this visible Glory was always the peculiar
Character of God's immediate Representative, and the Royal Crown and Robes as
it were with which the most High adorned him at his Inauguration, and
Investment with his own Kingly Authority; so St. Peter expressly tells Cornelius
and his Company, that God had anointed him with the Holy Ghost, and with Power,
Acts 10.13. that is, by that outward Sign of the visible Glory in which the
Holy Ghost descended upon him, he had invested him with Regal Power, and
deputed and declared him to be King of the Church. And this in all probability
was the Reason why he forbad his Disciples to declare his Transfiguration till
after his Resurrection from the Dead, Mark 9.9. because he knew that if they
did, the Jews would not believe it, but would maliciously interpret it to be a
false Pretense of his to the Title of God's immediate Representative and
Viceroy, that visible Glory in which he appeared being the proper Character of
that divine King by whom the most High God had formerly governed them; and
therefore in all the History of his Life you find he did industriously avoid
openly to avow his Regal Authority, and only insinuates it by Consequences and
obseure Intimations. For so violently were they prejudiced against his being
their King upon the account of his obscure Parentage, and mean Condition, that
he could not but foresee how unseasonable it would yet be publicly to own his
Regal Authority, and consequently the Glory of his Transfiguration which did so
apparently infer it; till by more miraculous Effects, and particularly by his
Resurrection from the Dead, he had sufficiently proved and demonstrated it; and
then he openly declares without any Reserve, that all power was given him in
Heaven and Earth, Matthew. 28.18. Since therefore it is so apparent by this
Characteristical Glory, in which his Person was inrobed, and which the Apostle
assures us they saw him invested with, we have all the Reason in the World to
conclude that the most High God has deputed him to be King and Lord of the
Church. For when the Apostle tells us that they saw this visible Glory which
shone upon him at his Baptism and Transfiguration, he does as good as say that
they saw all the Solemnity of his divine Coronation, that they beheld the most
High God circling his Brows with the Royal Diadem, and investing his sacred
Body with the Imperial Robes of the great King of the World. So that if it be
true what St. John says, that they did see this Glory, (as we have all the
Reason in the World to conclude it is, because he offered to seal his Testimony
of it with his Blood, and the other two that saw it with him actually did so)
then we cannot but acknowledge the blessed Jesus to be our King, to whose
divine Authority we are bound to pay the lowest Homage and Obedience; and that
whenever we wilfully transgress his Laws, we do openly rebel against our most
rightful Sovereign, to whose Service we are bound by all possible Ties and
Obligations.

2. They saw the Glory of that miraculous Power which he exerted in the Course
of his Ministry; from whence I infer the Credibility of the Christian Religion:
For the many stupendous Miracles that he wrought, were a most plain and
unquestionable Evidence of a Divine Power residing in him, and accompanying his
Ministry. For never were there so many miraculous Effects produced, either
before or since, in the World, by the most renowned Workers of Miracles that
ever were; and all that has been done by the most famous Magicians, that are
recorded in History, were but like the little Tricks and Delusions of Jugglers,
compared with the wondrous Works of our Savior; and yet it is apparent that his
Education had been most plain and simple, that he never had been instructed in
any Mathematical Science, or mystical Rites, or in any other Art of performing
Wonders, either by Humane Wit or Diabolical Assistance; but was bred up under
the Care of his poor honest Parents, who were forced to earn their Bread with
the Sweat of their Brows, and so in all Probability was trained up in his
Father's Profession, that so by his daily Labor he might be able to contribute
to the Charge of his Maintenance. And yet it is plain, this homebred Person
sometimes, only by speaking of a Word, sometimes merely by the Touch of his
Hand, sometimes by a silent Virtue proceeding from him without any outward Sign
intervening, did more and far greater Wonders in three or four Years Time, then
all the most skilful Physicians, Magicians and Mathematicians could ever do
either before or after him. Now how was it possible that ever such a Person
should ever have accomplished such great and mighty Things as he did, had he
not been endued with Power from above? And if he was endued with such a Power,
what greater Evidence can we desire of the Truth and Divinity of his Doctrine?
For it is not supposable that the God of Truth would have endued our Savior
with this miraculous Power, had that Doctrine been false which he sought to
confirm by it; because in so doing he would have openly patronized a Cheat, and
designedly contributed to the Propagation of an Imposture, which is utterly
inconsistent with his Truth and Veracity: So that now the Truth of Christianity
finally resolves into the Veracity of God, which is the Foundation of all the
Certainty in the World. For admitting that God can either deceive or be
deceived, we do not know but our Faculties may be constantly imposed upon, and
then there is nothing in Nature that we can be certain of: So that if it be
true, as St. John here testifies, that they did see the Glory of our Savior's
Miracles, that is a most undeniable Evidence of the Truth and Divinity of his
Doctrine; and that they did see it, I think is as evident: For it is not
imaginable that any single Man would openly testify a known Lie without some
Temptation inducing him thereunto; much less that so many Hundreds of Persons
as the Eyewitnesses of our Savior's Miracles were, should conspire to cheat
the World, not only when they had no Temptation to it, but when they had all
the Reason in the World against it; for they saw their Master suffer a shameful
Death before their Eyes, by which they might easily divine what their own Fate
would be if they persevered to preach up his Miracles and Doctrine, which they
could not resolve to do without bidding Adieu to all their temporal Hopes, and
engaging themselves to undergo all the Miseries and Calamities in the World;
and if they testified what they knew to be false, they transgressed the Rule of
their own Religion, and thereby forfeited all their Hopes of a blessed
Immortality in the Life to come. And can it be imagined that so many Men should
at the same Time so unanimously agree to report and testify the Miracles of a
Man whom they had lately seen crucified before their Eyes, when they knew in
their own Consciences, that it was all a mere Forgery, and could not but
foresee, that by persisting in it, they should incur an inevitable Ruin in this
Life, and an eternal Damnation in the Life to come? Was there ever such a
desperate Piece of Madness heard of from the Beginning of the World to this
Day? And yet this monstrous Thing, which is by a thousand Times more incredible
than any thing in the Christian Religion, we must not only imagine may be, but
believe that it really was; or else confess that St. John says true here, that
they did see the Glory of his Miracles, which is so undoubted an Evidence of
the Truth of his Doctrine. Wherefore since we are compassed about with such a
Cloud of Witnesses, let us by a lively and vigorous Faith adhere to the Truth
of our holy Religion, and then we shall find it quick and mighty through God,
to the casting down the strong Holds of our vicious Habits, and implanting in
us all those divine Dispositions which are necessary to qualify us for those
endless Joys which our blessed Lord has promised to, and prepared for us.

3. They saw the Glory of that divine and incomparable Doctrine which he
taught: From whence I infer the Unreasonableness of Men's entertaining mean and
contemptible Opinions of the Christian Faith, since it is so excellent in it
self that it was a Glory to the Son of God to be the Author of it. We have a
sort of Men among us who would fain be accounted the Wits and Virtuoso's of the
Age, who pretend to acknowledge a God, and a Providence, and all the Principles
of Natural Religion, and yet openly profess a very mean and contemptible
Opinion of Christianity, and take all Occasions to represent it as a ridiculous
Fiction, fit only to be imposed upon the credulous Vulgar. But I would fain
know of these mighty Men of Reason, what plausible Pretense they can urge for
this their bold and blasphemous Censure? Is it because Christianity is a
Revealed Religion? or, because there is any thing in it that is unworthy of God
whom we pretend to be the Revealer of it? or because there wants credible
Evidence of its being revealed by him? If they pretend to reject it because
it is a Revealed Religion, I would beseech them to consider how it could have
comported with the Goodness of God never to make any Revelation of his Will to
the World, when the Generality of Men were lost in such a Midnight of
Ignorance in respect of Natural Religion; how even the natural Notions of the
Deity were corrupted into all manner of Follies and Vanities, and Men had
formed Religions not only hateful to God, but nauseous to all that were wise
among themselves; and how defective also they were in the best and purest
Precepts of Morality, having at last consecrated their Vices, and inthroned
them among the Graces of Religion: In which miserable State of Things, it is so
far from being unreasonable to expect a Revelation, that it is hardly possible
to vindicate God's Goodness without supposing it. For should he have for ever
left Mankind in this bewildered State without Revelation, he would have been
more wanting to Man, who is the noblest of all his earthly Creatures, than he
is to the most contemptible Animal; for to his meanest Creatures he has given
sufficient Ability to attain the highest End of their Beings, which Mankind can
hardly be supposed to have in his corrupt degegenerate State, without supposing
a new Revelation from Heaven. For we have an innate Notion within us of a
Supreme Being above us, that is superlatively good, and endued with all
possible Perfection; our natural Reason dictates to us, that to converse with
and enjoy him for ever, is the highest Good that we are capable of, and the
most suitable to our rational Natures; but by what means we may be reconciled
to him in this State of Revolt whereinto we are fallen, and how at length we
may arrive to the Enjoyment of him, could never have been sufficiently made
known to us in this Maze of Ignorance wherein we were involved, without some
divine Revelation: And therefore to suppose Revelation unreasonable in our
miserable State and Circumstances, is to suppose it unreasonable for the great
and good Governor of the World to furnish his noblest Creature Man with
sufficient means to obtain his most excellent End. And if it be acknowledged
that there is a Revelation, because it is so highly reasonable that there
should be, let us consider which of all the Religions in the World, that
pretends to be from God, is most likely to be the Revelation of his Will, and
then I doubt not, if we impartially compare them, but our reason will soon give
its Vote for Christianity. If you enquire for this Revelation of the
Enthusiastic Poets of the Heathen, how wild and extravagant is that Religion
which we find in the Theology of Hesiod, the Hymns of Orpheus, the Odes of
Pindar, and the Poems of Homer, Virgil, and Ovid? If you consult the Heathen
Oracles of Delphos, Dodona, and Jupiter Hammon, how vain and frivilous, how
uncertain and fallacious, are all their Responses? besides that, the Books and
Records of them are long since perished and consumed. If you enquire for this
Revelation in the Old Roman Theology, which Numa pretended to receive from his
Goddess Egeria, that also is lost, being burnt by the Roman Senate, as Valerius
Maximus tells us; for that it contained many Things in it not only destructive
to the Gods and Religions of other Countries, but also to his own and the Roman
Profession. Or shall we confront Christianity with the Alchoran of Mahomet,
which he often pretends to have received from God? There we shall find every
Page almost abounding with monstrous Cheats and Impostures, the whole being
nothing else but a confused Medly of impious and contemptible Fopperies, heaped
together by a Triumvirate of Arians, Jews, and Pagans, who were all of them
known Impostors in the Ages wherein they lived: So that to confront
Christianity with any of these, is to light up a Rush Candle, and resolve to
outface the Sun with it. For as for Christianity, it is a Religion made up of
the most divine and Godlike Institutions; its Precepts being such as are most
worthy of God, enjoining nothing but what is either true Godliness, and most
generous Morality, or what are the most efficacious Means and Instruments of
promoting them. And as for its Doctrine, it partly consists of those Principles
of Natural Religion which all wise Men, of whatsoever Nation or Religion, have
owned and acknowledged, such as the Existence, Unity, and Providence of the
Godhead, the Imortality of the Soul, and the Rewards and Punishments of Another
Life, together with the great Day of Accounts, wherein Men shall receive
according to what they have done in the Flesh: And even the Doctrine of the
Holy Trinity, which is the profoundest Mystery of all our Religion, has been
owned and professed by the greatest and most famous Philosophers that ever
were. And as for those Doctrines that are purely Christian, such as the Birth
and Life, and Death, the Resurrection and Ascension of our Savior, together
with his Sitting on the Right Hand of God, and coming at the last Day to judge
the World, they are all of them so excellently contrived to serve the great
Ends of Religion, so wonderfully pregnant with Motives and Arguments to engage
Men to the greatest Purity and Goodness, that by their own native Beauty and
excellent Contrivance, they manifest themselves to be the Products of a divine
Wisdom. So that there can be no reasonable Pretense to contemn Christianity
either because it is a Revealed Religion, or because it contains any thing in
it that is any ways unworthy of the Revealer: And that there wants not
sufficient Evidence to demonstrate it to be the Revelation of God, I have
already proved in the former Inference. So that after all the lewd Talk of
these confident Men, it is apparent there is not the least Color of Reason for
their impious Censures of Christianity. But alas! it is evident that the
Foundation of their Quarrel against it, lies not so much in their Reason, as
their Lusts. Christianity lays them under severe Restraints, and will not
permit them to be wicked in quiet, which provokes them to arm their Wit, and
the little Reason that they have against it; that so having baffled, or rather
laughed themselves out of their Religion, they may be left at liberty to play
the Fools and Madmen without Control or Disturbance. And I make no doubt but
if instead of that strict Piety and Virtue which Christianity enjoins, it had
but indulged to them the Liberties of the Heathen Religion, so that they could
have but acted all their Wickedness with Devotion, sacrificed to the Gods in
drunken Bowls, and worshipped in the Arms of a Strumpet, there are no Men in the
World would have been more zealous Christians than they. But let no Man be so
foolish as to imagine that he can alter the Nature of Things by laughing at
them, or that Christianity will cease to be true in Compliance with our wicked
Interest and Desires; no, no, Things will be as they are in despite of us, and
howsever we will please to fancy them. And if after all our rude Contempts of
Religion, it be found to be true, as I doubt not but it will, we shall be
sensible when it is too late that it had been more for our Safety to have
played before the Mouth of a Cannon while it is spitting Fire, or to have
caught hold of a Thunderbolt as it comes roaring down from the Clouds, than to
have played with Religion, and made it the Subject of our impious Scorns and
Buffooneries.

4. And lastly; They saw the Glory of his immaculate Holiness and Purity: From
whence I infer, that Holiness and true Goodness is the greates Glory and Honor
to humane Nature. For this was the Glory of the Son of God himself when he
assumed our Nature, and dwelt among us; and there is nothing more glorious in
Christ than his Goodness; and notwithstanding those excellent Doctrines that he
preached, those stupendous Miracles that he wrought, and that visible Splendour
in which he was inrobed, he had not deserved the Name of a great and glorious
Man if he had not been just and charitable, temperate, and humble, and
Heavenly-minded and eminent in all those divine and humane Virtues which are
the proper Glory and Ornament of humane Nature. For that which makes a Man more
honorable then a mere Animal, and advances us into the next Degree of Beings
to Angels, is our Reason, by which alone we border upon the Divinity, and do
claim Kindred with the Angelical Natures. That therefore which is truly our
Honor and Glory, consists in living according to that Reason by which we are
advanced above all sublunary Natures; that is, in governing our Passions and
Appetites, Words and Actions, according to those Eternal Rules of Righteousness
which Right Reason dictates to us; and if instead of doing thus, we wholly
resign up our selves to the Dominion of our brutish and unreasonable
Inclinations, we thereby render our selves more despicable and infamous than
the most beastly Brutes in all the Creation, and even those Goats, and Wolves,
and Swine, and Tigers, whom we resemble in our beastly Manners, could they see
our Shame, would doubtlesly hiss at us, and reproach us for Greater Beasts than
themselves; for they all live up to the best of their Natures, and regularly
pursue the highest End for which they were created; whereas we who are Allied
to the noblest of Beings, and are created and designed for the most glorious
Ends, do by our base and unreasonable Condescentions shamefully under-value our
selves in pursuing no Ends but what are extremely unworthy of us: So that it
had been much more for our Honor and Reputation to have assumed the Shape and
Nature of Brutes, when we assumed their Manners and Customs; for then our
Actions would have very well become us, and neither God nor Men could have
justly upbraided us for them. But to lead the Lives of Brutes in the Shape and
Nature of Men, is monstrous; it is to advance the Beast above the Man, to place
our. Heels where Nature has placed our Head, and become our own Reverse and
Antipodes.

OF THE AUTHORITY OF THE Holy Scripture.
JOHN V. 39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life.


BY the Scriptures here must be meant the Old Testament; for as yet the
greatest Part of the New was unrevealed, and the whole of it unwritten. They
were those very Scriptures was now preaching, owned and acknowledged to be the
Word of God; for in them, says our Savior, ye think ye have eternal life;
which it is certain they did not think of any other Scriptures but only those of
the Old Testament; and they are they, says he, which testify of me. And to be
sure there were no other Scriptures which could testfy of Christ to the
unbelieving Jews, but only those of Moses and the Prephets, these being the
only Scriptures whose Testimony they credited. But yet the Reason which our
Savior urges to move them to read the Old Testament, does as much oblige us to
read the New as well as the Old, as it did them to read the Old; for in them ye
think ye have eternal life; that is, in them yet think ye have eternal Life
promised, and all the Necessaries to be believed, and done by you in order to
your obtaining it, proposed to you. And indeed as they thought, so it was; they
had eternal Life proposed to them in Hieroglyphics; for that was the Mystery
of their Holy of Holies, that was the Interpretation of their Land of Canaan,
and the spiritual Sense of all their general Promises of good Things to come:
They had all the Articles of Faith, and all the Instances of Duty that were
necessary to their Attainment of eternal Life exhibited to them in the Writings
of their Prophets, and the Types and Figures of their Law. For it was by this
Rule alone that all the Holy Men of the Jewish Nation did live and believe; and
either this was sufficient to guide and direct them to eternal Life, or they
were left under a fatal Necessity of falling short of it: It was the Law of the
Lord that did enlighten their Eyes, and rejoice their Hearts, and convert their
Souls; and it was in keeping it that they found great Reward, Ps. 19.7, 8, 11.
And therefore either they fell short of the Reward of eternal Life
notwithstanding this their Illumination and Conversion, or they found it in
keeping that Law by which they were illuminated and converted; and if in
keeping their Law they found eternal Life, then it is certain that in their Law
they had it. So that these Words of our Savior (for in them ye think ye have
eternal life) do not imply that they were mistaken in thinking so, or at least
they only imply that they were mistaken in thinking to obtain eternal Life by
adbering to the prime and literal Sense of their Law without pursuing the
Mystery and Spiritual Meaning of it; which was indeed the Error of the
Pharisees, with whom our Savior is here discoursing. For the internal Sense
and Mystery of their Law was the Gospel, all whose Articles of Faith, and
Precepts of Duty, were (though darkly and obscurely) expressed and represented
in the Types and Figures of the Mosaic Institution. And hence the Apostle
tells, that both the Priests and their Oblations, did serve unto the example,
and shadow of heavenly things, Heb. 8.5. So that the heavenly Things contained
in the Gospel were the substantial Idea's which those Legal Types and Patterns
contained and represented; and the same Author calls that Law a shadow of good
things to come, Heb. 10.1. that is, it was an obscure Scheme or Prefiguration
of the Mercies of the Gospel, of which eternal Life is a principal Part. Since
therefore the Law was nothing else but only the Gospel in dark and obscure
Ciphers, if in this we Christians have eternal Life, in that the Jews had it
also: And therefore the Reason which our Savior here urges to oblige the Jews
to search the Scriptures of the Old Testament; [for in them ye think have
eternal life] does at least equally oblige us Christians to search the
Scriptures both of the Old and New. For if they had just Reason to think they
had eternal Life in the Old Testament, and were thereupon obliged to search
into it, we have rather more Reason to think that we have eternal Life in the
New, since the New Testament is nothing else but only the Old decyphered and
unriddled; and therefore we must not only have eternal Life in this, as they
had in that, but we must also have it far more expressly than they. In the
Prosecution of this Argument therefore, I shall endeavor these Two Things.

I. To show you that in the Holy Scriptures we have eternal Life. II. That this
is a very forcible Reason to oblige us to search them.
I. First, that in the Holy Scriptures we have eternal Life; that is, that in
them we have eternal Life proposed to us, together with all that is necessary
to be believed, and practiced by us in order to our obtaining it; or in other
words, that the Holy Scripture is a sufficient Rule both of Faith and Manners
to guide and direct us to eternal Happiness. And this is one Article of the
Faith of the Church of England, which we are required to explain to the People;
for so in her sixth Article our Church professes, that the Holy Scripture
contains all things necessary to Salvation; so that whatsoever is not read
therein, or may be proved thence, is not required of any Man that it should be
believed as an Article of Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to
Salvation. Now to make the Scripture a sufficient Rule as to all Things
necessary to Salvation, there are two Things necessary; First, That it should
be full; and Secondly, That it should be clear: both which the Holy Scripture
is in an eminent Degree, as containing in it all that is necessary to be
believed, and done in order to eternal Life. And this will evidently appear
from these three following Propositions: 1. That the Holy Spirit inspired the
Writers of the Scripture with all that is necessary to eternal Life. 2. That
they preached to the World all those Necessaries with which the Holy Spirit
inspired them. 3. That all those necessary Truths which they preached, are
comprehended in those Sacred Writings of theirs of which the Holy Scripture
consists.


1. That the Holy Spirit infpired the Writers of the Scripture with all that is
necessary to eternal Life. For first, our Savior, by whom they were originally
instructed, declares, that as the Father loved him, and showed him all things
that himself did, Joh. 5.20. so he had made known to them all things that he
had heard of his Father, Job. 17.8. And then when he went from them, and ceased
to instruct them in his own Person, he promised that by his Spirit he would
teach them all things, and bring all things to their remembrance whatsoever he
had said unto them, Job. 14.26. and that by the same Spirit he would guide them
into all Truth, Job. 16.13. If therefore the Spirit did perform this Promise to
them, (as there is no doubt but he did) then we are sure that he did teach them
over again whatsoever Christ had taught them before, and if Christ had taught
them whatsoever he had heard of his Father, (as he declares he had) then it is
certain either that he taught them all Things necessary to eternal Life, or
that he himself had not heard from his Father all Things that are necessary
thereunto.

2. That as they were taught by the Spirit, all Things necessary to eternal
Life, so what they were taught, they preached and delivered to the World. For
so our Savior commanded them to go forth into all the World, and teach all
Nations to observe all those things which he had commanded them, Matthew. 28.19,
20. Which Injunction of his they strictly observed; for so we are told, that in
Obedience to it, they went forth, and preached every where, Mark, 16.20. And
that their preaching extended to all Things necessary to Salvation, is evident
from their own Testimony: For thus St. Paul tells the Ephesians that he had not
shunned to declare unto them the whole Counsel of God, Acts 20.27. And to be
sure in the whole Counsel of God, all that is necessary to Salvation must be
included. And concerning that Gospel which he had preached to the Corinthians,
he thus pronounces, By which also ye are saved, if ye keep in Memory what I
preached unto you, unless ye have believed in vain, 1 Cor. 15.1, 2. but how
could they be saved by that Gospel he preached to them, unless it contained in
it all Things necessary to Salvation? And this very Gospel which the Apostles
in their constant Ministry proposed to the World, St. James calls the ingrafted
Word, which is able to save our Souls, Jam. 1.21. And for the same Reason it is
also called the Word of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19. The Word of Salvation,
Acts 13.26. And the World of Life, Acts 5.20. And the Savor of Life unto Life,
2 Cor. 2.16. And also the Power of God unto Salvation to every one that
believes, Romans 1.17. Neither of which it could be justly styled, supposing it
to be defective in any Thing necessary to the eternal Happiness of Men.

3. And lastly, That all those necessary Truths which they preached, are
comprehended in those Writings of theirs, of which the Holy Scripture consists.
It is true, before the Christian Doctrine was collected into those Scriptures
of which the New Testament now consists, it was all conveyed by Oral Tradition
from the Mouths of the Teachers, to the Ears of the Disciples; but in a little
Time those holy Men who first preached it, found an absolute Necessity of
committing it to Writing, as a much surer Way of preserving it uncorrupted, and
transmitting it down to all succeeding Generations; for thus Eusebius tells us,
Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 15.
That the Romans not being satisfied with St. Peter' s preaching of
Christianity to them, earnestly desired St. Mark, his Companion, that he would
leave them in Writing, a standing Monument of that Doctrine which St. Peter had
delivered to them by Word of Mouth, which was the Occasion, says he, of the
Writing of St. Mark' s Gospel: Which thing St. Peter understanding by a
Revelation of the Spirit, being highly pleased with their earnest Desire, he
confirmed it by his own Authority, that it might afterward be read in the
Churches. It seems in those Days the Romans did not think oral or unwritten
Traditions a sufficient Conservatory of divine Truths, nor did their Bishops
then forbid the reading of the Scriptures to the Laity in their own Language.
After which he tells us, L. 3 c. 24.
that St. Matthew and St. John were the only Disciples of our Lord, who had left
written Commentaries of the Things which they had preached behind them; and it
was, says he, Necessity that impelled them to write. For Matthew having
preached the Faith to the Hebrews, and intending to go from them to other
Nations, wrote his Gospel in his own Country-Language, that thereby he might
supply the Want of his Presence to those whom he left behind him. And
afterward when Mark and Luke had published their Gospels, John who had
hitherto only preached the Gospel by Word of Mouth, being at length moved by
the same Reason betook himself to write. And the Three former Gospels, says he,
arriving to the Knowledge of all Men, and particularly of St. John, he approved
them, and with his own Testimony confirmed the Truth of them. From which
Relation it is evident, that that which moved those holy Men to commit their
Gospels to Writing, was this, that they judged it necessary for the
Conservation of the Christian Doctrine, that so these in their Absence might be
standing Monuments of the Faith, to preach that Gospel to Men's Eyes which they
had preached to their Ears: And if they wrote to preserve the Faith, to be sure
they would leave no necessary or essential Part of it unwritten. There are
several Propositions in these Gospels which, though very useful, are far from
being essential Parts of Christianity; and can we imagine that those holy Men
who wrote on purpose to conserve Christianity, should take so much Care to
write many Things which are not necessary Parts, and in the mean time omit any
Things that are? Eusebius tells us of St Mark in particular, (...); i. e. he
took great Care of this more especially, not to pretermit any of those Things
which he had heard, (even from St. Peter) nor to affix any thing to them that
was false: And if he were so careful not to omit any Thing, to be sure he would
be particularly careful not to omit any thing which he judged necessary to the
eternal Happiness of Men. But what need we depend upon humane Authority, when
as, if we consult those Sacred Writings themselves, (which so far as they go,
all Christians allow to be the Word of God) we shall find they give this
Testimony of themselves, that they comprehend in them all Things necessary to
eternal Life. For thus the Writers of the New Testament testify of the Old,
That they are able to make us wise unto Salvation through Faith which is in
Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 3.15. And if the Old Testament alone was able to do this,
then much more the Old and New together; but how could they make Men wise to
Salvation, if they were defective in any Article that is necessary to
Salvation? and then the same Author goes on and tells us, that all Scripture is
given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness; that the Man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, v. 16, 17. And if the Old
Scriptures were sufficient to make the Man of God perfect, and to furnish him
thoroughly unto all good Works, one would think that the New and Old together
should not be defective. For that the Scriptures of the New Testament as well
as of the Old contain in them all Things necessary to eternal Life, they
themselves do plainly testify of themselves: For thus St. Luke in the Beginning
of his Gospel tells his Theophilus, to whom he writes, that forasmuch as many
had set forth a Declaration of those things that were surely believed among
Christians, it seemed good unto him also having had a perfect understanding of
all things from the first, to write them down in order that he might know the
Certainty of those things wherein he had been instructed: From whence I infer,
that supposing St. Luke performed what he promised, his Gospel must contain a
full Declaration of the Christian Religion: For, First, by promising to give an
Account of those Things which were surely believed among Christians, he engaged
himself to give an entire Account of Christianity, unless we will suppose that
there were some Parts of Christianity which the Christians of that Time did not
surely believe. Secondly, In promising to give an Account of those Things of
which he had a perfect Understanding from the first, and in which his
Theophilus had been instructed, he also engages himself to give a complete
Account of the whole Religion, unless we will suppose that there were some
Parts of this Religion which St. Luke did not perfectly understand, and in
which Theophilus had not been before instructed. Thus also St. John testifies
of his Gospel, Chap. 20. 31. These things are written, that ye might believe
that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life
through his name. And if it be objected that by these Things the Apostle only
means the Miracles of Christ which are the Motives of our Belief, and not his
Doctrines which are to be believed by us; this is notoriously false, since by
these Things St. John means his Gospel in which not only the Miracles, but the
Doctrines of Christ are contained; and therefore in his first Epistle, chap. 5.
13. he says, These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of
the Son of God that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may
believe, or continue to believe on the name of the Son of God; Where by These
Things it is plain he means only that Christian Doctrine which he had been
teaching throughout the whole Epistle. From which two Places I argue, that all
Things necessary to eternal Life are written, because he expressly tells us that
These Things were written to this end, that they might beget and nourish in us
that Faith by which we may obtain eternal Life; but if that Faith which these
written Things was designed to beget in us, be not sufficient to eternal Life,
then were these Things written in vain, and the End of writing them, which was
that we might obtain eternal Life, by believing them, was wholly frustrated;
but if that Faith were sufficient to eternal Life, then these written Things
which begot that Faith, and were the Object of it, must contain in them all
Things necessary to eternal Life; for how can they beget in us a Faith that is
sufficient to eternal Life, unless they propose to our Faith all Things that
are necessary thereunto?

And thus I have endeavored to demonstrate from Scripture it self, which all
agree is the Word of God, and consequently the most concluding Authority in the
World, that the Holy Scripture is in it self a sufficient Rule of Faith and
Manners to direct Men to eternal Life. And if this be so, I would fain know by
what Warrant or Authority any Man or Church, can pretend to obtrude upon the
Faith of Christians any unwritten Traditions, or Doctrines of Faith, and Rules
of Worship, not recorded in Scripture as of equal Authority with those recorded
in Scripture, and equally necessary to the eternal Happiness of Men. For that
there have been such bold Imposers in the Christian World Irenaeus assures us
in the 2d Chapter of his 2d Book against Heresies; where he tells us of a sort
of Heretics who taught, that the Truth could not be found in the Scriptures by
those to whom Tradition was unknown; for as much as it was not delivered by
Writing, but by Word of Mouth. And these Heretics De Praescrip. Haeret. c. 25.
, as Tertullian observes, confessed indeed that the Apostles were ignorant, and
that they did not at all differ among themselves in their Preaching, but said
they revealed not all Things unto all Men; some Things they taught openly and
to all, some Things secretly, and to a few; which secret Things were the
unwritten Traditions which they sought to impose upon the Faith of Christians.
And how far the Church of Rome it self does in this matter tread in the
Footsteps of these ancient Heretics, is but too notorious: For thus in the
Preface of their Catechism it is expressly affirmed by the Council of Trent,
that the whole Doctrine to be delivered to the Faithful, is contained in the
Word of God, which Word of God is distributed into Scripture and Tradition. And
in the Council it self they declare, and define, that the Books of Scripture
and unwritten Traditions are to be received and honored with equal pious
Affection and Reverence: In which Words they expressly own another Word of God
besides the Scripture, viz. Tradition, which they equalize with the Scripture
it self. And this is almost verbatim the very Assertion which both Irenaeus and
Tertullian condemn for Heresy; and as they are the same, so we find they are
grounded on the same Authority: For those very Texts of Scripture which those
ancient Heretics urged for their Tradition, are urged by Bellarmin for the
Tradition of his Church. Thus for their Tradition, as Irenaeus and Tertullian
acquaints us, they urged that of St. Paul, We speak Wisdom among them that are
perfect; and also, O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust; and
again, That good Thing which is committed to thee, keep: All which Texts are
urged by Bellarmin in his 4th and 5th Books de Verbo Dei, in behalf of that
Tradition which the Church of Rome contends for: And it is something hard that
that which was damned for Heresy in the Primitive Church, should be made an
Article of Faith in the present Roman. Not that we do disallow of Traditions
universally received in all Churches and Ages; for we frankly acknowledge that
what is now contained in Scripture was Tradition before it was Scripture, as
being first delivered by Word of Mouth before it was collected into Writing;
and therefore whenever it can be made evident to us that there are any
unwritten Doctrines bearing the same Stamp of Divine Authority with those that
are written, we are ready to recive them with the same Veneration as we do the
Scriptures themselves. For it is not their being written that does authorize
them, but their being from God, and our Savior, and his Apostles; and
therefore when once it is made appear to us that Christ or his Apostles taught
so and so, that is sufficient to command our Assent and Submission whether it
be made appear from Scripture or Tradition. So that the Reason why we embrace
some Doctrines and reject others, is not merely because the one are written,
and the other not; but because to us, who live at so great a distance from
Christ and his Apostles, it can never be made so evident, that what is not
written was taught by them, as what is. What is written has been delivered
down to us by the unanimous Tradition and Testimony of the Church of Christ in
all Ages, which I am sure can never be justly pretended of any one of those
unwritten Traditions which the Church of Rome now imposes upon the Faith of
Christians. Let them but produce the same unanimous Testimony that any one of
those Twelve Articles which they have thought meet to superadd to the ancient
Creeds, was taught by Christ or his Apostles, as we do that what is contained
in Scripture was so, and we will as readily embrace it as any Proposition in
Scripture; but if this Article be neither to be found in Scripture, nor
delivered down to us as taught by Christ or his Apostles, by the unanimous
Testimony of the Church of Christ through all Ages, we must crave their pardon
if we cannot receive it as Part of the Word of God. But how impossible it is to
prove by the unanimous Testimony of the Church, that any unwritten Doctrine is
Part of the Word of God necessary to be believed by all Christians, is evident
from hence, because for several Ages after our Savior the Church unanimously
taught, that whatsoever was necessary to be believed was contained in
Scripture; and for the same Church at the same time to testify that this or
that unwritten Doctrine is a Part of God's Word necessary to be believed, and
yet that all Doctrines necessary to be believed are written, is plainly to
contradict it self. And yet we find the Primitive Fathers unanimously attesting
that the Scripture is the Rule from whence we draw all the Assertions of our
Faith, the last Will and Testimony of our Savior by which all Controversies
are to be decided, the Boundaries of the Church, out of which it is not to
depart, the Touchstone of Truth, the Foundation and Pillar of our Faith for the
Time to come, and the only certain Principle of Christian Doctrine and
Demonstration in Matters of Faith. These are their own Expressions, and
abundance more than these we meet with to the same purpose; and which is very
observable, they not only assert the Scripture to be a full and adequate Rule
of Faith, but severely declaim against all Additions to it. Thus Eusebius
Pamphilus in the Name of the Fathers of the Council of Nice, (...); i.e. those
Things which are written, believe; those Things which are not witten, neither
think upon, nor enquire after. Thus also St. Austin, Quicquid inde audieritise
Scriptura sacra, hoc vobis been sapiat; quicquid extra est, respuite, ne
erretis in nebula: Whatsoever ye hear from the Holy Scriptures let it savor
well with you; whatsoever is without them, refuse, lest ye wander in a Cloud.
St. Bazil declares, that it is a manifest falling from the Faith, and an
Argument of Arrogance either to reject any point of those Things that are
written, or to bring in any of those which are not written; and that it is the
Property of a faithful Man to be fully persuaded of the Truth of those Things
that are delivered in the Holy Scripture, and not to dare either to reject or
to add any thing thereunto. Thus Tertullian advers. Hermog. Si enim non est
scriptum, timeat Vae illud adjicientibus aut detrahentibus destinatum: If what
he pretends be not written, let him fear that Woe that is denounced against
such as add or take away. What Likelihood therefore is there that they who thus
severely forbid adding any thing to the written Word of God, did ever so much
as dream of another Word of God consisting of unwritten Traditions? And indeed
methinks it is very strange if there had been any other Word of God besides
what is written, there should no notice be taken of it in that which is
written; especially considering that if it be as necessary to be believed as
the Roman Church defines it; it is as necessary that we should have Direction
where to find it, and how to know it when we have it; but of this we have not
the least Intimation in Scripture. For as for those Words of St. Paul, 2 Thessalonians.
2.15. Hold the Traditions which ye have been taught, whether by Word, or our
Epistle, all that can be justly inferred from them is only this, that the
Thessalonians at the Writing of this Epistle had only an Oral Tradition of a
great Part of that Gospel which St. Paul had preached to them, the Gospels
being as yet either not collected into Writing, or not dispersed abroad into
the Churches; so that then this, and his former Epistle to them, were perhaps
the only written Part of the New Testament that was yet arrived to their hands;
and if so, then this Command of holding the Traditions by word, did oblige no
longer than till they had received the written Gospel; because then those
Traditions by Word were all recorded in Scripture, and being there recorded,
they were thenceforth obliged to hold them as Scripture, and no longer as
Traditions by Word. But supposing there are still unwritten Traditions in the
Church that are not in Scripture, but yet were delivered by Christ or his
Apostles, and so are equally the Word of God with the Scripture; I would fain
know how we who live at so great a distance from Christ and his Apostles,
should either know where to find, or be assured that they are such when we have
them. We know very well that even in the Primitive Ages there were sundry
counterfeit Traditions which Heretics pretended to derive from Christ and his
Apostles; and if it were so easy a matter to counterfeit Traditions then, how
much more easy is it now? I confess Vincentius Lirinensis gives us a very good
Rule how to distinguish counterfeit from true Traditions; quod ubique quod
semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est, hoc est vere proprieque Catholicum: That
which was every where, and always, and by all Christians believed, that is
truly and properly Catholic. And by this Rule we are willing to abide; if they
can show us any Article of Christianity not recorded in Scripture, which has
been every where, and always believed by all Christians, we will readily admit
it as an unwritten Word of God, and with the same Respect and Reverence as we
do that which is written: But this we are fully assured they will never be able
to perform, seeing, as was shown before, the Primitive Church does with one
Consent attest the Scripture to be an entire Rule of Faith, in which all the
Articles of Coristianity are contained.

But we are told that for these unwritten Traditions we must rely upon the
present Church of every Age, and receive as a divine Tradition whatsoever she
defines to be so; where by the present Church is meant the present Roman
Church; that is to say, whatsoever this Church defines we must believe it,
because she defines it; which we cannot but think is a hard Case; First,
Because we know very well that the Roman Church is at best but a Part of the
Church universal, and we know no Right that any Part has to impose upon the
Whole, and to oblige it to believe whatsoever she proposes, merely because she
proposes it. Secondly, Because in Fact we are very well assured that the Roman
Church is so far from being a sincere Preserver of Tradition, that there is no
Church in the World has more studiously attempted to counterfeit and deprave
it; of which innumerable Instances are given by our Authors, many of which are
now acknowledged even by their Authors to be true. For even their Vulgar Latin
Edition of the Bible it self, which they prefer before the Originals, is
confessed by themselves to abound with manifest Errors and Corruptions; and
even to the very Canon of the Bible they have added sundry Apocryphal Books
which we certainly know the Primitive Tradition never admitted as Parts of the
sacred Scripture; and it is notorious to all the World how many Books and
Writings they have forged, and how many of the Writings of the Ancients they
have gelded and interpolated to defend and support those pretended Traditions
which they have imposed upon the World as Articles of Faith. And after she has
been guilty of so many apparent Falsifications, we cannot but think it a very
hard Case that we should still be obliged to believe her upon her own bare
Word. For in the third Place, at this rate of Proceeding we must in many
Instances condemn the Traditions of the Primitive Church in Complement to those
of the present Roman; which if we believe our own Eyes, and the most authentic
Histories and Records of those Times, do expressly thwart and contradict one
another; and since, if we would never so fain we can never believe both Parts
of a Contradiction, we must in believing the one give the Lie to the other.
Nay, Fourthly and lastly, though we should be persuaded, as we think we have
Reason to be, that many of the Traditions of the present Church of Rome are not
only not mentioned in Scripture, but directly contrary to it; (as for Instance,
their performing Divine Service in an unknown Tongue, which we think is as
contrary to 1 Cor. 14. as one Proposition can be to another: (yet if that
Churches Definitions do by their own Authority oblige our Faith, we must
believe her against Scripture it self. And this we think intolerable, that any
Church or Christian should be obliged to believe the unwritten Word of the
Church of Rome in a Matter wherein, upon the most diligent and impartial
Search, they are verily persuaded it contradicts the written Word of God; and
if the Sentence of the one or the other must be made void, we think it is very
reasonable that the Voice of her pretended unwritten Word should be silenced by
that more certain one of the lively Oracles of God. But after all, if what I
have endeavored to prove be proved, viz. that the Holy Scriptures are a
sufficient Rule of Faith and Manners to conduct us to eternal Life, this will
be enough to evacuate all that is pretended for this unwritten Word of God. For
God and Nature we know do nothing in vain; and therefore if one Word of God be
sufficient, viz. that which is written, what need have we of this other which
is unwritten? And so I have done with the first necessary Property of a Rule of
Faith, viz. that it be full; and shown at large that the Holy Scripture is so
as to all Things necessary to Salvation; and therefore shall now proceed to.

II. The Second, viz. That it be clear and intelligible to those whose Faith
and Manners are to be regulated by it.

I do not mean when I say that the Scripture is clear, and plain, and
intelligible to all those to whom it is a Rule of Faith and Manners, that it is
throughout so in all its Proposals. For it cannot be denied but there are many
Things not only in St. Paul's Epistles, but also in other Parts of Scripture,
hard to be understood; and such as do not only exceed the Apprehension of
common Capacities; but also puzzle the Understandings of the most acute and
profound Enquirers, But that which I assert is this, That all those Doctrines
of Faith, and Rules of Manners which are necessary for Men to believe and
practice in order to their Attainment of eternal Life, are so plainly and
clearly revealed in Scripture that there is no honest teachable Mind that is
capable of understanding common Sense, but may from thence received full
Information of them upon faithful and diligent Enquiry. And though in some
Texts these Necessaries are not so plainly proposed as in others, yet in some
Text or other they are all of them so plainly proposed that no Man can read the
Scripture, and still be ignorant of them without being wilfully blind; for
which there is no Remedy either in the Scripture, or out of it. And this I
shall endeavor to prove, 1. From the express Testimony of Scripture. 2. From
the avowed Design of writing the Scripture. 3. From the frequent Commands God
lays upon us to read the Scripture. 4. From the Obligation that lies upon us
under Pain of Damnation to believe, and receive all those Necessaries to
Salvation contained in it.


1. From the express Testimony of Scripture it is evident, that in all Things
necessary to Salvation at least, the Scripture is clear and plain. For to be
sure if in any thing the Scripture be plain, it is in those Things that are
most necessary to be believed and known; and therefore if it be obscure in
these Things, we may reasonable presume it is plain in nothing: But that it is
in many Things plain and easy to be understood, is evident from its own
Testimony: For thus of the Mosaic Law it is expressly affirmed by Moses, This
Commandment which I command thee this day, it is not hidden from thee, neither
is it far off, Deuteronomy. 30.11. Where Moses speaks not only of the Ten
Commandments, which consisting for the most part of Laws of Nature, are upon
that Account more easy to be understood; but of all the Commandments of Moses
in general, whether Ceremonial, Judicial, or Natural. For so, v. 16. This
Commandment, we find, contains as well the Statutes and Judgments, as the
Commandments of the Law, all which must take in the whole Mosaic Institution.
And accordingly, Ps. 119.105. David calls this Word of God, a lamp unto his
feet, and a light unto his path; which how could it be if it did not burn clear
enough to guide and direct him? and if it did, then to be sure it burnt clear
enough to direct him in those Things wherein it was most necessary for him to
be directed. Again in the 19th Ps. v. 7, 8, we are told, that the Testimony of
the Lord is sure, making wise the simple; and that the Commandment of the Lord
is pure, enlightening the eyes. But how can any Law make the simple, wise, or
enlighten the Eyes of Men, unless it be so plainly and clearly delivered as
that the simple may be capable of apprehending, and the Eyes of Men of
discerning the Sense of it? I know it is objected by Bellarmin, that these
Words do only imply that this Law indeed being understood, does enlighten Men's
Eyes, and direct their Practice; but by no means that it is plain and easy to
be understood. But this is a mere Cavil; for it is plain that it is by
understanding the Law, that the simple are made wise, and the Eyes of Men
enlightened. If therefore this Law be so obscure in its self as that it cannot
make it self understood by all that sincerely enquire into it, how is it
possible that it should make them wise, or enlighten the Eyes of their Minds?
But it is plain that the Intent of those Passages of David was to excite, and
encourage Men to study and observe the Law: But what though the Law makes the
simple, wise, when they understand it? what Encouragement is this for the
simple to study it, if it be so obscure that they cannot understand it? And
since they must understand it before they can observe it, what Encouragement
does this Consideration give them to observe it, that it will make them wise
when they understand it, if it be not plain enough for them to understand it?
But then that forecited Passage of Moses does in express Words contradict this
Cavil of Bellarmin; for he tells the People that the Commandment he gave them
was not hidden from them; whereas if it had been so obscurely delivered to them
by Moses, that upon their sincere and diligent Enquiry they could not
understand it, it is certain that it had been still hidden from them how wise
soever it might make them when they did understand it: And to say that such a
Proposition will make me wise when I do understand it, is no Argument at all
that it is not hidden from me if it be so obscurely expressed, as that upon my
sincere Enquiry I am not capable of understanding it. But that the Old
Testament at least in all necessary Matters was plain enough even to common
Capacities, is evident from the frequent Appeals our Savior makes to it in his
Contests with the Common People of the Jews. Thus in the Text he bids them,
Search the Scriptures, for they are they which testify of me; and in other
Places What says the Scripture? and does not the Scripture say so and so? Now
how impertinent would it have been for our Savior thus to appeal to it at the
Tribunal of the People, if he thought it so obscure that the People were not
capable of understanding it? How trifling would it be for a Man to appeal to
Suarez's Metaphysics in a Controversy with a Plowman, or to refer him to
Euclid's Elements for the determining the Bounds and Measures of a Field?

And as from what has been said, it is apparent that the Scriptures of the Old
Testament were at least in all Necessaries plain and clear to the Jews; so it
is no less evident that the Scripture of the New Testament are so to
Christians, since it gives the same Testimony to it self of its own Clearness,
as the Old Testament does. For thus, 2 Cor. 4.2, 3, 4. the Apostle tells us,
that they did not handle the Word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of
the Truth, commending themselves to Men's Consciences in the sight of God. But
if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost; in whom the God of this
World has blinded the Minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them.
Supposing then that they wrote with the same Plainness and Clearness with which
they speak, (which there is no shadow of Reason to doubt of) then from these
Words it is evident; First, That they did neither in their Preaching nor
Writings affect to discourse dubiously or obscurely, but that their great
Design was so to manifest and make known the Truth as that by their Plainness
and Simplicity they might recommend themselves to the Consciences of all that
heard or read them: Secondly, That in Fact they had in their Sermons and
Writings so clearly taught the Gospel, that if after all it remained hidden or
obscure to any, it was only to such as were lost and irrecoverable. Thirdly,
That that which rendered the Gospel which they had taught and written, hidden
or obscure to such, was not the Obscurity either of the Matter which they
taught, or of their Manner of Teaching it, but their own worldly Affections
which blinded their Eyes, and hindered them from seeing that which in its self
was illustriously visible. Which is an unanswerable Evidence of the Clearness
and Plainness of the Scriptures of the New Testament in all necessary Things;
for if they are clear to all but such as wilfully shut their Eyes against them,
they are as clear as they need be to honest and teachable Minds; for there is
nothing can be clear enough to such, as are not willing to understand. And
accordingly the Gospel, which the Apostle calls the Grace of God which brings
Salvation, is said to have appeared, or shone forth, to all Men; teaching us,
that denying Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present World, Tit. 2.11. Now if the Gospel did
shine forth unto all Men, it must be in the Sermons and Discourses of those
that had preached it to the World; and if they so preached it as that it shone
forth to all Men, they must necessarily have preached it very plainly and
clearly: Either therefore it was wrote as it was preached, or it was not; if it
was not, it was not wrote truly and sincerely; if it was, it was wrote very
plainly, so as to make it appear and shine forth to all that read it. It Is
true, there are some Things obscure both in the Old Scriptures and New; but
then these are such Things as are no Parts of the Necessaries and Essentials of
Religion; such Things as Men may be safely ignorant of, or be mistaken about,
without any hazard of their eternal Life. For all that the forecited
Testimonies prove is only this, that that true Religion by which God governs
the Faith and Manners of Men, is so far forth as it is necessary to be believed
and practiced, plainly and clearly revealed to them in the Holy Scriptures. But
besides this, all Men agree there are a great many other Things revealed in
Holy Scripture, which, because they are not necessary for all Men to
understand, are many of them not so plainly revealed as that all Men may
understand them. But since the Scripture was written to teach and instruct Men,
to be sure it teaches them most plainly that which is most necessary for them
to know; and therefore since there are some Things plainly taught in Scripture,
as is evident to any one that reads it, to be sure among these Things are
contained all that is necessary for Men to know and understand.

2. From the avowed Design of writing the Scripture it is also evident, that in
all Things necessary it is plain and clear. For thus concerning the Old
Testament, St. Paul tells us that whatsoever things were written before time,
were written for our learning; that we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope, Romans 15.4. And if they were written for our
Learning and Instruction, to be sure they were so written as to teach and
instruct us, that is, plainly and clearly, especially as to those Things
wherein we have most need to be instructed. And then as for the New Testament,
St. Luke tells his Theophilus, that the Reason of his writing his Gospel was
that he might know the certainty of those things that were surely believed
among Christians, and wherein he himself had been instructed; And if it were to
ascertain us of the Principles of Christianity that he wrote his Gospel,
certainly he would take care to write it after such a Manner as that those that
read it might understand it, otherwise he must run counter to his own Design.
Thus also St. John says, that he wrote his Gospel that Men might believe that
Jesus is the Christ the Son of God; but how could his Gospel induce Men to
believe This, unless it be so written as that Men may understand it? And so
also for his Epistles he tells us, that he wrote them that they that believed
in Jesus might know that they have eternal Life, and that they may believe, or
continue to believe, on the name of the Son of God: And if this were his End,
to be sure he would take care to write so as that they might understand;
otherwise how could they know by his Writing that they had eternal Life, or be
moved thereby to continue to believe on the name of Jesus? For there is nothing
can create in Men either Knowledge or Faith, but what they understand. Seeing
therefore the great End of Writing the Scripture was to instruct the World in
the great Things of Religion, either we must say that both the Writers of the
Scripture, and the Holy Ghost that inspired them were defective in Skill, or in
Care so to write as to obtain this End; or that their Writings are an effectual
Means to obtain it, which it is impossible for them to be, unless they are
plain and clear as to the great Things of Religion. In short every wise Agent
pursues his End by the most proper and effectual Means; and I would fain know
whether to write plainly or obscurely be the most proper Means to instruct Men
by Writing; if to write plainly, then either the Apostles wrote so, or they
were not wise Agents, since to instruct was the great End of their Writing. The
most natural Way of conveying to Men's Minds the Notices of Things is by Words
either spoken or written, and seeing whatsoever can be spoken in plain and
intelligible Words may be written in the same Words, there can be no doubt but
those Words will be as intelligible when they are written, as when they are
spoken; for why should the same Words be more obscure when conveyed to us by
our Eyes, than when conveyed to us by our Ears? Seeing then the Sense of
Scripture may be as plainly conveyed by Words written as by Words spoken, and
seeing that even those who deny the Plainness of Scripture do yet allow that
the Sense of it may be plainly conveyed by Words spoken, or which is the same
thing, Oral Tradition; if the Scripture be not plain it can be resolved into no
other Reason but this, that God would not have it so; for there is no Doubt but
he could have spoken as plainly as Men, and have written as plainly as he
spoke; and therefore if he has not done so, it was because he would not; but
to say that he would not write those Things plainly which he thought necessary
for all Men to know, and which he wrote on purpose that all Men might know, is
to say that he would, and would not at the same time; or that he wrote them on
purpose that Men might know them, and yet that he wrote so as that they might
not know them.

3. From the frequent Commands God lays upon us to read the Scripture it is
also evident, that in all necessary Things it is plain and clear. That God does
not only allow, but will and rquire us to read the Scripture, I shall show at
large hereafter, when I come to treat of searching the Scripture. Supposing
therefore at present the Thing to be true, I would fain know to what purpose
should God require us to read the Scripture, if in those things which are
necessary for Men to know and believe, it be not plain and intelligible. Does
God require us to read it, for the sake of reading it, or for the sake of
understanding it? If the former, reading any other Book might as well have
answered God's End as reading the Scripture; because reading is reading
whatsoever it be that we read; if the later, then either the Scripture is plain
and intelligible as to all those Things which he requires us to understand, or
he requires us to read it in vain. For to what Purpose should we read that we
may understand, if that which we are to read be not plain enough to be
understood by us? As for Instance; the Bereans, Acts 17.11. are highly
commended for searching the Scriptures daily; now I would fain know was this a
Virtue in them, or was it not? If not, why are they commended for it; if it
were, it was certainly their Duty. What was the Intendment of it; was it only
that they might be expert Readers? Why are they so commended for reading the
Scriptures above any other Book, seeing that reading any other Book would have
done as well for that Purpose as reading the Scriptures? But the Text it self
tells us that the Intendment of their reading the Scripture was, that they
might know whether those things were so or no which St. Paul had preached to
them; but how should they know this by reading the Scripture, if the Scripture
which they read were not plain enough to be understood by them? Again St. Paul
gives this as a great Commendation of his Son Timothy, that from a Child he had
known the Holy Scriptures; whence by the Way we may learn, that it is not so
great a Reproach to our Church as the Romanists intend it for, that we permit
Women and Children, Tinkers and Cobblers to read the Scripture. But I pray, what
was the Meaning of Timothy's knowing the Holy Scripture from a Child? Was it
that he knew the Words of it only, or the Sense of it also? If the former, a
Parrot may be taught as much as Timothy had learned, and consequently deserve
as high a Commendation as he; if the later, then it seems the Scripture is
plain enough for a well-disposed Child to know the Sense of it, so far forth at
least as it is necessary to be known, and this is as much as we desire. If
therefore God requires us to read the Scripture, as Timothy did, the End that
we may know and understand it as he did, then either we may understand the
Sense of it by reading it, or else God requires us to read it in vain.

4. And lastly; From the Obligation we lie under upon pain of Damnation to
believe and receive those Necessaries to Salvation contained in Scripture, it
is also evident that as to all those Necessaries it is plain and clear. That we
are obliged to believe under pain of Damnation all that the Scriture proposes
as necessary to our Salvation, is agreed on all hands; but how can Men be
justly obliged to believe such Things as are obscure, and doubtful, and
uncertain, and of which they can have no certain Knowledge? Either the
Necessaries to Salvation must be plainly and clearly expressed in Scripture, or
we have not sufficient Reason to believe them; and to say God will damn us for
not believing those Things which he has not given us sufficient Reason to
believe, is to charge him with the most outrageous Oppression and Injustice.
But we are told that though God has not clearly revealed to us in Scripture
those Things which he has obliged us to believe upon Pain of Damnation, yet he
has left us sufficient Reason to believe them; for he has left us to the
Conduct of an Infallible Church, that is to say, of the present Church of Rome
in all Ages, whom he has authorized to explain and define to us all Things
that are necessary to be believed, which we are to receive upon her Authority,
and not upon the Scriptures; so that if we firmly believe what She defines and
proposes to us, we are sure to believe all Things that are necessary to be
believed. Now in Answer to this Objection, which indeed is the great Foundation
that the Faith of those of the present Church of Rome relies on, I desire these
Things may be seriously considered.

1. That before we can reasonably rely upon the Authority of the present Church
of Rome in defining and proposing to us the Articles of our Faith, there are
sundry Things that we must believe upon the Authority of Scripture.

2. That these Things which we must believe from Scripture before we can rely
upon the Authority of that Church, are at least as obscurely revealed in
Scripture as any other Article of our Christian Faith.

3. That after all these Things, upon our relying on that Church's Authority,
we are left to the same or greater Uncertainties than upon our relying upon the
Authority of Scripture.

4. That in relying upon the Authority of the Scripture we are left to no other
Uncertainities than just what is necessary to render our Faith virtuous and
rewardable; whereas by relying upon the Authority of that Church, supposing it
to be a certain Ground, as it is pretended, our Faith would have little or
nothing of Virtue in it.

1. That before we can reasonably rely upon the Authority of that Church in
defining and proposing to us the Articles of our Faith, there are sundry Things
that we must believe upon the Authority of Scripture. As for Instance; we must
in the first Place believe that there is a Church, or Society of Christians
separated from the World, or incorporated by a peculiar Divine Charter. Now
whether there be such a Church or no is a Question that must be resolved by the
Scripture, and not by the Church; because to believe that there is a Church
because the Church says there is a Church, is to take that for granted which
is the Thing in Question. Secondly, We must believe that this Church has
Authority to define and propose to us the Articles of our Faith, which must
also for the same Reasons be believed on the Authority of the Scripture, and
not of the Church. For to believe that there is a Church that has Authority to
propose to us the Articles of our Faith, is to believe that there is a Church
which we are obliged to believe; and how can I believe this upon the Church's
Authority, unless I can believe it before I do believe it? Thirdly, Before we
can rely upon this Church's Authority in defining and proposing to us the
Articles of our Faith, we must believe that this Church is infallible; for if
she be not Infallible, how is it consistent with the Truth of God to oblige us
to believe Her, seeing in so doing he must oblige us whenever She errs to
believe her Errors? but that she is infallible is not to be believed upon her
own Authority; for then her infallible Authority must be the Reason of our
Belief that She is Infallible, that is, we must believe her infallible, because
we believe her infallible. Seeing then we cannot believe it on her own
Authority, if we believe it at all, it must be upon the Authority of Scripture.
Fourthly, Before we can rely upon the Church of Rome's Authority to define to
us the Articles of our Faith, we must believe the Church of Rome to be this
infallible Church: But seeing this is no self-evident Principle, we must have
some other Evidence besides her self to induce us to believe it; and what else
can that be but Scripture? We are told indeed by some of her greatest Divines,
that there are certain Marks and Notes of a true Church peculiar to the Church
of Rome, by which we are obliged to believe Her the true Church; such as
Antiquity, Universality, Holiness of Doctrine, etc. But seeing no Doctrine can
be holy that is not true, we must be satisfied that that Church is true before
we can know that it is holy; so that before we can reasonably submit to her
Authority, we must be very well assured that her Doctrine is true, and this we
cannot be assured of by her Authority, because that as yet is the Matter in
Question; and therefore we can be no otherwise assured of it, but only by the
Authority of Scripture; and when we are assured beforehand by the Authority of
Scripture that her Doctrines are true, her Authority comes too late to assure
us. Seeing therefore it is evident that there are some, if not all the Articles
of the Roman Faith that must be known and believe by us upon the Authority of
Scripture before we can safely rely upon her Authority to define them to us,
how can we be obliged to settle our Faith upon her Authority, when as before we
can reasonably admit her Authority, we must believe several of the Articles of
our Faith upon the Authority of Scripture? For I would fain know, are these
Articles of Faith, or no? That there is a Church; that this Church has
Authority to define the Articles of our Faith, and that in so defining, this
Church is infallible, and that this infallible Church is the Church of Rome? If
they be, as they themselves own they are, then there are some Articles it seems
that must be believed without the Church's Authority upon the single Authority
of Scripture; and if some, why not all? why should not the Scripture be as
sufficient to authorize us to believe the Rest as these, since its Authority is
as great in one Text as in another? Especially considering

2. That these things which we must believe from Scripture before we can rely
upon the Authority of the Church of Rome, are at least as obscurely revealed in
Scripture as any other Article of our Christian Faith. The great Reason urged
by the Romanists against our Relyance upon the Scripture for our Faith is the
Obscurity of it; and if this be a good Reason it proves a great deal more then
they would have it, viz. that we ought not to rely upon Scripture even for
those Articles, without believing of which we can have no sufficient Ground to
rely upon the Authority of their Church. For I would fain know, is it clear and
plain from Scripture that the present Catholic Church of every Age has
Authority to define the Articles of Faith, and that in all its Definitions it
is infallbile? and that the present Church of Rome is this Catholic Church? If
so; how come those Texts upon which those Articles are founded to be understood
in a quite different Sense, not only by us, but by the greatest part of the
Primitive Fathers, as has been abundantly proved by Protestant Writers?
Supposing that we should be so blinded by our Partiality to our own Tenets as
to misapprehend plain and clear Expressions of Scripture, it is very strange
methinks that the Fathers who were never engaged in the Controversy, and so
could not be biased either one way or the other, should yet misapprehend them
too. What is this but to say that let Men be never so indifferent, yet they may
be easily mistaken in the Sense of very plain and clear Expressions; and if so,
what signifies either Speaking or Writing? But to proceed to some Instances;
will any modest Man in the World affirm that the Church of Rome's infallibility
in defining Articles of Faith to all succeeding Generations is more plainly
expressed in those Words of our Savior, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will
I build my Church, than the Divinity of our Savior is in the Beginning of the
first Chapter of St. John's Gospel, where it is expressly affirmed that he is
God, whereas in the other there is not the least mention either of the Church
of Rome, or of Infallibility, or defining Articles of Faith? Why may we not
then as well depend upon the one Text for the Article of our Savior's
Divinity, as upon the other for that of the Church of Rome's Infallibility?
Again, are there not innumerable Texts of Scripture wherein the Articles of
Remission of Sin, the Resurrection of the Dead, the last Judgment, and the
World to come are at least as plainly expressed as the present Church fo Rome's
Infallibility is in any of those Texts that are urged in the Defense of it? and
therefore if we believe the later upon the Authority of Scripture,
notwithstanding the pretended Obscurity of it, why may we not as well upon the
same Authority believe all the former, since the former are at least as plainly
expressed as the later? Either therefore the Scripture is plain enough to be
relied upon as to this Article of the Church of Rome's Infallibility, or it is
not; if it be not, we have no Ground for our Dependence upon the Authority of
her Definitions and Proposals; if it be, it is plain enough to be relied upon in
all other necessary Articles of Faith, since these are all as plainly at least
expressed in Scripture as that. For if we may not rely upon Scripture because
it is not plain, then where it is equally plain, it is equally to be relied on.

3. That when we come to rely upon this Church's Authority, we are exposed to
far greater Uncertainties than while we relied upon the Authority of Scripture.
For in the first place, we are of all sides agreed that the Scripture is
Infallible, and that such and such Writing are Parts of Scripture; and
therefore are absolutely secure that if we follow the true Sense of it, it
cannot mislead us. But the much greater Part of Christians deny that the Church
of Rome is Infallible; even the Church of Rome it self owns the Authority we
rely on to be infallible, but all Christians all the World over, besides those
of her own Communion, disallow hers to be so; and to forsake our Dependence
upon an Infallibility which all own, to rely upon an Infallibility which but
few in Comparison admit, is certainly a very dangerous Venture. And then
Secondly, As for the Infallibility of Scripture we are certain where to find
it; viz, in every Text, and in every Proposition therein contained, which being
all the World of God, must be all infallbile. But as for the Infallibility of
the Roman Church, as they have handled the Matter, it is almost as difficult to
find as to prove it; some cry, lo it is here; and some, lo it is there; some
place it in the Pope only, others in the Pope and his College of Cardinals;
some in the Pope presiding in a General Council, others in a General Council
whether the Pope preside in it, or no. So that in this Church, it seems, there
is Infallibility somewhere, but what are we the better for it if we know not
where to find it? If we go to the Pope for it; there have been two or three
Popes at once that have decreed against one another; and therefore one or
the other of them to be sure were mistaken. How then shall we know which is the
true infallible one? And when I have found the true Pope, others tell me I am
not yet arrived at the Seat of Infallibility until I have found him in his
College of Cardinals; and when I have found him here I am still to seek, seeing
I find the same Pope ( Eugenius the Fourth for Instance) decreeing one Thing in
his College of Cardinals, and the quite contrary in a general Council; and
therefore I am sure he could not be infallible in both. Therefore otehrs send
me to the Pope in a General Council; but when I come thither, I find my self at
a Loss again; because I meet with several Instances of one Pope's defining one
Thing in one General Council, and another Pope, the quite contrary in another;
and therefore in one or the other Council I am sure, the one or the other Pope was
mistaken. And as for General Councils themselves there are sundry of them which
are owned by some, and rejected by others of the principal Doctors of the Roman
Communion. And even when Councils are legally assembled, there are so many nice
Disputes among them, what it is that makes them General, and when it is that
they act Conciliariter as they call it, that is, so as to render their Decrees
perpetually and universally obliging; that though we were resolved to build our
Faith upon the Authority of this Church, yet if we will use that Caution in
believing that we ought to do in a Matter of so great Moment, we should find
our selves involved in greater Uncertainties concerning these Things than we
are concerning the Sense even of the most difficult Places of Scripture. But
then Thirdly, When we are passed over all these Difficulties we are still at as
great a Loss to understand what is the Sense of the Church to be believe by us,
as what is the Sense of Scripture. For the Church has no other way to deliver
her Sense to us but either by Oral Tradition, that is, by Word of Mouth; or by
Writing; If She deliver her Sense to me by Oral Tradition, how can I know what
that is who never heard Her speak either in its diffused Body, or in a General
Council, or in any other Representative; unless it be that of my own
Parish Priest perhaps, who for all I know may be Ignorant or Heretical, and so
either not understand himself the Church's Oral Tradition, or whilfully pervert
it to a contrary Meaning? And if the Church deliver here Sense to me by
Writing, as She has done in the written Decreesof her General Councils, must I
read over all her Decrees? How should I do that who understand not so much as
the Languages in which they are written? Or suppose they were Translated, how
shall I know that they are faithfully rendered any more than I do that the
Scripture is so? But suppose I were certain of this, and should thereupon
proceed to read them, alas, I find in them a great many difficult and dubious
Expressions, yea, and at least seeming Contradictions to each other; how then
can I be more certain of the true Sense of these Writings than of the Sense of
the Writings of Scripture? But you will say, the Church has digested her Sense
of all her Articles of Faith into a plain Creed and Catechism, viz. that of the
Council of Trent, whereby the plainest Reader may without any laborious
Enquiries be ready instructed what he ought to believe. This I confess is
something; but as for those Articles of Faith wherein We and the Church of Rome
are agreed, we find them as plainly expressed in Scripture as in that Creed and
Catechism; and therefore we have Reason to believe that if those Articles
wherein we disagree had ever been intended for Articles of Faith, they would
have been as plainly expressed there as these; but it is no wonder we should not
find them plainly expressed there, when we cannot find them expressed there at
all. But do we not find that the Scriptures even in the plainest Expressions of
Articles of Faith have yet been perverted by Heretics, into a contrary
Meaning? And what then? Are not the Words of Councils as liable to be perverted
into a contray Meaning as the Words of Scripture? For do not the Roman Doctors
differ as much about the Sense of their Councils, as we do about the Sense of
our Scriptures? Yea and have we not a notorious Instance of it at this very
Day? For what can be more contrary than Belarmine's Exposition of the Trent
Faith, and the Bishop of Condom's? And yet both allowed by the Pope, who by the
Authority of that Council is made sole Arbitrator of the Sense of it. But then
Fourthly and lastly, As to the Sense of Scripture our Reliance on the Authority
of that Church leaves us at as great an Uncertainty as it found us. For where
the Scripture designs to speak plainly, as it does in all Things necessary to
Salvation, the Church cannot speak plainer; and therefore there we may
understand the Scripture as well without the Church as with it; but where it
does not speak plainly, the Church of Rome has left us not infallible
Commentary whereby to understand it; so that where the Scripture is plain She
has not made it plainer, and where it is obscure She has left it as obscure
as ever: So that after all the Noise that is made of Infallibility her Doctors
are fain to apply themselves to the same Methods of Understanding Scripture,
that is, to consult the Sense of Antiquity, and compare Text with Text, and the
like that we fallible Protestants do; and when they have done all, are as
liable to be mistaken as we. Nay they themselves confess that even General
Councils themselves may be mistaken in their Applications of Scripture; that
is, that they may misapply them to wrong Purposes, which they cannot do without
mistaking the Sense of them, of which there are a great many notorious
Instances in the second Council of Nice; which to prove it the Duty of
Christians to worship Images, urges God's taking Clay, and making Man after his
own Image; and likewise that of Esaias, There shall be a Sign and Testimony to
the Lord in the Land of Egypt; and also those Passages of David, Confession and
Beauty is before him. Lord I have loved the Beauty of thy House. O Lord my Face
has sought for thee. O Lord I will seek after thy Countenance. O Lord, the
light of thy Countenance is sealed over us. And from that Passage, As we have
seen, so have we heard, they argue that there must be Images to look on; and
because it is said, God is mavelous in his Saints, they conclude that the
Church must be decked with Pictures: And from No man lights a Candle and
puts it under a bushel, they wisely infer that Images must be set upon the
Altar; all which are as remote from their Sense as the first Verse of the first
Chapter of Genesis. What greater Certainty have they with their Infallibility
than we without it? We can know as well the Sense of plain Texts of Scripture,
as of plain Texts of Councils, or Creeds, or Catechisms; and we can as easily
pervert the Sense of the one as of the other: And as for those that are not
plain, even Genreal Councils you see for all their Infallibility may be
mistaken about them as well as we. So that when all comes to all, by forsaking
the infallible Authority of Scripture to rely upon the infallible Authority of
that Church, we are so far from ariving at a greater Certainty of Faith that we
are involved in greater Uncertainties than ever. But then,

4. And lastly, in relying upon the Authority of Scripture we are left to no
other Uncertainties than just what are necessary to render our Faith virtuous
and rewardable; whereas by relying upon the Authority of the Church of Rome
(supposing it were as sure a Ground of Faith as it is pretended) our Faith
would have little or nothing of Virtue in it. It is pretended (though falsely
you see) that that Church's Authority is so sure a Ground of Faith, that while
a Man depends upon it he cannot be mistaken in any necessary Article of Faith;
which in Reality amounts to no more than this, That while a Man believes as
that Church believes, which Infallibly believes all that is necessary to
Salvation, he infallibly believes all that is necessary to Salvation; and it is
equally true, that while a Man believes as the Scripture teaches, which
infallibly teaches all that is necessary to Salvation, he infallibly believes
all that is necessary to Salvation; that is, both are equally false. For no Man
can infallibly believe either the Church or Scripture, because Infallibility
exceeds the Capacity of humane Nature; no Man can so believe either but that he
may be mistaken, and if he may be mistaken, its possible he may not believe all
that is necessary to Salvation, whether he grounds his Faith upon the Church or
the Scripture. But because this Church pretends so to secure my Faith while I
depend upon her Authority as that I cannot be mistaken, for this very Reason I
cannot depend upon it, because I am sure of this, that God never designed for
me any such Means of Believing as should render my Faith infallible. For to
what End should he require me to take so much Pains and Care to secure my Faith
from Errors, if he has furnished me with any certain Means of being
infallible? It would be but applying that Means whatever it is, and my Danger
would be immediately over; and then I need trouble my. Head no further, being
now so secured as that I cannot be mistaken; after which it would be very
impertinent methinks for God to trouble me with those unecessary Injunctions of
trying all Things, and holding fast to that which is good; of searching the
Scriptures, and trying the Spirits whether they be of God; and taking heed
whilst I stand lest I fall. What need a Man be at the Expense of all this
Labor and Caution, whose Faith is already secured? Seeing therefore God
requires these Things at our Hands, it is a plain Case that he never intended
us any Method how to be infallbile in believing; and therefore since the Church
of Rome's Authority is pretended to be such a Method, for that Reason it ought
to be rejected. It Is plain that God intended that our Faith should be a Grace
and a Virtue, and consequently that it should be an Act of our Wills as well as
of our Understandings, which supposes the Evidence of it to be irresistible;
for what Virtue is it to believe that the Sun shines when it glares full in our
Eyes? Since therefore our Faith must be a free and voluntary Assent upon such
Motives as are sufficient to satisfy an honest Mind, but not to compel either
an obstinate Infidel or self-deceived Hypocrite; God did not think fit so to
secure our Faith as to leave is impossible for us to err damnably; And, indeed
if he had, it would have been no Virtue in us to believe savingly; for what
Virtue is it for a Man to do that which it is impossible for him not to do? It
is sufficient that we cannot err damnably in our Faith without some damnable
Fault in our Wills; but if we eithre refuse to enquire into this Revelation for
what is necessary for us to believe, or will only enquire into it with a Mind
that is biased with wicked and sinful Prejudices, or will not submit our
Understandings to it upon the clearest Conviction, there is no doubt but we may
be ignorant, and we may be deceived in Things of the greatest Moment, and it is
but just and fit that we should: And if notwithstanding these Faults we could
not err, for God's sake what Virtue would it be to be Orthodox? But if with
honest, humble, and teachable Minds we will diligently enquire into divine
Revelation, we shall there find all the Necessaries to Salvation so clearly and
plainly proposed to us, that 'twill be morally impossible for us either to be
ignorant of, or deceived about them. So that by relying on Scripture you see we
are exposed to no other Uncertainties than just what are necessary to render
our Faith a Virtue; and God does as much require that our Faith should be
virtuous as that it should be Orthodox; that it should be the Act of an honest,
humble, diligent, and teachable Mind, as that it should be extended to all
Things necessary to Salvation. Now our Faith may be Orthodox without an
infallible Certainty, but it cannot be virtuous and rewardable with it. To what
purpose then do the Romanists talk of an infallible certainty in Believing? Is
it reasonable to expect more certainty than God ever intended to give? He has
given as much as is necessary for honest Minds and no more, and whether Knaves
and Hypocrites believe right or wrong is of no great Concernment. If therefore
our Faith be liable to no other Uncertainty than just what is necessary to try
our Honesty, that is much better for us in Respect of the Virtue of our Faith
than an infallible Certainty. Supposing therefore that the Church of Rome were
as infallible as it pretends, it is certain that the Scripture is as infallible
as that; but whether we rely upon one or the other we are fallible still. And
could that Church render us as infallibly certain as it pretends, it would
thereby preserve indeed the Orthodoxy of our Faith, but then at the same Time
it would destroy the Virtue of it: For to believe right when we cannot believe
wrong is fatal and necessary; but to believe right when through our own Default
we may be believe wrong, this is virtuous and remwardable.

By what has been said therefore, I think it is sufficiently evident, that it
is upon the Scripture we are to rely, and not upon the Church, especially upon
the Roman Church, for all Things necessary to Salvation; and therefore since we
are obliged to believe these Things upon pain of Eternal Damnation, it
necessarily follows that they must be plain and clear, and Scripture; otherwise
we could not be justly so obliged to believe them. And thus I have shown at
large that the Scripture is the great Rule of our Faith and Manners, and that
as such, it is both full and clear, as containing in it all Things necessary to
Salvation, and proposing them so plainly and clearly, as that upon an honest
and diligent Enquiry all Men may find and discover them.

A Second Discourse
Upon JOHN V. 39. Search the Scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal
life.


WHether these Words are to be rendered Indicatively, [Ye do search the
Scriptures] as some would have them, or Imperatively, [Search the Scriptures]
as our Translation renders them, amounts to the same thing; For if we render
them Indicatively, [Ye do search the Scriptures] it is evident, that they are
spoken with Approbation, Ye do read the Scriptures, and ye do very well in so
doing: For thus we find the Bereans commended for Scarching the Scriptures, and
Timothy, for knowing them from a Child. And if to Search the Scripture be a
commendable Practice, then to be sure our Savior here mentions it at least
with Approbation; and what he approves when done, that to be sure he would have
us do. Whether therefore it be delivered in the Form of a Command, or of a bare
Assertion, it is equivalent to a Command, it being at least an Assertion of a
Thing which he approves, and consequently would have all Men to Practice. But
because there is a numerous Party in the Christian World which does not only
forbid the People to Search the Scriptures, but represents it as a Practice of
very dangerous Consequence, it is hereby become necessary that we should not
only assert, but prove their Obligation to it, which otherwise would be very
needless, there being nothing more plain and evident in it self. Now to prove
that the People are obliged to Search and Read the Scriptures, I shall as
briefly as I can, argue the Point from these following Topics.

1. From the Obligations which the Jews were under-to Read and Search the
Scriptures of the Old Testament. 2. From our Savior's and his Apostles
Approbation of their Practice in pursuance of this their Obligation. 3. From
the great Design and Intention of Writing the Scriptures. 4. From the Direction
of these Holy Writings to the People. 5. From the great Concernment of the
People in the Matters contained in them. 6. From the Universal Sense of the
Primitive Church in this Matter.
1. From the general Obligation which the Jews were under the Read and Search
their Scriptures. For so God requires them to keep the words which he commanded
them, in their Hearts, and to teach them diligently to their Children, and to
talk of them as they sat in their Houses, and as they walked in the way, and
when they lay down, and when they rose up, and to bind them as a sign upon
their hands, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8. And elsewhere, This book of the Law shall not
depart out of thy mouth, but thou shatl meditate therein day and night,
speaking to the Children of Israel in general, Jos. 1.8. And again, Ye shall
lay lip these my words in your heart and in your soul, that your days may be
multiplied, and the days of your Children, in the Land which the Lord swear
unto your Fathers to give them, as the days of heaven upon the earth, Deuteronomy.
11.18, 21. And to meditate on God's Law day and night, David makes a Part of
the Character of the Blessed Man, Psalm. 1.3. Now if they could not keep God's
Laws in their Hearts, as most certainly they could not; if they could not teach
them to their. Children; if they could not talk of them upon all just and
proper Occasions, and in a word, if they could not meditate on them day and
night without being very well acquainted with them by diligent Search and
Reading them, it is most certain that to Read and Search into them was their
indispensible Duty. Now if there be the same Reason why we should Read the
Scriptures as there was why the Jews should, then the Obligation of these
Commands must extend to us as well as to them; because the Reason of the Law is
the Law; but it is evident, even beyond Contradiction, that there is no good
Reason assignable for the one, which is not of equal force for the other; and
whatsoever is objected by our Adversaries in this Point against our Reading the
Scriptures, is of equal validity against the Jews Reading them. It is Objected,
That our Reading them, through our Incapacity to understand them, must occasion
a great many Errors and Heresies in the Church. And why should not their
Reading them occasion the same, since neither their Understandings were larger
than ours, nor their Scriptures clearer and more intelligible than ours? It is
farther objected, that because of the many ill Examples recorded in Scripture
it is dangerous for the People to read it; because of their Aptness to be
misled and corrupted by Example. But I beseech you, are there not more bad
Examples in the Old Testament than in the New? And were not the Jews as apt to
be corrupted by them as we Christians? And therefore since these Objections do
press as much against their reading the Scriptures as ours, it is certain they
ought to keep both from it or neither. Seeing therefore notwithstanding these
Objections God obliged the Jews to read them, it is plain they are not of Force
enough to disoblige us from doing the same.

2. From our Savior and his Apostles Approbation of this Practice of the Jews
in Pursuance of their Obligation to it, it is also evident that we are obliged
to the same. That the Common People of the Jews did ordinarily read the
Scriptures in our Saviou's Time, is evident not only from the Text, Search the
Scriptures (which if you take them Indicatively, are an express Declaration
that they did read them; and if you take them Imperatively, necessarily imply
that they themselves owned that they ought to read them) but also from those
Questions which our Savior frequently asked them in his Conferences with them;
such as, Have ye not read? Have ye never read in the Scripture? And has not
the Scripture said so and so? Which Question would be very Impertinent if
reading the Scripture were not then ordinarily practiced by that People. And
that even their holy Women were then so well instructed in the Scriptures as to
be able to instruct their Children, Timothy is a signal Instance, who, though
his Father were an Heathen, had known the holy Scriptures from a Child, 2 Timothy
3.15. which knowledge he must necessarily have derived from his Grandmother
Lois, and his Mother Eunice, whose Faith St. Paul celebrates; 2 Timothy 1.5. And
this Practice of reading the Scriptures which was so common among that People
in our Savior's time is so far from being discontinued either by himself or
his Apostles, that it is always mentioned by them with Applause and
Approbation. Thus the Bereans are commended as a People of a nobler Strain than
those of Thessalonica, because they searched the Scriptures daily whether those
Things which St. Paul had preached to them were so or no. And St. Paul is so
far from reprehending Timothy for meddling with the Scriptures whilst he was a
Layman, that he mentions it to his Honor, that he had known the Scriptures
from a Child. And in all those Passages wherein our Savior takes it for
granted that the Common People of the Jews did read the Scripture, we have not
the least Intimation of his dislike of their Practice, which we should
certainly have had, had he apprehended it to be either dangerous or
unwarrantable. Seeing therefore neither our Savior nor his Apostles do in the
least disallow of the Scriptures being read by the Common People, but on the
contrary do expressly commend it; this is a plain Argument that it was their
Intention to perpetuate the Practice of it to future Ages. For seeing the Jews
read the Scriptures in Obedience to an express Command of God, as was shown
before, had our Savior intended that they should not continue it, he would
doubtless have repealed that Command by some Countermand, which he was so far
from doing that he not only every where allows of their reading the Scriptures,
but also expressly approves and commends it; whereby he plainly establishes the
Obligation of that ancient Command in Obedience to which they did read them.

3. From the great Design and Intention of Writing the Scriptures, it is also
evident, that the People are still obliged to Read them. It is plain the great
Design of Writing the Scripture was to instruct Men in the Knowledge, and
persuade them to the Practice of True Religion; For thus of the Scriptures of
the Old Testament St. Paul tells us, That whatsoever things were written
aforetime, were written for our learning, Romans 15.4. and for our admonition, 1
Cor. 10.11. And as for the New Testament, we are told, That it was written that
we might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing we
might have life through his name, Joh. 20.31. And St. Peter tells us, That he
wrote both his Epistles to stir up the pure Minds of Christians by way of
remembrance, and to put them in mind of the words which were spoken before by
the Holy Prophets, and of the Commandment of the Apostles of our Lord and
Savior, 2 Pet. 3.1. And St. John gives us this account of his Writing his
Epistles, These things have I written to you that ye sin not, 1 John 2.1. And
St. Jude, this of his, Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of
the common Salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you
that ye should earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered unto
the Saints, v. 3. These are the Ends for which the Scripture was written; but
how can the Writing of it contribute to these Ends if we are not permitted to
Read what is written? For the Scripture was written to the People as well as to
the Clergy, as I shall show by and by; but to what purpose should it be written
to the People to instruct and admonish them, if the People are not allowed to
Read its Instructions and Admonitions? What Influence could the Writing it have
upon the People's Belief, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, if they had been
debarred from acquainting themselves with what is written concerning him? How
could it stir up their Remembrance, if they might not Read what it suggested to
their Memory? By what other way can it keep the People from Sinning, but by
Motives and Persuastions? But how should its Motives and Persuasions affect
their Minds if they are not allowed to consult and understand them? Upon what
Account can it move the People earnestly to contend for the Faith once
delivered to the Saints, if they are not allowed to learn from it either what
that Faith is, or what those Reasons are which oblige them to contend for it?
So that to write to the People on purpose to instruct and reform them, and at
the same time to purpose to debar them from Reading it, is either to suppose,
that the Writing will operate like a Charm, or to purpose a downright
Contradiction. For how oddly would it have looked, if in the afore-cited
Passages, the Apostles had expressed themselves thus: These thing are written
for your Learning and Admonition; but it is by no means fit you should learn
from them what they teach and admonish you. These Things are written that ye
should believe that Jesus is the Christ and the Son of God; but they are not
written that you should enquire of them whether Jesus be the Christ or the Son
of God. These Things are written to put you in Mind of what has been spoken by
the Prophets and Apostles; but they were not written that you might acquaint
your selves by them what the Prophets and Apostles spoke. These Things are
written that you should not Sin; but beware you do not read them lest the bad
Examples recorded in them occasion you to Sin. In short, These Things were
written to excite you earnestly to contend for the Faith once delivered to the
Saints; but you are by no means allowed to enquire into them lest you should
misunderstand them, and and so instead of contending for the Faith you should
contend for Heresy and False Doctrine. Had the Apostles thus expressed
themselves, I appeal to any reasonable Man whether these Passages would not
have startled his Understanding, and tempted him to question whether the
Authors of them were well in their Wits; and yet this must have been their
meaning, supposing that they meant that the People should not read what they
wrote.

4. From the Direction of these Holy Writings to the People, it is also
evident, that the People are still obliged to Read, or acquaint themselves with
them. For so we find the Law of Moses was delivered by God to all the People as
well as to him and Aaron; and (as was shown before) they were all of them
commanded to search and enquire into it. And so also were the Sermons of the
Prophets, which are usually prefaced with an, Hear O Israel, Hear O House of
Judah, Hear O House of Jacob, and Hear all ye of Judah. So also our Blessed
Savior Preached his Sermons and Parables, not only to his Apostles, and
Seventy Disciples, but also to the People, and to the Multitudes. And so also
his Apostles direct their Epistles, not only to the Saints, to the faithful in
Christ Jesus, to the Beloved, which in the Language of Scripture includes every
Christian; but also to all that are at Rome, to all that in every place call
upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, to all the Saints which are in Achaia,
to all the Saints which are at Philippi, to the twelve Tribes which are
scattered abroad, to the Strangers scattered through Pontus, Galatia, etc. and
to them which have obtained like precious Faith with us, that is, to all the
Jewish Christians dispersed over the World. Seeing therefore the Scriptures
were directed to all, as well Laity as Clergy, this not only gives a Right to
all to Read them, but also lays an Obligation upon all to acquaint themselves
with them. For the very directing such a Writing or Epistle to such or such
Persons, does, in the Sense of all the World, imply, that he who writes does
design and intend, that they to whom he directs it should Read and Peruse it;
and therefore, since the Scriptures were written to all, that is a plain
Intimation, that it was the Intention of the Writers that all should Read them.
And for us not to Read what God has written, and directed to us, is by
implication of Fact, a Profane Neglect and Contempt of his Mercy, and looks as
if we either thought him such an Insignificant Being, or our selves so little
concerned in any thing that he can say or write to us, as that it would not be
worth our while to receive, and peruse the Contents of those Sacred Epistles,
which by the Hands of his Holy Penmen he has vouchsafed to direct to us. Nor
is it a sufficient Excuse for our Contempt, to say, that in Consideration of
our own Proneness to Err and Mistake, we ought to content our selves with this,
that our Spiritual Guides should Read God's Writings for us, and deliver the
Sense and Contents of them to us: For to be sure, had God intended that the
Priests only should read them, he would have directed them only to the Priests,
and ordered them only to deliver the Sense of them to the the People; and
therefore since he has directed them to both, this necessarily implies that it
was his Intention that both should read them. For if God had not directed them
to Men, neither Priests nor People were obliged to read them; and therefore
seeing the great Reason why any Men ought to Read them is, because they are
directed to Men, this Reason obliges all Men to Read them; because they are
directed to all Men. For not to be highly concerned to know and understand what
it is that God writes to us is an Argument that we have a very mean Regard both
of his Majesty, and his Mind, and Will. But to be sure whosoever is highly
concerned to know what such a Writing contains, will, if he can, be very
curious to peruse it with his own Eyes at least, supposing that it is not
unlawful for him so to do; because there is nothing gives that Satisfaction to
a Man's Mind as the Information of his own Sense. So that for Men wilfully to
neglect reading the Scripture which God has so expressly directed to them, and
thereby not only licensed but obliged them to read it, argues a very profane
Disregard both of the Author of it, and of the Matter it contains; and for any
Man, or Society of Men to forbid the People to read what God has written and
directed to them, is not only to deprive them of a Right which God has given
them, but also to acquit them of a Duty which he has laid upon them For St.
Paul in those Epistles which he wrote to the Christian People in general of
such and such Churches, still takes it for granted that they would read them;
as being not only warranted, but obliged thereunto by his writing them; for so
Ephesians. 3.3, 4. speaking of that great Mystery of the calling the Gentiles which
God had revealed to him, concerning which says he, I wrote before in few words,
whereby when ye read ye may understand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ.
So also 2 Cor. 1.13. We write no other things unto you, than what you read,
that is, than what you may at least, and are obliged to read by virtue of our
writing them to you. And as for his Epistle to the Thessalonians, which he
wrote to that whole Church, he gives charge that it should be read to all the
Holy Brethren, 1 These. 5.27. So also for that of the Colossians, When this
Epistle is, or has been, read amongst you, cause that it be read also in the
Church of the Laodiceans; and that ye likewise read the Epistle from Laodicea.
Where you see he all along either supposes or requires that what he wrote to
all should be read by all and to all. If therefore this Authority of St. Paul
be sufficient to over rule the Authority of any pretended Successor of St.
Peter, then it is certain that reading the Scripture is still the Duty of
Laymen notwithstanding any Papal Prohibition to the contrary.

5. From the great Concernment the People have in the Matters contained in
Scripture, it is also evident that they are obliged, if they are able, to read
it and acquaint themselves with it: For as for the Matters which the Scriptures
contain, they are such as are of everlasting Moment to the People as well as to
the Clergy. The Articles of Faith which the Scripture proposes are as necessary
to be believed by the People as by the Clergy. The Precepts of Life which the
Scripture prescribes are as necessary to be practiced by the People, as by the
Clergy. The Promises and Threats with which the Scripture inforces those
Precepts are as necessary to be considered by the People as by the Clergy: And
seeing both are equally concerned in the great Matters which the Scriptures
contain, what Reason can be assigned why both should not be obliged to acquaint
themselves with them? I know it is pretended that it is the proper Office of the
Clergy to study the Scriptures for the People as well as for themselves, and
that therefore the People are obliged to receive the Sense of the Scriptures
upon Trust from their Teachers without making any farther Enquiry. But I
beseech you, are you sure that your Teachers are infallible? That they are not
so is most certain, it being notorious that most of the prevailing Heresies of
Christendom were first set on broach by the Teachers of the Church, and it is
impossible they should be infallible, who have so often actually erred even in
Matters of the highest Moment. Suppose then what is fairly supposable, that
your Teachers should mislead you, and not only into dangerous but damnable
Errors; are you sure that they shall be damned for you, and that you shall
escape? If so, then Heresy in the Laity can never be damnable if they receive
it upon Trust from their Teachers; and consequently their Souls are as safe
under the Conduct of false Teachers as true; provided always that right or
wrong they believe what is taught them. But if your selves must give an Account
to God as well for your Faith as for your Manners, and are liable in your own
Persons to eternal Damnation (as most certainly you are) as well for Heresy as
Immorality, then it is the most unreasonable Thing in the World that you should
in all Things be obliged to believe your Teachers upon Trust; for at this rate
a Man may be eternally damned, merely for believing what he is obliged to
believe. If it be said that the People are not bound to believe what their
particular Pastor teaches, but what the Church teaches them, and the Church
cannot err though their particular Pastor may; I would fain know how shall the
People be otherwise informed what the Church teaches them than by the
Expositions of their particular Pastors, they being at least as incapable of
informing themselves what the Doctrine of the Church is, as what the Doctrine
of the Scripture is; and therefore if their Pastor should err damnably in
expounding to them what the Church teaches, as it is supposable he may if he be
not infallible, there is no Remedy but they must err damnably in believing
whatsoever their Pastor teaches. But we are farther told, that it is sufficient
for the People that they believe in the gross that whatsoever the Church
teaches is true, and that as for the particulars there is no Necessity that
they should be informed about them; because he who believes that all that the
Church teaches is true, implicitly believes all that is necessary, seeing the
Church teaches all that is necessary. But the mischief of it is that this
compendious Way of Belief is utterly insignificant, and does no way comport
with the Design and Intention of a Christian's Faith. For God does not require
our Faith merely for its own sake, but in order to a farther End, that it may
purify our Hearts, and Influence our Lives and Manners; that is, that the
Matters which we believe might by being believed by us affect our Wills, and
continually move and persuade us to abstain from all Ungodliness and Worldly
Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World; and
if our Faith has not this Effect upon us, St. James assures us that it is a
dead Faith, and will profit us nothing. But how is it possible that our
believing such and such Propositions should move and persuade us, if we do not
know what those Propositions are, and what is the true Sense and Meaning of
them? What Man can be persuaded by such Proposals as he does not understand,
and of which he has no Manner of explicit Knowledge? An Heathen that believes
that whatsoever God teaches is true does implicitly believe that Jesus Christ
came from God to reveal his Will to Mankind, because it is certain that God
teaches this; but what is he the better for this his implicit Belief? What
Influence can it have upon his Heard and Manners, who perhaps never heard of
Jesus Christ, nor of any one Proposition which he revealed to the World? And so
he who believes that whatsoever the Church teaches is true, does implicitly
believe that there shall be a future Judgment, a Resurrection of the Dead, and
an everlasting State of Happiness or Misery after Death, because all these
Things the Church teaches; but if he never hear of them, or has no explicit
Knowledge and Belief of them, how is it possible they should operate on his
Will and Affections, or ever persuade him to be the better Man or the better
Christian? And the same is to be said of all the other articles of
Christianity. So that either we must believe to no Purpose, and content our
selves with an insignificant Faith that will not at all avail us; or take up
our Faith upon Trust from fallible Teachers who may mislead us into damnable
Errors, and if they should, we must be liable to answer for it in our Persons,
and at our own eternal peril; or, which is the Truth of the Case, we must be
allowed to enquire, and judge for our selves at least in all Things necessary
to our eternal Salvation. Seeing therefore there are many Things in Scripture
which the Scripture it self obliges me upon Pain of Damnation to believe; it
hence necessarily follows, that so far forth as the Scripture obliges me to
believe what it teaches, it obliges me to understand what it teaches, otherwise
I must believe I know not what, which is impossible; and so far as the
Scripture obliges me to understand what it teaches, it must oblige me to
search, enquire, and judge what it teaches; because I cannot understand without
enquiring and judging: But how can I enquire what the Scripture teaches if I
cannot be admitted to read and consult the Scripture? And so again, there are
many Duties in Scripture which the Scripture it self obliges me to practice
upon pain of eternal Damnation; but how can it oblige me to Practice what it
does not oblige me to Understand; or how can it oblige me to Understand what it
does not oblige me to enquire after? But how can I enquire what it is that the
Scripture obliges me to Practice, when I am forbid all access to it, and it is
locked up from me in an unknown Tongue? In short therefore, seeing the Things
contained in Scripture are of the highest Moment to the People, and it is as
much as their Souls are worth not to Believe and Practice what it Teaches; and
seeing they can neither Believe nor Practice what they do not understand; it is
of infinite concern to them so far at least to Read, Consult, and Understand
the Scripture, as they stand obliged to Believe and Practice its Doctrines and
Precepts.

6. And lastly, From the Universal Sense of the Primitive Church in this
matter, it is also evident, that the People are obliged to read or acquaint
themselves with the Holy Scripture. For the Primitive Church for above six
hundred years were so far from debarring the People the use of the Scripture,
that it continually urged and pressed it upon them as a matter of indispensable
Obligation. For so Origin wishes, That all would do as it is written, viz.
Search the Scriptures. So also Clemens Alexandrinus, Hearken ye that are afar
off, hearken ye that be near; the Word of God is hid from no man: it is a Light
common to all men, and there is no Darkness in it. So also St. Austin In Orat.
adhort. ad Gent.
, Think it not sufficient that ye hear the Scriptures in the Church, but do you
also read the Scriptures your selves in your own Houses, or get some other to
read them to you. So also St. Jerome In Psalm. 86.
, The Lord has spoken to us by his Gospel, not that a few, but all should
understand. And elsewhere, speaking of the Women that were at Bethlehem with
Paula, It was not lawful, says he, for any one of all the Sisters to be
ignorant of the Psalms, nor to pass over any day without learning some part of
the Scriptures. And elsewhere Ep. ad Coloss. c. 3.
, We are taught, says he, That the Lay People ought to have the Word of God
not only sufficiently, but also with abundance, that so they may be able to
teach and counsel others. So also St. Chrysostom Ep. ad Colos. Hom. 9.
, Hear me O Laity, get ye the Bible the most wholesome remedy for the Soul; and
if ye will no more, at least get the New Testament, St. Paul's Epistles, and the
Acts, that they may be your continual and earnest Teachers. And elsewhere he
affirms In Matthew. Hom. 3.
, That it is more necessary for the Lay People to read the Scriptures than
either for the Monks or Priests, or any others. And to cite no more of the
infinite Authorities of the Fathers to this purpose, St. Basil observes In
Psalm. 1.
, The Scripture of God is like an Apothecarys Shop full of Medicines of sundry
sorts, that so every Man may there choose a convenient Remedy for his Disease.
And that the People as well as the Priests were then allowed the Use of the
Bible, is evident from a notorious matter of Face; for when the Roman Emperors
endeavored to force the Christians by Persecution and Torments to deliver up
their Bibles to be burnt, that so by extinguishing those Sacred Records they
might extinguish Christianity, they examined not only the Bishops and Clergy,
but also the People of all Degrees and both Sexes; many of whom, as well Women
as Men, owned that they had Bibles, but rather chose to die than to deliver
them up; and many others, who to avoid Death, delivered up their Bibles, and
are therefore branded with the ignominious Name of Traditors, for which they
were excluded the Communion of the Church, and could not be readmitted without
a long and severe Penance. But it is impossible the People could have been
Traditors if they had had no Bibles to deliver up; and therefore being so, is
an undeniable Argument, that the People were then allowed the Use of the
Scripture as well as the Priests. And by the way, it is very strange that any
Community of Christians should think that a proper Way to extinguish Heresy,
which those Heathen Persecutors made use of to extinguish Christianity. But
that in those first Ages these People were allowed the Use of the Bible, is a
case so plain, that they who of later Ages have thought meet to repeal this
Allowance, have never been able to produce so much as one probable color of
Primitive Authority to warrant their practice. And though in other Points they
not only claim but ravish Antiquity, in despite of Modesty as well as Truth;
yet here they are so abandoned of all pretense to it, that they are not able to
produce so much as one Passage of any Primitive Father that seems to discourage
the People from Reading the Scripture, and much less that forbids them so to
do: And it is notorious to all the World, That in the Primitive Ages, when the
Latin was the Vulgar Language of the Romans, the Bible was translated into that
Language for the Use and Instruction of the People; but when through the many
Incursions of the Barbarous Nations into the Roman Empire this Language was
worn out by degrees, and instead of being the vulgar, became an unknown Tongue
to that People; the Governors of that Church, having to serve their own
secular Ends, introduced into it sundry corrupt Doctrines and Practices which
they feared the Light of the Scripture might detect to the People, they thought
it most advisable not to translate it into the New Vulgar, but to let it remain
locked up from their Cognizance in the Old Latin, which by this Time very few,
except the Clergy, understood. And when for some Time it had lain hid from them
in an unknown Tongue, they proceeded at last wholly to forbid the Use of it to
the Laity. So that about the Ninth and Tenth Ages, which all argee were
over-cast with gross Darkness and Ignorance, the Scriptures were shut up, like
the Sybilline Oracles in the Capitol, and none but the Priests were allowed to
Read and Consult them. And though upon the Commencement of the Reformation, the
Bible was for some time set forth again in sundry vulgar Languages among the
People, yet did the Guides of that Church soon find it necessary, for Defense
of their own Unscriptural Doctrines and Practices, to remit it to its old
Confinement. For First, The Council of Trent, in the Fourth Rule of their Index
Expurgatorius, forbids the Laity to read, or so much as to have the Bible in
the Vulgar Language, though translated by those of their own Church, without a
Licenee in Writing from the Bishop of the Diocese, or the Inquisitor; and this
upon Pain of not receiving Absolution of their Sins unless they delivered up
those their Bibles to their Ordinary. To which Rule, Pope Clement the Eighth
afterward added observation, That hitherto by the Command and Practice of the
Holy Roman and Universal Inquisition, the Faculty of granting such Licenses for
reading or keeping Bibles in the Vulgar Tongue, or any Summaries or Historical
Compendiums of the said Bibles, is taken away; which is to be inviolably
observed. And in the Index of Prohibited Books, published by Pope Alexander the
Seventh, not only those Bibles that are translated and printed by Heretics,
but also all Bibles in any Vulgar Tongue are absolutely forbidden. And though,
where the Reformation has prevailed, they are forced against their own Laws
more freely to indulge the Use of the Scripture to their People, yet in those
Countries where they are sole Masters this Privilege is very rarely granted.

And now being thus necessitated to deprive the People of the Light of the
Scripture, lest they should thereby discover their Errors and Corruptions, it
was necessary for them to invent some plansible Pretenses to justify a
practice so contrary both to Scripture and Primitive Antiquity, and so
enormously derogatory to the common Right of Christians; and when it must be
done, it is a very hard Case if Men of Wit and Learning cannot find something
to say for any thing. Now the two main Pretenses that are urged in this Case
are; First, That a general permission of the Use of Scripture to the People
must necessarily open a wide Door to Errors and Heresies: Secondly, That it
will prove an unavoidable occasion of great Corruptions in Manners.

1. That a general Permission of the Use of Scripture to the People must
necessarily open a wide Door to Errors and Heresies; because there are many
Things in Scripture which are hard to be understood, and which the Unlearned,
who are unqualified to understand them aright, will be apt to wrest into a
wrong Sense to their own Destruction. To which I answer,

1. That this Reason holds as good against the writing and publishing the
Scripture at first in Languages that were vulgarly known to the People, as
against the Translating them now into the vulgar Languages. For the Hebrew, in
which the Old Testament was written, was the vulgar Language of the Jews, and
the Greek in which the New Testament was written, was then the most vulgar
Language of the Jews, and Gentiles; and yet notwithstanding there were the same
hard Things then in the Scripture as now, and the People were as unlearned
then, and as apt to wrest these hard Scriptures to their own Destruction then
as now; yet God notwithstanding thought fit to write and publish it in
Languages that were most known to the People; and therefore, either we must
say, that he did not take that Care that he ought to have done to prevent
Errors and Heresies, or that this is no good Reason why the People should be
debarred of the Scripture in their own vulgar Language. For why should not the
Writing the Scriptures at first in the vulgar Languages as much open a Door to
Heresy, as the translating them afterward, seeing it is neither their being
written in the Vulgar Language, nor their being translated into the Vulgar
Language, but their being in the Vulgar Language that is here pretended to set
open this dangerous Door to Heresies.

2. This Objection strikes with equal force against God's writing and
publishing the Scripture to the People, as against their reading and consulting
it. For that God wrote these Scriptures to the People, and that in so doing, he
not only gave them a Right, but also laid on them an Obligation to Read them, I
have already showed. If therefore the Reading the Scripture by the People be
such an unavoidable In let of Error and Heresy, as this Objection pretends, it
was doubtless very unadvisedly done of God to publish such a dangerous Book to
the World; which those for whom he published, and to whom he directed it cannot
familiarly converse with without eminent Peril of being infected with Heresy.
And if the Scripture be such a quarrelsome Knife as these Men say it is, that
the People can hardly touch it without cutting their Fingers, they are
certainly more beholding to the Church for taking it from them, than they are
to God for bestowing it on them.

3. This Objection makes as much at least against the Priests Reading the
Scripture as the People. For most of those Heresies that have been broacht to
the People were first brewed by the Priests, from whose Lips the People do
commonly derive their Errors, as well as their Knowledge: Witness those famous
Heresies with which the Christian World has been so distracted from one
Generation to another, such as the Novatian, the Donatist, the Arian, the
Pelagian, the Eutichian, the Eunomian; all which Counterfeits, and a great many
more, were first coined by the Clergy, and dispersed for current Christianity
among the Laity. And therefore, if this Pretense, that the Reading of Scripture
opens a Gap to Heresy, be a sufficient Reason why the Laity should not Read
it, it is a much more sufficient Reason why the Clergy should not Read it. For
it requires Skill and Learning as well to wrest the Scripture into such false
Senses as are likely to impose upon the World, as to interpret it into its true
Sense; and I am very sure that it ordinarily requires more Wit and Art, to
extort from the Scripture probable Errors, than it does to discover by it
necessary Truth; and if so, then if the danger of letting in Heresies is a true
Reason why any should not Read it, it is much more a true Reason why the
Learned should not Read it than the Unlearned; and confequently why the Priests
should not Read it than the People, seeing the former are more qualified to
extract Heresies from it than the later. If therefore this Objection signify
any Thing, it must be this, That it is a very dangerous thing for any Body to
Read the Bible; that this same Divine Book, which God thought fit to publish to
the World, and which the Primitive Church thought fit to oblige all that were
able to Peruse and Study, is now become such a dangerous Inlet of Heresy, that
like Pandora's Box, you can no sooner open it, but Swarms of Errors and False
Doctrines will presently fly abroad into the World; so that it would be very
well for the World if it were either utterly extinguished, or hid in some
inaccessible Repository, where no Mortal Eye might ever approach it.

4 This Objection expressly contradicts our Savior, and the Primitive Fathers.
For Matt. 22.29. our Savior tells the Sadducees, who were cavilling with him
about the Resurrection; Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures. Had therefore
the Sadducees been of the same Mind with our Objectors they would doubtless
have told him, by your good Leave Sir, in this Point you your self are in an
Error, for in all Probability had we known the Scripture or been intimately
acquainted with it, we should have erred much more. Either therefore our
Savior was mistaken in charging the Error of the Sadducees upon their
Ignorance of Scripture, or our Objectors are mistaken in making it so necessary
an Expedient for the Prevention of Error to forbid the People being acquainted
with Scripture; for it is plain He and They are of quite Different Opinions in
the Case. But whatever their Opinion is, I am sure the Primitive Fathers were
of the same Opinion with our Savior: For Irenaeus writing of the Valentinian
Heretics, Lib. 3. c. 12.
All those Errors they fall into, because they know not the Scriptures. So St.
Jerome, In Ep. ad Ephesians. l. 3. c. 4.
We must search the Scriptures with all Diligence, that so as being good
Exchangers we may know the lawful Coin from the Copper. And elsewhere, That
infinite Evils arise from Ignorance of the Scriptures, and that from this Cause
the greatest Part of Heresies have proceeded. St. Chrysostom is of Opinion,
that if Men would be conversant with the Scriptures and attend to them, they
would not only not fall into Errors themselves, but be able to rescue those
that are deceived; and that the Scriptures would instruct Men both in right
Opinions, and good Life. And to name no more, Theophilact tells us, that
nothing can deceive them who search the Holy Scriptures; for that says he is
the Candle whereby the Thief is discovered. But it seems, according to Modern
Experiments, this Candle of Scripture rather serves to light the Thief into the
House, than to discover him when he is there; and therefore it is thought
necessary for honest Men's security either that it should be wholly
extinguished, or at least hindered from giving Light by being shut up in a dark
Lanthorn of an Unknown Tongue. But when they who were once the honest Men are
become the Thieves, it is no wonder that they should thus change their Note,
and complain of the Light of this Candle as dangerous to them, which heretofore
they esteemed their greatest Securith. I am sure the Reason assigined by St.
Peter, why some Men wrested the Scriptures to their own Destruction, was not
their reading the Scripture, but contrary wise their not reading it enough,
which they that are unlearned, says he, wrest to their own destruction, 2 Pet.
3.16. Unlearned in what? Why doubtless in the Holy Scripture. For as to humane
Learning, St. Peter himself was as unlearned as they; and if it were their
being unlearned in Scripture that occasioned them to wrest it into an heretical
Sense, then it is not Men's reading the Scripture that leads them into Heresy,
but their not reading it enough. To say therefore that the Peoples reading the
Scripture is an Inlet of Heresy, and to say, no it is not their reading it, but
their not reading it enough is the Inlet of Heresy, is an express
Contradiction; the former our Objectors say, the later our Savior, his
Apostles, and the Primitive Church say; and I think it is no hard Matter to
determine which of these two Contradictions we ought to believe.

5. And lastly, According to this Objection, the best Way to keep Men from
being Heretics is to deprive them of all Means of arriving at the Knowledge of
the Truth: And this, I confess, is a very certain Way: though not a very Honest
one. Let Men know nothing of Religion, and to be sure they cannot be Heretics,
it being impossible for Men to err in their Conceptions of those Things whereof
they have no Notion. Put out a Man's Eyes, and you certainly prevent his being
imposed upon by false Medium's of Sight to mistake one Color or Figure for
another; And yet I fancy most Men would think this a cruel Kind of Courtesy.
But if Men must not be allowed Scripture to instruct them in the Truth, for
this Reason; because it may occasionally mislead them into Errors and Heresies,
then they must be allowed no Means of Instruction that may occasion them to
err, and consequently no Means at all, there being no imaginable Means of
Instruction which may not be an Occasion of errors and Heresies. Is the
Scripture it self in its own Nature an Occasion of misleading Men into Heresy,
or not? If you say it is, consider before you say it, how it could consist with
the Truth and Veracity of God to publish such a Book to the World as tends in
its own Nature to seduce and mislead the Understandings of those that read it.
If you say it is not so in it self, but only that it may be so accidentally, I
would fain know what Means of Instruction is there which may not accidentally
become an Occasion of misleading Men into Heresy; and therefore if this be a
sufficient Reason to deprive Men of Scripture, it is sufficient to deprive them
of all other Means of Instruction. And seeing the Knowledge of Religion is the
Food of Men's Souls, to keep them in Ignorance for fear they should err, is to
deny them Food for fear they should surfeit. There is no doubt but Men whose
Minds are tinctured with Heretical pravity will be apt enough to extract the
Poison of Error out of the clearest Conveyances and Discoveries of Truth; but
what then? Do not bad Men ordinarily apply the best Things to the worst
purposes? If Men fall into Heresy by reading the Scripture, where lies the
Fault? not in the Scripture sure, no Christian will Pretend that; and if it be
in themselves, in their Pride, or Vainglory, or Covetousness, or Sensuality,
(as it is demonstrable it is) is it just that All should be deprived of it,
because some ill Men have made an ill Use of it? Some Men have surfeited by
Eating and Drinking, is it just that all Mankind therefore should be deprived
of Meat and Drink? Suppose a Prince, pretending to be an infallible Geographer,
should issue out a Proclamation commanding all his Subjects to travel at
Midnight, and should assign this as the Reason of it, that he had been
certainly informed that several of them had lost their Way at Noon, and wandered
into Bogs and Precipices by the Light of the Sun; would any one imagine this to
be the true Reason, or rather would not every one believe that his true Design
was to keep his People in Ignorance of the Roads and Situation of his Country,
that so they might never be able to discover the Errors of his Maps, which
would perhaps discover him to be not only a fallible Geographer, but also a
very erroneous one? And where the People are forbid traveling in the Light of
the Scripture, whatever may be pretended, wise Men will believe that the true
Reason is not to prevent the Peoples falling into Errors, but to prevent the
discovering the Errors of those to whose Guidance and Direction they are wholly
and solely subjected. And this I conceive is a sufficient Answer to the first
Objection, viz. That the Allowance of the Scripture to the People, is a
dangerous Inlet of Error and Heresy. I proceed therefore to the Second, which
is this;

Object. 2. That there are many Things recorded in Scripture which are very apt
to suggest lewd Thoughts to the People, and thereby to corrupt their Manners,
as particularly the many bad Examples therein related, which are of a very
contagious Nature, and consequently dangerous for the People to converse with.
In answer to which I desire these four Things may be seriously considered.

1. That this Objection strikes as much against the Scripture it self as
against the People's reading it. For what worse Thing can be said of the
Scripture than this, that it is such an infectious Book, so apt to excite
impure Thoughts in Men's Minds, and to kindle lewd Affections in their Hearts,
that it is by no Means fit the People should read it? Should this be said to a
Turk, or a Heathen, who had never read one Word in the Bible, he would
certainly conclude it to be nothing but a Canto of Ribaldries written for no
other End but to provoke and entertain the lascivious Inclinations of Mankind.
And certainly had our Objectors but as much Reverence for this Holy Book as
they pretend, they would rather oblige their People to read it than withold
it from them, upon a pretense that does so scandalously reflect upon its
Reputation. If there be any such Passages in Scripture as are apt to start lewd
Thoughts in Men's Minds, the utmost that can be fairly pretended, is, That those
Passages ought to have been left out of the Peoples Bibles, or at least to have
been left untranslated: But to urge this as a Reason, why all the rest of the
Scripture should be denied to the People, insinuates, as if the whole were
nothing else but a mere Kennel of contagious Obscenities. For to urge that for
a Reason, why the Scripture in general should not be read by, or to the People,
(which at most is only a Reason why some few Passages of it should not be read
by them) is to suppose the whole Scripture to be made up of such Passages as
are apt to infuse vicious Thoughts into the People; than which what can there
be supposed more false in it self, or more derogatory to the Scripture?

2. This Objection, if it proves any Thing, does as well prove that it was
unfit for God to publish the Scripture to the People, as it is for the People
to read it. For is it fit, that He, who is a God of purer Eyes than to behold
Iniquity, should publish such Things to the World as are apt to engender impure
Thoughts in Men's Minds? And yet though Men's Minds were as apt to imbibe impure
Thoughts when these Things were first published, as they are now; this hindered
not God from publishing them to the World in such languages as are best known
and understood by the People. Either therefore God did not so well know what is
apt to corrupt Men's Minds as our wise Objectors; or he was less concerned than
they to preserve them for being corrupted; or what they object is both false
and scandalous. For to say, That the wise and holy God has published such
Things to the World as his Ministers find necessary to conceal from the World,
lest its Thoughts should be corrupted by them, is in effect to say, that his
Ministers are grown wiser than he, or are more concerned for the Interest of
Holiness than he. If the Vicious Examples, for instance, that are recorded in
Scripture are more apt to deprave Men than to instruct them, what need they
have been recorded? What is there in the mere Story of Noah's Drunkenness and
Incest, and David's Adultery, considered abstractly from the good Instructions
it gives, that should move God to deliver it down to all future Posterity? If
it serve no good Ends, it is recorded to a bad purpose; and therefore, if for
this Reason, because it is apt to corrupt Men's Minds, the Church be obliged to
conceal it now, for the very same Reason God was obliged to have concealed it
for ever. Either therefore we must say that God did very ill in publishing it,
or that the Church does very ill in suppressing it; for God could have no other
End in publishing it to the World, but only to instruct the World by it. If
therefore it be not instructive, God was mistaken; but if it be, it is fit the
World should be acquainted with it.

3. That this Objection does expressly contradict the Scripture it self; For
whereas it tells us, that the bad Examples recorded in Scripture would be apt
to deprave the Peoples Minds and Manners, St. Paul tells us the quite contrary:
These Things were our Examples, to the intent we should not lust after evil
things, as they, i. e. the Israelites in the Wilderness, lusted. Neither be ye
Idolaters, as were some of them: Neither let us commit fornication as some of
them committed, and sell in one day three and twenty thousand: Neither let us
tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed of serpents:
Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were destroyed of the
destroyer: Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples; and they are
written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come, 1 Cor.
10.6, 7, 8.9, 10, 11. Whereas this Objection urges that there are sundry
Passages in Scripture which should the People read, would excite evil Thoughts
in their Minds; The same St. Paul tells us, That all Scripture is profitable,
not only for Doctrine and Reproof, but also for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, 2 Timothy 3.16. Whereas this Objection pretends, that it would be
very unsafe for young People especially, to be allowed the Scripture, because
there are several amorous Stories and Passages in it which will be apt to
suggest wanton Thoughts to their gay and amorous Fancies. David, it is plain,
was of a quite contrary Mind; for wherewith says he, shall a young man cleanse
his way? by taking heed thereto according to thy word, Psalm. 119.9. than which
two Passages what Assertions can be more contrary one to another.

4. And lastly, That supposing this Objection to be thus far true, that there
are some Passages in Scripture which may sometimes occasionally excite bad
Thoughts in Men's Minds, yet this is no just Reason why the Use of Scripture
should be forbid to the People. For every Thing which the People occasionally
make bad Uses of, is for that Reason to be forbid to them; even Prayer and the
Sacraments, and the Profession of Christianity ought to be for bidden them as
well as the Scripture, seeing of the one as well as of the other, many People
do occasionally make very bad Uses. So long as the Scripture is good in it
self, and apt in its own Nature to instruct and edify those that read it, this
is sufficient not only to warrant the Peoples Use of it, but to enjoin and
require it; and if it sometimes occasion corrupt Thoughts in corrupt Minds,
this is no more a Reason why the People should be deprived of the Light of it
than some bad Men's making ill Use of the Light of the Sun is, why the Sun
should be extinguished, or why the People should be for ever shut up from the
Light of it in dark and dismal Dungeons. But as for those very Passages in
Scripture, which do sometimes occasion ill Thoughts in Men's Minds, they are so
far from doing it of their own Natures, that as they are delivered in
Scripture, there is nothing more naturally apt to repress bad Thoughts, and to
arm and fortify Men's Minds against them. As for instance, The bad Examples
recorded in Scripture are generally delivered with infamous Characters, severe
Prohibitions, and dreadful Instances of God's Vengeance attending them, which
render them much more apt to repress than to excite evil Thoughts in Men's
Minds; to quicken them to Prayer and Watchfulness against Temptations, and when
at any Time they have been overcome by them, to encourage them to Repentance;
or when they have overcome them, to stir them up to a grateful Acknowledgment
of that preventing and assisting Grace of God, by which they have been enabled
to resist and repel them. These are the natural Uses of those bad Examples
recorded in Scripture; and therefore, if instead of Making these Uses of them,
some Men pervert them to bad Purposes, that is their Faults and not the
Scriptures. It is sufficient that the bad Examples in Scripture, as they are
there recorded, are in themselves of excellent Use to the People; but should
Men be deprived of the Use of every good Thing they abuse, I would fain know
what one good Thing would be left free to their Enjoyment. And now having
proved at large the Peoples Right and Obligation to Use and Search the Holy
Scripture, and answered the main Objections against it; I shall conclude with
these two Inferences from the whole.

1. If he People are obliged to acquaint themselves with Scripture, then they
are obliged to receive upon the Authority of Scripture those Divine Truths
which it proposes to their Belief. For to what other end should we be obliged
to read and consult the Word of God, but only that we may learn from it what is
his Mind and Will? but how should we learn from Scripture what God's Mind is,
if we are not to believe what he therein declares upon Scripture Authority? If
I must not believe when I read the Scripture that this is God's Mind, because
the Scripture says so, it is impossible I should ever learn God's Mind by
reading it; and consequently I am obliged to read it to no Purpose: For there
is nothing can teach me what God's Mind is, but that which gives me sufficient
Ground to believe that what it teaches is the Mind of God. When therefore I
read the Scripture, and find such a Proposition plainly asserted in it, is this
a sufficient Ground or no for me to believe it to be the Mind of God? If it be,
then the Authority of Scripture is a sufficient Ground for my Belief; If it be
not, then the Scripture cannot teach me what God's Mind is; because it cannot
give me sufficient Ground to believe any one Proposition in it to be the Mind
of God. We are told indeed, that we are not to receive the Sense of the
Scripture from the Scripture, but from the Church, who alone has Authority to
Expound it to us, and whose Expositions in all Matters of Faith are infallible.
But if this be so, to what end should we read the Scripture, seeing the only
End of Reading is to learn the Sense of what we read, which according to this
Principle is not to be learnt from Scripture? So that though there be no other
wise End of reading the Scripture, but only to learn from it what it means, yet
it seems for Men to read it for this End is a perfect Labor in Vain; seeing it
is not from the Scripture but from the Church that they are to learn the
Meaning of Scripture. For as for the Scripture, if these Men are to be
believed, it is nothing but a heap of unsensed Characters; so they expressly
term it: But what do they mean by it? Is it that the Scripture consists of a
company of Letters, and Syllables, and Words, that carry with them no
determinate Sense, that God Almighty has written and published a Book to the
World that means nothing? If so, then when the Church by its infallible
Authority pretends to expound the Scripture, Her meaning is not to expound the
Sense of it, but to impose a Sense on it which was never in it; for how can She
expound the Sense of a Book which has no Sense in it? If the Church is to
expound the Sense of Scripture, the Scripture must have a certain determinate
Sense in it before She expounds it; for to expound the Sense of That which has
no Sense, is Nonsense: And if the Scripture has a certain Sense in it
antcedently to the Church's Exposition of it, why do they call it a parcel of
Vnsensed Characters? If their Meaning be only this, that the Sense of Scripture
as it is delivered in Scripture, is so obscure and ambiguous, that without the
infallible Exposition of the Church, we can never be certain what it is;
besides, that this is notoriously false, the Scripture in all necessary Points
both of Faith and Manners, being so very plain and clear, that any Man that
reads it with an unprejudiced Mind, may be as certain of the Sense of it, as he
can be of the Sense of any Writing, and consequently of the Sense of any
written Exposition of the Church; besides this, I say, it is evident, that
whatever these Men pretend, it is not merely because of the obscurity of
Scripture that they oblige Men to ground their Faith upon the Church, and not
upon the Scripture. For they own as well as we, that in many Things the
Scripture is very plain and clear, and yet they will by no Means allow Men to
ground their Belief of these things upon the Authority of Seripture, but all
must be resolved into the Authority of the Church. By which it is evident, That
if all the Scripture were as plain as the plainest Scriptures, they would still
contend for the Necessity of Men's relying upon the Church, and not upon the
Scripture; and consequently that the true Reason why they contend for it, is
not because the Scripture is obscure, but because they are resolved to advance
their Church's Authority. We own as well as they, that where the Scripture is
obscure, Men ought to be guided by the Authoty of the Church, which we freely
allow to be the best Expositor of Scripture. But the true State of the
Difference between them and us, is this, That whereas we require plain Men to
judge of plain Things with their own Understandings, and all Men so far forth
as they are capable, to judge for themselves in Matters of Religion, and not
content themselves to see with the Church's Eyes, where they are able to see
with their own; nothing will satisfy these Men, but to have all Men, as well
Wise as Simple, surrender up their Faith and Judgment to the Church, and wink
hard, and believe whatever the Church believes, purely because the Church
believes it. Whatever they pretend therefore, the Truth of the Case is this;
They will by no means allow us to believe upon the Authority of Scripture; not
because the Scripture is obscure, (though this they pretend, for were it never
so plain the Case would be the same) but because they are sensible that this
will inevitably subvert their usurped Dominion over the Faith and Consciences
of Men. But we must believe upon the Authority of the Church; and who is this
Church I beseech you? Why they themselves are this Church. So that whereas God
has published a Book called the Bible, on purpose to declare his Mind and Will
to the World, here are started up a Sort of Men that call themselves the
Church, who very gravely tell us; Sirs, You must not so much as look into this
Book, or if you do, must not believe any one Word in it upon its own Credit and
Authority. For though we do confess it is the Word of God, yet we are the sole
Judges of the Sense of it; and therefore whatsoever we decalre is its Sense,
how unlikely soever it may seem to you, you are bound in Conscience to receive
and believe it for this very Reason, because wedeclare it. In short, you must
resign up your Eyes, your Faith, your Reason, and Understandings to us, and see
only with our Eyes, and believe only with our Faith, and judge only with our
Judgment; and whithersoever we shall think fit to lead you, you must tamely
follow us without presuming to examine whether we lead you right or wrong. But
yet after all to induce us thus to inslave our Understandings to them they
themselves are fain to appeal to Scripture, and allow us in some Things to
judge of the Sense of it, and to believe those Things upon its Authority. For
no wise and honest Man will ever believe either that They are the Church, or
the infallible Judges of the Sense of Scripture without some Proof and
Evidence;and for this this they are fain to produce several Texts of Scripture,
such as, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church. Now
supposing that to be true, which is notoriously false, viz. that those Texts do
necessarily imply that They are the only true Catholic Church, and that as
such they are constituted by God infallible Judges of Scripture; yet before I
can believe so, I must judge for my self whether this be the Sense of them or
no; and if I judge it is, I must believe that they are the Church, and
infallible upon the Scripture's Authority and not theirs; for their Authority
is the Thing in debate, and I cannot believe upon it before I believe it. So
then, though we must believe nothing else upon Scripture Authority, yet upon
this very Authority we must believe that they are the Church, and that they are
infallible, which are the fundamental Principles of their Religion; that is to
say, we must believe as much upon Scripture Authority as will sever their turn,
and no more. But may I be certain of the Truth of these two Fundamental
Principles upon Scripture Authority, or no? If I may, why may I not as well be
infallibly certain upon the same Authority of other Principles of Christianity
as well as those, seeing there are no common Principles of Chrstian Religion
but what are at least as plainly reealed in Scripture as these. But this will
spoil all; for if Men may be infallibly certain of the Principles of Religion
upon Scripture Authority, what will become of the Necessity of Men's relying
upon the Church, which is founded upon this Principle that Men can arrive at no
infallible Certainty in Religion by relying upon the Authority of Scripture, or
indeed any other Authority but the Church's? But if I cannot be infallibly
certain of those two Principles, viz. that they are the Church, and Infallible,
by those Authorities of Scripture which they urge to prove them, how can I be
infallibly certain of any Thing that they declare and define? For if I am not
certain that they are the Church, for all I know the Church, may be infallible,
and yet they may be mistaken; and if I am not certain that they are infallible,
for all I know they may be the Church, and yet still be mistaken. In short, no
Authority can render me infallibly certain, but that which is infallible; no
Infallibility can render me infallibly certain, but that of which I have an
infallible Certainty. Either therefore the Scripture can render me infallibly
certain of the Infallibility of their Church (and if it cannot, I am sure
nothing can) or it cannot; if it can, why may it not as well render me
infallibly certain of other Principles of Christianity which are at least as
plainly revealed in it as that? If I cannot, how can I be infallibly certain
that any Thing she defines and declares to me is true? If then the Authority of
Scripture can give us an infallible Certainty, we have as just a Pretense to it
as They, it being upon this Authority that we ground our Faith; if it cannot,
neither they nor we can justly pretend to it; because they cannot otherwise be
infallibly certain of their own Infallibility but by Scripture. But the Truth
of it is, God never intended either that they or we should be infallibly
certain in the Mtters of our Religion; for after all the Means of Certainty
that he has given us he still supposes that we may err, and plainly tells us
that there must be Heresies, and that even from among the Members of the true
Church, where infallible Certainty is (if it be any where) there should arise
false Teachers who should bring in damnable Doctrines; which could never have
happened if he had left any such Means to his Church as should render her
Children infallibly certain. All that he designed was to leave us such
sufficient Means of Certainty in Religion, as that we might not err either
dangerously or damnably without our own Fault. He has left us his Word, and in
that has plainly discovered to us all that is necessary for us to believe in
order to eternal Life. He has left us a standing Ministry in his Church to
explain his Word to us, and to guide us in the Paths of Righteousness and
Truth; but still he requires us to search the one, and attend to the other with
honest, humble, and teachable Minds; and if we do not, we may err not only
dangerously but damnably, and it is but fit and just we should. But if we
diligently search the Scripture, and faithfully rely upon its Authority,
without doing of which we search it in vain; if we sincerely attend to the
public Ministry, with Minds prepared to receive the Truth in the Love of it;
though we may possibly err in Matters of less Moment, yet as to all Things
necessary to our eternal Salvaion our Faith shall be inviolably secured; and
this is as much as any honest Man needs, or as any honest Church can promise.

2. From hence also I infer that in the Matters of our Faith and Religion, God
does expect that we should make use of our own Reason and Judgment. For to what
end should he put us upon searching the Scriptures, but that thereby we may
inform our selves what those Things are which he has required us to believe
and practice? But if it were his Mind that we should wholly rely upon the
Authority of our Church, or of our Spiritual Guides, and submit our Faith to
their Dictates without any Examination, what a needless and impertinent
Employment would this be for us, to search and consult the Scriptures? Consult
them, for what, if we are not to follow their Guidance and Direction, and to
take the Measures of our Faith and Manners from them? And if for this End God
has obliged us to consult them (as to be sure it can be for no other End) then
he has obliged us to employ our own Reason and Judgment, to consider what they
say, and enquire what they mean; otherwise he has obliged us to consult them
to no Purpose. It is as evident therefore that God will have us use our own
Reason and Judgment in discerning what we are to believe, and what not, in
Religion, and not lazily rely upon others to see and discern, and believe for
us, as it is that he would have us search and consult the Scriptures; and that
I think is evident enough, from what has been said, to any one that is not
resolved to admit of a Conviction. And indeed seeing our Reason is the noblest
Faculty we have, it would be very strange if God should not allow it to
intermeddle in the highest and most important Affair wherein he has engaged
us; and seeing it is our Reason only that renders us capable of Religion, what
an odd Thing would it be for God to for bid us making use of our Reason in the
most important Concerns of Religion, that is, in distinguishing what is true
Religion from what is false, and what we ought to believe from what we ought to
reject? I know it is pretended by those who urge the absolute Necessity of
submitting our Reason to the Church, that they allow Men to make Use of their
own Reason and Judgment in discovering which the true Church is, and that all
they contend for is only this, that when once Men have found the true Church
they ought to enquire no farther, but immediately to deliver up their Reason
and Understanding to it, and believe every Thing it believes without any
farther Examination. So that before Men come into their Church, it seems they
are allowed to see for themselves, but after they are in, they must wink and
follow their Guides, and depute them to see and understand for them; which to
such Men as are not quite sick of their own Reason and Understandings should
methinks be a great Temptation to keep them out of their Church for ever: For
if I may judge for my self while I am out of it, but must not while I am in it,
I must be very fond of parting with my own Eyes and Reason if ever I come into
it at all. But suppose I was always in it, and had been bred up in its
Communion from my Infancy, will they allow me when I come to the full use of my
Reason fairly to question whether theirs be the only true Church or no, and to
hear the Reasons, and examine the Scriptures, and consult the Doctors on both
sides? No, by no means; this I am forbid under the penalty of being deprived of
the Benefit of Priestly Absolution. So that in short they will allow me to make
Use of my Reason if I have been bred an Heretic in order to my Reconciliation
to their Church, but if I have never been an Heretic I must never use my
Reason to examine the Truth either of my Church or Religion; that is to say, I
may use my Reason when there is no other Remedy, and I must continue a Heretic
if I do not: But it were much better that I had never had Occasion to use my
Reason at all. So that according to these Men the Use of our Reason in Religion
is only the least of two Evils; it is not so bad as to continue a Heretic, but
if I had never been one it would be very bad, and a certain Way to make me one;
which methinks looks very odd, that the Use of my Reason should be necessary to
reduce me from Heresy, and the disuse of it as necessary, when I am reduced, to
preserve me from relapsing into Heresy. It Is a memorable Passage of the Bishop
of St. Mark in the Council of Trent, that Seculars are obliged humbly to obey
that Doctrine of Faith which is given them by the Church, without disputing or
thinking farther of it. Where by the Church he means the Clergy assembled in
that Council. So that according to this Man's Doctrine the Faith of the People
is a mere Beast of Burden, that right or wrong must bear all the Load that the
Priests shall agree to lay upon it; and though it should feel it self oppressed
by them with never such gross Contradictions or Absurdities, it must think no
farther of it, but tamely trudg on without starting or bogling. At this Rate
what Tricks may not the Priests play with the Faith of the People? Let them
invent what Doctrines they please to serve the Interest of their own Ambition
and Covetousness, the People must believe them without asking why; or if they
should ask why, they must expect no other Answer but this, because we have
thought to define and declare them. For it is by no means allowable that the
People should exercise any private Judgment of their own, about Matters of
Faith; no, I confess it is not, where the Matters proposed to their Faith are
false and erroneous; because it is a thousand to one but one time or other the
People will discover the Frauds and Impostures of the Priests, and this would
spoil all. But if the Matters of Faith are true, in all Probability the farther
the People enquire into them the better they will be satisfied about them; and
if in the Exercise of their private Judgments they should in some particulars
err, that is far more tolerable than that they should be utterly deprived of
the Means of being able to give an Answer to every one that asks them a Reason
of the Hope that is in them. But when God has given the People reasonable
Faculties on purpose that by them they may be able to distinguish what is true
from what is false, for any Party of Men to forbid them the Use of these
Faculties in distinguishing what is true from what is false in Religion, in
which above all Things they are most highly concerned, it is a most injurious
Usurpation upon the common Rights of humane Nature. For by this Means our best
Faculty is rendered useless to us in our greatest Concerns; and whereas God gave
it to us on purpose to guide and direct us, we are utterly deprived of it is
Guidance where we have most need of it, and where it will prove most fatal to
us if we should happen to err and go astray.

A DISSUASIVE FROM APOSTASY.
1 TIMOTHY I. 19. Holding faith, and a good conscience; which some having put
away, concerning faith have made shipwreck.


THese Words are a part of St. Paul's Charge to his Son Timothy, wherein he
Pathetically Exhorts him as a Valiant Bishop, to take all possible Care to
preserve the Purity of the Christian Doctrine in his Diocese of Ephesus, which
at that time abounded with false Teachers, whose Business it was to sow the
Tares of Heresy and false Doctrine in that large and fruitful Field, the
Cultivation whereof St. Paul had committed to his Charge. And that he might
discharge this Office the more effectually, the Apostle warns him in the first
Place to take Care of himself, that he did not suffer his own Faith and Manners
to be depraved and corrupted by those lewd and irreligious Principles which
those Antichristian Seminaries were then scattering among his People; that so
he might be an Example to his Flock, as well as a Teacher of pure and undefiled
Religion. And this, v. 18. he presses upon him from the Consideration of what
had been foretold of him by Divine Inspiration, before ever he entered upon his
Ministry; viz. That he should war a good warfare, that is, prove a constant and
courageous Champion of the Christian Faith; which Prophesies, he exhorts him to
use his utmost endeavor to verify both in his Profession and Practice, by
holding, or as it is in the Original, (...), having, or keeping faith and a
good conscience; which later, viz. a good conscience, some having put away,
concerning the former, viz. Faith, have made shipwreck.

Before we proceed to the Design of these Words, it will be necessary briefly
to explain some Terms in them; as, 1. What is meant by Faith. 2. What by a good
Conscience. 3. What by putting away a good Conscience: And 4. What by making
shipwreck of the Faith.


1. As for the first, What is here meant by keeping the Faith? I answer, By
this Phrase Faith, we are to understand the Christian Creed, or summary of
those necessary and essential Doctrines whereof the Christian Religion is
composed: For at that time there was little else professed and taught in the
Christian Churches, but only the fundamental Principles of Christianity,
together with the nearest and most immediate Inferences from them; so that few
then mis-believed but such as mis-believed in Fundamentals, and every Error in
Doctrine was generally a Heresy. The Christian Faith in those Days lay within
a narrow compass, and so it continued till the Wantonness and Curiosity of
succeeding Ages started disputable Opinions, and as they prevailed, adopted
them into the Family of Faith; insomuch, that in process of Time, sundry
Opinions were received, that were never so much as heard of, in the Apostolical
Age; and as soon as they were received, they were presently declared necessary
Articles. And as for the contradictory Opinions, though Christianity was little
or nothing concerned whether they were true or false; yet they seldom underwent
any milder Name than Heresy, or gentler Doom than Damnation; which has been
one of the grand Occasions of all the Ruptures and Divisions that have happened
in the Christian World. But as for the Faith which the Apostle here speaks of,
it was of a much less Bulk than what it is now arrived to by rolling through
the wild Opiniatry of Sixteen Disputation Ages, which by degrees have swelled
it from a short script into a large Volume. For if we look into the New
Testament, and into the Writings of the most Primitive Fathers, we shall find
the Sums of Christian Faith therein contained, consisting of very few Articles,
and those such only as are essential to Christian Religion, and such as wherein
almost all the differing Persuasions of Christians do to this Day concenter. To
hold the Faith therefore is to persevere immovably in the Profession of the
true Christian Doctrine, so far as in us lies, and not to be prevailed upon to
desert or forsake it, either through Fear of Persecution, or Hope of Temporal
Advantage, or the Knavish Arts and Sly Insinuations of false Teachers.

2. The second Term here to be explained, is, What is meant by keeping a good
Conscience? Conscience in general is nothing but our practical Judgment
directing us what we ought to do, and what to avoid, and approving or
reproving, according as we follow its Directions, or run counter to them. The
Conscience therefore is good or bad, according as the Directions are which it
gives for the Government of our Lives and Actions. If our Judgment be false and
erroneous, and directs us to do what we ought to avoid, or to avoid what we
ought to do, it is a bad Conscience, that instead of being a Light to guide our
Steps in the Paths of Righteousness, is only a wandering Night-fire that leads
us into Bogs and Quagmires. As on the contrary, A good Conscience is our
practical Judgment well informed, and truly directing us in the Course of our
Actions what we ought to do, and what to avoid: For a good Conscience is the
true Echo of God within us, that faithfully resounds his Voice, and upon all
Opportunities of Action, repeats after him to our Wills and Affections. To keep
a good Conscience therefore implies two Things: First, To maintain in our Minds
a true Sense of Good and Evil, and so far forth as in us lies, to preserve our
practical Judgment pure from all false Principles of Action, and not to suffer
either our vicious Inclinations or worldly Interest to warp and seduce it, and
cause it to mistake Evil for Good, and Good for Evil. Secondly, It implies our
following the Dictates and Directions of a good Conscience, our doing what it
bids, and abstaining from what it forbids, and faithfully resigning our selves
to its Conduct and Government, and not to be prevailed upon by any Temptation
whatsoever to act counter to its Sense and Persuasion. In short, To keep a good
Conscience is to live in a strict Conformity to the Dictates of a well-informed
Judgment, and not to allow our selves in any Course of Action which this
Vice-God within us forbids or disapproves.

3. The Third Term to be explained in the Text, is, What is meant by putting
away a good Conscience; which being directly opposed here to keeping a good
Conscience, must denote the Contraries to it. To put away a good Conscience
therefore is either, first, to corrupt our own Judgment of Things and Actions
out of vicious Affection or worldly Interest, and impose upon our selves false
Notions of Good and Evil; or, secondly, to act directly contrary to our Sense
and Persuasion; to leave undone those Things which our own Conscience tells us
we ought to do, and to do those things which it tells us we ought not to do. In
short, to put away a good Conscience is to live in any known Course of Sin,
either of Omission or Commission; to practice Contradictions to our own
Judgments, and to follow the Inclinations of our Wills against the Light and
Conviction of our Consciences.

4. The last Enquiry, is, What is here meant by making shipwreck of the Faith?
which being here set in Opposition to holding or keeping the Faith, must
signify oppositely, and consequently must denote not holding and keeping it;
or which is the same thing, losing and abandoning it: For in this Allegory, the
true Christian Faith is represented as a Ship, and a good Conscience, or a pure
and holy Life as the Pilot, that steers and governs it. And indeed, in that
State of Things there was no other Pilot, but Purity of Conscience and Holiness
of Life was able to conduct and preserve this Ship, and carry it safe through
those incessant Storms of Persecution, wherein at that time it was tossed and
agitated. For when Christians have once thrown off the Obligations of a good
Conscience, by abandoning themselves to a wicked and dissolute Life, what is
there left to restrain them from abandoning their Faith when it stands in
Competition with their Worldly Ease and Interest? And though there should be no
Competition between their Faith and Interest, but they might freely enjoy them
both without any disturbance; yet their wicked Lives will naturally tempt them
to corrupt their Faith with wicked Principles; of which later in the next
Verse, he gives an eminent instance in Hymenaeus, who had not wholly deserted
Christianity, but only renounced one Fundamental Article of it, viz. The
Resurrection of the Dead: As of the former, he gives another Instance in
Alexander, who as it seems probable, had through the Fear of Persecution
deserted Christianity it self.

The Words thus explained may be resolved into this Sense, That Men's living
wickedly against the Convictions and Obligations of their Conscience, does very
much expose them to Apostasy from true Religion into gross and impious Errors.
Thus to the love of money, which is the root of all evil, the Apostle
attributes Men's Erring from the Faith, 1 Timothy 6.10. And that which exposed
those silly women, 2 Timothy 3.6. to the Seduction of false Teachers, was their
being laden with sins, and led away with diverse lusts. And the same Apostle
ascribes Demas's Apostasy to his Covetousness, or inordinate love of this
present World, 2 Timothy 4.10. But that I may evince this Truth more fully, I
shall give you some particular Instances of the mighty Tendencies there are in
every vicious Course of Life to Error and Apostasy from true Religion.

1. It corrupts and debauches Men's Reason and Understanding. 2. It renders the
Principles of true Religion uneasy to there Minds. 3. It deprives Men of the
highest Encouragements to Constancy and Stedfastness in Religion. 4. It weakens
the natural Force of their Consciences, which is the greatest Restraint from
Apostasy. 5. It strengthens the Temptations to Apostasy. 6. It provokes God to
give us up to the Power of Delusion.
1. Living in any known and willful Course of Sin, corrupts and debauches Men's
Reason and Understandings. So long as a Man lives in any known Sin he does not
only live without, but against his Reason, which instead of being the Guide of
his Actions, has nothing at all to do with them, but like an idle Spectator,
does only behold the brutish Scene without any Part or Concern in it. And
whilst a Man thus abandons himself to the Government of his own blind Will, and
lives not only in the perpetual Neglect, but Contempt of his Reason, it is
impossible for him not to wast and impair it. For as our rational Faculties are
improved and perfected by Exercise, so they naturally languish and decay,
through Disuse and inactivity; and consequently the less Use we make of them in
the Government of our Lives and Actions, which is their proper Office and
Employment, like standing Waters they must corrupt and putrify. And indeed
there is no impure Lust but does by its own natural Efficacy disable Men's
Reason and Understanding: For while we are in these Bodies, our Mind is fain to
work by bodily Instruments, and to make Use of Brains, and Blood, and Spirits,
in all its Operations; and according as their Temper is good or bad, its
Operations will be more or less perfect: But while a Man indulges himself in
any impure Affection, that will naturally distemper these Organs of his Mind,
and indispose them for the Use of his Reason. For so Madness, which is such a
Distemperature of the Brain, and Blood, and Spirits does wholly alienate them
from the Use of Reason and Discourse, is usually found to be the Effect of some
wild and extravagant Affection, such as Pride, or Covetousness, Anger, or
Fearfulness, Jealousy, or Lust; and if these Passions, being once arrived to
their utmost Rage and Excess, do so often run into downright Madness and
Distraction, to be sure every inordinate Degree of them must be a Tendency
toward it, a great Disturbance of Mind, though not a total Distraction; and
how much they exceed their due Bounds and Measures, by so much they must taint
and vitiate these necessary Instruments of our Mind and Reason. Thus every
inordinate Lust does by a natural Influence disturb Men's Reason, and sully the
clearness of their discerning Faculties. So that what Clearness is to the Eye
of the Body, that Purity from vicious Affection is to the Eye of the Mind; it
brightens its Apprehensions, and renders its Conceptions of Things more quick,
distinct, and vigorous: Whereas on the contrary, all disorderly Affection does
more or less cloud and disturb the Brain, chill or inflame the Spirits, hurry
them into tumultuous Motions, or render them listless and unactive; by which
continual Disorders, our discerning Faculties must by Degrees be extremely
weakened and confounded. And whilst the Mind is thus lost in the Fogs of
inordinate Affection, it is an easy Matter to seduce and mislead it, it being
through the Dimness of its sight apt to be imposed upon by false Colors, and
tinctured with Prejudice and undue Apprehensions of Things. Weak Minds are
easily abused, especially in Matters of Religion, which being placed beyond the
Prospect of Sense, require a severer Attention in order to the forming of right
Apprehensions concerning them; and therefore the more Men weaken their
Understandings by their Lusts, the more they must be exposed to Errors and
Delusions. But them,

2. Living in any known Course of Sin, renders the Principles of true Religion
uneasy to Men's Minds. Whilst a Man leads a wicked Life, his Religious
Principles, if they are pure and true, will perpetually reproach and upbraid
him: For there are no Contraries in Nature more irreconcilable to one another
than true Faith and bad Manners; the great Design of all true Faith being to
move and persuade Men to abstain from all Ungodliness, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present World. If therefore a Man's Faith be
true and genuine, he cannot live wickedly without acting against the full
Persuasion of his own Mind, which must necessarily render him very uneasy; for
in this State of Things he acts with a self-condemning Judgment, and every
Compliance with his Inclination sets him at odds with his Reason; all the while
he is meditating any wicked Design, he struggles with his Conscience, and
confronts and outrages his own Convictions; and when he has acted it, every
Reflection he makes on it is a bitter Invective against himself: Thus so long
as the Principles of true Religion possess his Mind, he finds himself
continually hagg'd and oppressed by them; they sit as an uneasy Load upon his
Soul, and will not suffer him to Sin in quiet, but perpetually cause his sinful
Delights to go off with an ungrateful Farewell, and recoil upon him in many a
sickly Qualm and Convulsion. In which State of Things he has no other Remedy,
but either to forsake his Principles, or his Lusts; or to live in perpetual
Variance with himself; and therefore, if he still resolve to Sin on, in all
probability he will soon grow quite weary of true Religion, and quit his Mind
as soon as possibly he can of those stern and inflexible Principles which
create these Discords in his Breast. And whilst he is in this Temper it will be
an easy matter to pervert him to any Religion that will give Ease to his
straitlaced Conscience, and cast a more favorably Aspect on his Lust: for
being resolved to follow his vicious Inclinations he now sees through them, and
understands by them; and whilst his Mind runs upon the false Biass of his
Lusts, that Religion which is most grateful to them will seem most reasonable
to him. Show him a way how he may worship God acceptably without the Expense of
a strict Attention, and the inward Devotion of a pure Heart, and heavenly
Affections; merely by numbering so many Prayers on a String of Beads, by seeing
a Priest act over such a Set of Ceremonies, and hearing him in varied Tones
sometimes pronounce, and sometimes murmur a Form of Words in an Unknown
Language; and though at first view it may seem very absurd to him, yet the very
Looseness and Carnality will be apt to engage his Affections to it, and then
they by degrees will go near to wheedle his Understanding into a more
favorable Opinion of it. Propose to him an Expedient how he may go to heaven
at last without undergoing the Severities of a sincere Repentance and
Amendment; tell him there is a certain Church in the World whose Priests, if he
confess his Sins to them with any Degree of Sorrow and Remorse, have full Power
to Pardon and Absolve him; so that if he do but take Care not to die without
Confession, however he lives he cannot miscarry for ever. He may indeed go into
a very hot Place called Purgatory, and there suffer a while very grievous
Things before he get to Heaven; but if instead of parting with his Lusts while
he lives, he will part with his Money when he dies, he may at easy Rates
purchase of that Church such a Number of Masses, Requiems, and Indulgencies, as
will in all Probability soon procure his Dismission from those temporary
Sufferings into eternal Happiness: How odly soever this Doctrine may appear to
his Reason, to be sure it will be charming enough to his Lusts; and when once a
Man's Lusts are retained the Cause is half carried at the Bar of his Judgment.
And so in all other Instances it is a great Disadvantage to true Religion, and
as great an Advantage to false, that Men's Faith and Reason are so much swayed
and biased by their Lusts. For though there is no Religion can be true but
what is pure and holy, yet it is the Holiness of true Religion that does
provoke their Lusts against it, and it is their Lusts that do provoke their
Reason; and when all is done there is nothing does more strongly incline, or
frequently pervert depraved and wicked Minds to false Religion than its
Compliance with their vicious Affections, though this very Thing is one of the
most certain Signs in Nature of its Falsehood.

3. Living in any known Course of Sin deprives Men of the greatest
Encouragements to Constancy and Steadfastness in the true Religion: For
doubtless the highest Encouragement to Perseverance in the Truth against all
Oppositions and Temptations, is the Hope of those glorious Rewards that await
them in the World to come. 'Twas this that guarded the Faith of the ancient
Martyrs safe through all the Rage and Cruelty of their Persecutors, their
having an Eye to the Recompense of Reward, the Sight of which inspired the
drooping Souls with an invincible Courage; made them despise Racks, and Wheels,
and Flames, and exalt and triumph under the most exquisite Torments. And indeed
what less Encouragement than the Hope of being eternally happy within a few
Moments could have enabled a Company of tender Virgins, delicate Matrons,
infirm and aged Bishops to endure those long and dolorous Martyrdoms, as many
times they did, when their Tormentors took their turns from Morn to Night, and
plied them with all Kinds of Tortures till oftentimes they were forced to give
over; and confess themselves overcome either through Weariness or Compassion?
But now by indulging our selves in any known Course of Sin we throw away this
Sovereign Cordial, and leave our selves naked and destitute of all the mighty
Supports it is able to give us under any Temptation to Apostasy. For how can we
hope for any Good from God, and much less for so great a Good as a Heaven of
immortal Joys amounts to, whilst we persist in open Rebellion against him;
especially when he has expressly suspended this mighty Recompense upon our
constant and faithful Obedience to his Will, and told us plainly before hand,
that we might know what to trust to, that if we fail of this he will be so far
from admitting us into that Place and State of Blessedness, that he will banish
us for ever from his Presence into outer Darkness, and eternal Wretchedness and
Despair? When by wilful Sin therefore we have cast away our hope of Heaven,
what have we left to support our Constancy to the Truth if ever we should be
called to suffer for it? How can it be expected that rather than renounce our
Religion, we should be contented to part with our Goods, or Liberties, or
Lives, when all our Hope is shut up in this Life, and we have no Prospect of
Compensation either here or hereafter? If ever therefore we would be steadfast
to the Truth against all Temptations, we must above all Things take Care by a
holy Life to cherish and keep alive the Hopes of Heaven in our Breasts, which
is the only Anchor that can hold and secure us in a stormy Sea from making
Shipwreck of our Faith.

4. Living in any known Course of Sin weakens the natural Force of Men's
Consciences, which is the greatest Restraint from Apostasy. Indeed for Men to
apostatize from their Religion to secure their worldly Interest is a Thing so
base and infamous, so foul an Instance of a cowardly, degenerous, and
prostitute Soul, that if a Man were under no other Restraint but only that
Sense of Honor that is lodged in all brave Minds, he would scorn so mean, so
poor a Condescension. But yet when all is done, there is no such powerful
Restraint upon Men as that of a good Conscience, which is the natural Bridle by
which God curbs our headstrong Nature, and keeps it from flying out into all
the wild Extravagancies it is inclined to. For it is from God and in God's
stead that Conscience acts, who is the most powerful Being in the World: When
it commands, it is with God's Authority; when it rebukes, it is with God's
Majesty; when it applauds, it is with God's Complacency: It proceeds not upon
Principles of mere Policy or Prudence, which require us to act this way now,
and anon the contrary, as Circumstances after; but upon the awful Principles of
Divinity, which oblige us by all that we can hope or fear for ever, and require
of us the self same Things and Actions in all Circumstances; and the sole
Reason it insists on is the Will of God, whose Pleasure or Displeasure can make
us happy or miserable for ever. The Voice of Conscience is not, This I judge
most expedient for thee to do, and this to avoid, but this thou must do, and
this avoid as thou tenderest the Love of God and dreadest his everlasting
Hatred and Revenge: And it is no less than eternal Bliss that Conscience
allures our Hope with, and eternal Vengeance that it alarms our Fear with; and
if Men will not be withheld by such powerful Restraints as these, what can
withold them? Whilst therefore a Man cherishes his Conscience by complying with
it and follows its Directions, this, if any Thing, will secure his stedfastness
to the Truth against all Temptations; whilst this has any Power over him, he
will as soon eat Fire as sacrifice his Faith to his Interest. For, for a Man to
renounce his Religion upon any Prospect of temporal Gain or Loss, is such a
flagitious Violation of all that is Sacred, such a monstrous Instance of
High Treason against God, such an open Blasphemy of his Truth, such a bold
Defyance of his Majesty, and in a word, such a Complication of vile Perfidy,
base Ingratitude, and impious Falsehood, that but to think of it is like
looking down from a stupendous Precipice, that swims the Head, and strikes the
Mind with Horror and Amazement; so that while a Man's Conscience has any Power
over him, he will no more be able to prevail with himself to commit the one,
than to throw himself headlong down from the other, whilst he is under the
Horror of the Prospect; and he will find it so much more easy to endure the
worst of Persecutions, than to commit such an Outrage and Violence on his
Conscience, and undergo those horrible Reflections and stinging Remorses that
must follow it: But after a Man by wilful Sinning, has often wounded his
Conscience, the natural Tenderness of it will by Degrees wear off, till at
length it grows quite callous and insensible. For what is reported of
Methridates, that by often drinking of Poison, he had so familiarized it to his
Constitution, that at length it sat quietly on his Stomach, and gave him no
Disturbance, is true of Conscience, which at first recoils at every sinful
Potion, and cannot swallow it without suffering violent Spasms and Convulsions;
but having been awhile accustomed to it, it by Degrees grows more and more
natural, till at length it goes more glibly down without straining, and goes
quietly off without Remorse or Reluctance. And when once a Man's Conscience is
frozen over by a Custom of Sinning, it will every day grow harder and harder,
and at length be able to bear the heaviest Loads of Guilt without Relenting;
and when once Things are Reduced to this State, Good and Evil, Virtue and Vice
are Things indifferent to him which he chooses or refuses as they come to hand,
and are more or less subservient to his present Convenience. He can blaspheme,
and pray, oppress and give Alms with the same Unconcernedness of Mind; and to
act the Devil or the Saint are Parts so indifferent to him, that he can perform
them both with the same Remorslessness. And when a Man is thus got loose from
the Restraints of his Conscience there is nothing so bad that can come amiss to
him. If therefore while he stands in this Posture his temporal Interest should
chance to beckon him to change the best Religion in the World for the worst; to
pray to insensible Images and dead Men's Ghosts instead of the everliving God;
to let go Substances to catch at Shadows and Ceremonies, and to part with the
most rational Truths for the most palpable and fulsom Contradictions; he has
no Principle in him strong enough to withold him from a base Compliance, his
Conscience being laid fast asleep, which whilst awake would have trembled at
such an horrid Proposal. And though by thus prostituting his Faith to his
Interest, he at once renounces his God, his Savior, and all his Hopes of
future Immortality; yet his insensible and remorsless Heart is no more touched
or affected with it, than if it were the slightest Peccadillo. Thus by letting
go a good Conscience Men pave themselves an easy way to Apostasy from true
Religion, which otherwise would be one of the most craggy and difficult
Passages in all the Highway to Hell.

5. Living in any known Course of Sin does very much strengthen and enforce the
Temptations to Apostasy. He who lives under the Conduct and Government of a
good Conscience, takes Care to regulate his Affections toward the Things of
this World, so, as neither to fear the Evils of it too much, nor love the Goods
of it too well; but makes a just and equal Estimate of both, and by that
proportions his Affections toward them; and he who does this, disarms them of
their tempting Power, which is chiefly owing to our selves, and the false
Estimate we make of them. It Is our own Imagination that gives Life and Efficacy
to the Charms and Terrors of the World, and renders them so successful and
victorious: We fancy that to be in them which is not, and so are affected not
so much with the Things themselves, as with the false Representations that we
make of them. But he, who by following the Dictates of a good Conscience, has
reduced his wild Affections within the Lists of Reason and Sobriety, can from
thence defy the World, and maintain his Post against all its Temptations. He
loves its Goods no better than they deserve, and consequently he loves them not
so well as to part with his Virtue, his Innocence, and his Soul for them. He
dreads its. Evils no farther than they are truly dreadful, and consequently is
fully satisfied, that to Sin is much more dreadful than to suffer; and he has
found by often Experience, that in the faithful discharge of his Duty, there is
far more Peace, more Joy, and Satisfaction than in all the vain Allurements of
this World. He has found another Heaven upon Earth, besides these temporary
Enjoyments; a Heaven within his own Breast composed of joyous Hopes, and
blessed Expectations; and in this Heaven has often found himself a thousand
times more happy than among all the Festivities of an earthly Paradise; and
therefore knows very well that he is bid to his Loss when ever he is tempted to
exchange the one for the other. He is thoroughly sensible, having already found
it to his Smart, that by Sinning he shall sustain a much heavier Loss, and
expose himself to far more exquisite Agonies of Mind than any this World can
threaten him withal; and therefore certainly reckons upon it, that when ever
to avoid a Sin he incurs a Suffering, he wisely chooses of two Evils the least.
And while his Soul stands thus affected, it is shot-proof against all
Temptations, and much more against those Temptations which solicit him to
renounce his Religion, and in which he knows by Experience there is far more
Good than the World can propose to him in Exchange for it. He knows both how
little the World, and how much true Religion is worth; and having made a just
Estimate of both, to propose to him any worldly Hope as a Price for his Faith,
is the same Thing as to offer a Miser Dross for his gold. His Mind is fixed in
this Persuasion, that all the Mischiefs this World can do him are
inconsiderable to one who must live for ever in another unspeakably happy or
miserable; and therefore to threaten him into a Apostasy with any worldly Fear,
is to attempt to blow up a Rock of Marble with a Squib of Wildfire. But when
once a Man has taken off the Restraints of his Conscience from his wild
Affections, and let them loose to the World, they will aid and assist its
Temptations against him, and animate them with a thousand times more Life and
Vigor than is in their own Natures. For as for the Goods of this World, they
can never bewitch us as they do, did we not give a Dress to them; we paint
their Faces, and varnish them over with an artificial Beauty, and then fall in
Love with our own Fucus; and so much as we value and affect them beyond their
natural Worth, so much Power we give them to conquer and inslave us. When
therefore by leading a sensual and wicked Life, a Man has wholly devoted
himself to the World, he has put himself into the Worlds Power to be commanded
and disposed of as it pleases. And now if any worldly good beckons and invites
him, his mad Affection will presently hurry him after it, though it be through
thick and thin, through the most flagitious and enormous Courses. If any
worldly Evil threaten and alarm him, he must immediately fly, though it be from
Virtue and Innocence, from God and Heaven, and all that is Sacred in Religion.
His Affections have rendered him a mere Laquey to the Goods and Evils that are
without him, and whither ever they send him, he must go, wherever they lead
him, he must follow, let their Vagaries be never so wild or wicked. If
therefore, while his Soul is thus enslaved to the World, he should be tempted
by him to Apostatize from his Religion, what has he to restrain or secure him?
For ever since he got loose from his Conscience, he is wholly led by his
Affections, and these being chained and saftned to the World, hale him after it
which way soever it moves. So long as his Religion and his worldly Interest
consist, and go hand in hand, he is very well content to own and follow it; but
if ever a Storm of Persecution should part them, in all Probability he will
follow his Interest, and like the treacherous Orpha, give his Religion a
parting Kiss and leave it. For his Heart is now so wedded to the World that he
esteems nothing so good as its Goods, and nothing so evil as its Evils; and the
one being his Heaven, and the other his Hell, all other Considerations are
overcome by them; and to obtain the one, and avoid the other he must stick at
nothing, no not at renouncing his God and his Religion, together with all his
Hopes of a future Immortality.

6. And lastly, Living in any known Course of Sin provokes God to give us up to
the Power of Delusion: For so long as Men submit themselves to the Guidance and
Direction of a good Conscience, the Spirit of God who is a Spirit of Truth
abides with them, and not only directs their Wills, but also informs their
Understandings, and enables them to discern the Beauty and Reality of those
heavenly Truths, which he has revealed to us in the Holy Scriptures. For
though, since he has revealed already the whole Will of God to us concerning
our eternal Salvation, we have no Reason to expect that he will reveal new
Truths to us; yet seeing so far forth, as it is necessary, he has promised and
engaged, that he will cooperate with us to enable us as well to understand the
Will of God as to perform it; we have the greatest Reason in the World to
depend upon it, that so long as we cherish his heavenly Inspirations, by
yielding to them our free and ready Compliance, he will be so far an assisting
Genius to our Understandings, as to suggest to us those Truths which he has
already revealed, and set them before our Eyes in so fair a Light, as that we
shall not fail more clearly to discern, and more distinctly to apprehend them
than otherwise we should or could have done. For when he writes his Truth upon
our Minds, it is with such a Victorious Sunbeam as will endure neither Cloud
nor Shadow before it. Whenever he speaks, he speaks not to our Ears but to our
Minds, and represents Things nakedly and immediately to our Understandings. He
converses with our Spirits, as Spirits do with Spirits, without involving his
Sense in articulate Sounds or material Representations; but objects it to us in
its own naked Light, and characterizes it immediately on our Understandings.
And as he proposes the Divine Light to us, so he also illuminates our Minds to
discern and comprehend it: He raises and exalts our Intellectual Powers, and as
a vital Form to the Light of our Reason, invigorates and actuates it, and
thereby renders its Apprehension of Things more quick, and piercing, and
sagacious. Thus does the Holy Spirit more or less assist us in the true
Understanding of Divine Things, as he finds us more or less compliant with his
heavenly Pleasure; and though he stands no more obliged to render our Minds
infallible than our Wills impeccable, yet so long as by our sincere Obedience
to his holy Suggestions, we keep our selves under his Conduct and Direction, we
may depend upon it, he will either preserve us from all dangerous Errors, or if
for just Reasons he should permit us to fall into any such, they shall not
prove dangerous to us, but either we shall be convinced of them while we live,
or obtain Pity and Pardon for them when we die. But whilst we persist in any
willful Course of Sin, we do not only violate our own Conscience, but also
repel those good Motions of the Spirit of God, whereby he strives to reduce and
reclaim us; in doing which we continually grieve him, and if we do not forbear,
shall at length provoke him wholly to forsake and abandon us, to give us up to
our own Hearts Lusts as desperate Wretches, with whom he has hitherto strove
and struggled in vain, and of whose future Recovery there remains no farther
Hope or Prospect. And when he has forsaken us, our Mind will not only be left
naked and destitute of all those Helps and Advantages for the understanding of
Divine Truths, which it receives from him, but also be exposed to the Cheats
and Fallacies of Evil Spirits, whose Recreation it is to put Tricks upon our
Minds; to banter and play upon our easy Faith, to cast Mists before our Eyes,
and therein to juggle away all true Religion from us, and foist in the Room of
it, the most fulsom Errors and Mistakes. For so the Apostle tells us of
Antichrist the great Deceiver, that he should come with all the deceivableness
of unrighteousness to them that perish, because they received not the love of
truth, that they might be saved. And that for that Cause, viz. their not
receiving the truth in the love of it, God should send them strong delusion
that they should believe a lie; that is, by abandoning them to the Power of
cheating and deluding Spirits: That they all might be damned, who believed not
the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. And God
grant that this at last prove not our Fate, that because we have sinned against
the clearest Light, and gone astray in all Unrighteousness under the best and
purest Religion in the World, we are not at length given up by God to follow
the wile Delusions of Antichrist, and to believe all those fulsom Lies and
Impostures which he from Age to Age has been imposing upon the World. But
whether it prove thus or no, this I am sure of, that by persisting in any
vicious Course against the Light and Conviction of our Consciences, we highly
provoke Almighty God to withdraw his Grace from us, and give us up to our own
Hearts Lusts; and when this is done, our own Hearts Lusts will soon betray and
give up our Faith to false and vicious Principles of Religion.

And now having shown at large what strong and prevalent Tendencies there are
in a wicked Life to Apostasy from true Religion, I shall conclude this Argument
with two or three Inferences.

1. From hence I infer, What a great Malignity there is in Men's being
inconstant to, and apostatizing from the true Religion in Compliance with their
sinful Affections; it being, as you see, the ill Daughter of a bad Mother, (a
debauched and a dissolute Conscience) and consequently partaking of all its
natural Bane and Malignity, even as all other bad Effects do of the malignant
Nature of their bad Causes. But the Truth of this will more fully appear by
considering the particular Evils which Men's Inconstancy to and Proneness to
revolt from the true Religion implies; of which I shall give you these five
Instances: 1. The great Impiety of it. 2. The desperate Folly of it. 3. The
foul Dishonesty of it. 4. The shameful Cowardice of it. 5. The vast Hazard and
Insecurity of it.


1. Consider the great Impiety of it. He who can part with his Religion, or any
Principle of it, upon any other Terms than a full Conviction of the Falsehood of
it, is either a downright Atheist; who believing no Religion to be true,
governs himself by this Principle, That the wisest Course is to profess none
but that which is uppermost, and most for his Interest; or a profane and
impious Wretch, who, though he believes his own Religion true, exchanges it for
another which he believes to be false, upon no other Consideration, but so much
temporal Advantage to boot: By which he plainly declares, that in the Balance
of his Estimation the Odds between Truth and Falsehood, the Declarations of God,
and the Impostures of the Devil is so inconsiderable, that the least Addition
of the transitory Goods of this World to the later, renders it of sufficient
Weight to turn the Scale against the former, and that for his part he is not
much concerned whether the Almighty be his Friend or Foe; and provided he may
but enjoy his Ease and Pleasure a few Years longer here, he is very well
contented to part with all his Hopes and Interest in God for ever. For this is
the natural Construction of Men's Apostasy from the true Religion in
Consideration of their worldly Interest, that that Interest is in their Esteem
far more eligible than God with all his Power and Goodness, that it is better
to be without God in the World than without Preferment, and that that Man makes
a very good Bargain, who gets a good place in Exchange for his Maker, and with
the treacherous Judas fells his Savior, though it be but for thirty pieces of
Silver: Which is such a monstrous Degree of Impiety, as one would think, should
be sufficient to scare and affright the most courageous Sinner that has but
the least Apprehension of God, or Sense of Good and Evil. But then,

2. Consider the desperate Folly of Men's abandoning their Religion in
Compliance with their vicious Affections. For he who without through Conviction
abandons the Profession of his Religion, whether it be true or false, does
together with that most certainly abandon all the blessed Rewards, and incur
all the dreadful Penalties that true Religion promises and denounces, because
though his Religion perhaps may be false, yet in renouncing it whilst he
believes it true, his Will does as maliciously renounce the true Religion as if
it really were so. He thought it true, and yet renounced it, by which he
plainly declares that if it had been true he would have renounced it; so that
whether it be true or false, it is all one to him, his Will is the same, his
Crime and Guilt the same; it is true Religion he intentionally renounces, and
therefore in so doing he does intentionally renounce all his Concern and
Interest in true Religion. Now what a desperate piece of Folly is this for a
Man to part with all his Stock in the Common Bank of Religion which if it be
not a down right Sham and Imposture, is of everlasting Moment and Concern to
him, only for a present Gratification of some vain and unreasonable Lust; to
divorce himself for ever from the Love of God, to quit all Title and Interest
in the precious Blood of the Savior of the World only to curry a short-lived
Favor with Men, with Men whose Breath is in their Nostrils, and who within a
few Days or Years must go off the Stage, and leave us here perhaps forlorn and
destitute? To part with all my glorious Hopes of Heaven, which are my best
Heaven upon Earth; and which is worse, with Heaven it self, where I have
Treasures of Bliss sufficient to maintain me in a most happy Port to eternal
Ages; only to gain or secure a transitory Estate or Preferment, which, while I
have, it cannot make me happy, and from which erelong I shall be torn and
divided, and not be a Farthing the better for forever; to expose ones self as a
public Spectacle of Scorn and Contempt to God and Angels, and all the wise and
good Part of the rational World for a short extemporary Blaze of pompous
Splendour and Greatness which lies at the Mercy of every Counter-blast of
Fortune, and in all Probability will ever long expire in Smoke and Stink,
Wretchedness and Infamy; to plunge ones self headlong into all the Agonies and
Torments, the Horrors and Desperations of a woeful Eternity, only to escape a
short Persecution, and a glorious Martyrdom; when a little after perhaps I
shall suffer a great deal more and longer under the Gout, or Stone, or
Strangury without the Comfort of dying in a brave Cause, and being assured of
an immortal Recompense than I could have done under the Hand of the Executioner
with it? And yet all these mad Pranks that Man plays at once, who abandons his
Religion in Compliance with his Lusts.

3. Consider the soul Dishonesty of it: For, besides that our Religion being
the most sacred Pledge committed to us by God for our own Use, and the Use of
our latest Posterity, we cannot vicously desert and abandon it without
betraying of God, and falsifying our Trust to him; and which is worse, without
squandering away the most inestimable Good that ever he committed to Men, upon
our own base Lusts, and his most execrable Enemies, which is Dishonesty
blackned with the foulest Ingratitude: Besides this, I say, by forsaking our
Religion in Compliance with any lewd Affection, we not only do a dishonest
Thing at present, but also totally discard the Obligations to Honesty for the
future: For there is nothing can rationally oblige a Man to be thoroughly honest
but only his Religion, or inward Sense that it is his indispensable Duty
toward God, before whose righteous Tribunal he must one Day give an Account of
all his Actions. The two great Motives of humane Action are Religion, and
worldly Interest: Now as for Religion, that consists of fixed and unalterable
Principles, which will by no Means ply or bend to the Alterations of outward
Affairs and Circumstances; but do in all Conditions move and oblige us with
equal Force and vigor; whereas Worldly Interest is a fickle and mutable Thing
that varies and alters with every outward Turn and Revolution: So that that
which is my Interest to Day, may prove my Damage to Morrow; and if it should,
whatever Part I act to Day, it will oblige me to act the contrary to Morrow.
When therefore a Man has let go his Religion, and has nothing but his
Interest to hold him, it is Cross or Pile for the future; whether you find him
an Honest Man or a Knave; because from henceforth he will be Knave or Honest
according as it serves his Turn, and that which serves his Turn to Day may
prove his Loss and Prejudice to Morrow; so that whether to Day or to Morrow he
proves a true Man or a Cheat, wholly depends upon the Die of Fortune, and you
must consult his Stars to find the lucky Hour or Moment when you may safely
trust him. For after the Wretch has been so perfidious as to renounce his God
and his Religion, he has no one Principle remaining in him upon which you can
fasten any lasting Confidence. As for his Interest, that is such a fickle and
inconstant Thing that there is no trusting it; if it plead for you now, the
next Turn of Affairs it may be retained against you, and the Man being got
Ioose from all the Ties and Obligations of Fidelity, you may be sure he will
stick at nothing be it never so foul, that his present Interest invites him to
to serve himself; he will make no Bones, whenever he has a fair Opportunity,
to cheat and betray his own Father; or supplant his dearest Friend or
Benefactor; and what should hinder him? his Conscience and Religion being gone,
and with them all binding Principles of Truth and Honesty. For when a Man
forsakes his Religion out of any vicous Affection, he does in Effect make this
public Declaration to the World, By this my own Act and Deed I do here for
ever renounce all the Obligations to Honesty and fair Dealing with God or Men,
and am resolved for the future to be deaf and inexorable to all the
Importunities of Conscience and Religion. From henceforth I will listen to no
other Call but that of my worldly Interest; when that bids me be honest, I will
be honest, and when it bids me play the Knave, I will play the Knave;and
therefore for the future I warn all that know me to trust me no farther than
they can make it my Interest to be true, and not to venture the most trifling
Matter in which they are unwilling to be wronged, either upon my Faith, or
Word, or Oath, without demanding of me such ample Securities as may render it
impossible for me to wrong them without wronging my self. For this is the
Principle I now intend to live by, That is always best and fittest to be done,
that is most subservient to my present Interest. This in construction of Fact
is the Profession which that Man takes up, who in Compliance with any vicious
Affection abandons the Profession of his Religion.

4. Consider the shameful Cowardice of it. The Advantages of true Religion are
great enough to encourage a Mind of any Constancy or Firmness to charge through
the greatest Difficulties the World can interpose between them and him. Who
that has the Spirit of a Man would ever boggle to wade through a narrow
shallow Stream of temporary Sufferings, whilst on the farther Shore he beholds
a Heaven of Immortal Joys ready to receive and reward him? But for a Man to
turn his Back, and run away from God and Heaven for Fear only of being
disappointed by some lewd, or covetous, or ambitious Hope, is such an Instance
of vile, prostitute Baseness as is beneath even Contempt and Derision. For what
Danger or Difficulty dares that Wretch encounter, that dares not stand by his
Religion, in which he confesses all his future Hopes are involved, for fear of
losing such a Place, or being disappointed of such a Preferment, which within a
few Days or Years he knows very well he must lose for ever? He who has a Mind
capable of being scared out of his Religion by such mean Considerations as
these, is good for nothing but only to be made the Football of Fortune; to be
kicked up and down upon her scornful Toe at Pleasure, who by threatening him
with the smallest Evil, can huff him out of the greatest Good, and finding him
a wretched passive Thing that has not Strength enough to resist her weakest
Impressions, makes him her Sport and Recreation, and turns him into any Thing,
and tosses him whither she pleases; from Truth to Fashood, from God to the
Devil, and from Heaven to Hell without the least Control or Opposition. For
the poor Man's Soul is grown so tender and effeminate, that for the greatest
Good in all the World he cannot endure the least Air of Suffering to blow upon
him: Tell him of Suffering for Righteousness Sake, and the very Thought of it
frights and appales him. Present but a Persecution at his Breast, and bid him
stand and deliver, and the crest-fallen Pultroon is presently ready to cry out,
O spare my Life, spare my Skin! and take my Religion, take my God, and all my
Hopes of Heaven and Immortality. And who but an infamous Coward would ever
endure to be hectored out of so vast a good by the weak and impotent Evils of
this World; which if they do their worst can only rob him of a few transitory
Enjoyments, which without their Constraint he must ere long take his leave of
for ever? How ridiculously mean-spirited would it be for a Man to deliver up
his Purse to a Thief, who he knows has no other Weapon but a slender Switch to
hurt and offend him? But for a Man to deliver up his Religion, and with that
his God and his Heaven, at the demand of a short Skin-deep Affliction, which
can only disease him for a few Moments, and shall then determine in everlasting
Pleasure and Delight, is a thousand times more mean and ridiculous.

5. And Lastly, Consider the vast Hazard and Insecurity of a Man's parting with
his Religion in Compliance with his vicious Affections: For that which moves
him to it is only his Prospect of living at Ease a few Years longer, or
gratifying some covetous Desire or Ambition; but whether he obtain these Ends
by parting with his Religion, is vastly hazardous and insecure. Perhaps when I
have acted this implous and perfidious Part, I may be cast into such
Circumstances, as may force me upon impartial Reflections, and make me see,
whether I will or no, the Blackness and Infamy of my Revolt and Apostasy; which
if it should happen would inevitably raise such a Swarm of Horrors in my
Conscience, and cast me into such Agonies and Convulsions of Soul, as will
render me a Hell and a Devil to my self, and give me a thousand times more Pain
and Uneasiness than all those temporal Evils coule have done, for fear of which
I ran away from my Religion. And if to shun Poverty, I should throw my self
into Desparation; if to avoid a Prison, which to an innocent Mind with a
righteous Cause can make a Heaven upon Earth, I should cast my self into a Hell
upon Earth; if to keep in a whole Skin, I should bring upon my self the
intolerable Anguish of a wounded Spirit; if to escape being rejected,
disgraced, and discountenanced by Men, I should expose my self to the perpetual
Clamor and Reproaches of my own Conscience: If these Things, I say, should
happen, as its very probable they may, I shall find my self miserably
disappointed of that Ease and quiet Enjoyment for the sake of which I basely
abandoned my Religion; I shall find that to save my Garments from being singed,
I have thrown my Body into a consuming Flame, and only exposed my Breast to
save my Buckler. But then suppose this should not happen; suppose my Conscience
should be stupid and insensible enough to bear the Guilt of my Apostasy without
Remorse or Relenting; yet my Prospect of Gain and Advancement in this World is
extremely hazardous and insecure. For it is a thousand to one, but they to
whose Religion I turn, and upon whose favor I depend, will by one Means or
other discover my Falsehood and Insincerity; and if in the Course of my Actions,
or any other suspicious Indication, they should find Cause to be jealous that I
embraced their Religion only to serve my Interest, and against the Persuasion
of my own Mind; if they are wise they will treat me as a dangerous Person, upon
whom there is no Reliance; For how can they imagine that I should be true to
them who have been false to my Religion? It is a Proverb among the Jews, That
Proselytes are not to be trusted to the Tenth Generation, and by too many woeful
Instances in our own Neighborhood, we find it a Maxim in some Men Politics,
That a New Convert is no more to be trusted than an Old Heretic. And though
for a while they may think fit to use me as a proper Tool to serve a present
Design, yet to be sure they will use me to longer than they needs must; and
when I have done their Work, I must expect to be thrust out to make room for
such as they can more safely depend on. And if this should not happen, as it is
very probable it may; yet seeing all humane Affairs are liable to perpetual
Turns and Mutabilities, perhaps upon the next Revolution a contrary Interest
may appear upon the Stage, and then I shall find my self deserted of all my
present Supports and Dependencies, and like a forlorn Wretch utterly abandoned
both by God and Men, without any other Company to entertain me in this my
mournful Solitude, besides the woeful Remembrances of my Guilt and Shame. To
such infinite Uncertainties of obtaining their Ends are those miserable Men
exposed, who desert their Religion in pursuit of their worldly Interest. And so
I have done with the first Inference: But then,

2. From hence I infer, How cautious a Man ought to be in changing his
Religion, or any Principles of it, least that which induces him to it be not so
much his Conviction as his profligate Conscience. I do not pretend, that Men
are always to maintain the same Persuasion in Matters of Religion; for such an
Obligation would as effectually serve the Interest of false Religion, as of
true. Whatever some Men pretend, we are all of us from Top to Bottom, a Company
of fallible Creatures; and if we are in an Error, as it is possible we may, it
is our Duty to endeavor to be better informed. Nor do I deny, but an
honest-minded Man, without being in the least influenced by a bad Conscience,
may be innocently, or at least pitiably seduced from Truth to Error by false
Colors and probable Appearances, for want of sufficient Sagacity to
distinguish between Sophistry and true Reason. But if in Compliance with any
vicious Affection, or in Pusuit of any worldly Interest, a Man deserts the
Truth, and takes up false and erroneous Principles, his Error is no longer
imputable to the Weakness of his Understanding, but to the Wickedness of his
Will; and a willful Error in his Faith will prove as fatal and as damnable to
him, as a willful Wickedness in his Manners; and when ever his wretched Soul
shall appear before the great Searcher of Hearts, it shall certainly be treated
by him as a willful Apostate that has perfidiously renounced his Baptismal
Vow, and abjured his God, his Savior, Truth, and Religion. And seeing it is
thus, it very highly concerns Men, as they love themselves, or have any Regard
of their own everlasting Well-being, not to desert their Religion or any
Principle of it, upon any other Motive than a thorough Conviction of its
Falsehood; not to suffer themselves to be seduced from it by any temporal
Interest or vicious Affection, lest in so doing they reprobate themselves from
God, and all the blessed Hopes of a glorious Eternity hereafter. For when Men
are upon changing their Persuasions in Religion, it is an ordinary Thing for
their Interests and Passions so to intermingle with their Reasonings, that
without some Care and Observation of themselves they will not be able to
discern which of the two has the greater Influence upon them; insomuch, that I
am very apt to think that there are a great many careless and unreflecting
People that are hurried merely by their Interest and Passions out of one
Religious Persuasion into another, who yet through gross Neglect and
Inobservance of themselves, believe themselves to be Converts upon pure Reason
and Conviction. Perhaps upon the Solicitations of worldly Interest their Minds
were wrought into a strong Inclination to a Change; insomuch, that they
vehemently wish that they could but satisfy their Reason and Conscience of the
Truth and Reality of that new Persuasion, which these their importunate
Passions so earnestly invite them to embrace; and then with this strong Bias
of worldly Interest upon their Minds, away they run hunting after Reasons and
Arguments to convince and satisfy themselves; and if in this Heat of Affection
they can but light upon any little show of Probability, that will quickly
improve them into irrefragable Proofs and Demonstrations: For when a Man
enquires, whether such a Doctrine be true with a strong Inclination of Will to
find it so, he will be afraid to consult the Reasons and Arguments against it,
lest they should convince him that it is false, and thereby defeat his
Inclination. And when once a Man is so prepossessed as that he will listen only
to one side of the Question, be that side never so absurd and rediculous, it is
a hard Case if he cannot find Reasons enough to wheedle himself into the Belief
of it; for his very Inclination to believe it will deter him from entering into
a strict Examination of those Reasons, and being afraid to examine them too far
lest he should find them false and unconcluding, if he can but discern the
least Color of Probability in their first View and Appearance, that will be
sufficient to convince him, and render him a warm and zealous Convert: For
indeed, the Man was a Convert in his Heart upon Reasons of worldly Interest,
before ever he thought of those Reasons of Religion that made him a Convert in
his Judgment; so that 'twas his Interest that Converted his Affections, and his
Affections that Converted his Faith; and yet all this while, for want of
Self-reflection, the Man imagins that his new Faith is wholly owing to the
Reason and Evidence it carries with it; whereas, would he but impartially
consult himself, and take a little Pains to review the Steps and Progress of
his Change, where it began, and how it proceeded and concluded, he would soon
be forced to acknowledge, that the first and fundamental Reason of it was
nothing but a worldly Interest. Wherefore to secure you against this dangerous
Piece of Self-delusion, by which I doubt there are too many Men do eternally
Ruin and Destroy themselves, I will endeavor to give you some certain Signs
and Indications by which you may be able to judge, if ever you should be
tempted to change your present Religion or Persuasion, whether you do it
sincerely and upon pure Conviction of Mind, or in mere Compliance with any
vicious or worldly Affection: And I shall give them to you in these following
Queries, which I earnestly beseech you seriously to propose to your own Souls,
whenever any such Temptation shall befall you.

1. Whether upon your first Entrance on the Debate of Changing, your Prejudice
lie on the side of your present Religion, or of that you are invited to turn
to? 2. Whether you have not some distaste in your Affections to your present
Religion, before you entertained any Overtures of changing it? 3. Whether that
which gave you first Inclination to Change was not some temporal Interest? 4.
Whether before you entertained any Intention to Change, you were fully resolved
to consult impartially both sides of the Question? 5. Whether when you first
entered upon this Consultation it was your unfeigned Intention, whatever shall
happen to you, to adhere to that Side which should appear most reasonable? 6.
And lastly, whether before you were inclined to change; you did conscienciously
comply with the Obligations of Religion, and continued to do so afterward?
1. When you fall under any Temptation to Change, ask your own Soul whether
your Prejudice lie on the side of your present Religion, or of that which you
are tempted to turn to? There is no Man that sincerely professes any Religion,
but must be strongly prejudiced for it, especially if he imbibed it betimes,
and was principled in it by his Education; for how can he sincerely profess it
without engaging his Affections toward it, and heartily espousing its
Interest? For though I confess it is a Fault for Men so to preingage themselves
to any Religious Principles, especially such as are not exceeding clear and
evident (and such are all the Fundamentals of Christianity) as to shut their
Ears against all contrary Reasons, and obstinately resolve never to part with
them, or so much as to admit into Consideration any Argument or Evidence
against them; yet after all it is impossible for any sincere Professor of any
Religion, whether it be true or false, to be so indifferently affected toward
it as not to side with it in his Will as well as in his Faith and Judgment; so
that whenever he is tempted to desert it, the Temptation must necessarily find
him strongly preingaged for it; and unless it bring a long with it sufficient
Evidence not only to convince his Reason, but also to captivate his Prejudice,
it will never be able to prevail. For if ever the Man loved his Religion, his
Passion will contend for it as well as his Reason; so that all Arguments
against it, be they never so strong and cogent, will at first especially find a
difficult Access to and an ungrateful Reception in his Mind; and though he is
so overborn by the Strength of the Evidence against it that he can no longer
forbear doubting and suspecting it, yet still he is very loath to part with it,
and still he wishes it were true, though he is not able to evince it so, till
after having endured a long Siege of strong and pressing Arguments he is driven
at length out of all his Defenses, and then his Prejudice yields as well as his
Judgment to surrender up his erroneous Faith to the prevailing Power of his
Convictions: This is the natural Temper of every sincere Professor of any
Religion. When therefore you are at any Time tempted to change your Religion,
before you proceed, pause a while, and consider seriously how you stand
disposed, and which way your Heart is preingaged; whether to the Religion you
have hitherto professed, or to that for which you are invited to change it.
Consult a while with your own Souls to which side of the Question you are most
inclined to listen, whether to the Side which asserts your present Persuasion,
or to that which contradicts and opposes it. Observe but which Way your Wishes
and your Passions move, whether for or against it, and which Reasons and
Arguments you are most concerned for, those that oppose, or those that defend
it. For assure your selves if the Temptation to Change find you lukewarm and
indifferent, or so much as easy and pliable to its Proposals; if it finds you
unaverse to admit of a contrary Persuasion, or forward to catch at every Show
of Evidence against that Religion which you have hitherto professed, or ready
to be staggered out of it upon the first Appearance of any Reasons or
Probabilities against it; if, I say, you find any of these evil Symptons upon
you when you are first tempted to change, you have great Reason to suspect that
you are a false Hypocrite to that Profession which you have hitherto made; that
there is some vile Affection in you that has got the Ascendant of your
Religion and your Conscience, and that if in this Temper you proceed to a
Change, you will be found to be a Convert of your Lusts and not of your
Convictions.

2. When you fall under any Temptation to change your Religion, examine whether
you have not entertained some Distaste to it in your Affections, before you
proceed any farther; whether you have not entertained some Quarrel against it
upon the account of the Disturbance it gives you in your vicious Delights and
Enjoyments; or because it too severely exacts of you universal Sanctity of Life
and Manners, to which of all things in the World your Heart is most averse, and
without which the inflexible Principles of your present Persuasion will not
permit you to hope for any Favor from God either here or hereafter. Consider
whether upon these Accounts your Mind be not cankered with a secret Enmity
against your Religion; whether under those Qualms of Conscience it often gives
you, your Heart does not rise against it, and you do not sometimes secretly
wish that you could release your Faith from its tyrannick Principles which give
you so much Pain and Disturbance, and submit it to some gentler Religion that
would permit you to Sin in quiet, or at least prove more indulgent to your
Lusts: For if this be your Temper you are in very great Danger of being
betrayed by it into any false and corrupt Religion that shall be tendered you
in exchange for your own. For if this other Religion offer but any fair Terms
to your vicious Affections, or propose but any Expedient how to accomodate the
vexatious Quarrel between them and your Consciences; if it does but any way
reconcile your Hope of Heaven to your vicious Manners, by directing you to some
easier Terms of Salvation than that of forsaking all Unrighteousness, and
worldly Lusts, and live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present
World; if it will but admit of any Commutation of that unsufferable Penance of
Godliness for bodily Exercise, of inward Mortification for a long Fast or a
sound Whipping, of putting off the old Man for putting on a Hair Shirt, of
running the Race of a holy Life for a santring Pilgrimage, or the like; this is
a Religion for your Tooth, with which your naughty Heart will be ready enough
to fall in love upon the first Interview: and when once it has gained our
Heart and Affections, if we do not take the greater Heed they will quickly gain
our Faith and Judgment: For when a Man is angry with his own Religion because
it sits uneasy on his Conscience, if a more easy Religion presents it self to
him, he can hardly forbear wishing it were true though as yet he has no
Evidence that it is so; and then a very slender Evidence will suffice to induce
a Belief of the Reality of any Thing which a Man earnestly wishes and desires.
If in this ill Temper of Mind therefore you should be tempted to change your
Religion, it concerns you as much as your Souls are worth to look about you;
for you have a Seducer in your Breast, a prevalent insinuating Seducer, viz.
some vile and sinful Affection, who, if you listen to his charming Persuasions,
will certainly betray you into a most damnable Apostasy. Wherefore before you
proceeed to examine the Merits of the Cause, consider seriously with your
selves that that Disturbance which your present Religion gives to your vicious
Affections, for which you are so angry with it, is so far from being a just
Ground to suspect it, that it is a real Evidence of the Truth of it; because it
is a sensible Demonstration of its Holiness, which is an inseparable
Concomitant of Truth; and therefore for you to desert it upon this Motive is in
Effect to pronounce it a false Religion; because it gives you a sensible
Experiment of its Truth and Reality.

3. When you fall under any Temptation to change your Religion, consider
whether that which gave you the first Inclination to change was not some
temporal Interest; whether before ever you admitted any Thought of a Change,
you did not perceive another Religion appear upon the Stage attended with all
the fair Hopes and Advantages of this World, and whether this Prospect did not
first suggest to you a great Inclination to enter into its Retinue. I do not
deny, but that even worldly Considerations may so far influence honest Minds as
to put them upon a more severe and impartial Scrutiny of their present
Persuasions in Religion; and unless it be in Case of palpable Truth or Falsehood
it is but honest Prudence, when a Man's temporal Interest lies at stake, to
take Care that he is sure of his Hand, that he does not throw it away upon a
false Persuasion in a Fit of blind Humor or Obstinacy, and sacrifice that to
an erroneus Judgment which he ows to no other Altar but Truth's. And indeed
before I throw my self upon any Suffering, whether it be Loss or Pain, I am
bound in Conscience diligently to enquire whether it be for Truth or
Righteousness sake, lest instead of receiving the Crown of Martyrdom I am sent
away to seek my Reward in the Paradise of Fools. But if merely upon the
Consideration of any present Loss or Advantage I find my self strongly inclined
to change my Religion, before ever I enter into the Merits of the Cause to
examine the Reasons pro and con, it is a certain sign that that Loss or
Advantage that inclines me, has a more powerful Influence upon me than my
Religion; that I love the World better than God, and do prefer my earthly
Expectations before all my Hopes of everlasting Happiness. And if in this ill.
Temper of Mind I should be tempted to a present Change, it concerns me as much
as my Soul is worth to be very careful what I do; For I stand upon the Brink of
a Precipice, the foul and fatal Precipice of Apostasy, into which if I fall I
am ruined for ever. For if in changing my Religion it be found that I followed
this my wicked Inclination more than any sincere Conviction, I must expect to
be treated by God as an Apostate and Renegado, as a wilful Deserter of his
Cause, and Betrayer of his sacred Truth. But if I change while I stand thus
inclined, it is fearfully hazardous but this will be found to be the Truth of
the Case; for in all Probability my wicked Inclination will cast a Mist before
my Understanding, and so darken its Prospect that it will hardly be able to
distinguish the grossest Sophistry from the clearest Reason. So that now those
Arguings which before I saw through with half an Eye, and looked upon as most
aburd and ridiculous, will appear to my abused and biased Mind, in the Colors
of clear Evidence and plain Demonstration, and I shall be ready to surrender up
my Faith to those trifling Pretenses of Reason and Authority, which before I
laughed at and despised: Now, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build
my Church will seem a very pregnant Proof that all the Bishops of Rome from St.
Peter are ordained the Supreme Heads of the Church, and the Fountains of all
Ecclesiastical Authority, though they are not so much as mentioned in it, no
nor from any Thing that appears so much as thought of. Now This is my Body
looks like a substantial Evidence of the Truth of Transubstantiation, and of
all those wild Absurdities it contains; though those Forms of Speech, I am the
true Vine, and I am the Door, do as substantially prove that Christ bears
Grapes, and turns upon Hinges. Now every. Thing will appear to me in a quite
different Guize from what it did before, and I shall fancy that I spy
Demonstration where before I could only discern Probability; for a good Sum of
Money, or a rich Preferment is a strange Clearer of some Men's Eyesight. Thus
when a Man begins to think of changing his Religion under the powerful
Influence of his worldly Interest, that is usually the only effectual Reason
that leads and persuades him: As for other Reasons, they only serve for
Form-sake to disguise the foul Apostasy into some Resemblance of a sincere
Conversion; for till his Interest struck in with them, they signified nothing
with him, made not the least Impression on his Mind; but being backed with
that, all on a sudden they are wondrous cogent and persuasive; from whence it
is evident that they received their Strength and Force from his Interest,
without the Air of which they are not able to operate; and consequently that
the Change of his Faith is owing to the overruling Interest of his Covetousness
and Ambition, and not at all to the Prevalence of Reason and sincere
Conviction. For 'twas that Interest that strongly inclined him to change before
ever he knew any Reason for it, and then 'twas that Inclination that made his
Reasons, and created his Convictions; and let him talk what he pleases of
Reason, Scripture, and Authority; if he was strongly inclined to change before
he was moved to it by Reason and Evidence, it is plain that the prevailing
Motive of his Conversion was either the Fear of losing some good warm Place, or
the Hope of gaining some important Station or Preferment. And if this be found
the Truth of his Case when he comes to appear before the Tribunal of God, it
had been a thousand times better for him that he had never been born; for then
he will be found a base Deserter of his God, a treacherous Judas to his
Savior, and a perfidious Renegado from his Religion, and according to the
Quality of his Sin and Guilt receive his Portion of Damnation.

4. Consider whether before you entertained any Intention to change, you were
fully resolved impartially to consult both sides of the Question. I doubt there
are too many among us that first resolve to change their Religion, and then
begin to enquire after Reasons and Arguments against it, and that their
Resolution to change is so far from being the Effect of sincere Conviction,
that their Conviction is the Effect of their Resolution. First, Some vile
Affection, or some temporal Interest recommends another Religion to them that
either gives them leave to be wicked without Remorse or Disturbance, or
promises them Gain and Advancement; upon which they resolve right or wrong to
entertain and embrace it; and then to excuse themselves to their own
Consciences, or to vindicate their Reputation to the World from the Scandal of
being downright Apostates, they fall a hunting after Reasons and Arguments to
convince themselves of the Truth of it, or at least to make the World believe
that it was not their Interest but their Conviction that turned them. And when
Men thus resolve first, and enquire afterward, to be sure their Enquiry will
be very partial; for being fully resolved to change their Religion upon some
vicious or secular Motive, it is become their Interest to pick Holes in it, and
to reason or cavil themselves out of the Belief of it. And this makes them shy
of bringing the Matter under a fair and impartial Examination, lest while they
are seeking Reasons to overthrow their Faith, they should find Reasons to
establish and confirm it. So that they begin their Enquiry with these secret
Intentions; We will listen only to one side of the Cause, and leave the other
to shift for it self; and seek for as many Arguments as we can against our
Religion, but none for it. We will read the Books and consult the Teachers of
one side only, viz. the opposite side to our present Belief and Persuasion, and
if among them we can but find Arguments enough to render the contrary
Persuasion any way probable, we will submit our Faith to it without any farther
Enquiry, and not trouble our selves to examine the Evidence on the other side,
for Fear we should be convinced in spite of our Teeth that the Truth lies
there; and then our Conscience will never let us be quiet, but be perpetually
clamouring against us for base and impious Apostates. That this is the foul and
hypocritical Intention of too many among us is notorious enough by their
Practice; they leap from Church to Church, and from one Communion to another,
without any Pause or Consideration; they are with us to Day, and gone from us
to Morrow, and are such Mushroom, extemporary Converts, that before ever we
hear they doubted of their own, they are confirmed in a contrary Religion. In
short, they steal out of their Religion so softly, and with so little Noise,
that they are commonly gone before ever we hear they are going, as if they were
afraid we should stop and detain them by better Reasons and fuller Convictions.
Whereas had these Men any Conscience or Honesty in them, they would consider,
that Religion is a Thing too sacred and serious to be thus dallied and trifled
with, and that to change ones Religion is a matter of such vast Importance as
requires a long and through Consideration, and a very clear and full Conviction
of Mind; that there is too much depends upon it to part with it upon slight
Pretenses, and that it concerns them as much as an Eternity of Bliss amounts
to, not to desert it upon any other Inducement but that of a through
well-weighed Persuasion of Conscience. And if they had had any such honest
Thoughts about them while they were under the Temptation to change, they would
never have admitted any Doubt of their Religion, but upon great and palpable
Evidence; and then they would have doubted long before they would have
concluded against it, and not have precipiated their Judgment hand over head
into a contrary Persuasion, till they had first applied themselves for
Resolution again and again to their old Guides, and Pastors, and with all due
Deference to their Authority, had strictly examined all their Reasons and
Answers, till they had thoroughly inspected their Arguments pro and con, and
equally heard both sides of the Cause; till they had read, advised, and
consulted on both sides, and weighed the whole Matter over and over with the
greatest Care and Exactness. But when Men run away from their Religion in an
Instant, without ever observing this regular Process of sincere Enquiries, it
is a plain Case that their Wills were resolved before their Understandings, and
that they were converted before ever they were convinced; and consequently that
it was not Reason and Conviction that turned them, but Lust or Interest: For
though when they are turned they may perhaps be very diligent to seek
Conviction, yet this is only an After-game which they are fain to play to save
their Conscience or their Reputation.

5. Consider before you entertain any Intention to change, Whether it be your
unfeigned Intention, whatever shall happen to you, to adhere to that side which
shall appear most reasonable. Perhaps you are not yet arrived to that Height of
Impiety as to resolve right or wrong to change your Religion, whether you find
it true or false upon a just and fair Examination; for this is such an horrible
defiance of God, such an express and absolute Renunciation of all that is
sacred and good as no Man can be guilty of who is not utterly abandoned of all
his natural Sense of Religion, and Relish of Good and Evil. But yet perhaps you
may be tempted to change with the Prospect of such Advantages on the one side,
and Calamities on the other, which though it does not obtain of you that base
and wicked Resolution, yet does so far prevail as to engage you upon a fresh
Enquiry to try whether upon second Thoughts and better Consideration, you can
satisfy your own Minds of the Truth of that Religion you are invited to turn
to, that so you may, if possible, comply with a good Conscience, and secure
your Interest in doing your Duty. And thus far you are safe enough; but before
you proceed any farther, it concerns you, as you tender your everlasting
Interest, to look into your own Souls, and consider seriously whether you are
unfeignedly resolved, whatsoever the Consequence of Things may be, to cleave
fast to the Truth of God on which side soever you shall find it. Put the
Question to your selves over and over, O my Soul, here are such, Advantages,
and such Calamities before you, importuning you to change your present
discountenanced Religion for a more thriving and prosperous One: Are you now
resolved fairly and impartially to examine the Merit of the Cause? And if
thereupon you still find Reason to believe that your present Religion is the
very Truth of Jesus, will you rather renounce those Advantages and incur those
Calamities than for go it? Will you follow the Truth wheresoever you find it,
and whithersoever it shall happen to lead you, though it be from Preferment to
Persecution? Are you resolved by the Grace of God to prostrate all your
temporal Hopes and Fears before it, and rather to lose any Good, or suffer any
Evil than desert it? For let me tell you, if you find your heart shrink at this
Proposal, or that you have any reserved Intention, if the worst come to the
worst, rather to part with your Religion right or wrong, than to shake hands
with your temporal Interest, you are in a very unfitting Temper to examine on
which side the Truth lies. For it is a plain Case, your Mind is under a
prevailing Bias of temporal Hopes and Fears, which will be sure to incline it
to favor that side of the Question which is most for your Interest, and 'twill
be impossible for you to examine fairly and judge impartially whilst your
Judgment is thus bribed and corrupted by your Interest. For your Will has
already determined upon the Matter before ever your Understanding has heard
the Cause, and it is your secret Intention, right or wrong to forgo your
Religion rather than your Interest, if ever they come in Competition. So that
now you will be obliged in your own Defense to use your utmost Art to set the
fairest Colors upon the Evidences against your Religion, and to stifle and
enervate those that assert and maintain it, lest they should so confirm you in
the Belief of it as that when Occasion requires, you will not be able to
surrender it up without committing an horrible Outrage and Violence upon your
selves. Wherefore before you suffer your worldly Hopes and Fears to summon your
Religion upon a new Trial, be sure you fix this Resolution in your Souls; By
the Grace of God I will now lay aside all Interest and Affection, and strictly
examine the Evidence on both Sides with an equal and unbiased Judgment. I will
attend to nothing but the Reasons of Things and the pure Merits of the Cause;
and wherever I find the Truth lies, whether on the side of my Interest or
against it, I will be sure to follow it whatsoever shall be the Event and
Issue. For if upon the Temptation of any worldly Interest you bring your
Religion to a new Trial, with this secret Intention, that though it should
still aprove it self to your Judgment, yet you will rather part with it than
abandon that Interest, this very Intention will be apt to blind and mislead
your Judgment, to arm your Wit and Reason against your Religion, and to set all
your Faculties at work to argue you out of it, and pervert you from it to a
contrary Faith and Persuasion; which if it should accomplish, you will
certainly be found guilty of a willful Apostasy when you come to be tried
before the Tribunal of God, to whose all-seeing Eye the most secret Motions of
your Souls are as visible as if they were written on your Foreheads with a
Sunbeam; who sees your treacherous Heart, and false Intention rather to
forsake his Truth than your Interest, and knows very well that it is this that
seduces you, and gives Force to those false Reasons and Convictions that impose
upon your Judgment, and betray your Faith.

6. And lastly, When you fall under any Temptation to change your Religion,
consider whether before you were inclined to change you did conscitiously
comply with the Obligations of it. We have too many Men that pretend to be
mighty inquisitive after the true Church and the true Religion, and yet live as
if there were no such thing as true Religion in the World, and quietly allow
themselves in such impious Courses as do openly affront the common Principles
of all Religions. There is nothing they dread so much as Heresy, and, if you
will believe them, are monstrously concerned to examine whether the Church with
which they now communicate be Catholic or Heretical; and yet all this while
they persist without any Concern or Remorse in the most damnable Heresy in the
World, and that is a wicked and immoral Life. So that upon comparing their
Atheistical Lives with the loud Cry they make about the true Catholic Faith
and Church, one would be tempted to think that their Christianity began at the
wrong End of their Creed, and that they believed in the Holy Catholic Church
before they believe in God the Father Almighty, or in Jesus Christ his only Son
our Lord; Which is such a gross and fulsom Piece of Hypocrisy as one would
think any modest Man should be ashamed of. For in the name of God; Sirs, What
have you to do to wrangle and make a Noise about Religion, whose profligate
Manners are a Shame and Scandal to common Humanity? It is a Reproach to any
Religion for you to name it, and Shame to any Church for you to pretend to it;
and therefore when such as you raise a Cry after the true Church and true
Religion, it is a plain Case that whatever Pretense you bring upon the Stage
you are prompted by some base Interest behind the Curtain. And is it not a
pleasant Thing to hear such Profligates as these pretend to be Converts, who
only turn from one Opinion to another, but still continue as wicked and
unreformed in their Manners under the Opinion they turn to, as they were under
that they turned from? These are such Converts as there is no Church in the
World that advances true Piety above worldly Interest, but would glory to lose,
and blush to gain: And what Diogenes said of a wicked Fellow that praised him,
that the Religion may say which those Men turn to, What Hurt have I done, what
wicked Principles am I guilty of, that such vile Wretches as these should
commend and embrace me? For for God's sake, what is it that they are converted
to? Is it to any Thing that renders them wiser or better Men? No, The contrary
is too notorious through the whole Course of their Actions. Well then, it seems
they are converted to something that does them no manner of Good, that serves
them to no true End of Religion, that is to a mere empty Notion that only
gingles about their Understandings, but has no good Influence on their Hearts
and Manners. Had their Conversion proceeded-upon pure Principles of Conscience,
that would have obliged them to change their Manners as well as their Opinions;
there being very few Opinions in Religion so contradictory to the natural
Sentiments of Conscience as a vicious and immoral Life. Supposing that the
Papal Supremacy, Purgatory, and Transubstantiation were true, yet that the
contrary Doctrins to these are Errors can never be so evident to any Man's
Conscience, as that Drunkenness, Adultery, Fraud and Oppression are Sins; and
therefore for any Man to pretend that he forsook those Errors out of
Conscience, who yet makes no Conscience of continuing in these Sins is such a
transparent Hypocrisy as has not Vizor and Disguize enough to abuse either the
most Candid or Credulous. If therefore before you are resolved to forsake your
Sins you are tempted to forsake your Religion, it is a plain Case that it is
not your Conscience or Conviction that tempts you, but your Lust or Interest.
Had it been Conscience, it would have been far more importunate with you to
reform your Manners than your Faith, and to become good Men, than Catholic
Believers; and therefore under your present Circumstances you ought to be very
careful what you do, and how you comply with the Temptation, lest to all the
Rest of your Sins you add that foul and fatal one of Apostasy, and thereby fill
up the Measure of your Iniquities, and finally provoke Almighty God to abandon
you as you have abandoned him, and give you up for lost and desperate.

FINIS.

