A Seasonable Caution to Apostate Protestants: Or, Mercy and Judgment at once
Visible: Wherein you will find heart refreshing Mercy to the Firm Protestants; and
Soul ruining Vengeance on the rotten Time-serving ones that turn Papists.
Verifying, in the very letter, that Promise, Whosoever will save his life,
shall lose it: and whosoever will lose his life for my sake, shall find it:
Mat. 16. 25. (as here the true Protestants did, who gave themselves up for dead
men, rather than turn Papists to save their lives; and yet were miraculously
saved: when, at the same time, the Rotten unsound Protestants, who, at that
Pinch, turned Papists to save their lives, yet perished.
Written by Mercurius Hibernicus, an Ey-witness of the Protestants Miseries,
and of the Papists Treacheries in Ireland; from whom expect several sheets to
the shame of Popery.
NOW are the Days, doubtless, whereof Christ and his Apostles forewarned us;
That there should be a departing or falling away from the Faith: (1 Timothy 4. 1.
2 Pet. 3. 3. Jude 18.) and that because of Iniquities abounding, the love of
many should wax cold, Matthew. 24. 12. Cold for Christ, and the true Christian
Religion; Nay, They shall even deny Christ, 2 Pet. 2. 1. 2 Timothy 2. 12. And
these things, with many more are come to pass at this very day.

And this has proceeded from the cursed design of the JESUITS, and the rest
of the Romish Faction, who debauch many great Ones, and they, by their wicked
Example (which almost carries the sorce of a Command with it) the whole
Comonalty, (by deluding them with pretenses of Venial sins, and Pardons, etc.)
For is not Whoring, Swaring, Drunkning, Lying, Aequivocating, etc. become as a
mighty Stream overflowing the whole Land, thereby fitting us for some worse
Judgment, if the Plague, the Fire, and other Punishments we have had, do no
good upon us. Therefore be steadfast: How dreadful is it to consider, and what
a sure Token of approaching Judgment is it, to see

I. Many quandam zealous Protestants, grown of late so cold, (colder since the
PLOT than before) so narrow spirited and basely timorous, (thinking it is a
great piece of discretion, and that they show an emphatical piece of Wisdom)
That when Discourse is raised in Company, concerning POPERY, they will either
shift it off with a Drool, force some other Discourse, or sneak away, in hopes
to save their Bakon, (cujus contrarium verum est,) so that, really, they are
ashamed, or half afraid to own themselves Protestants: Showing not so mch zeal
for the true Worship of the true God, as a Turk does for Mahomets, or a Heathen
for his Idol: hereby declaring that they have sat under a dead Ministry, of
whom God has said, They shall not profit the People. Those that never felt the
Power of God, under an Ordinance, in turning them from all Sin, and showing
them the desperateness of their Condition without Christ, a holy Life, etc.
will turn to any, the worst of prevailing Religions, especially to that which
tollerates Sin, as Popery does: nay, makes it meritorious, as murdering Kings,
burning Cities, etc!

II. Others are so pusillanimous, so dirty, and dastardly; That they dare not
own the Truth, when they hear it traduced and impugned by men popishly
affected: when e'n the Spirit of God and their own Consciences prompt them to
speak: as if they were ashamed of Christ, (See Mark 8. 38.) and with Spira,
desperately quench and resist the Motions of the Holy Ghost: and if any put
them to it by Interrogatories, they will answer with an Equivocation, or an
Italian shrug: Know, they that dare not Speak for Christ, will hardly either Do
or Suffer for him; These are light Wheat, that will soon be blown aside, if the
Wind rises a little: especially, if Euroclydon blow hard.

III. There is also another sort, who, tho they will talk pretty freely
concerning the PLOT, etc. yet their words are so cunningly and artificially
placed, as if they were coined on purpose: Yea their Expressions are many times
so ambiguous, and savoring of the JESUITS canting Querks, that the wisest Man
alive can hardly tell what to make of them: and all these three aim at the same
thing, viz. hoping, by Silence, Indifferency, and Neutrality, to find favor of
the Papists, if they should get uppermost; which is the greatest Folly
imaginable: as I could evince by many woeful Examples, in the Rebellion, in
Ireland where they were most egregiously perfidious, promising the Protestants
quarter, but in stead thereof murdered them in cold Blood: And this one
Relation, shall serve in stead of many, whereby you may see, if you will, what
you are to expect when they have the Sword, etc. Take it faithfully as I
received it from Captain Edward Leventhorp, and others.

DUring the late Wars in Ireland, A Castle well manned with English,
Protestants, being suddenly and straightly besieged by the Enemy, in so much,
that in few days, they were reduced to so great Extremity, that they must of
necessity either starve, or yield to the Mercy of the merciless and implacable
Papists (whose tender Mercies are Cruelty; as all along the Maryan Days, the
Troubles in Germany, and the Irish Rebellion has been proved.)

Hereupon, the Day and Hour being appointed whereon they should march out of
the Castle, without any thing, save only their wearing Clothes: These Noble
Souls (I call them so for their Magnanimity for the Cause of Jesus Christ) came
out of the Castle, and as soon as ever they came forth, so soon were they
surrounded by the Enemy; as you see in this Figure: who, with drawn swords in
their hands, waited only for the Word of Command to fall on, and cut them in
pieces: whilst, the other poor Souls were upon their Knees, one while calling
upon God for Mercy, and another while crying to their Enemies for Pity: but the
Papists had sworn the Ruin of them all, and had done it too, if GOD by a
strange and wonderful way had not prevented it. For, just as the Commander was
about to give the Word, to fall on, and spare none of the English Soldiers;
GOD, I say! put it into the Commanders mind, to ask them one Question first:
and it was this, He demanded if there were any Roman Catholics among them? if
there be (said he) let them draw out, and separate from the rest, who were to
stand still: The Word was no sooner out of his Mouth, but out came three or
four, and confessed themselves Roman Catholics, and withal antedated their
Religion: after them, came half a dozen, and at the heels of them half a score
more, and diverse others after them, and all acknowleding themselves Catholics,
ante-dating, as the first did. Whereat the Popish Commander turned about and
smiled: and when no more would come, he asked the rest that stood Firm, If they
were resolved to dye PROTESTANTS? They, (like true Christians, Heaven born
Souls indeed) answered, That they would not change their Religion to save their
LIVES!

Say you so? Quoth the Popish Commander! But what, I pray, Do'nt you think the
others that separated from you good Catholics? No, (said the steadfast
Soldiers) because they never owned themselves as such till now, and they do it
for fear of Death.



I verily believe it, (said the Commander) for I thought as much before. Then
turning to the rest of his Officers and Soldiers, he said, Them yonder,
meaning those that separated, are but Counterfeit Catholics, and the Rogues do
it only to save their LIVES, and to abuse us, for they will run away the next
Opportunity: Therefore, by GOD, they shall die every man of them, and the other
for standing so bravely to their Principles shall live; and whom I would sooner
trust, upon any occasion, than the other, or any such Time-serving Rascals, as
they are!

In short, he put all the Revolters to the Sword, and saved the other for their
brave Resolution: and not only so, but sent them with a safe Conduct to the
next English Garrison, having as many of his own sent in Exchange, that had
been Prisoners. By this noble Act, the said Commander won great Applause
amongst the English.

Now, consider this, all ye that think to save your Lives and Estates by
temporising and basely ante-dating your Religion, or dirtily complying with,
and fawning upon every base pitiful (the most of them are no better) Papist
before hand, as if ye would forespeak Friendship, as I am too sure many do. And
possibly, you that are next to, removed but one little step from them, may find
some favor, for a very little time, from them, till you and them, if they can
by any idle foolish pretense get you to assist them against such as are more
zealous against their Idolatries: But, when their work is so far done, then
they will more easily cut you off too, for the least step of Reformation since
Qu. Mary's days, their Soul hates, even as the purest worship. For I can liken
them to no better a Crew than Rogues and Thieves that live in an honest place;
who will carry it very fairly among the Neighborhood, to have some ^^dies good
word at a pinch: so they, make to some one party to shelter under them: and
the^^ only Polyphemus's Courtesy will be yours, that is, to die last; when you
have seen the Throats of others cut, your own turn comes next.

There are Seven sorts that above all others are most likely to turn Apostates,
viz. The Covetous, the Ambitious, the Self-lovers, the Over-nice, the
Formalists, the Ignorant and the Fearful. See Rev. 21. 8. Mat. 10. 33. Mark.
13. 13. Rev. 2. 10. 25. 1 Cor. 16. 13. Phil. 4. 1. 1 Cor. 10. 12.

These 7 include the first three abovenamed; and are wrapped up in the word
HYPOCRITE; and amongst them, there are diverse great Professors even of all
sorts, who (as well as the loose, ignorant, debauched, profane Protestants)
for fear or favor, may join with the Papists against sincere Protestants; as
the Lutherans joined with Papists against the Calvenists, An. 1567. and about
the 10 year of Q. Eliz. especially when allured thereto by the curious Arts of
Jesuits and their Proselytes, the P^^ltring Baits of Profit and Preferment.
Seconded by the lusty (tho feigned) Promises of some principal Papists and
their Agents. But God can (and perhaps will) bring it so to pass, That such
revolting Wrethes, may be served as they above mentioned: or, if not so, yet
they cannot escape Vengeance: for I am confident they will perish by one means
or other, perchance by the hands of true Protestants: And, for my own part, I
do profess, (if God will make use of the Arm of Flesh, in our defense) I would
sooner give quarter to French or any other outlandish-Papist, than any English
Apostate whatsoever (Laity or Clergy) that should join in Arms with them, or
our domestic or home-born Papists against the Protestants Cause.

And I write this with an heart that never yet feared the greatest or the
proudest Papist in the World: who have been at the routing of such, almost an
hundred times, in my junior days: and therefore, I think, I should know the
better how to deal with them now; if they will needs force us to it, by falling
upon us first: for till then we will not stir one foot: Let them otherwise
provoke us never so much, as they have done very often, and do daily: besides
burning of London, Southwark, etc. But as crafty Fowlers as they are, they
shall not catch old Birds in the Chaff.

Be steadfast, 1 Cor. 15. 58. -- stand fast, 1 Cor. 16. 13. For, In all Gods
Armory, there is no defense for the Back, the Runagade, the Apostate must
everlastingly perish. O Apostate bethink thy self betimes!

True Protestants will rather choose to die,
Than Christ, or their Religion deny:
And bravely persevere, come, what will come,
But Hypocrites will bow the Knee to Rome,
Even these 7 Monsters, which I named before,
Would Popery, if it were up, adore.
Notwithstanding all this, Let us, and all that think they stand, beware lest
we fall, (1 Cor. 10. 12.) as they may, without Divine Assistance:
Self-Confidence being a most dangerous Rock on which many have split, even in
this present Age: Remember the Apostle Peter: and the Apostate Pendleton, in
the Book of Martyrs.

LONDON, Printed by Th. Dawks, living in Black friars. Sold by Langly Curtis in
Goat Court on Ludgate Hill. Where also may always be had, 1. Godfrys Murder
made Visible, containing the Cruelties of the Papists therein. 2. A Chronology
of Popery, showing When and Who brought in their Fopperies. 3. Packs of Cards
illustrating the Plot, with a Book to explain them. 4. The Beggars Petition to
Hen. 8. against Popery showing Reasons enough why the King did throw off the
Popes Authority. 5. Dr. Otes's Vindication for discovering the Plot, tho the
wicked Papists rage at him for it. 6. Romes hunting match for III Kingdoms. 7.
Englands Calamity foreshewn from the Growth of Popery. 8. Dr. Salmons
Dispensatory. 9. Dr. Salmons Horae Mathematicae, or Soul of Astrology,
containing an account of Nativities by Inspection only, without Calculation;
and of the evil of the next succeeding years, etc. 10. Famous Mr. Rich's
Absence supplied, by a Key to his Shorthand Table, faithfully discovering the
whole Art, in that Method, he taught his Scholars, together with the reserved
Rules in their proper places: the Table being little worth without this Key; as
also that all Books of this Art, in Mr. Rich's Name are Counterfeits: and for
the Truth hereof he appeals to Mr Rich's Scholars.

The Papists Method in spreading their Pamphlets and Pestilent Books, is this,
When the People come to Confession, every Priest injoyns those that confess,
and expect Absolution, to buy such Books as promote, holy Mother Churches
Interest, and that they lend them to the poor sort, their Neighbors and
others; and this they must do either as a Meritorious Act, or as a Penance for
some fault.


