ANIMADVERSIONS UPON A Letter and Paper, first sent to His Highness by certain
Gentlemen and others in Wales: And since printed, and published to the world
by some of the Subscribers.

BY ONE Whose Desire and Endeavor is, TO Preserve Peace and Safety, By removing
Offense and Enmity.

Printed in the year 1656.

A Preface to the Subscribers of the Paper.
FRIENDS:
I Have formerly been engaged in our public Affairs, but have since been so
long disingaged, as may well free me from the suspicion of being a Courtier;
being both offended at, and an offense to them that be in Power: I am free from
all Parties that are in the Nation, and shall use my Liberty, in dealing as
impartially as I can (or as my weakness will permit) 'twixt you and our present
Governors, whom you oppose; if I do incline to either side, it is to you, as
most needing Pity: It Is true, they are to be pitied rather than envied, yet
your condition seems to me much worse than theirs every way, as much weaker and
darker, in your way and spirits, as you are in outward place (...) power. I am
a man so much under Temptation, Offense, Persecution and Contempt, that if
there be a Party of such, I am very natural to them; and, if there be any by as
in my temper to incline me to any, it is to such: I assure you, upon the review
of what I have written, my Judgment smites me, for having been more gentle to
you, than in Justice and in true Love I ought to be, or than your case requires
I should be; and therefore shall, I doubt, in transcribing of it, be
necessitated to more sharpness than I intended: But if I were not conscious to
my self of a Design of Love to you in it, and that in this work I should more
serve you than them, I could not proceed in it.

I have examined and observed all things of this nature (that I have met with)
against this present Government, they have passed the private censure of my
Pen, though not published; and this I must say of yours and the rest, That
though this present state of things be very reproveable, having much evil in
it; yet none of you have come forth in Righteousness and Judgment against it,
nor in a Light that is able either to Convince or Instruct; but a deal of weak
and dark Accusations, from minds uncasie and sick with Passion and Discontent,
all tending to blow up a Spirit of Wrath and Violence, and so to multiply our
Wounds and Maladies, not to cure them. I have hitherto been silent, thinking
that those weak Passions that have looked out, would vanish quickly as smoke,
and so they have: But in this Paper of yours the humors are more gross, are
gathered together, and come out in an outward Tumor, as if you intended to make
a business of it; and therefore I am drawn forth in public to Treat fairly
with you, and to divert you from your course, which, I fear, is dangerous to
your selves and to us all: And this I do upon a double ground;

I. First, As one that has an Interest in the common Peace of the Nation, and
in the Safety of the Honest and Religious Party; both which are lodged, for the
present, in this Government, be it never so corrupt: This Open and United
declaring against it, with such Violence and Boldness, tends to undermine our
Peace, by Raising a New War, and so to let in miserable Confusion amongst us:
Your Design seems to be, To take the Power out of these men's hands into your
own; which is, (...), a vain and irrational Attempt, for the Sword is already
d^^^sed of, and settled, not to be removed: You may Disturb, Wa^^e and Destroy,
by opening a way for your and our Enemies, but not get it to your selves; and
if you had it, you would undo us, and make your selves more miserable by your
Reigning, than you can be by Suffering: God, I know, can bring Light out of
Darkness, and Salvation out of Confusion; but as a Man, my Nature is much
engaged to uphold this wretched Frame of things, in which our Peace and Safety
seems to lie, till God be pleased to find a better way for us, rather than the
whole work should run back into utter Desolation and Confusion: And therefore
cannot but withstand your Spirit, in which there does not appoar either
Strength to get, or Wisdom to use Power; if you should have so much Wrath and
Fury to administer, as to overthrow this Power, you might continue a time to
Torment the Nation; but the same Violence and Wrath would hurry you on to such
things, as would Ruin both your selves and us.

II. Secondly, I would deal with you as a Christian, and one that earnestly
desire to see the least: Beam of the true Glory of that Kingdom of Christ that
you profess for: True, you have the Name and Notion of it amongst you, and that
too pitifully besmeared with Darkness and Folly; but for the thing it self, you
are so short of it, yea so opposite to it, that when it shall come forth in
Truth and Power, you will not be able to stand before it; I am very much
persuaded, that if you had any thing of a sober and real sense of your selves
and it, of your own Vileness and Uncleanness, and of its Majesty and Purity,
you would hide your selves in Shame and Self-condemnation, and not appear
openly for it: And therefore I cannot, but in that little knowledge that I have
of Religion, appear against your Unjust and Undue claim to the Kingdom of
Christ: It may be you are confident you have it, and act for it, and do expect
that all should bow to that broken Image of it that you have set up; whatever
you now think, 'twill be at last found a great kindeness to you, to tell you,
That you in your present Actings are not so much as in a way to it; but are
setting up Passion, Enmity, Darkness and Wrath, not the Grace of Christ and His
Kingdom.

O take no pleasure in meddling with Sin and Evil in any, God knows is a grief
to me to deal with it; were it not necessary for your Instruction, I could not
at all take notice of: I am sorry I am not able to do you good, without
discovering your weakness to you and the world; my intention is not to condemn
or dishonor you, but to direct you into a better path: You are now come forth
against your Brethren in the common Road of Accusation and worldly Enmity,
wherein you disturb the peace of your own house, where you may live quietly;
you gratify your Enemies, and that railing, wrathful Spirit that is abroad in
the world, and cannot but wound and vex your own souls: I shall only wish you
to retire into your selves and your own souls; you fight now with the Fame,
Appearance and outward Show of Sin in your Brethren; you may at home deal with
the very Spirit, Body and Root of the same Unrighteousnes, where if you
prevail, you may come forth to convince them and save us; whereas in that
blind way in which you are, you can do nothing, but wound, provoke, build up
Wrath, harden and strengthen Sin amongst us.

As it is not my intent to condemn you so not to justify them that you
condemn; The whole world cries out against them: I have not Love enough to wipe
off all that is charged upon them, they must therefore patiently bear their
Reproach, till God bring sorth their Righteousness; I fear they are guilty, it
may be, of more than you can accuse them of; but certainly, not of all you
accuse them of: Its a small thing to be judged of man; If they have Innocence
at home, 'twill make them think so: Man judges by appearance, God searches the
heart; They are upon their Trial, and will in time show what is in them: All
that I desire for them is, That they may not be disturbed in their Work, which
is, To Protect as in Peace and Safety, till God bring forth some more excellent
Glory amongst us: They are a People that profess the Name of God, and have
appeal^d to him, and do daily; It Is much my mind, That they might stand
against Man's violence, and that God would be pleased to judge their Cause
himself: To his Justice and Mercy let us leave them.

Friends, Bear with me, I am offended at them with you, and at you with them,
and most of all at my self: I (...) ^^stifie my self in what I do, but am in
fear, lest while I ^^^^rpose, I may be guilty of greater Folly than either of
you: As I cannot justify my self, so can I not condemn my self as guilty of
any known Evil in it; for that Fear of the Lord that makes me doubt all my
Actions; makes me likewise careful to avoid Evil. What I offer to you, is the
frame of my Spirit concerning public Transactions, and the Observations that I
have made upon things while I have been a Spectator; Thus far I may commend
them to you, That what I administer to you (if you can receive it) will be more
profitable and pleasant to you, than that Spirit in which you act: All that I
desire of you is, but that you would lay aside Wrath, malice, etc. which darken
the mind, and that you would with Meekness admit them to a friendly and
ingenuous Consideration. If these Animadversions may but a little ease your
troubled Spirits, temper and alay your Anger, 'twill be an ease to you, and a
pleasure to

Your unknown Friend,

The LETTER and PAPER enclosed, Subscribed by certain Gentlemen and others in
WALES, and sent to His Highness; viz.
A WORD FOR GOD: OR, A Testimony on Truths behalf; from several Churches, and
diverse hundreds of Christians in Wales (and some sew adjacent) against
Wickedness in High places. With a Letter to the Lord General CROMWELL. Both,
first presented to his own hands, and now published for further Information.

Job 36.1. Suffer me a little, and I will show thee that I have yet to speak on
Gods behalf.

Isa. 43.8, 9. Fear ye not, neither be afraid: have not I told thee from that
time, and have declared it? ye are then my witnesses. Is there a God besides
me? Yea there is no God, I know not any.

They that make a graven image are all of them vanity, and their delectable
things shall not profit; and they are their own witnesses, they see not, nor
know, that they may be ashamed.


To OLIVER CROMWELL Captain General of all the Forces in England, Scotland and
Ireland.
SIR;
Forasmuch as you have caused great searchings of heart, and Divisions among
many of Gods people, by a sudden, strange and unexpected Alteration of
Government, and other Actions, to the great astonishment of those who knew your
former public Resolutions and Declarations; considering also how (contrary to
foregoing Acts and Engagements) you have taken upon you a Power, by which you
are utterly disenabled (and if there were in you a heart) to prosecate the good
things covenanted and contended for, with so many great hazards, and the
effusion of so much precious blood; and by reason whereof you are become justly
suspected in your Ends in time past, and Actions for future, to very many of
those, of whose Affections and faithful Services you have enjoyed no small
share; in all the difficult Passages and Enterprises of the late War: These
things considered by us (as we know they are by many Churches and Saints) and
there being a deep sense upon our Spirits, of the Odium under which the Name of
Christ, his Cause, People and Ways do lie, as it were buried) as also of the
exceeding Contempt which the wonderful and excellent Operations of God are
brought into, even those eminent Wonders which the Nations have been Spectators
and Witnesses of, and wherein your hands have been partly engaged in. We cannot
(after much serious consideration, and seeking of the Lord, many of us, both
together and apart) but present to your hands the ensuing Testimony, which
(however you may look thereon) is no more than Necessity exacts from us for the
clearing of our own souls from guilt, and discharging of our duty to God and
Men. Therefore we earnestly wish you to peruse and weigh it, as in the sight of
God, with a calm and Christian-like Spirit, and harden not your neck against
the Truth, as you will answer it to the great Judge, before whose impartial
Tribunal you (as well as we) shall be very shortly cited, to give an account of
things done in the body; whether good or evil, where the true Motives and Ends
of all your Actions will be evident, where no Apology will be accepted of, for
your slighting and blaspheming of the Spirit of God, nor for the hard measure
you give his people, by Reproaches, Imprisonments, and other Oppressions; and,
where Pride, Luxury, Lasciviousness, and Changing of Principles, and forsaking
the good ways of Justice and Holiness, will not have the smalleft rag of
pretense to hide them from the eyes of the Judge. Which things (whatsoever you
say for your self) are (even at, present to be read in your forehead) and have
produced most sad effects every where; Especially (1) in filling of the Saints
hearts and faces with an inexpressible grief and shame; and (2) the stopping
(at least) the strong current of their prayers, which was once for you, if not
the turning thereof directly against you: To these we might add, (3) the
hardening of wicked men, yea the refreshing and justifying of them in their evil
doings and speakings against the Gospel, Name and Spirit of our Lord Jesus
Christ; And lastly, Gods signal withdrawing from you and your Designs. Oh that
then you would lie down in the dust, and acknowledge your Iniquity, and return
unto the Lord by unfeigned Repentance, doing your first work; and that you
would make haste to do so, lest Gods fury break forth like fire upon you, and
there be no quenching of it. This would rejoice us much, as being real
Well-wishers to your Souls everlasting Happiness, though we must with equal
Pity and Detestation, Declare against your Designs and Way.


A WORD for GOD.
THe wise God that teaches the fowls of Heaven to know their appointed times
(who directs his peoples work in Truth) has, we hope, Ier. 8.7.
directed us (after a long time of silence and carnest seeking the Lord) to
express and declare what we sinde in our consciences touching the transaction
of this season; and though some may think (as we our selves have been tempted
to think) That this is a time wherein the prudent should hold his peace, it
being such an evil time, that men are made Offenders, yea Traitors for Words;
yet considring how the Lords Remembrancers should not keep silence, Ier. 20.9.
and fearing that if we should altogether hold our peace at such a time as this
(as Mordecai said to Hester) Deliverance would come another way; Isa. 62.6.
and we could expect no share in the enlargement of Gods people, or safety in
the day of trouble: Hest. 4.14.
Withal sinding how Self would prompt us (like Issachar) to see that rest is
good, and outward prosperity pleasant; Genesis 49.^5.
and how the same temptations (which we sinde and fear many of our dear
Brethren. to be under) have set upon some of us, as to have men's persons in
admiration because of advantage, and by good words, fair speeches and promises,
to be deceived, and drawn away in simplicity, Inde. 16
especially by the example of some eminent in en (like Peter) insomuch that
many Barnaba's are carried away with their dissimulation, Romans 16 18.
and as well Ministers as Military men willing, to serve the King for his work
and wages: 2 Samuel 15.7.
However, seeing every man must give an account unto God for himself, we have
examined what particular duty was incumbent upon us, Gal. 2.13.
and how in faithfulness toward God, and meekness toward, Men, 2 Chronicles 4.23.
we should perform the same. Moreover, considering how the Saints did formerly
bear their testimony (not loving their lives unto the death) and by the blood
of the Lamb and their testimony did overcome; Romans 14.12.
and how God did heretofore stir up some of his people (both in England and
Scotland) to bear witness to the Truth and ways of God, Rev. 12 7.
against the ways and wickedness of Men) as a Forlorn-hope, though they were in
comparison but a few, Numb. 14.6, 7, 8, 9.
like Joshua and Caleb, two of twelve; or li the two Witnesses, a small, yet
suffcient number. Observing also, That there are present Truths, and every work
being beautiful in its season, Rev. 11 3.
as (in the beginning of the late Wars) was the witnessing against the Book of
Common Prayer, Surplice, Cross in Baptism, 2 Pet. 1 12.
and other Ceremonies, (being Superstitious things imposed by the Bishops) and
against Ship Money, Monopolies, etc, (Civil things) imposed formerly by the
King: All which were afterward declared, protested and covenanted against;
which Protestation and Covenant are fresh in the memories, and pressing the
Consciences of some of us, even unto this day; besides the Engagement, and the
several Acts of Parliament made against Monarchy or Kingly Government; All
which now seem to be forgotten or neglected: And those that spoke or writ in
defense of such things, as the Parliament, Army, and the Godly people in the
three Nations approved, asserted, and purchased at a dear rate, are now
accounted Fanatic Fools, Disturbers of Civil State, and Intermedlers in things
that concern them not; under which notion many suffer Imprisonment, and other
trials, as Evildoers, from those men, who now build what they did once
destroy, and justify what they did once condemn: Aug. 1. 1650. p. 11, 12
Witness their own Writings, particularly The Declaratio of the Officers and
Soldiers of the English Army (whereof the Lord Cromwell was General) The words
whereof are as follows: We are persuaded in our Consciences, That the late
King and His Monarchy, was one of the ten Horns of the Beast spoken of, Rev.
17.13, etc. And that we were called forth by the Lord, to be instrumental to
bring about that which was our continual prayer unto God, viz. The destruction
of Antichrist, and the deliverance of his Church and people: And upon this
single account we engaged, not knowing the deep Policies of worldly Statesmen;
and have ever since hazarded our lives in the high places of the field (where
we have seen many wonders of the Lord) against all the Opposers of the work of
Jesus Christ, whom we have all along seen going with us, and making our way
plain before us: And having these things singly in our eye, namely, The
destruction of Antichrist, The advancement of the Kingdom of Christ, The
deliverance of his Church, and the establishment thereof in the use of his
Ordinances, in Purity, according to his Word, and the just Civil Liberties of
English mem. These, with many other expressions, both in the Declaration and
several other Papers of the Army, Letters of the General, cited both in the
Declaration of the Members of several Churches, and Petitions of the three
Colonels, Sanders Okey and Allured
besides several other Papers which might be instanced in, which we leave to
all unbyassed men to consider, and compare with actions done by the sarne men
since that time. But in pursuance of our duty to God, our fellow Members and
Contrymen, as we are Christians, having a right to the things of Christ, and
as we are men having a right to our Native Privileges, We do Declare our real
Apprehensions and Consciences, which (to the great grief of some of us) we have
so long concealed, waiting if God might by his providence alter our minds.

I. That the Sins and present condition of this Nation holds parallel in many
things with the old Israelites, after the mighty wonders of God showed unto
them in their great deliverance out of Egypt: For instance, Psalm. 106.13.
They and we have soon forgot God our Savior, and the great works which he did;
we have not set our hearts aright, and our Spirits have not been steadfast with
God, but have gone back, and dealt treacherously, Psa. 78.9.10.
and turned aside like, a deceitful Bow; and not trusting to his salvation,
have provoked the Lord to anger with our invention; Ps. 106.28, 29.
so that men have dominion over our bodies, and over our cattle, at their
pleasure: (...) 37.
And we are in great distress, for this is a day of trouble and of blasphemy;
for the children are come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring
forth.

II. That blessed Cause, and those noble Principles propounded and prosecuted
by the old Parliament, and the Good, people of this Nation (in the maintaining
of which God did miraculously appear) are now altogether laid aside and lost,
and another Cause and Interest (quite contrary, as we conceive) espoused and
maintained; for then the Advancement of Christ's Kingdom, the Extirpation of
Popery, and Popish Innovations, the Privileges of Parliament, the Liberty of
the Subjects, and an equal Distribution of Justice were declared and fought
for; and Tyranny, Oppression, Injustice, Arbitrariness, Destroying the
Privileges of Parliaments, we declared and engaged against: But how far some
men have now receded from, and acted contrarily, to the dishonor of God,
Scandal of Religion, great grief of many faithful men, and the strengthening of
the wicked in their principles, and justifying their practices, we leave to the
consideration of all those that are sober and wise.

III. Moreover, the unadvised and unwarrantable changing of the Government, and
a swearing thereunto, does (as we judge) put a Necessity upon the chief
Undertaker thereof, to overthrow the very foundation of a Commonwealth, and to
maintain the things comprised in the said Instrument (whether right or wrong)
And to turn the very edge and dint of his Sword against the faces and bowels of
such, as should or shall declare their Consciences contrary thereunto.

IV. As a consequence and fruit of this Forbidden Tree, many of the choice
Servants of God, and Faithful of the Nation (some Gentlemen, Ministers of the
Gospel, Soldiers, etc.) are imprisoned, without knowing their Accusers, or
having so much as was granted by the Heathens to the Apostles, or the benefit
of a fair and public trial, according to the Fundamental Laws of this Nation.

V. Under pretense of Necessity, still to continue the heavy Burdens of Taxes,
Art. 27. ^^ 30.
Customs, Excize, etc. upon the Nation, without (yea contrary to) the consent
of the People represented in Parliament, and contrary to their own Instrument.

VI. Notwithstanding all the fair pretenses and promises of Reformation, yet
what abominable and horrible Impieties, Injustice and Oppression, are there
couched and covered under this new Form, from the head to the tail (as the
Prophet says) treading in the footsteps of their predecessors; witness the
receiving of the Honors, Profits, Customs, Benefits, Tenths and First Fruits,
coming in formerly to the Crown; the Exalting of Sons, Servants, Friends and
Favorites (though some of them known to be wicked men) to the highest places
and greatest preferments, which the good Rulers of old, as Gideon, Nehemiah,
and others did not do, because of the fear of the Lord, and the bondage which
was heavy upon the people. Witness also the Unreasonableness of the Army, to
have so many Officers, which might easily be reduced to a lesser number, and
both Officers and Soldiers, for many years to receive their pay (even in a time
of Peace) when the poor Peasants or Tenants (who pay but Ten shillings Rent per
Annum) do pay out of their Penury, to maintain them in their Pomp and Luxury.

VII. We cannot, without grief, mention the sad eftects of the secret Design of
Hispaniola, to the loss of so many men's Lives, Expense of so much Blood and
Treasure, and the indangering of this Commonwealth by Invasion, as also thereby
rendering us a scorn and a snuff to all the Nations round about.

Lastly, We do Declare and publish to all from our very hearts and souls, That
those of us that hand any hand in joining with the Parliament and Army
heretofore, had no other Designs against the late King or his party, save as
they were Enemies to the Lord Christ, his Kingdom and people, hinderers of his
work, and Oppressors of the Nation; and that it never came into our hearts to
think or intend the pulling down of one Person to set up another, or one
Unrighteous Power to permit another; but as we aimed (primarily) at the Glory
of God, so likewise at the general good of the Nation, and particular benefit
and just Liberty of every man: And it grieves us that any just cause is given
them to stumble at Professors, or complain that they are deprived of their
Freedom, and several ways more oppressed, than in the days of the wickedst
Kings.

We do also believe in our hearts, That (though the wors;t things are not
without Gods permission and providence) yet that this Government is not of Gods
Approbation, or taken up by his counsel, or according to his Word; and
therefore we do utterly disclaim having any hand or heart in it: And for the
Contrivers and Undertakers thereof, we suspect and judge them to be great
Transgressors therein, and so much the more, because they are Professors of
Religion, and Declarers, Engagers, and Fighters against the very things they
now practice: And it is most evident to us, that they thereby build again what
before they did destroy; and in so doing they render Themselves, the Cause,
Religion, Name and People of God, abominable to Heathens, Papists, and profane
Enemies; which is a grief to our souls to consider.

We do also detest the practices of these men, in imprisoning the Saints of God
for their Consciences and Testimony, and just men, who stand for Moral and just
Principles, and the Freedom of the Nation and people; and their breaking of
Parliaments to effect their own Designs.

We do also from our souls witness against their new Modeling of Ministers (as
Antichristian) and keeping up of Parishes and Tithes (as Popish Innovations;)
and we disclaim all Adherents to, owning of, or joining with these men in their
ways; and do withdraw, 2 Timothy 3.
and desire all the Lords people to withdraw from these men, as those that are
guilty of the Sins of the Latter days, Matthew. 24.
and that have left following the Lord, and that Gods people should avoid their
sin, lest they partake with them in their plagues: Thus concluding our
Testimony, we subscribe our Names hereunto.

William Jones. John Morgan, John Thomas. Evan Jones. John Philips. Thomas
Jones. John Beevan. Thomas Lewis. Gabriel Lewis. Howel Thomas. Thomas Philips.
Willliam Howels. William Waters. Howel John. John Price. Meredith Philips.
William Jenkins. Thomas Prosser. Jenkin Grissith. Howel Williams. Thomas
Williams. Richard Howel. Watkin Price. William Powel. Thomas Powel. Lewis
Williams. Lewis Reece. Reece John. Howel Reece. Richard John. Richard Price.
John David. David Morgan. Morgan William. Morgan Robert. John William. Lewis
David. Thomas Edwards. Reece John. Jenkin Jones. William Jones. Ienkin Rosser.
Rice Rosser. Nicholas Griffiths. Lewelin Beevan. James Powel. Mirick Morgan.
Evan Meredith. William Jones. Meredith Rees. William Edward. Richard Roberts.
Lewis David. Morgan John. Richard Thomas. Meredith William. Wilkin Rice.
William watkin. Reece David. Watkin David. David William. William Philips. John
Williams. Henry Thomas. John Jones. John Farmer. Henry Meredith. Trehern
Morgan. Richard David. Evan John. Edward Evan. Thomas Evan. David Evan. Howel
Waters. Ienkin Waters. John Howel. Philip David. Rice Richard. Edward Matthews.
Watkin Richard. Thomas Evan. Lewelin Ienkin. Ienkin William. Thomas William.
Evan Lewelin, John Lewis. William waters. Morgan David. John David. David
Walter. Reece Jones. Philip Jones. Iervice Jones. Edward Ienkins. Watkin
Ienkins. David Thomas, Rice Jones. Evan John David William. Henry Williams.
John Bedward. Thomas Tunman. Robert Tunman. Roger Grissith. Thomas Morgan.
William Price. David Davies. David Price. Richard Morris. John Evans. David
Powel. Wall er Lewis. Richard Meredith. William Morris. James Haydock. William
Bostock Philip Russel. Edward Williams. James Morgan. David Rutherch. William
Bays. Reece Jones. Richard James. William Hopkins. Lewis Jones. William
Watkins. Richard Mils. John Thomas. John Smith. William Price. Vavasor Powel.
John Williams. John Hammer. Morris Grissith. Edward Owens. Richard Grissith.
Walter Davies. Thomas Gwin. Thomas Vaughan. John Powel, Rees Havard. Roger
Thomas. Thomas Lewis. John Watkin. Walter Lewis. William Thomas. William Lewis.
Richard Vaughan. David Jones. Rice Thomas. Henry Thomas. John Williams. Thomas
Powel. John David. John Rowbuck. Evan Watkin. Charles Lloyd. Hugh Thomas. Rosser
Watkin. Thomas Grissith. Lewis Price. Morgan Lloyd. William Thomas. Lewis
James. John Thomas. Robert Thomas. Howel Watkin. Thomas Price. Roger Williams.
John Baddam. John Powel. David Roberts. John Pugh. Thomas Parry. Howel
Williams. Walter Price. William Bevan. Lewis Prytherch. David William. Lewelin
ap John. Ienkin Grissith. Peter Chidlow. Arthur Chidlow. William Jones. Owen
Humphrey. Evan Thomas. Samuel Brees. John Lewis. William Bea^sley. Thomas
Morgans. John Symonds. William Beddoes. Morris Williams. James Williams.
William Matthews. Lewis Price. Evan Ellis. Richard Tudge. William Fernel.
Edward Gretholder. John Tomkins. Thomas Tudge. Hugh Evans. Owen Lewis. Owen
Jones. Edward Brees. Ralph Robothom. William Lewis. John Powel. David
Kadwalader. Rowland Tudge. David Evan. John Tibbots. Samuel Williams. Richard
Bromley. Richard Baxter. John Crowther. Francis Mason. John Evans. David
Philips. William Evans. Thomas Ellis. Thomas Crowther. Thomas Fernel. Richard
Irish. Henry Jones. William Phipps. William Beeket. Daniel Brees. Francis
Hancock Edward Irish. Oliver David. William Dabellis. Lewis Pugh. Richard
Rogers. Owen Jones. Edmund Rosser. John Meredith. William Thomas. Llewelin
Lewis. John Rowland. Lewis Williams. William Lewis. Edward Williams, Howel
Rees. Rowland Morgan. Philip Gyles. James Watkins. John James. Lewis Jones.
Michael Watkins. Edmund Morgan. Rosser Thomas. John Rosser. Thomas John. James
John. Elias Thomas. John Howel. William John. Rosser Watkin. Daniel John.
Thomas ap John. Gilbert Morris. Matthew Prichard. Edward Jones. Owen Edward.
David Thomas. John Pugh. Howel Thomas. Reece ap David. John Bevan. Thomas
Lloyd. Kenrick Jones. James Quarrel. Edward Williams. Edward Moore. John
Roberts. John Brown. Alexander Powel. Hugh Powel. John Nicholas. Philip
Williams. Robert Sanctley. John James. Edward Roberts. Walter Thimbleton. John
Fowler. Hugh Prichard. Henry Williams. William Win. Richard Saltonstal. Rice
Jones. Richard Williams. Philip Rogers. Richard Roberts. Thomas ap Thomas.
Ellice ap Roger. David ap Edward. David Lloyd, Thomas Edwards. Francis Lith.
James Park John Meredith. John Owens. William Iennings. George Ienkins. William
Heatley. John Lewis. David Jones. Ieffrey Parry. John Hughes. John Evans.
Richard Jones. William Rider. John Ratlieff. William Jones. Ralph Hopley. Hugh
Price. Grissith Jones. Brian Sixsmith. Nathaniel Edwards. John Meredith.
A POSTSCRIPT.
READER,
THis Paper had sooner come into thy hands, if the Subscribers hereof (who were
willing to do nothing rashly) had not waited for further counsel and direction
from God herein, than they had at the first intention of the publishing hereof;
and withal it was deferred for a tim^, h^ping that God might some other way
convince the Person chiefly conc^^ned in it: And seeing; God gave him time to
repent, and yet he repented not, (Rev 2.21.) we have published this our
Testimony. To which you might hope had many more Subscribers (who were willing
to own this Paper) If convenience and providerce had made way for it to (...)
into their view: There has been great endeavors to st^^le it in the (...); to
that end, some of the Subscribers were threatened with imprisonment, and Orders
were issued out to imprison some (whereof one was ^^cured) namely Mr. Vavasor
Powel, who was taken by a company of Soldiers, from a day of Fasting and Prayer
at Aberbech^n in Montgomery shire, where many Saints were gathered together,
which c^used much s^dness, yea and much hearr-breakings to them all; and he
remained for some time a prisoner upon that account.

ANIMADVERSIONS Upon a LETTER and PAPER subscribed and sent to His Highness,
by, etc.
I Intend not a captious Answer to this Letter and Paper, but a friendly Treaty
with the Subscribers, and such a Treaty as may be a service of Love to all
honest minds that are offended at the present Government or Governors: My
endeavor shall be, either to remove those Offenses out of the way, or to
enlarge men's minds, that they may walk in a way without Offense. I shall not
therefore, to carp at words, examine every particular passage of the Letter and
Paper; but shall choose out the knotty pieces which I conceive may, either in
our Affairs, or in the minds of men, he an occasion of stumbling, and shall
use the best skill I have to resolve them.

The Title is, A Word for God, or A Testimony on Truths behalf, from several
Churches, etc. against Wickedness in High Places: 1 The Inscription, A Word for
God, did at first grieve me, I thought the name of God was misplaced and
abused; Wit offered its service, to show the vanity and falsity of the Title,
Scripture would have confuted it and pulled it down: But Reverence to the Name
of God, and Love to you, would not accept of either of these to oppose; but
chooses rather to admit of your Title, and in the simplicity of what Light I
have, to Treat with you concerning it.

I will admit, that God has a Controversy with those you testisie against,
because they have sinned against him; they have departed from him, and he seems
to forsake them; and that you in this Division, are for God, against his People
and their Sins: This, I think, is the best of your case. God withholds his
Grace and Presence from his people, and suffers them to wander in Darkness and
Trouble, and gives this reason, Your iniquities have separated 'twixt me and
you, etc. You find this, and separate from them too, and testisie your dislike
of them, and detestation of their ways, and plead for God and his justice
against them: And this, you think, cannot but be holy, and safe, and your duty
to God. Before we question this, I shall propound another Case; which, though
it differ from yours, yet it may have something in it like yours, which may
give light to you, or at least offer something to you, which you have not yet
considered:

It Is the Case of Elijah, 1 Kings 19. The Israelites were at that time great
sinners: The man of God, so indeed he was, did oppose their sins; for the
discharge of his duty, he was in danger of his life; and to save himself, is
forced to say, and to hide himself in the wilderness, ver. 4. where he was sad
to think how cross things went to his ministry: For, though God had appeared
for him against his enemies, yet they went on still, and wickedness prevailed,
which was more than he could bear; and therefore in a passion desired he might
die: Being overcome, and even spent with the evil of the times and discontent,
he is by an Angel refreshed, who feeds him twice, v. 5, 6, 7. and 'twas such
miraculous food, that he walked forty days and forty nights in the strength of
that meat, ver. 8. and so came to Horeb, the mount of God. He has left Israel,
and so by the help of Angels, being extraordinarily assisted, he arrives at
Gods mount, and waits upon God there, where at first he declared his Covenant
with his people, by giving them his righteous Law. Such a man, so assisted, in
such a way; you cannot think it an injury to you, to be set by him, though you
meet with a reproof there: While he was here in a Cave, the word of the Lord
came to him, What do thou here Elijah? This is not thy place, thou art not in
thy work; thy Ministry is hot, thy Spirit active, but I intended it to be
employed in and with Israel, not against them; to keep alive that little good
that is in them, not to separate from them, and destroy them.

Elijah answers, and to save himself from the reproof, says, I have been very
jealous for the Lord God of Hosts: That what he had done, was for the Lord God,
and that in great zeal he had left them that left the Lord, Why should he
continue any longer with the children of Israel? His heart was for God, for
they have forsaken thy Covenant; not only broken their own Covenants, but
thine too; Thrown down thine Altars: The Name of Christ and his Cause lies as
it Were buried; They have killed thy Prophets and Ministers for their
Testimony; and I, I only am left: He thought there was none true, because none
of his temper; and none in Israel, because none in his cave; And they seek my
life, to take it away; I must leave them or dye, I cannot live amongst them,
ver. 10. Then God calls him forth of his private hole, his Cave, into which he
was retired, and from his melancholic, jealous, narrow, fearful Spirit, where
he could see nothing but himself and his own dark apprehensions, to consider
God in his several ways and dispensations, ver. 11. Go forth, and stand upon
the mount before the Lord: And to discover to him, of what Spirit he is, shows
him himself, and what things or spirits work or act before God, and yet God not
in them: A great and strong wind rends the mountain, and breaks the rocks in
pieces; after the wind an earthquake, more terrible then the wind; and after
that a fire, more fierce than the earthquake: He expected to find God in
these, but could not; therefore of each it is said, God was not in the wind, nor
in the earthquake, nor in the fire: He had been exercised in such kind of
Dispensations, which did either threaten or execute fierce wrath, but men were
not converted by such violent and terrible works. At this he was troubled, and
thinks that Israel, in refusing such mighty things, had for ever refused the
Lord himself; but he was mistaken if he so thought, for God was not in these
things: Neither was he himself moved by either of these, till the fourth came,
which was a still small voice; He looked upon the other, but finding not God
there, his very nature retired from them, being boystrous and violent: But as
soon as the still small voice came, which was humane and gentle, of his own
nature, heard best, and understood best within, at home in his very heart, this
was one with him; and presently he wraps his face in his mantle, and goes
forth, and stood in the entering in of the cave: This still small voice only
had power upon his heart, to draw it forth from it self to God. All men, good
and bad, that are turned aside from God by any kind of Lust or Passion, run
into some secret dark Den, where they lie: Now all Legal blustering Ministry's,
may for a while affect or affright, but draw not the creature out from himself,
where he is lodged, till God sends a still small voice into his heart, which is
the word in thy heart and mouth. This does a little convince Elijah, That God
was another thing than he for the present apprehended him; and therefore,
ashamed of himselft, he wraps his face in his mantle, and yields to go forth to
God; but is not yet fully convinced of his error. When men are strong and high
in their spirits, wherein they think they are for God, it is hard to convince
them, That their Zeal is not for God, but for their own Ministry and way, for
their own Lives and Honors: When God had moved him a little nearer to himself,
he falls upon him again, What do thou here, Elijah? or, What have thou to do
here? Thou art an Israelite, one with them, of the same nature, have sin in
thee as well as they, and they righteousness as thou have: Why do thou
separate from them, and become an Enemy to them? He stands stiffly for his way
that it was Zeal for God, saying the same words that he said before, ver. 14 A
consident and froward Spirit: God finding him so sixth in this angry way, as not
to be instructed by the sight of God, he leads him forth into a work suitable
to his mind; he was full of wrath, and therefore God imploys him in a way
wherein he might give him vent: If nothing will please thee, but to plague
Israel my people for their sins, Elijah shall bring it forth, but not
administer it by his own hand, Go on thy way to Damascus, and anoint Hazael
king of Syria: what a terrible malignant and cruel enemy to poor Israel this
Hazael proved, is afterward declared, 2 King. 8.12. Yet his name signifies
visions of God, or seeing of God; he might have his strength from the same
ground that Elijah had: Seeing what God had done to Israel, and how Israel had
sinned against God, and that seeing upon this God had forsaken Israel, from
this his Sword might he whetted against Israel: And this is the firstborn of
Elijah his fiery Spirit, ver. 16. And Iehu shall thou anoint to be King over
Israel; a man terrible enough against Idolatry, against Ahab, Iezebel, and the
Prophets of Baal; but constant to himself, so his name signifies, and so he
was, though a great Zelot against the corruption in Court, and in the Prophets,
and that according to the Word of the Lord; yet he had an eye to his own Honor:
And this was Elijah his second Son, and doubtless there was much of self in
Elijah; I have been very zealous: I, I only am left, and they seek my life.

His third command was, Elisha shall thou anoint Prophet in thy room: The
meaning was this, this Spirit of Elijah was of too violent a temper; and
therefore, like John, it must decrease; he must give over to another, to
Elisha, the salvation of God, so his name signifies: And it is the best of this
Spirit, it spends its fierceness, and is at last, being weary of it self,
willing to resign to him, whose nature is, not to destroy, but to save.

But poor Israel, that needs so many Rods, needs some Pity too, ver. 17. Him
that escapes the Sword of Hazael, shall Iehu stay; and him that escapes the
Sword of Iehu, shall Elisha slay; Slain and slain: yet at last, he that saves,
slays most, slays himself, to slay Self, Death and Enmity.

Yet, says God, ver. 18. I have left me seven thousand in Israel, the knees
that have not bowed unto Baal, etc. A complete number, a sufficient Army to
carry on his work; These are reserved to me, kept by God in secret, whose
hearts were inwardly and truly reserved to the Lord, so safe, that they could
not depart from him.

Now in all this it appears, That this Man of God was in a dark Spirit, for the
present, in a high discontent; for he thought he had been f r God, but was not:
Those things wherein he had been exercised, he over-valued them, and his
Ministry with them; for God was not in them, but in the still voice: He was
much out also concerning Israel, he thought they had been utterly lost, no good
lest amongst them; but was seven thousand short in his measure.

Lest you think I have misrepresented this Case of Elijah, you shall see it
censured in the Gospel, Romans 11.1. Has G d cast away his people? God forbid:
Some, that measure things by their own private and separated Spirit, think he
has; but God forbid, that there should be no more Mercy, nor Patience in God,
than there is in the best of men. ver. 2. Wot ye not what the Scripture says
of Elias, how he makes intercession against Israel? saying, ver. 3. Lord, they
have killed thy Prophets, dug down thy Altars, and I am left alone. He,
though a Prophet, was in a great error; in stead of interceding for, he
intercedes against Israel: it minds me of a Clause in this Letter, The strong
current of their Prayers, which was once for you, the turning thereof against
you: But this is not Prophet-like, it is rather like the worst malignant Spirit,
like the Accuser. -- And observe, That such declaring against Isreal's sin, is
plain interceding against them; it is indeed, to be instant and earnest for
their destruction: This I desire the Subscribers to mark: And this Judgment,
made upon some evil actions and outward appearance, by man darkened with
passion, was very far from God, and the Election of his Grace. A humane and
Legal Spirit, under a Covenant of Works, provoked into Enmity, is the nature of
this Spirit; and so Paul brings it in here, whatever it pretended to be zeal
for God, yet 'twas against God himself, and against the liberty of his
Election, and the Freeness of his Grace: I Will but apply the words of the
Apostle, ver. 5. Even so then at this time also, etc.

It may be you will deny the Application of Elijahs Case to yours, and will not
admit your Adversaries to be Israel; and I may also deny you to minister in the
Holiness, Power, Truth and Evidence that Elijah ministered in: Therefore I choose
rather to wave the parallel; only let this Case of Elijah be considered
absolutely by it self, and it does sufficiently evince these Conclusions:

I It Is very common, for humane Passion to intrude it self into Gods service,
yea it is very ambitious of being his Attorney to speak for God; and while he
seems to advance God, it is to prefer it self: For, who would not be on his
side, where he may Spoil, Plunder, Revenge freely.

II. If God be but angry a little, he will not want some to help it forward; he
needs not now the Devil, nor Egypt or Babylon to minister Wrath, he may find
enough Ministers or Prophets in Israel will sue for the employment; specially
if it be against Job, he will sinde Religious Friends, that will handle him
cruelly enough.

III. That if Man be employed in any Ministry, wherein there seems to be any
light or power, as coming from God; he is apt to magnify it above measure, and
to account of it as God himself, to expect the same Honor and Subjection that
is due to the Lord, though it be but a Whiffler, one that goes before to make
way for him.

IV. If this Ministry obtain not, and his way be refused, he is apt to be
highly displeased, and be foolishly angry beyond all reason; though all the
works of man are to vanish, and to give place to that which is perfect, yet man
commonly is so angry, that he will not outlive his Ministry.

V. But foolishly adhering to his Ministry, though it be of Sin and
Condemnation; when God repents of his anger, as ordinarily he does, he
over-eagerly engaging himself, is left behind, and so lost in it: Fleshly Zeal
is of a very slight and combustible nature, and if it get into the fire of Gods
anger against Sin, rarely comes off; but over-acting in it, is commonly
scorched and burnt up by it, and so may happily get to Heaven in a fiery
chariot as Elijah did, but is altogether unfit for any saving or healing work.
When Man's Enmity and Passion has gotten into Gods Name and Cause, if God
should not withhold Spirit and Power from it, and render it vain, it would make
mad work, destroy all but themselves; and therefore there is a necessity of
turning it home upon it self, that it may hurt none but it self, which is a
good and just end of it. These things well considered, might make men afraid to
intermeddle with Divine displeasure against others Sins, in which men are
ordinarily so busy, as if there were no other Religion.

But sure there is a more excellent way: When God was very angry, and justly,
with Israel, Exodus 32.10. Let me alone, says he to Moses, that my wrath may wax
hot against them; this was a good Spirit, to interpose, and to offer to be
blotted out of the book of God, ver. 32. rather than God should destroy his
people: Thus Christ does for us all, he is willing to become a sinner with us,
and there suffer the displeasure of God as the worst of sinners, rather than
suffer the wrath of God to break forth upon us: If he should take part with God
against sinners, what would become of you? If he be an Advocate for God and his
Justice, and not for Transgressors, alas how miserable were we all! This might
a little incline men's hearts, and bend them toward thoughts of Love, Pity, and
interceding for others, though transgressors.

You superscribe your Letter, To Oliver Cromwell, Captain General of all the
Forces of England, Scotland and Ireland: This Title is a fair one, and so
different from that which is ordinarily given him, that it cannot escape my
Animadversions; and it contains in it the head of the Quarrel, Whether Captain
General of the Forces of England, Scotland and Ireland, or Protector of the
Commonwealth of England, etc. If we could find one the true nature and inward
reason of both these, we might clear your understandings, and so in time
compose the difference: I shall a little consider the Person, and then his
Place or Title.

It Is better dealing with Things than Persons, they are so nice and curious,
that a man can hardly handle them without offending, especially if they be
Great ones; for there is a double temptation attends one in it: 1. To Flattery,
to please the Court: and 2. Of Detraction, to please the People: However, this
Person the Protector, being the chief subject of the Letter and Paper, I cannot
avoid speaking my Apprehensions of him; and being sensible of some ingenuity
and equality of mind in it, I shall do it without Apology.

I shall only give you my Observation of his Original, what he was before
these times, and then what share he has had in these late public Transactions:

I. First, this great Man is risen from a very low and an afflicted condition;
one that has suffered very great troubles of soul, lying a long time under
sore terrors and temptations, and at the same time in a very low condition for
outward things: in this School of Afflictions he was kept, till he had learned
the Lesson of the Cross, till his Will was broken into Submission to the Will
of God, etc. Religion that is thus laid into the soul with the hammer and fire,
is ordinarily more solid, and more useful than what comes in only by Light
into the Understanding. I have had opportunity to measure (as well as I was
able) most men that have appeared in any eminency in these times, and have
always observed his Spirit, as to the active or practical part of Religion, as
through, as full, as sound, and as hearty in it as any, yea more: it may be,
what I have now to say, is but my Fancy; but take it amongst other things, That
the time of his extreme suffering was, when this Cause of Religion, in which we
are now engaged, was at its lowest ebb; and that, when he came forth into
comfort of Spirit, and enlargement of estate, Religion began then to spring
forth into an interest divided from the Kingdom and Nation, though it was low,
yet it began to look abroad, and to seek either a new state here, or in other
Regions; and so he suffered and rose, or sprung forth with this cause, as if he
had one life with it.

II. Secondly, His manner of appearing in public Employment has been visible
to all: public work seemed to be exceeding natural to him, his soul was one
with it, which made him act with more vigor than other men, and so constant and
steady to it, as not to be discouraged by difficulties, nor taken off either by
offense or by opinions of other ways, as many eminent men have been, a main
pillar of the strength of it in all its changes; I must be excused if I tell my
thoughts of him, I am the freer in it, because they have continued with me in a
long time of offense and prejudice concerning him; There has to me appeared in
him a singular spirit of Brightness, Clearness, Largeness and Self-denial, of
care for, and love to the cause of Religion and honest men, as much above other
men, as Saul was higher than the people in stature of body; for which I did
conclude before ever he had any Command in Chief, that if ever this Cause did
succeed, he would be the Head of it: He had an honesty, an integrity, a
nobleness in him, which did attract and unite honest men to him; a love and
loveliness in which affections of good people did concenter, and a largeness to
receive and comprehend all honest men of differing judgments, and this He did
by the virtue and dignity of his Mind, long before he had the advantage of
Supreme Command to do it, which was a proof to me that his inward worth, not
any outward accident, has given him his preeminence.

To his great industry, faithfulness and wisdom in business, he has been
always attended with a singular blessing of Success in all his Affairs, and
that constant both in the Field and Council, and often times in some great
works the Word and Arm of the Lord has been revealed to him; and with him
(according to the manner of Gods speaking to his people in these days, by giving
in to the heart some Scriptures with great power and spirit) whereby his Faith
has been strengthened to attempt great things; As he has been often guided by
the word of the Lord in his great Undertakings, so I do think, and have
particular reason to believe, that in that which is so much offensive to men,
viz. The breaking of Civil and Worldly Powers, he has had the same Authority
and Word of Command.

Consider now such a person rising from great afflictions, from whence he comes
sanctified by grace, called forth into pablique action, and therein appearing
in largeness, integrity and courage; assisted with the presence and blessing of
God, guided and strengthened by the arm and word of the Lord, which above all
sets the clearest stamp of Majesty upon a man, according to the words of Christ
John 10.35. If he called them gods to whom the word of the Lord came: These
things together are certainly a foundation, yea, the substance of greater and
truer Honor, than these last Ages have had experience of.

Yet he has no reason at all to be proud, nor we much reason to boast of him;
for though these are excellent things, yet they have been shadowed and sullied
with very great weakness, that does much eclipse their luster; for besides the
dirt that malice cast upon him, and the pollution contracted from the nature of
his work, which has been destroying work, and so impure; besides these, I say,
there is personal weakness, rash passions, sudden engaging for, and as sudden
turning from things, which shows want of foresight, incontinency and
inconstancy of mind; some violent strains and leaps which have stretched
conscience and credit, large promising to oblige parties and persons, and too
short performance to give satisfaction, which show a mind not standing firmly
upon its own basis of truth, but carried off into looser ways of policy; And
though the tottering state of things may seem to excuse it, yet certainly such
actings so disproportionable to the truth and faithfulness of God, do more
shake him, and with him the public peace, than any thing in the world.

But notwithstanding these (or if not these, what ever other weakness may
cleave to him) I must prefer Oliver Cromwell in querpo, with the stamp of God
upon him, before Oliver Protector and all His train of Greatness; and that His
naked person, with what God has done in him, and by him, has really more
dignity and majesty upon it, than if he had with his Protectorship fetched from
Westminster all the Honors and Titles of all the kings of England; and
therefore I think, what ever may be fancied, the Subscribers have done him no
real injury, in writing, To Oliver Cromwell.

I have done with the person, and I am glad I have done with it, I may say of
my commending him, being a great person, as Paul said of his commending
himself, 2 Cor. 12.11. I am become a fool in glorying, ye have compelled me: It
looks foolishly and uncomely to me, and it may be to others more; but I have
been compelled to it, to testify the truth against men's ignorance and malice.

For the Title given him, Captain General of all the Forces in England,
Scotland and Ireland, I am not offended at it, for though some may think His
Highness is degraded by it, from Protector to General; yet he that will look
beyond that vail of discontent, that for the present covers your faces, and
will look into the more inward reason of your minds, in retaining this Title
of General, will not be much troubled at it, though he be very zealous of His
Highness honor: That which I think either is or should be your intent in it, is
this: if you consider;

First, That the Forces and Armies in England, Scotland and Ireland, are the
sole and proper interest of the godly party, being at first raised and since
mantain'd for the safety of good people, their spirits have most freely and
lively acted in them, and been the chief strength of them; so that the Forces
are theirs, or rather they are vertually and truly the Forces of England,
Scotland and Ireland, and that in distinction from, and opposition to all other
people of the Nation; of which the honest party may say as Jacob said of
Reuben, Genesis 49.3. Reuben thou art my firstborn, the beginning of my strength:
This military Power is the firstborn, the beginning of strength that God has
given his people in the earth.

Secondly, I suppose you may consider, that this Power of the Militia you now
have, or are, is as Jacob said of Reuben, The excellency of dignity, and the
excellency of power. The absolutest and perfectest power in the earth, having
the substance of all Government in it, it gives both reason and being of all
Government, Safety, and the name also; whence all Governments are called Powers
and the Sword in scripture: and that which makes it very suitable to this
season, that having the Forces in our hands, we have our Lives and Liberties
secured, and so may quietly wait for more light, and are free to dispose of our
selves according to the best light and understanding that shall be brought
forth amongst us; which is no small mercy, if we had hearts to improve it, to
be once free from all the yokes that were upon our necks by the blind and
malignant Constitutions of the Nations, and set free to follow the best light
God shall shine forth to us.

Thirdly, You have reason to consider, that as all former Powers are dissolved,
viz. The Power of King and Parliament, by their irreconcilable Breaches and
continued Wars; so this Title of Captain General of all the Forces of England,
Scotland and Ireland, does not only extinguish the three distinct Kingdoms and
their Governments, and subject them to these Forces, but lays waste the pales
whereby they were formerly divided, and turns them all into one Militia, under
the command of one General; for the Command of the Forces of all three
Kingdoms, is both a greater Power, and of another kind, and must needs swallow
up the three particular Governments into it self, which is a large field that
we are brought into: that now the General of these Forces has an unlimited
Power to enlarge his Militia, to take in all honest men if he please, and to
give them what pay he judges reasonable; and in order to it, to raise what
money he pleases in the three Nations, to restrain and secure what persons he
suspects to be Disturbers of his Army and Command, to inflict what punishment
he pleases upon his enemies, to make what Constitutions he will for the
securing these Forces, and to repeal all Laws that are against their Safety and
Quiet: These things are natural and essential to a General in and with his
Army, which will be accounted absurd for either King or Protector of England to
do: so royal and absolute Authority in the hands of an honest General entrusted
for, and in fellowship with the whole Party, in a capacity distinct from the
Nations, is a thing worth remembering.

Fourthly, You cannot but consider that the General has been the chief
Instrument of getting the sword into the hands of honest men: You cannot but
remember how industrious he was to have an honest Regiment, then an honest
Army, at least under honest Officers, how he sent for honest men from all parts
of the Nation, and employed and encouraged them; and this favor he showed to
honest men, as honest men without partiality; when he had gathered them
together, pleaded their Cause against their enemies: You know how constantly
the Work prosper'd in their hands under his Conduct, and how they have been
kept in union, and in order and discipline by his Wisdom and Government; so
that if the honest people of the three Nations have obtained an outward and
visible Power in the earth, and to be above their enemies, safe and secure, the
General is the immediate Patron and Father of it, it being first conceived, and
since brought forth and cherished, principally (as by an instrument) by his
Counsel and Conduct; and if he that gave life to this Body, should not uphold
and preserve it, it would in all probability fall into division and confusion;
therefore you have reason to challenge him to be General of all the Forces,
they consisting by him, and we in and by them.

Fifthly, This his Authority is so bright and unquestionable that none can deny
it, nor you, or any honest man a snare in it: This Title Captain General of all
the Forces, and so of all the Armies of honest men in the three Nations; it
has been the product of Providence, after our many years wars, openly declared
and sealed to by the Lord in all parts of the three Nations; therefore if you
had but united your selves to it, and taken in the interest and relation of all
honest men, which is your and their due (and must be implied, though not
expressed) it is then, I think, the honorablest Title in the world, a mercy
beyond all we could expect, had we eyes to see it, and hearts to make a sober
use of it.

I judge these very fundamental Considerations: First, The union of all honest
men to the Armies as their own. Secondly, The excellency and freedom of
Military power. Thirdly, That the Forces of the three Nations being united
under one General, are a Power larger and greater than their former civil and
divided States, and fully comprehends them in it self. Fourthly, That the
General is the Natural Father of this power. Fifthly, And all this the
workmanship of Providence, justified by Success in the face of all the world;
which put together, would make a good Ground for us to unite and stand upon.

The reason why you refuse the common Title of Protector, is I suppose this,
That as General he stood in a special relation to honest men, as divided from
their enemies and all others in an Army, where you expect a more open, friendly
and ingenious converse with him: You think he has by being Protector of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, levelled this Distinction, and
brought you into the common condition of the Nation, and now every man has as
much share in him as you or we: your discontent is jealousy, lest your Lord
General should forsake the wife of his youth, the honest people of the Nation,
his sister, his spouse, in the morning of her beauty, and commit adultery with
that rotten harlot, Old worldly Power and Greatness.

And that he should seem to desert you, and that general and unlimited Power
that he had with you, and you with him, and this won and worn in the face of
the three Nations, and take up a limited Power, a broken clipped Title, maimed
and imperfect, and that a Mushrom, a thing that rises in a night, none knows
from whence; that he should carry his and your conquering Sword, and hang it up
amongst the Monuments in Westminster, and fetch out of the old Records, or the
Lawyers pates, a ceremonial empty thing without spirit or vigor, and therewith
wrap up and invelope himself from the converse and enjoyment of his own body
and spouse: Now in this I confess, I would a little indulge your jealousy,
though it be mixed with an unseemly rage, yet I hope there is love at the
bottom, and a sense that His Highness has divested himself of too much of that
Greatness and Power which he had, and which is necessary to uphold us and our
cause in that state into which he has brought us: But withal let us consider
it is an error that deserves pity, it may be he intended it as an act of
humility, not of disloyalty, that he considered himself as a private person,
not as a General entrusted with all the Honor won by honest men in these wars,
and if he has wasted his strength and might by it, he will quickly feel the
want of it, and will be ready to entertain a loving invitation back again; and
if in stead of suing a Divorce, your Letter and Paper had been a loving
Challenge and Claim of your right to him, it might for ought I know have had a
very excellent effect.

Meeting with these two considerable Questions in your Title, I could not but
give them as serious a Consideration as I was able, in hope it may help to
clear our Work for the future: I shall now hasten to your Letter.

ANIMADVERSIONS UPON ALETTER sent to His HIGHNESS BY Certain GENTLEMEN and
others in WALES.
IN the beginning of your Letter you speak of A Sudden, Strange, and Unexpected
alteration of Government, etc. to the great astonishment, etc. I doubt it is the
vapors that do arise from your own passion, that do occasion this great
astonishment in you; for, let a man but with a little Reason view our late
public Transactions, and Change of Government will be no strange thing to him:
From the beginning of these times, we have been little but Changes; we have
changed from three States to two, from King, Lords and Commons, to Lords and
Commons; for a while they governed us, and then we turned from two to one, the
Commons only, without King and Lords: And this has been turned, purged,
dressed, broken and patched up again, diverse times and ways; these are great
changes of Government, but a greater yet follow^d: When the Remnant of the old
Parliament was taken away, that wherein the Authority of the King in Calling,
and the Liberty of the People in Choosing, met in one Constitution; And the then
General and his Council, private persons, exercise the Authority of the King,
and Liberty of the People, and merely out of their own wills create a
Parliament: Now all Civil Power is changed into Military, and that triumphing
in the highest Absoluteness, as if the Sword were the only Lord of the world,
the Alpha and Omega of Government; as if it gave the King his Majesty, and the
People their Freedom, and could challenge them when it pleased; yet this change
did not so much astonish you, for some of you were Members of this Parliament:
Neither had you reason to be offended at this, because by this change, your way
had an opportunity to put in its Claim to Power; this was the Vertical point.
The next change was rather downward again, into an Instrument, which sets up
One as Supreme, and a Parliament chosen by the People; this is not altogether
so strange to England as the former: Now which of these you mean, I know not;
to complain of the former change from the long Parliament to the little
Parliament, is against your own Interest; and to complain of a change from a
Parliament imposed, to a Parliament chosen, is against the Interest of the
People: I will not trouble you, to resolve which of these changes does affect
you most: Many are offended at the taking away the old Parliament, and that
Cause you seem to undertake; whether it be really your Interest, I Will not
determine: I shall only give you and others that are unsatisfied with that
act, my thoughts concerning it.

That long Parliament deserves to be mentioned with much Honor, by all Honest
men in the Nation that did adhere to it; for that it had in it many sound and
worthy men, and was a long time a Bulwark that kept off Slavery and Destruction
from breaking in upon us, in many a hard brunt and desperate assult; yet the
removing of them at that time, might be no injury to them or us:

I. That Parliament, as they then stood, was no Legal Constitution, nor had
they Right to the Government, by our Laws: What Right had they to take away the
Life and Office of a King, by whose Authority they were made a Parliament? Or
what Right had they to take away the House of Lords, a Constitution Ancienter
than themselves? When this was done, what just Power had they to constitute
themselves a Commonwealth? There was no act of the people that either made them
so, or gave them power to make themselves so; they had no such power inherent
in themselves, neither could they ever manifest any such stamp of Majesty set
upon them by God and his providence. Now, if the Parliament did assume the
Government, without any Rule or Authority, and impose It and Themselves upon
the People, and so upon the Army; what Law is broken, in pulling down that
which stands not by Law?

II. That Government, such a Constitution as it had, was from the Army; the
Army urged them to do justice upon the King, which they neither could nor durst
do themselves: For, they and eveny Rational man must confess, that were it not
for the Strength, Honor and Success of the Army, that which we call Parliament,
Government and Commonwealth, would have been made Confederacy and Rebellion.
It Is true, the Army did at least tolerate, and so far consent, as to submit to
this Government; but I know not that they by any act did ratify it, or ever
intend to perpetuate it: And that consent was not an act of Judgment and
Righteousness; for in all our Affairs hitherto we have not had so much light
and clearness, as to produce any work of true Wisdom and Understanding. But as
in all other things, so in this, we are driven and thrust forward from one
thing to that which is next, as the sense of Danger and the hopes of Ease lead
us, in the dark, without Judgment: And so the Army set up, or admit of this
Government, by a Parliament, without King and Lords, being at hand, knowing no
better, finding some ease in being freed from worse Oppressors, and as a
present convenience: And if they had power to admit it, or set it up, when they
found it useful; why may they not pull it down and reject it, when they felt it
grievous and burthensom.

III. That which you call the Government, as it never had a Formal Constitution
either from God or men (that I know of) so before it was taken down, it had
quite lost the nature and spirit of Government; a dry Tree, shrunk up into a
private and selfish spirit: There were good men and good things amongst them;
but as the Princes of Zoan, Isa. 19. mingled with a perverse and foolish
spirit, that four or five of the best of them could not agree in any one
Proposition for public good; though they were both wise and honest men, yet
(they themselves know) they were absurdly and peevishly divided, in so great a
confusion, that there could be no reason of expecting any more fruit from them:
They were a long while a Burden to the Nation, and the People very sensible of
it; and did, by a general dislike and scorn of them, re-call that choice that
they had made of them, and the Honor they had put upon them; and would, if the
Army had not guarded them, have expressed their rejecting of them from being
their Representatives, by pulling them out of the House; they were indeed full
ripe; and, had not the Army done it, the rage of Women, or some such base hand
would have gather^d them: 'Twas doubtless an Honor for them, to dye by so Noble
a hand, which had given and continued life to them: I believe they were
self-condemned, and the more ingenuous of them were sensible of an Enlargement,
by their being discharged from their sore and unprofitable travel; only having
long enjoyed their places, they lingered and were loath to depart; and when they
saw they must go, they would provide for their speedy return, and would have
dyed to live again: which was the great incivility done to them, in their
apprehensions, they were prevented in their propagating their likeness, and
themselves also into A new Representative.

IV. The then General and Officers did not this work voluntarily, which (for
ought I know) they might have done, had they had light and strength sufficient
for it; but they were thrust upon it by the Soldiers and inferior Officers,
which I suppose you may remember, and that your own spirit was busy and active
in it, and much rejoiced in it when it was done, and you had indeed some more
reason for it than others, for that body was very averse to your way, and to
the things you would have done, yea far more averse than this present Power is:
For you now to fetch your Enemies (so you counted them while they lived) out of
their Graves, to oppose and accuse your Friends, for an act which you approved
of, it is a strange change of your minds: If you could come out of this mist
of Discontent, and behold your present posture, how you seem to love, and plead
for that which is not; which, if it were again, you would seek the destroying
of it again; and how you prosecute them with hatred, which did your work for
you, and are your Friends, you would be greatly astonished at the strange form
of your own spirits (a greater wonder than Change of Governments) and you would
confess, I am apt to believe, That both your Love to them, and your Enmity to
these, is feigned and not real.

I must deal as nakedly as I can with you, and them, and all the world, and
tell you, That I do think there was Iniquity in that action, and in all actions
of that nature; for, pulling down is a dark and wrathful Ministry, and
ordinarily performed by such a spirit as Jehu had, whose name showed his
nature, sibi constans, constant to it self, or self-seeking, though employed by
God: To destroy old worldly buildings, though very rotten, is not a work for a
pure Evangelical spirit; the Vengeance administered may be righteous, but if
there were not a deal of fleshly Zeal, Pride, Self love, and some brutish
Cruelty or hardiness in us, we should not be fit for such a service. Therefore
I fear, before God will make use of us in any Honorable work, to build a place
of Rest for himself, he will wash away the stain of Blood that sticks upon us,
make us to be ashamed and loath our selves, for that Rashness, Fierceness and
Violence, that have accompanied all our late Wars and Transactions: Indeed a
right sight of this Evil, would make you and me, and all of us, not to condemn
others, but our selves, and the state or kind of the ministry we have been
exercis d in: But for you to overlook the evil of the whole Party, and of the
Parliament it self, in cutting down, by a long War and much Blood, King and
Lords, two Estates superior to themselves; and to seem to be astonished, that
an Army should gently lay aside that Parliament, which it had given life to and
upheld, and in such a season, in such a manner, where no Blood spilt, no Tears
shed, none made Fatherless, none Widows: This great trouble you express is some
strange and new grief taken up of late, you and others did rejoice in it. To
pull down old Houses, is a dusty and thankless work; they that live in them, or
are part of them, and subsist by them, will be angry at it: But that you should
be cordially offended at it, who expect another Kingdom and Monarchy, for whose
sake this is done; yea that did do it, and would do it again, if it were
undone: Or that you should complain of that done by these, while you are
endeavoring to do the same thing upon these, I cannot reach the reason of this
Mys^^ry! For who sees not, that you are about to change the Government if you
can, though it be by War? And therefore it is you express your fear that they
are utterly disabled to prosecute, etc. Angry at former changes, and fear we
shall have no more; that now things are bound up fast by an Oath and
Instrument, that we shall go no further, you need not fear it: This Government
was set up in haste, and not constituted with that Consideration and Wisdom, as
to last many Ages: The Earth reels and staggers as a drunken man, it is not an
Instrument that will keep it steady, and the minds of men so loose, as not to
be bound by Oaths; wait with patience, another change may make room for you,
before you be fit for action: Provide you Wisdom, Love, and Righteousness, our
Necessities will call for them, I fear, before you will be able to administer
them.

The next thing I would note to you is, You say, Justly suspected ends in time
past; and in your Paper, Not knowing the deep Policies of worldly Statesmen:
You use to acknowledge God in all these things, and that this work was carried
on with a high hand of Providence, beyond all the contrivance of men: Sure you
have changed your station, you were within, and saw the inward Spring, Gods
hand; now you are without, and look upon the outside of the Hanging, and there
you see Policy; our Judgments alter as our Sight, that which is a Man while we
are nigh to it in Love, removed at a distance by a little Enmity, seems to be a
Beast: Love thinks no evil, sees nothing but God in all; Enmity removes God
from the sight, and sets up men and deep designs.

I shall desire you to consider, 1. That Atheistical, worldly wise men use to
talk at this rate, This was designed long ago. 2. That they talk thus, because
they would seem to be wise, and to understand deep Policy. 3. Though they seem
to be wise, yet are become Fools; for it is the greatest folly, not to
acknowledge God in all things. 4. That men talk what they live, and do pretend
to, but cannot attain it, their attributing so much to Policy, shows they are
well-wishers to it, which may make us fear you will begin to tread in these
steps: But alas, how much better, safer and easier is it for you, to be
Children, and to ascribe things, though a^^^^st us, to Gods hand? May I not say
to you, as Paul to the Corinthians? 2 Cor. 11.3. I fear, lest by any means, as
the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be
corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ: You were children once, and
thought as simply and childishly as I do, That neither the Protector himself,
nor the wisest Heads amongst them, have the tenth part of that foresight that
is required to lay such a Design; I imagine they are as weak as you and I, and
other people, that know not what will be too morrow, nor have they foreseen the
things that are come to pass. Now pray how came you to be so wise, as to
understand these Politicians? who taught you this? I fear 'twas the Serpent,
the Accuser; sure these deep reaches do but torture and vex your minds,
therefore it is better to be children still, and to look up to Gods hand in all
things, be they good or evil: And if they are wise Statesmen, as I fear there
is too much of it amongst them (but not as you imagine) let us that are
standers by and overlook them, either pity them or laugh at them; for I am for
either, so it be innocent and harmless.

They have by their craft pulled down the King and his party, and set up
themselves in their place; this is the plot: And by this have made their
Enemies to hate them more than they did, and their Friends to hate them more
than ever they hated the Cavaliers; which they cannot but expect, if they sit
down in the Kings state; for who so odious, as a treacherous and apostate
Brother! Thus for a little forced Honor, they lift up themselves public
objects of Scorn and despite to both sides: A fine policy.

They may use their Policy, but God has a Design upon them, which has taken
effect; they are brought in a snare, catched in a net of perplexities, where
they are beset with Reproach, Danger and Trouble on every side, and know not
which way to go for Safety, they can neither go backwards nor forwards; Papists
and Cavaliers preparing against them abroad, their old Enemies at home more and
more enraged against them, their Friends and Brethren disserting and opposing
of them: If their worldly Policy has brought them into this pit, I am
confident, the more they devise, the deeper they will go into Confusion, and
that it must be Simplicity, Humility, and a childish Obedience to the Lord,
that must bring them out. It Is a fair warning to you, you are witnessing,
declaring, subscribing, engaging a party against these, as they against the
King, you begin to understand the way of it; if you should undermine them, as
they have done others (which I think you will not do) you would, by getting the
power and place, get the confusion, perplexity and trouble they have; and that
as much more, as your strength or cunning will be greater than theirs.

III. A third thing notable in your Letter, is a home Charge given the
Protector; it is indeed a stout Accusation, both for matter and manner; of
Slighting and Blaspheming the Spirit of God, Reproaching, Imprisoning and
Oppressing his people; Pride, Luxury, Lasciviousness, Changing of Principles,
Forsaking good ways, etc. and these to be read in his forehead; and that with a
citation to appear before the great Judge, and his impartial Tribunal: I am
unwilling to say how this agrees to the Maxim of Machiavel, Calumniate ^^^^ly,
something will stick: I had rather say to you, as our Lord to his Disciples,
when they were in such a passion, Luke 9.55. Ye know not what manner of Spirit
ye are of; they thought 'twas nothing but Zeal for Christ, exercised in a way
of God in Faith, and according to a good Scripture example, Lord, will thou
that we command fire to come down from Heaven, and consume them, as Elias, did?
But Christ disowns this, though it seems to be high Religion, yet it is but the
Spirit of the Destroyer, not of a Savior; The Son of Man is come, says he, not
to destroy men's lives, but to save them: Let me only desire you to turn your
minds a little from your present Anger, and to consider and answer these few
Questions:

Q. 1. Whether have you these things upon your own knowledge, or upon, the
report of others? Have all you that have subscribed this Paper, heard the
Protector Blaspheme the Spirit of God, and Reproach his People? etc. Or have
you seen His Pride, Luxury and Lasciviousness? I may well suppose you have not.

Q. 2. You say this is your Testimony and Witness; Dare you, or can you be
Witnesses of these things before any Judge? You subscribe and publish them; but
can any honest indifferent Judge admit of you to be lawful Witnesses in the
things you have not heard or seen?

Q. 3. Consider then, whether in this you act according to the lowest line of
Truth, according to the common Justice and Honesty that is amongst men? It Is a
great abomination, though commonly practiced amongst Professors, rashly to
receive and give credit to evil and false Reports of them they hate, or that
are of an opposite party, and that too in a way of Religion; which if examined,
will be judged, by the common Light of Nature to be, not only Ungodly, but
Unreasonable.

Q. 4. Whether do you think, that the great Judge will judge according to that
appearance, wherein you now behold the Protector and his actions? which is not
so good as by the sight of the Eye, and by the hearing of the Ear, but by
others seeing and hearing.

Q. 5. Whether, though you are now admitted to be Witnesses against the
Protector, as innocent persons, in the judgments of your selves and your own
party (it may be to none but your selves) yet when he and you (now two parties)
shall stand before the impartial Tribunal of the great Judge, whether then you
will be able to lift up your heads to accuse him, and will not rather be found
as guilty as he, and to stand in need of the same mercy with him?

Q. 6. It Is true, God will judge the Protector, for any rash and unseemly word
or act, against any persons or things that do but pretend to God; and for every
motion and expression of Pride, Falsehood, or vain Pleasures: But do you not
think that this Eye of God will pierce through this Mist of Calumny that is
upon him? Through this thick clay of worldly Greatness, with which he is now
daubed over and oppressed; and through the vail of Flesh, which makes him walk
unevenly; and search his Heart, whether it be Obedient and Upright, or true to
God and his work, or false in it, and seek to set up himself? God will
certainly prove and try him, the secret spirit of his mind, what it is in his
work; and when he has done that, do you not think he will search deeper than
his Spirit in his work, which may be weak and mixed, and at last judge him
according to the seed of Election, the seed of Christ and his Righteousness in
him? And then let me ask you, whether God will not so judge you? Look through
your vail of Duties, Profession and Ordinances; and try your Heart, with what
Spirit of Love, Obedience and Truth you are in your work; and whether will you
stand to this judgment? Or rather that God should judge you according to Grace,
to the Name and Nature of Christ, written upon you and in you? Sure the great
Judge will thus judge us at last, by his great judgment or last judgment, not
by the outward Conversation nor inward Intention, but finally by his eternal
Election, according to the Book of Life.

When you have considered these Questions, let me desire you to read the
thoughts of my heart concerning the particulars of your Charge; which thoughts
are not upon knowledge of Fact, but what account my Experience and Reason gives
me of such things: For if I do meet with such Reports as these, as sometimes I
do, and swallow them down without trying of them, and do bring them out again
in Discourse; I find they do pollute my soul, and that it is a very naughty
Spirit that made me either Receive or Report them: But when I have the exercise
of any kind of Judgment concerning them, I find cause to reject them; the
grief that I have received by them, makes me more expert in trying of them.

Slighting and Blaspheming the Spirit of God; I suppose some men bring to the
Protector, things in the Name of the Spirit, that he judges weak and foolish
Fancies, those he slights; others bring him things that he judges Ungodly, and
that, as they think, from the Spirit, these he blasphemes or speaks evil of:
And this he may do in Passion and fleshly hardness, not in tenderness to him
that utters them, who being grieved in his spirit, says the Spirit is slighted:
There is Blasphemy in one man against another, wherein both may pretend to the
Spirit, and this is too common: There is Blasphemy against the Son of Man; I
know not that any amongst us are guilty of this Blasphemy, because I see none
come forth in the power and purity of his Spirit; and if they do, Christ says,
It shall be forgiven them. But for Blasphemy against the Spirit, in that sense
wherein Christ expresses it, I dare not think any man guilty of it, because the
Spirit it self in his own majesty does not (to my sense) appear, but veiled
with humane weakness.

Reproaching and Imprisoning his people: We commonly call our selves and our
party, Gods people; but that you are so, excluding them, or that they are so,
excluding you, no third party or person can admit: And for Reproaches, you are
even with them if not beforehand; and, I doubt, would be in Imprisoning also,
if you had power. The conclusion that I make is this, Some of Gods people may
for their weakness deserve, and others in their weakness may inflict, Reproach
and Imprisonment upon Brethren.

Pride, Luxury, Lasciviousness: I suppose you intend only his high living,
though your words seem to charge his person with very foul abominations; I am
no Courtier, and therefore know not what his Conversation is in private: But in
the times of my acquaintance with him, I did not observe any such temper in
him; and in Reason, Age and multitude of Business, if not Virtue, should keep
him from such Sensuality now: I have heard also some that have been his
Servants, near to him, and strict observers of him, report, That his frequent
Praying Fasting and Watching, with other conscientious and strict Observances,
showed him inclined rather to turn Quaker than to looseness.

His way of living, I confess, I have sometimes grudged at, as too Kingly, and
not proportionable, either to his late condition; or to the present condition
of his Brethren; or to his own affairs, being in such want of Money: But upon
further examination of this Censure, I do find, that such as you and I are,
living at distance from such Greatness, our Minds and Breedings being as mean
as our Conditions, and our Spirits narrow and rigid, being outcasts also from
this present Glory, are troubled with a little Envy; and so not at all fit to
judge of it. I find others that have known what Greatness is, of n^bler and
freer minds, and live nearer to it, say, That there is nothing but what has
been ordinary, amongst noble Persons; not the tenth of what Expense has
formerly been, and no more than is necessary for the Honor of the Nation: This
I am sure, it is a mean and low Spirit this, that does at once envy and over
value uch Greatness; Solomon, that lived at another rate than the Protector,
gives us a true account of such men's conditions, Eccles. 5.11. When goods
increase, they are increased that eat them; and what good is there to the
owners thereof, saving the beholding them with their eyes?

Changing of Principles: Your way of Writing, shows you as unable to judge or
Principles as I am; our minds are so short and distempered by passion, that we
cannot give a Rational account of the series of Actions: If any cross our wills
and opinions, we are so much disturbed at the sense of the present evil done to
us, that we cannot consider the good that such persons have done, or now do for
us; All former things are forgotten, and we are nothing but Anger, and think
them nothing but Mischief or Wickedness.

And when we are enraged, we let fly at men's Principles, being not satisfied to
rebuke men's Actions, Opinions and Works, but would be avenged of their
Principles too; as if we would kill them at very heart, pull them up by the
roots, and leave them in an incurcable condition, Rotten in their Principles.
Men's Actions are crooked and various, Men's Opinions or Understandings, weak and
uncertain; Affections change as the wind; yea we may see the Heart waver and
stagger, sometimes Evil, sometimes Good carries it away: But how far goes Man
in the trying of these things? Can he search the Heart, to know what it is? But
Principles lie deeper than the Heart, and are indeed Christ, who is the
Principle, and Beginning of all things, who, though Heart fail, and Flesh fail,
yet he abides the root of all.

It Is worth considering, whether the Serpent may not, in directing the
blindeness of Man to charge all the weakness of their Brethren upon Principles,
intend to grieve and wound Christ himself: I do but propound it to consider,
because this kind of Uncharitableness is common, most men thinking they do'nt
charge home, nor speak to the purpose, if they do'nt reach men's Principles,
which indeed are safe enough from all men's Enmity. But alas, what a pitiful
thing it is for us, because by our expressing of our selves in words or
actions, in this mist of Confusion, we justle one against another, and offend
one another, our impatience presently rises high, and we quarrel with the
Principle; and would indeed (if we durst) be angry at God, that he leads not
all men the same way with us.

For the Protector, we do see plainly there is in him various Thoughts and
Counsels, sometimes he looks this way, sometimes that way, tossed about into
several stations and postures of Affairs; but of the Principles that move these
things, what they are, and how they work, I know not, nor dare judge.

Forsaking the good ways of Justice and Holiness: His way is in the wilderness,
and it is crooked; and has not our course been so from the beginning, reeling
and staggering this way and that way? And this shows, there is Injustice and
Unholiness amongst us, which cannot be excused, but must be bewailed: But
whether our late turns, which have been from your, mine, and many men's
judgments, have been a forsaking the good ways of Justice and Holiness, I know
not: In the way of Justice and Holiness, perfectly, I fear, we never yet were;
we may have mistaken it now, but may, I hope, gain by mistake, and be led into
it by a way we know not.

For your confident affirming to the Protector, That these things are even at
present to be read in his forehead; and, your citing him to answer it before
the great Judge, etc. It Is such a high strain of Confidence, that I am not able
to deal with it: You write as if you never intended to question your selves, or
be questioned by any other: But I beseech you consider, if there should be
found under these high Expressions, a Spirit of Enmity and Uncharitableness. If
you should present before the Lord, the common dirt of Report, which you gather
up in the streets of the World, and with it your own blind Passions and
Discontents; what cause of sorrow and shame will there be, for mingling such
profane stuff, and such highly holy things together? I Will tell you what I
think, That you will repent of this business if you live, and that long before
you shall come nigh the impartial Tribunal of God; and not only repent of this
Spirit, but of your great confidence in it. Blessed is the man that fears
always; had you feared more, you would have been more happy: My Soul trembles
at it, not daring to come, or to think that you should come to the Altar, much
less to the impartial Tribunal of God; with such a Spirit.

There is much of this Trade abroad in the world, men make it their work to
take up Reports against them they are disaffected to, and dress them up with
Religion, Scripture, a show of Zeal for God, and then cry them abroad, either
in Pulpits or in private Discourse, ordinarily mingled with either a bitter
curse, or a taunt and scorn: So that it is a very great part of the Religion
abroad, to defame their Adversaries, and this with great pleasure and a show of
Godliness.

I do desire that you and others would seriously weigh these Considerations
upon Exodus 23.1, 2, 3. Thou shall not raise, or as in Marg. receive a false
Report: Put not thine hand with the wicked, to be an unrighteous witness. 2.
Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil; neither shall thou speak in a
cause, to decline after many to wrest judgment. 3. Neither shall thou
countenance a poor man in his cause.

Let us consider what Reports are; generally, They are the echo or reflection
that men's persons and actions make upon Empty, Malicious and Proud minds:

I. Empty and hollow minds make a Report or noise; The solid Christian, his
voice is not heard in the streets, his work is inward, at home upon his own
soul, and his conversation is in heaven, with the glorious works of Christ;:
But the formal Hypocrite is a Busy body, exercised in the base and vile things
of other men's iniquities, or in the Report of them, which are vain and impure
things, like himself.

II. Reports are brought forth by Malice; did men love, they would cover
iniquity: Charity thinks no evil, rejoices not in iniquity, 1 Cor. 13.5, 6.
If a man did either love God or his Brother, he would abominate evil, not take
it into his thoughts, nor rejoice to hear or speak of iniquity, because
iniquity is an enemy both to God and to his Brother. But Malice, which is the
height of sin and wickedness, makes a man love sin, and delight in it, because
it serves him to pull down them that he hates: So that he joins himself to Sin,
and is Co^federate with it, because it does mischief to his Adversaries; and
therefore it is, that though he seem to dislike it, yet he gives it the
advantage of his gifts, his Zeal and Language to enlarge and advance it.

Malice is a very base thing, but this kind of malice is the worst: A noble
enemy trusts to the righteousness, truth and justice of his own Cause, and
being satisfied with that, can wait with patience till God bring forth his
righteousness; but scorns to defile himself, by making use either of the sins
of his Adversaries, or the lying reports of the world, to help his Cause, or
hurt his Enemies.

III. Pride raises Reports; for were a soul truly sensible of his own and
others miserable captivity in this world, and under this body of death, he
would not take pleasure in speaking of other men's evil actions, or the fame of
them, but his soul would be bowed down into secret mourning for the body and
root of Sin and Death in himself and others.

It Is indeed a cruel kind of prido, either to make men sinners if they are
not, or to make them worse than they are; or if they be indeed fallen, to
trample upon them, and insult over them by bitter and public Accusations; or
for men to exalt their own seeming Religion and Righteousness, by that which is
an offense to God, and a wound to his name, and their brethrens souls.

II. We see what is the root of reports, whence they come: Let us consider in
the next place that the Text calls them false reports: They are generally so,
they cannot be true that are the children of such parents, as Hypocrisy, Malice
and Pride: Man is a lie, he is so vain a thing, that he can hardly be true in
the best temper; he is a false and broken glass, that gives very imperfect
representations of things: Put a straight stick into the water, and it will
seem crooked, especially if the water be moved with the wind, so are the minds
of men naturally as water; and at this time water agitated by several winds of
Passions, Fa^^ions, Discontents, Jealousies, Prejudices and Enmities, so that
it is impossible to meet with a right representation of any man, or his actions
in the world: All sorts of men, good and bad, have been abused by reports, I
have observed it from the beginning of these times, we never could have a just
and true account of our Enemies, but very bad men have been made much worse by
reports; if I find a man delighting to censure them he dis-affects, though it
be mingled with a demure look and Scripture language, yet if it come only as
news, behind men's backs, to stir up rage against their Enemies, I conclude
it is false, either totally or in part, a thing not done, or not done with that
mind as is reported, or in that manner: And if any will trouble himself to
examine such a report to the bottom, I do not doubt but he will find it so;
but for my part, if I find him out of his way; in public, when it should be
in private, and behind the back, when it should be to the persons face; or if
I find him angry and biting, or idle jeering and quibling, I conclude him a
Vagabond, and count it more safe and easy to shut the door upon him; for if I
do but give him a nights lodging, he leaves the sting wherewith he wounded
another name in my spirit, to my great pain; and this I often find by
experience.

III. Therefore a third observation have I leaned from the Text, and experience
not to receive such false reports; The Receiver is guilty as well as the
Reporter: He that loves and makes a lie, Rev.22.15. they are thrust out
together; for he that loves, entertains and rejoices in a lie, is of the same
nature with him that made it; it is no excuse therefore, I heard it, and I heard
it of many honest men: A lie is a base, void, foul thing, which a heart that
loves truth may discern and reject, what ever tongue brings it; but hereby men
are cheated, if a friend bring it, and it be against an Enemy, we think we
shall do it wrong to question or suspect it, whereas we may justly suspect
every man; Man and Lie being so much allied: Parties are never free from
malice, nor malice free from lies, and therefore men had need take heed what
they receive in these days.

A second Branch of this Observation is, By receiving men raise a false report,
it may be from a disturbed passionate tongue into a more serious mind, and
from common idle talk, into devout and religious Considerations, and from them
into Pulpits, into praying and preaching, and at last it is raised, as in this
Letter, to the impartial Tribunal of God; so that which at first is either
nothing or some humane frailty, it may be some rash word or action from a
temptation, is made a great wickedness, for which the person and his way or
work is condemned, and Religion, Scripture and the Name of God brought in to
execute it: What follows in this Scripture, I would have the Subscribers and
all discontented people consider, Put not thy hand with the wicked to be an
unrighteous witness. The same things that you in this Letter and Paper testify
against our Governors, the common people of the Nation which you judge wicked
and profane, do exclaim against them: Change of Government, destroying the
Foundations of a Commonwealth, pulling down others to set up themselves, Taxes
upon pretense of necessity; These things are charged upon them by your and
their Enemies; which if you had consider^d, you would not have put your hands
to the Paper, neither will you any longer join with your wicked Enemies, to
destroy your Friends. Verse 2. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil,
etc. All forts of people almost are against the present Power, Cavaliers,
Presbyterians. Levellers, Anabaptists, reproaches are so general, and come so
thick, upon us in all places, that it is a kind of a crime not to comply: A man
can hardly keep the liberty of his own judgment; to think or hope well of the
present Government without the censure of being a Courtier: to dislike
Government is counted a virtue: It Is true, some of your Exceptions (and the
weakest of them) are proper to you and your party, but the most and the
strongest are Vox populi: Therefore your witness does either follow or lead a
multitude to do evil; which, if it does not condemn your Cause, it renders it
foully suspicious.

Verse 3. Neither shall thou countenance a poor man in his cause. This
discovers a subtle temptation which draws men into the snare of injustice,
while they seem to exercise mercy; there is a show of righteousness in
Suffering, which is very attractive to poverty, and move the Affection, if not
the Judgment to their Cause, be it right or wrong: Good men were lately low,
and evil men high; people are apt to think it is so still, and that Greatness is
oppression; and all suffering, righteousness: I doubt many are seduced by this
in these times, wherein there is so much of blind affection, and so little of
judgment: It Is surely good to be cautioned against the confidence of the
wicked, the strength of the multitude, and the insinuations of the poor.

It Is not amiss to read and consider what follows, If thou meet thine enemies
ox or ass going astray, etc. If thou see the ass of him that hates thee, lying
under his burden, etc. Here you have not an ox or ass going astray, and lying
under a burden, but men, your friends: The Text tells you your duty, if you be
able to perform it, it is to bring back that which is gone astray, and to help
that which lies under its burden.

These are the chief Things expressed in your Letter, which (as I conceive) do
offend your mind; some generals that run through both your Letter and the
Paper enclosed, we may consider hereafter. Your spirit comes forth more fully
in the Paper, which is the substance of your Testimony; where we have the
fairest opportunity of serving of you, by removing those stumbling blocks that
offend you; therefore I shall hasten to give you my thoughts of it.

ANIMADVERSIONS UPON A PAPER enclosed in a LETTER, and sent to His Highness
from some Gentlemen and others in Wales.
IN this Paper there is a Preface to the Articles, and the Articles themselves:
In the Preface you do as you do in your Letter, show us your Commission which
yon have, after a long time, earnest seeking of the Lord, what we find in our
consciences: and afterward, in faithfulness toward God, and meekness toward
men, perform what duty is incumbent upon us: and at last, in pursuance of our
duty to God, our fellowmembers, as Christians, as men, etc.

In these things I suppose you put much confidence, and think that none that
are religious will oppose a Work that comes into the field, in the name of Duty
and Conscience, accompanied with Prayer and Scriptures, etc. I deny not that
these things are amongst you, and in a great measure, but I would advise you
not to build too much upon them, for these Reasons:

I. First, Because, if you will look abroad, you cannot but see, what with
great grief; of heart I have observed, That in and with these things, viz. The
kingdom of Christ, Glory of God, much seeking of God, Conscience, Duty, etc. in
some, where there seems to be as much purity, sincerity and uprightness as in
your selves, I may say, more light, evidence and power; yet I say such vile
things have come forth in them and with them, which you your selves would
abhor, and which they themselves that brought them forth have sadly repented
of; do but therefore allow of a little suspicion of your selves, and consider,
that some while they honestly and heartily (for ought either themselves or
others know) seek after Christ, they are led into unreasonable and absurd
things, contrary to the light of Nature and Religion, and to the hurt of
themselves and mankind; and why may not you in your religious Zeal and Duties,
be carried into things contrary to the Law of Love, and destructive to your
selves and the public peace.

II. Secondly, Because you come forth, not against a people that are profane,
but such as are exercised in the same things that you are, a people that pray;
that wait and seek for God and his Light to guide them, as highly professing
and practicing religious Duties as your selves, and are in that wherein you
oppose them in their duty to God and men, and for ought that you or I can
judge, with as much sincerity as you, and such as have shined in the life of
godliness equal to you, if not beyond you, so that it is but praying against
praying, duty against duty, conscience against conscience, and sincerity
against sincerity; therefore if you do indeed honor these things as part of the
Grace and Kingdom of Christ, consider you do with Christ oppose Christ, you
sight against your own life and strength: Is it not then far more honorable and
Christian-like, to suffer the greatest loss of worldly Liberties and
Privileges, of Parliaments and Governments, and to pay Taxes, Tithes and all
that can be laid upon us, or that you contend against, rather than to war
Christ against Christ, duty against duty, prayer against prayer.

III. Thirdly, Because this Quarrel has been fought already in duty and
consicience to God, with prayer and seeking of the Lord, in defense of the
kingdom of Christ, and his Way and Worship, against a people who in obedience
to their King, maintained the Legal Rights and customary Worship of the Nation;
and judgment given in the case, not only for you, but for all the honest
people of the Nation which engaged for this cause; they therefore that will not
rest in the sentence of God, but make another Quarrel about the same thing
(wherein indeed there is none) will I think suffer as contentions in a high
degree; setting the way and people of Christ, against the way and people of
Christ; it is therefore but reason that good men and good things should now live
peaceably together, or if there be a difference, that we do not arm our selves
as the outwardly-religious against the outwardly profane; not with
Declarations, Accusations, nor with outward weapons, no nor with praying and
preaching in enmity, and against one another, as formely we did against the
Cavaliers; but with the spirit of God, which is a spirit of love and light,
with more inward weapons that will pierce to the dividing of soul and spirit.

IV. Fourthly, Because the things that you profess, and that we have spoken of,
had their time and their work in public, in which they appeared in power and
majesty against their enemies; but alas how much are they now polluted with
folly, madness, gross error, vanity, wrath and violence, as if the Abomination
of Desolation were in the holy place! It Is too visible in others, and visible
enough in your Paper, where there is (it grieves me to say it) falsehood, wrath,
deceit, and blowing the fire of War amongst brethren, which is abominable to
humble and gracious spirits, yea, to nature and reason, and tends directly to
lay us desolate, without safety or protection; therefore what ever you think of
the glory of your Cause, as you have dressed it up, I must in faithfulness tell
you my sense of it, (which I believe will be the sense of all rational men) I
had rather engage for the honest principles of Necessity, Safety, public
Peace, civil Government, though under many defects and corruptions, than for
the highest things that you profess, so as you now profess them; and though
this may appear to you profane, yet I know there is nothing more profane nor
more likely to extirpate all Religion, and to set Atheism on the throne, than
for honest and religious people to war upon one another.

Therefore Friends, before you go any further, be persuaded to come forth of
that private spirit in which you are, and with a little charity look abroad,
and you will find the Sun does not shine only into your window: That the law
of God is wondrous broad, and spreads it self over, and into other men's
consciences as well as yours, though with some difference, as the subject is
disposed to receive it; and that others are as true and obedient to that word
which is differently dispensed to them, as you are to what is manifest to you;
and you cannot but in reason conclude, that those that you oppose are bound in
duty to God and man, to keep the peace against all opposers whatsoever: and if
you are not sunk into, and covered over with your own Religion as some are,
their spirits being inferior to the Religion they profess, and so are mastered
by it, and not suffered to behold any thing but the glory of it, if it be not
so with you, you may see the same things in which you now come forth, in those
you oppose, and that owned and testified to by Gods providence, in giving them
a complete victory over their enemies; there the same things that you now
plead, have after long-sufferings and sore trials, attained more than we looked
for, and indeed as much as the world can afford, liberty, and power to secure
it: why then should not you rather, quietly enjoy and improve together that
great Mercy obtained by your and their praying and earnest seeking of God,
rather than begin a new and strange Contention 'twixt prayer and prayer, zeal
and zeal; for this strife, if it should go on, would be most black and
unchristian, and does threaten the utter defacing of the honor Religion has
gotten in the earth, a miserable overthrowing of that liberty and safety we
have, and the rooting out of Religion it self.

II. Secondly, Having showed us your Commission, from Conscience, Duty and
Faithfulness to God, etc. In the next place you in stead of propounding your
Grievances, or manifesting when the Difference began, and wherein it now
consists, or desiring satisfaction as brethren, you hasten to declare an
irreconcilable Enmity in the highest nature, and choose your ground to fight
upon, which is no worse than heaven, for which you quote Rev. 12.7. in the
margin, And there was war in heaven, Michael and his angels fought against the
Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his angels; and being engaged in the same
quarrel upon the same ground, you expect the same success; considering, say
you, they loved not their lives unto death, and by the blood of the Lamb and
their testimony did overcome: Thus have you leaped into heaven, and entered your
selves soldiers under Michael with his angels: I am unwilling to think or say
how unlike you are to the Lamb the Captain, or to such fellow soldiers; I
confess you are gotten out of my reach, I tremble to deal with men that will
but say they are members of that Army, therefore if you intend to secure your
Cause and selves by this high advance, you have your end; as to me, I shall not
dispute it with you, you may stay there till the sense of your passions and
weakness help you to understand the Revelations and your selves better.

But for the other Regiments that you are associated to, and speak of, that
were stirred up in England and Scotland to bear witness, etc. against the Book
of Common Prayer, Surplice, etc. and against Ship Money, Monopolies, etc. I may
be a little bolder, being things within my own knowledge and sphere: If I
should be too free with them, you would not be offended; if I should be too
plain with you, they would not be offended, because you are (how ever listed
here together) at a great distance in your opinions and affections.

In sum, you put your selves in the place of Micha^l and his angels, and the
Protector and them that join with him, in the place of the Dragon and his
angels; you are the heirs of the Saints, and of the honest old Puritan-party,
the witnesses, and they succeed the King* and his party, Egypt, Babylon,
Antichrist, etc. and by this devise,

First, you clothe your selves with heaven, purity, truth, and Christ his
Cause, a blessed state, unerring and undoubtedly successful! and them with
wickedness, falsehood, idolatry, a state of certain destruction.

II. Secondly, You conclude the cause has been heard, you have given in your
witness, they are condemned, there is nothing left but execution; you may now
fall on without any question, they will as surely fall before you as the Dragon
fell before Michael, or as the Kings- party fell before the Parliament-party.

III. Thirdly, This is your posture, an irreconcilable Enmity declared, no
possibility of repenting in them or you, no way in the world left for healing
or agreement, but desparately bound to fight it out; for this difference is not
'twixt brethren, nor between Israel back-slidden, and Israel abiding steadfast,
nor between the seed of the bondwoman and the seed of the freewoman, nor
between true Christians and hypocrites, nor between men enlightened and men yet
in darkness unconvinc'd, for all these may live in civil peace together, upon
the same earth, but a strife 'twixt Michael and the Dragon: 'twixt obstinate
and reprobated sinners, and blessed elected saints, where one party must be
saved in heaven, and the other must to hell.

IV. And fourthly, this only upon a similitude, and that made only in enmity
(which uses to put the highest stamp of wickedness upon enemies, and assume any
glory to it self, that he may by it be an excellent Destroyer) This made
comparison, and the consequent wrath, is without any real difference, either in
your spirits or work; for this I may affirm, that in the habits or qualities of
your minds to God, or in the work of God upon you, or your work for God, you
differ not; that is (setting aside knaves and hypocrites on both sides, which I
believe stir up enmity, and make the difference 'tween you) they are not
Babylon, nor you Zion; they not the seed of the serpent, and you of Christ, nor
the contrary. We intend not to meddle with the great Judgment of God, but with
your present standing, in which no indifferent man can have any show of reason,
to judge one party wicked the other godly, or that it is the work and design of
one to set up Christ, the other to set up Antichrist; but both of you are
brethren, children of the same Father, servants of the same Lord, of the same
repentance and faith, exercised in the same duties, with the same spirit,
laboring to advance the same Religion and Liberty in the Nation, only being in
darkness and under offense, you understand not wherein you either agree or
differ, but the difference is only in circumstances of tune, and manner of
doing things, and in outward condition; some have more, some less of the fallen
parties honor and riches, some are habited with outward greatness, others have
their lot in lowness and sufferings, some disguised with the outward palace of
the king, others disguised with the prison of old sufferers, these with some
petty differences in temper and natural disposition, some sudden and hot,
others heavier and cooler, some simpler, others wiser; these little things have
set up the standard of defiance: And besides these, I know no real difference
between you and them, except it be this late act of an Instrument, etc. which
is but one act, and that a sudden one, not set up or maintained in opposition
to any more excellent thing, only made and used as a prudential thing to
uphold a Government in the Nation, which you likewise would have upheld, though
you dislike their way and manner of doing it; but be persuaded to consider where
you are, and what you have done; you have blown up a deadly enmity 'twixt your
selves and your friends merely upon outward circumstances, or a false figure
and shadow of difference: It Is a fire that burns fiercely, and seems to be
implacable, but the fuel of it is very slight matter, or rather immaterial
speculations: when I consider how much you are one, and how little you differ,
how strongly and necessarily you are bound up in one Life, Religion and Safety,
and how airy and childish your strife is; You will excuse me, if I be a little
merry with your notional quarrel, these mistaken fancies may put you into a
fret, make you scold a little, but I hope there will be never a broken pate in
the cause.

It Is not at all a natural but a made and forced business, there being no
material ground of a quarrel, therefore though discontent and trouble put you
upon it rashly, yet me thinks you should not run so much hazard, with so much
labor and pains to maintain a mere notion and shadow of difference; if they
against whom you appear have but a little patience, and do nothing against you,
you must needs be weary of the quarrel and the cause quickly: finding the
foundation of the business so inconsiderable, I am almost inclined to leave it
off; but because, though it be little in it self, yet it is much to you, and you
seem to be serious in it, I shall endeavor what I can, to give you a better
understanding of them and your selves.

Now because this particular that we are upon, viz. That our present Governors
are in the place of, and Successors to the King and his party, and that you and
other unsatisfied people are in the place of, or are the honest and godly
party, I shall take a little pains to show the falacy of this conceit, which
does abuse many.

To clear this, let us search for, if we can find it, what was the real
difference 'twixt the Cavalier and the Puritan, and so what was the root of the
Quarrel 'twixt King and Parliament, and then see whether the same Quarrel be
carried on 'twixt the Subscribers and our present Governors.

In this controversy 'twixt the Religious and the Royal party, there was first
an inward Cause or Root of Division; and secondly there were many Disputes and
Questions, which were the effects of that Division: The first was less
observed, but more effectual; the second made a greater noise, more outward, as
if the Quarrel had been only about these things which were indeed but the
effects of division of hearts.

These outward things about which the Parliament and Parliamentary people were
exercised, were the Prerogative of the King, and Privileges of Parliament, the
Laws of the Land, the power of raising Money, Monopolies, Ship Money, etc. the
power of the Militia; and in sum, where the Supreme Power was, whether in the
King as Head, or in the Parliament the Representative of the People, the Body?
concerning these things you may observe:

I. First, They were but the outside of the Quarrel, wherein the more worldly
minds were exercised, and very remote from the inward Spring of difference
which lay deeper, as we shall see anon.

II. Secondly, In these things (if I do not much mistake) the King had the
better Cause, more justified by the ancient Laws of the Land, for though he had
been guilty of some mal^-administration of Government, yet he offered very
large satisfaction; neither were the Errors of his Government of so a high a
nature, as to deserve to be prosecuted by so violent a war, to Deposing and
Death: Some Princes I believe have done the same or worse things in Government,
and never questioned for them; but there was more at the bottom: and it may be
observed, that while the war was in the hands of men who only minded these
outward things, the King prosper'd exceedingly, and rose from a very low
condition to have far the greatest power; for those men that contended for
worldly power, did lust after, and unjustly challenge from the King those Royal
Prerogatives that our Laws had long given to the Crown, and for their lusting
fell in the wilderness.

III. Thirdly, These outward things of Law and Privilege, being but the
clothing of the Work, are worn out, and we are for the present (in such
respects) in a worse condition than formerly, Power more arbitrary, Taxes more
heavy, Privileges of Parliament more violated, Laws of less authority; and if
we could have foreseen what effects War and change of Government would
procure, we might in reason expect it; therefore they whose spirits are engaged
in these outward and worldly privileges and freedom only or mostly, have a
very hard bargain of it, and must needs be very much offended, if their hearts
do not value Religion, and the Liberties of it at a high rate, and have a
charitable opinion of it, that it will when it may attain some quiet and
security, bring forth the peoples liberties in more righteousness and largeness
than they have yet appeared in.

These Considerations premised concerning the outward part of the Quarrel
'twixt the two parties, let us now consider where the Original Division lay,
and whence it was that their spirits stood at such a distance one from another.

I. First, The honest or religious party, were by a work of God upon them,
changed in their minds, and were born into another spirit by the word of God,
converting and turning their hearts by Repentance and Faith toward God: this
life coming from God, depended upon him, subjected it self to him, would be
ruled by him, and not by man; the other party had no knowledge of this life,
but hated it, scorned it, dealt cruelly with it, would not suffer this child
to breathe its own breath in prayer, nor to speak its own language in
preaching, nor to eat its own food, or allow it its own growth; as inhumanely
cruel to it, as Egypt was to Israel, being strangely jealous of it, as if it
was the heir, and would in time get power to call them to account for all their
wickedness, they did bend the strength of the Government against it, and not
only so, but devised new stratagems to suppress it: We will not dispute
whether this life of godliness was in flesh or in spirit, 'twas doubtless much
in flesh, but not without spirit, but it was real, and such as did denominate
us to be the people and children of God, to be the seed of Israel, as the
enmity of the other party denominated them to be Egypt and Babylon, and to be
of Antichrist; so that here were two kinds of spirit or minds, one of God,
another of the world, one seeming to spring from the old stock of Abraham, and
of Christ and the Apostles; the other seeming to spring out of the world, out
of the earth: and the first took in all the godly party, hardly a man left out,
the other took in the chief of men maliciously bent against godliness: Now if
you my friends, that have subscribed this Paper, will but reflect upon your
selves, and look with the same eye upon your brethren, you cannot think that
there is in your selves a work of grace or godliness, that is not in them you
oppose, or that there is in them any such hatred to that grace of God, as was
in the Kings party; but you must conclude, that though they are a bone started
aside one way, you a bone started aside another way, yet you are members of the
same body.

II. Secondly, As these two parties, the Religious and Royal party differed in
the original and kind of their spirits, so did they in the law and rule of
their spirits; the one were subject to Christ and his Law in the worship of
God, and did see that he had given them Laws in his Word, far differing from
those which were practiced and commanded in the Nation, the other did stiffly
adhere to the Religion of their forefathers as it was established by law, and
would not admit of any other, but cruelly persecuted it, denying men to offer
to God such sacrifices as he required of them, and which they judged their duty
to serve him in; now pray consider, whether the case be so now 'twixt you and
your brethren whom you oppose, whether are you denied to perform any duty of
worship to God, that his word leads you to? nay, do not they do the same things
with you? or do you bring forth any rule or law of Christ in Religion that they
oppose; for civil things and Government, I think you don't pretend to any law
instituted by Christ. The notions and motions of your spirits may in some
circumstantial things clash, but you agree in your rule as to Religion, and to
follow the same law and rule of Christ in all things, so far as it is revealed
to you and them: freedom for your Consciences to serve the Lord in as much
holiness and purity as you can, you have as much as you can desire; if there
bea deviation from the rule in civil things, it is not in enmity to any rule, no
law of that nature coming forth that pretends to be from God.

It may be of good use both for you the Subscribers, and for the Protector and
our Governors, seriously to consider the inward spirit and root of difference
'twixt us and our enemies, and by it we may know where the marrow and strength
of our cause lies: It Is true, these things of godliness wrought in the heart,
and conscientious following the Rule and Law of Christ, did not at first appear
openly in Parliament or Army, and accordingly they thrived, but when they whose
hearts were engaged in these things came into action, and the King had to do
nakedly with such spirits, he fell before them, and was trampled under foot as
dirt; and it must needs be so, a people that have the least stamp or mark of
God, and his work and spirit upon them, and engaged to serve him, cannot but
with its weight and authority press down the fleshly arm and power of man as
nothing: I would propound it as a caution to both sides:

First to our Governors, that they will in all their affairs attend the motion
and growth of this spirit of godliness, and not to engage in Designs upon
principles of worldly policy, be they never so specious, but rather to sit
still, and to attend the cherishing and increasing of the life of godliness,
than to move in public actions till this life leads them forth; and then, not
out of prejudice or offense at the weakness and scruples of godly men to lay
them aside, and to commit their business to worldly men, though never so wise
and gallant men, but to lay the stress of all affairs upon this spirit, which
is doubtless the steddiest and truest to the works of God.

Secondly to the Subscribers and others, I would desire you to keep close to
the first principles of real inward godliness, and that you sink your spirits
more into Fundamentals, and not to suffer your minds to be elevated into high
strains, forms and notions of things, nor to be carried away with those who
never traveled in the way of godliness, and are either ignorant or unmindeful
of the Power and substance of Religion, which is your danger in your present
business; for many such we have that flutter about, and talk of Christ and his
kingdom, that never were seasoned with the principles of true Religion, and are
clouds without rain, wells without water; and while they profess for an outward
and glorious Reformation, oppose and quarrel with the truth of godliness, and
tall of outward freedom, while they are servants to Pride, Passion, Envy and
such like corruptions.

But upon a little more searching into the inward nature of things, you will
find your Quarrel very ill bottomed upon the former War; for you and your
brethren whom you now oppose, are as much one in the state and rule of your
spirits, as ever you and they differed from the Cavalier.

And now let rue desire you to compare our present Governors, in their standing
and actings with the old royal party, and you will see a great dissimilitude
'twixt them; and then compare your selves, in your present actings with the
honest old Puritan party in their motions toward the War, and you will find
as wide a difference.

I. Those of the King and his party grew out of an old stock and root of
Worldly Greatness, where they had continued many Ages, unmoveably fixed in a
State of outward pomp, far above, and opposite to the life and light of
Religion, where being settled in Peace and Power, they had many opportunities
and offers of the Light of Reformation, but they would not be healed; but being
rich, and living at ease and pleasure, were haughty, scorned all reproof being
lifted up upon the highest glory of the world, were beyond the reach of the
instruction of the poor people, who knew the truth, and so were hardened against
the Light, bending all the force of Government against that Light that did
spring forth; so that godly People were so far from any hopes of doing any good
upon them, that they might not live in the Nation without defiling their
Consciences, but were forced to fly into all parts of the world for a being;
now if these poor people being thus provoked by the brutish and un-natural
cruelty of the State, denying their innocent and peaceable spirits, the common
freedom of nature, of life and being, if they did when they were called forth
to it, rise up against them, how justifiable it was?

But on the other side, you know the original of our present Governors, that
they are of late sprung from a low and mean condition wherein they served the
Lord, and came forth with your selves from the same bondage, through the same
dangers, by the same zeal, courage, praying, fasting, etc. They never yet
attained any settled and quiet State of Government, but are still struggling for
life, and in perpetual danger of being over-turn'd by the malice of their and
your enemies, who are still laboring by secret plots, to do what they could not
by outward force: They are very far from ease and pleasure, their work being
full of difficulty, and men's minds and tongues bent against them: A persecuted
people, malign'd, envied, reproached, pushed and lifted at by all sorts of
people at home and abroad, under the scourge of evil tongues, under the rod of
dangers and fears, so closely followed with the cross, that they have not
opportunity to do good, nor to harden in evil* They have gone as far as they
have light to go, and profess they wait for more light; they seem to have an
ear open to instruction, and not only to give access to their brethren to
counsel them, but to invite them to it: And if they were not of themselves
disposed to hearken to the voice of Wisdom, yet the miserable uneasiness,
unsafety, and trouble of their way, should (me thinks) incline them to receive
any rational Proposals: Its possible there is more wisdom in the Nation than is
yet amongst them, and they may be guilty of not seeking it out, but I (that
have been a looker on) have not observed any wisdom come forth in public, that
I could judge worthy to be a guide to them: And whereas the former Powers did
design against the liberty and safety of your selves and other honest men;
these do conscientiously, and I believe in obedience to God, study your and
others safety and liberty; Now considering they are brethren of the same root
with your selves, their toil and labor, their difficulties, dangers and
darkness, their sufferings and reproaches for performing their duties, in
preserving your liberties, it appears to me to be as unjust, unnatural, and
ungrateful for you to rise up against them, uncal'd forth, as 'twas just and
natural for us (being called forth to it) to appear against the King and his
party.

Let me now represent to you the spirit of the old honest Puritan, if you duly
consider it, it had much worth in it; springing up from many great and
long-sufferings, bonds, banishment, shame, death, persecutions of all sorts,
which he endured with much meekness and long-suffering, never attempting any
thing against the Government, but prayed for it honestly, labored to preserve
it: the sufferings of that party for many years at home and abroad, did amount
to a very great sum, yet they never stirred till they were called forth by the
great Council of the Nation, a visible Power; and then how solid, sober,
obedient and peaceable they were in their motion, faithfully praying for their
enemies, and seeking not their destruction but their repentance, aiming at
nothing of Power to themselves, only liberty and safety in serving the Lord;
carried on to this present state of things blindlyand simply, not designing the
ruin of the King and his Power, but urged to it by necessity for their safety;
for they did show a willingness to comply with the King, and to save him, but
could not find him in the least natural to them, but all his Treaties and
Concessions were not voluntary but forced, which was sufficiently manifest; And
then he would in time, and as he had opportunity, have returned to his own
natural course with more violence than before, which would have made the latter
end to that poor people far worse than the beginning; so far as this was naked
and simple, it will justify that party, and the honesty and peaceableness of
their spirits, that they sought the preservation of their enemies to the last.

But how different from this Copy are you in your present actings? your rise is
not from sufferings, but from success and heights of Confidence, being fleshed
with victory, not having a deep spring of simplicity and obedience, but a
design laid upon outward observation of the Advantages of War, and having place
and Greatness in your eye if you prevail, and accordingly your motions are
rash, heady, fiery, fierce, I may say, seeking War and Blood, and directly
aiming at the destruction of your brethren: therefore bear with me for the
present, you will, it may be, thank me hereafter: I must tell you what I really
think, you come not near your pattern; for that spirit whose place you contend
for was, though low and dark, yet solid, true, just, advancing from a great
depth; after providence; in strength and integrity, and so endured much,
waiting for its season to come forth, and then attained more than in ever
expected or sought for; but yours in your present motion, which I believe is
not yours neither, but a strange spirit of discontent, is flashy, slight, full
of rage, and may, as smoke, offend and darken, but will quickly vanish.

This is one of the chief Grounds of the Quarrel begun, and therefore I have
taken the more pains to examine it; I hope when you and others find it a
deceitful Ground, you will retreat from it, and not engage upon such false
shadows of things against true friends.

There is one thing more that does offend you, and it is hinted here and there
in your Paper, That the present public Transactions have, been covenanted and
protested against: You urge the Engagement and Acts of Parliament made against
Monarchy, and particularly quote the words of the Declaration of the Officers
and Soldiers of the English Army, Aug. 1. 1650. page 11, 12. We are persuaded
in our consciences, that the late King and his Monarchy was one of the ten
horns of the beast, spoken of Rev. 17.13, etc.

I know not well how to help you over this block: it is sad to me, to think how
we have trifled with Oaths all along, swearing for every thing, and almost
against every thing in the Nation; covenanting for King, and engaging directly
against him: If the Land do not mourn, I wish it did in true repentance for
these things, and that we did earnestly seek unto the Lord for a way out of the
bonds that are upon our necks by sinful and rash Oaths.

In the interim, I cannot see that you do justly urge these things against your
brethren:

I. Because our great evil in this thing, is; we have sworn rashly, not in
Righteousness and Judgment, but in a heat and fit upon politic grounds for
worldly advantages: 'twas a sin to make them, and it is a sin to break them,
which is greatest I will not determine; bur this I am sure of, that you and all
of us are guilty, and therefore it is not ingenuous to charge another for that
which we are guilty of, without accusing our selves also.

II. Secondly, We may be ashamed to remember any of them, but if one, why not
all? why not the Covenant, Protestations, and at last the Oath of Allegiance?
for in all, the name of God was called upon: There is an oath for the King and
his Posterity, an Engagement and Declaration against him: 'twill be of little
use to enquire, whether an Oath required by a settled Government, and
voluntarily sworn to, for an Ordinance of God, instituted in plain Scriptures
both of old and new Testament (for so Kingly Government is) I say, whether such
an Oath? Or an Engagement enjoined by a broken Power, or a Declaration of an
Army, that never challenged any lawful Power, against an institution, upon an
interpretation of a dark prophecy of the Revelation, whether of these two be
most binding? 'Twill help you and us little to resolve it.

III. Thirdly, This is most considerable how far the letter of Oaths bind?
which may be in some doubtful, in others contradictory; and how far the equity
and spirit of them bind? and then to enquire what is the pith and substance of
all our Protestations and Covenants? which when sifted out, let them have their
just and righteous consideration: And then 'twere good to consider which of
them this present Government be against, whether it be not against those Oaths
and Covenants made for the Right of the King; and if so, how came we to be
acquitted from those former Oaths? or whether it be against the Engagements
made against Monarchy? it seems to me to be another thing set up besides,
rather than against that Engagement, being of another nature from that which we
engaged against, as we shall see hereafter; But alas, these Questions do not
heal nor help us, only they may serve as dust to put in our mouths to silence
us, that we upbraid not, nor accuse one another.

We have taken notice of the chief things in the Preface of your Paper, we
shall now proceed to consider the Articles of Accusation themselves, which
speak out plainly what it is that troubles you.

YOur first Witness or Article is against Apostasy, which you express in a
Parallel 'twixt this Nation and the old Israelites in their deliverance out of
Egypt, saying, They and we have soon forgot God our Savior, etc. We have not
set our hearts right, etc. but have gone back and deals treacherously, and
turned aside like a deceitful bow, etc. have provoked the Lord to anger by our
inventions.

This first is more honest and ingenuous than any thing that follows it; There
is a serious truth in it, and it is soberly and humbly expressed, if you do indeed
mean what you have written; For you say, WE have soon forgo^ten God, etc. WE
have not, etc. If you are true in this WE, you have taken your share of the
guilt and shame with your brethren, and the whole Nation, and have owned a
union with them in this head sin or root-sin of Back sliding, which is but
just; if it was a slip, 'twas an honest and a loving one, be persuaded to own
it, and to number your selves with us sinners, and to bear your part of guilt
and punishment also if it comes: Sin is general, so will Judgment be, it is
therefore safer for you to lie down under Self-condemnation, and either trust
to mercy, or seek to avert calamity, than to justify your selves as innocent
persons and witnesses.

I take no pleasure in speaking of it, but I fear what you write is too true,
that there is a general Apostasy amongst us; it may be they that are in great
place, and so liable to great temptations, are more guilty than others, or else
their guilt is more manifest; but sure there is a general declining in the
visible Professors of Religion, and, as you say, Our hearts have not been
right, nor our spirits steadfast to God, but we have turned aside like a
deceitful bow: It Is most manifest in these particulars:

I. First, We are in Religion divided into several opinions, forms, names,
words and ways of worshipping God, in which we walk in enmity to our brethren
of different judgments, which shows we have turned aside from God, who is one,
and his name one, whose Law is exceeding large, who is love: he saves all,
comprehends all under his wings: And that which is purely of God and his word,
it is sweet, easy and delightful to all that are godly; but that which leads
men into divided paths, and into opposition, whereby we grieve, afflict and
offend godly ones, there is in all those things some inventions of our own,
something of carnal reason: Therefore in all divisions that are amongst us, how
ever we commend our own way as pure, and would impose it upon others, and not
admit him to a share of the salvation that God has wrought for all his people
that denies it, yet there is in every one mixtures of our own, which while we
zealously prosecute, we turn aside from God, and his law of Love.

II. Secondly, We do as Israel, abound in performances, religious exercises, in
new moons, solemn assemblies, where we offer rivers of oil, the beasts of a
thousand mountains, expressions, enlargements, notions, scriptures, duties; yet
Israel departed from God, and turned aside into themselves in these things:
therefore are they called theirs own ways, and not that which God delighted in,
Isa. 66.3, 4. Alas, how grossly are our preachings, prayings, assemblings,
churchings, polluted with pride, vain glory, worldly ends? is it not apparent
that we deal treacherously with God, while we seem to exalt his kingdom, we do
indeed seek our own honor and advantage, and the exaltation of our own gifts,
party and ministry? For when we engage the strength and might of our hearts in
these things, and neglect to serve the Lord with our souls, in a soul humbling
and soul-cleansing work, wherein the power of godlinese lies; and when by these
things we life up our selves above others, and as Lords over others, do we not
as a deceitful bow? while we seem to shoot at Gods enemy, we shoot at our own
enemies, and while we seem to aim at his honor, aim at our own.

III. Thirdly, We once were meek and lowly, contented with mean things in the
world, so we might but enjoy Christ in his own Ordinances; Now how we employ
our Gifts, our Light, our Zeal, our Way, to get uppermost, Diotrephes-like, to
have the preeminence: what contending for dominion, envying, plotting, laboring
either to maintain or got Greatness and Power? employing our light and gifts to
pull down and destroy, not to save, and that which would destroy, would rise it
self and get into place: If there be amongst us these three, or any of them,
there is departing from God; enmity, self or pride, the constant companions of
Apostasy.

If we have departed from God, and the majesty and largeness of his salvation,
into destroying enmity, into perverse self, into tyrannical pride, it is no
wonder you complain that it is a day of rebuke, of trouble and blasphemy: And
what kind of blasphemy, not from Rabshakeh sent from the King of Assyria, but
from prophets and ministers which say they are sent from God, and should bring
tidings of peace? this must needs be rebuke both to them that administer it,
and to them against whom it is administered; it must needs be pitiful and sad
work to blaspheme or speak evil of our brethren that profess the Name of the
Lord, when every word wounds our friends, and the Name of God, it must also
wound our selves: when if what we say be true, it is woeful: and sad, when the
best of it is, that what is said is false, and a mistaken passion.

You say further in the words of Hezek^ah, The children are come to the birth,
and there is not strength to bring forth: Did you say it with his spirit and
faith, you would do as he did, rend not your own clothes, nor others honors,
but your hearts, and put on sackcloth and mourn before the Lord: Did you
believe that the children were come to the birth, that deliverance were near,
you would not be so angry; or did you travel with child your selves, you would
retire into the chambers of your own Souls, and not be quarreling in the
streets, or stirring up people to strife and contention: Or did you think our
Governors, or any with them were in travel, and wanted strength to bring forth,
you would not by contention weaken them as you do.

Let it be supposed then, there is indeed a great turning aside from God our
Savior, etc. into enmity, self and pride, what can you think to be the way to
recover us? Will the pulling down a Protector and his party, with Accusations,
Wrath and Violence, and setting up your selves or any other party in a way of
Parliament? Will this bring us back to God in love, self denial, humility and
true holiness? We cannot believe that you think it will, but that you must
think with us, that love, instruction and forgiveness, administered in the grace
and spirit of Christ, to melt and break men's hearts; these are the proper
Remedies to recover a backsliding people. Now I have gloss'd upon the sense of
the Subscribers, I shall give you a more naked account of my own thoughts
concerning this thing in these Animadversions.

I. First, We are escaped from an outward Egypt, but are still in that great
City Which is spiri^ually called Sodom and Egypt, Rev. 11.8. We and our
consciences are free from men, but our souls and consciences are in bondage to
darkness, to fleshly lusts, to wrath, pride and self love; while we were under
the power of outward enemies these durst not look forth, but being now free
from fear of others, our own naughtiness begins to appear.

II. Secondly, These noisome lusts of envy, evil surmises, pride and
self-exaltation, are of the same kind and spirit with that tyranny that men
exercised over us; which being in and amongst our selves, do pierce and wound
us more than when they were over us in others.

III. Thirdly, We have gotten a greater outward liberty and dominion, than we
have wisdom and strength of grace to manage, which is a dangerous evil, to be
over loaded with greatness, prosperity and honor, more than is proportionable
to our spirits: 'Twas a wise desire of Agur, Neither poverty nor riches, but
food convenie it for me. A little grace that shined clearly in a mean
condition, may be smothered and choked with worldly Greatness: when I see how
little of the majesty of the spirit of God there is, and how carnal men's minds
are, I fear we rose too soon, and are come forth into Power before we are fit
for it, or it fit for us; and if it be so, we may fear we shall lie down aga^n
in our old Egyptian graves, or a worse hell, till by some sharp suffering our
spirits be more refined: we do hang over a dangerous pit of confusion and
wrath, by a mere thread of Gods good providence, therefore it concerns all,
especially our Governors, to be very humble, very meek and patient, tender and
subject to what light shall come forth from God; for if God should be provoked
but to cut this thread, or to take off his hand from protecting of us, we are
like to be the most miserable, dishonorable and abominated people in the earth.

IV. Fourthly, Our corruptions which before lay hid, and in this time of
freedom break forth, are more than we expected, are noisome and foul, offensive
to our selves and visible to others, and they come in as a flood upon us in all
places, in all things, in outward and inward things, in civil and Church
affairs so much, that we know not how to resist them; neither is there visibly
appearing in any sort of people a remedy for these evils, or a spirit able to
deal with the huge Armies of Lusts, that overspread Religion, and men
professing godliness: This is a great disappointment, we looked for Peace,
Righteousness, Truth and Glory to flourish, but behold, Folly, Enmity,
Distraction, Iniquity and Shame covers our faces: This does vex and grieve men's
hearts, and every man complains of this and that, and most with the
Subscribers, fall upon them that are in power, because they do not cure these
maladies, and lead us into a better state; generally it causes wrath,
bitterness and rage against these evils in others, not in our selves; not
considering who it is that says, Isaiah 43.28. I have profaned the Princes of
the sanctuary, and have given Jacob to the curse, and Israel to reproaches; not
that the reason of this great displeasure of God lies at home in every man's
heart, if they did consider this is a divine hand, and the ground of it is in
our selves, and in the very state in which we are, being much in the flesh and
carnal, we should at least be still and silent, and not increase our evils by
open and shameful Quarrels, but rather heal and hide them by Love and
Repentance.

V. Fifthly, We in the outward things, as matters of Government, are yet
entangled in the manners and customs of Egypt, and ignorant of the Judgments
and Statutes of the Lord, or of our own land; for a way or form of Government
of our own that is proper for a godly people, we have not yet discovered to us;
therefore every one lays hold of some broken pieces of Egypt. The Instrument
patches up one and a Council, and the Old Law and Parliament, the Subscribers
seem to be for a Parliament only; But all these things about which we contend,
are parts of the Old Babel, and the Subscribers themselves as much in it as
any, as we may see hereafter: Now these things must needs vex our spirits,
having not yet found out a way suitable and sit for us: Though few know what we
ayl, or what will cure us, only our feet are in the stocks, and our minds
uneasy and unsatisfied, we kick and spurn against those that are next us.

But if the Subscribers or any others do think, that it is the design of the
Protector Himself, or Himself and Council, to carry us back again into Egypt,
into a Land of tyranny and oppression, or persecution, and to make himself and
posterity Lords over us there, I will not persuade your charity to think
otherwise: There is it may be so great a breach, and we have conceived such
dismal apprehensions one of another, that there is no talking of love: But we
may suppose that we have not quite lost our reason, though we have our faith
and love, do then but use your reason, and you cannot think that the Protector
can be so weak as to attempt such a design, or so strong as to effect it, if he
should aim at it.

For if he would carry us back to Egypt, his way were to heal Egypt, and to
restore the old malignants, as the proper Supporters of Royalty and Greatness,
and instruments of suppressing us and our principles of Liberty: One while all
the cry of jealousy was, He favored Malignants, that Malignants got up again;
but His late acts against them take away this doubt, and tell us the breach
'twixt them and him can never be healed; neither can we in reason think that
ever they should trust him, or he them; For though they do love outward pomp,
and tyranny, and persecution, the companions of it, yet they could not but hate
it in him, who is, as they think, a Destroyer and Persecutor of them and their
way, neither can he expect any thing from them but all the revenge an enraged
enemy can plot or act; therefore if he looks back to Egypt, he meets with a Red
sea, which lately devoured Pharaoh and his host, the same sea of blood waits to
receive him if he return.

If his way to Egypt be blocked up, so that he must resolve to cleave to
Israel, as his only hopes; Can he think then that Israel will turn Egyptians?
Or do we think that he can debauch the honest party, so as to blot out of their
souls all principles of Religion and Liberty, and to make them slaves to his
lusts of Pride and Tyranny? Can he think to lull asleep all those lively
awakenings of Courage and Zeal for Liberty, which move so highly amongst us, or
to persuade that Day of Light that has overspread men's minds (as to outward
Freedom) to retire again, and to lie down in darkness, that he might tyrannize
over us unseen and unfelt: can he or you think, that besides Dissenters, that
hate the appearance and show of Tyranny, there are not thousands that abhor to
bear the Yoke of Slavery from any, much less from him a Brother? and if they
did not see and feel, or hope for (at least) an honesty and uprightness in him,
would both desert and oppose him? If he should meet with some few weak hearted
Mungrels that would flatter his Greatness, and fall before it; yet should he
but discover a Heart to depart from principles of Liberty to Tyranny, not only
Passion and Discontent, but the very heart, life, and spirit of Truth and
Honesty in the whole party would with scorn reject him: Therefore be is engaged
and hedged in, that if he should have a lust after Ambition, he knows not which
way to have it, or how to compass it, without apparent ruin to his very
standing and being, which is upon the Foundation of honest men and honest
things; take him off from that bottom, he is the nakedest poorest wretch in the
world, and the most subject to scorn and contempt; and this so evident, that he
cannot but see it.

Neither can I think it hardly possible for the Protector and they that join
with him, knowingly and wilfully to desert that Religion and Cause, that has
been laid into their hearts by a deep work upon their Souls long before these
times, in which they have been bred, born, and formed by a continual work of
God upon them; for which they have often adventured their Lives, Names,
Estates, and all that they had: A Cause and Work that is as natural to them as
their lives; yea, now their very life and being, they having been brought forth
with it, to what they are, having no other hopes of subsistence in the earth,
but in it and with it. They may stagger and wander in much darkness, shortness
and insufficiency, they may have passions and temptations; but that they should
of a sudden, raze out of their souls all impressions made by God upon them, and
the deep engagements of their spirits to this work, and in a sit forsake all
and espouse another interest, cannot without much prejudice be received.

Or should I conclude man's heart so deceitful and false as to do this, yet I
must then doubt, that the very Religion, and the state in which we are, (when
the eminentest and strongest pillars fail) is not what we have thought it, but
that it likewise will corrupt and turn to rottenness, and all these appearings
of Light and operations of God, will be utterly lost in Apostasy, and that we
shall run back into Darkness and Profaneness, or Confusion; I confess, I cannot
in reason admit the one, without sad apprehensions of the other.

But then I consider also that this Work begun amongst us, is not so much
carried on by an inward Spring of Grace, but upon the Wheels of Providence;
drawing or driving men on into ways and paths, that their own light neither did
nor could direct them into; and therefore it depends not upon the stedfastness
and truth of men's spirits, they having the least share in it: but they and the
Work have been carried on upon Engines of Providence, so far beyond men's
knowledge, that if their hearts should fail, they know not which way to go
back; they are caught in such a net, and so involved in and with the Work, that
they must live and die in it, and cannot think how or where to live out of it:
which might help to ease us of the pain of jealousy which troubles us, and
unite all our hearts and spirits to do the utmost we can, to maintain what we
have got; for we are gone too far to retreat, we must think of going forward,
but backward we cannot go.

Your second Witness or Article begins thus: That blessed Cause, and those
noble Principles propounded and prosecuted by the old Parliament, etc. are now
wholly laid aside, etc. and another quite contrary espoused, etc. I confess, I
cannot but wonder why you should bless the old Parliament, except it be to
ourse our new Government: and why you should bless them and ourse these, I do
as much wonder, when I know they were much more opposite to your way than these
are. Neither did the old Parliament ever propound or prosecute, the destroying
of Parishes, taking away Tithes, or overthrowing of Ministers, which are your
Cause now against the present Government, as you express in the close of your
Paper; sure these men are apter for such Work than the old Parliament: And why
you should so magnify any thing that is past, as to call it Blessed, I know
not; I confess, I never yet saw any thing in agitation that could make all
parties happy and blessed: surely nothing is truly blessed, but that wherein
all good men may find rest. It may be you plate much of you happiness in a
Parliament, for in this Article you plead for the Privileges of Parliaments;
if you do not, many others do think it the only Cure of our Distemper: and
therefore I shall freely give you my thoughts of Parliaments:

A Parliament is a Constitution in which there is some Reason and Equity, and
of late it has been very benign to Liberty and Religion; for which we may
remember it with Honor: but I fear it has been made an Idol by many of us, and
exalted above its place, for which, it has been miserably blasted and cursed,
rendered a vain and unprofitable thing, subjected to scorn and contempt, having
lost its Union, Majesty and Wisdom. The Considerations that I have long had
concerning a Parliament, are these:

I. First, A Parliament is a Body, whereof the King is the head; and therefore
'twas called his Parliament, because formed and called by him at his own
pleasure, for his own ends; and 'twas his Interest, which he much pleaded for
in the beginning of these times, a Free Parliament; for, had they been Free in
their Debates and Votes, he and all his had been undoubtedly safe: For the
Parliament did zealously and heartily intend the advancing of him, and making
him a great Prince, and engaged and protested to it; however they were
afterward forced from their own Protestations, but not by any natural motion of
their own, but by an over-powering hand. A Parliament is the Interest of the
King, and a King as much the Interest of a Parliament.

II. Secondly, A Parliament is a wordly earthly Constitution, consisting of
worldly Matter, Gentlemen of Estates, and chosen by People, in the capacity
only of possessing so much Land; without any respect at all had in Electors or
Elected, to any Character of Grace or Anointing: and therefore it is the
Interest of the World, not of the Saints; a part of the fourth Monarchy, not of
the fifth; the strength of the Kingdoms of this world, not of the Kingdom of
Christ; formed by custom in the Darkness and Enmity of the world, not in the
Light and Wisdom of Christ.

III. Thirdly, The Parliament had it had its Privileges, viz. Freedom for all
its Members to Debate and Vote, would never have removed any thing of King,
Lords or Bishops; they had all stood to this day, had not the Parliament been
forced by the People. We may talk of Privileges of Parliament, but, alas, who
does not see that we did make bold with their Privileges, by driving some out,
and driving some on beyond their reason, to what we and the People affected;
and this so grossly, that though it might be a shame to do it, it is more a shame
to deny it; or to seem now to plead for the standing of Parliaments and
Privileges, when common sense or ingenuity will tell us, we have forced and
violated them at our pleasures from the beginning.

IV. Fourthly, We cannot in reason expect a Free Parliament at this time,
because the People are not fit to have a free choice of Members, or at least
not fit in the sense of the Subscribers; for, generally the spirit of the
Nation at this time is complaining of Sects and Divisions in Religion, and
jealous that the Anabaptist will get the upper hand, and pull down both
Magistracy and Ministry; therefore we cannot but think, give them Freedom to
choose, they would pitch upon sober wisemen, that should stop this inundation of
Innovations in Church and State: Therefore you cannot have a Free Parliament,
except you admit the People to a Free Choice, which is the foundation of a Free
Parliament, which indeed, neither the Subscribers, nor any rational honest man
can admit; for the greater number of the People of the Nation are either
Malignant and opposing Reformation, or lately offended at it, or Neutral, and
sottishly mindless of any thing but their profit; all these must be concluded
unfit to be the root of that power that must carry on the great Work begun, and
secure honest men and honest things: And should we restrain the Election to
honest men, (for which there is no Law) yet they also are for the present unfit
for choice, being divided into Sects and Parties, and so not competent judges
of men's ability to govern, but will over value their Friends, and undervalue
their Enemies; choose an unworthy man, because of our own party; and refuse a
worthy man, because opposite to us: so that the Foundation of a Parliament
would be laid (though chosen by the best men) not only in bitter strife and
enmity, but in unrighteousness and partiality; and what fruit can we expect,
but jangling and cavelling, from the root of blind and unjust Contention? But,
alas, a Free Choice is out of use amongst us, for the custom has been, either
to awe the People out of their choice by greatness, or to cheat them of it by
canvasing and importunities; and so either some great men, or busy factious
men, have made Parliament Men in most places: and the People in whom we would
place the original power, over our Lives, Liberties and Religion, are such
fools or beasts, as to be thus driven in their Election. If we should have a
Parliament at this time, I should fear it would be like that Beast spoken of,
Rev. 13. 1, 2. which did rise out of the sea; so the People or Nation is at
this time, a multitude of confused Tongues, Languages and Voices, carried this
way and that way by the breath and spirits of men. And the Beast was like a
leopard, full of spots of several and different colors, and of a monstrous
shape; the lower parts the feet as a bear; the upper parts, the mouth as a
lion: such would a Parliament be; They might roar as lions, speak high things,
big words, some of them; others be fierce and cruel as a bear; but yet a beast,
not of wisdom, meekness, or love, to heal our Distractions: for the fury and
wrathful spirits of the People can blow up no better a Representative, than a
fierce and raging Parliament.

And should this Parliament assemble and sit, and assume the Royal power into
their hands, will the Dragon (if I may alude to the Army) give them his Power,
his Seat, and his great Authority? An Army we have and must have, and it is now
Supreme; can we then think, that they that have the Sword in their hands, be
they the Subscribers or any other, will be so time, as to suffer themselves to
be voted Traitors by such a Lions mouth, and to be laid hold on by such a Bears
paws, and not remove them? For there is no Parliament that can meet, if they
have the courage to own their Privileges, but must condemn, not only the late
Acts; but the very Power and Being of the Army, as it now stands: And whether
there be men to be found upon the earth that will suffer this, when they have
the Sword, and so power to prevent it, and to fave their heads, all may judge;
and therefore a Free Parliament, as it is not possible to be had, so it is not
rational to think, that they should freely sit and vote under a superior and
different Power; for if they are not a beast, the Sword will make them one, and
drive them which way it please.

Let us now consider what has been said, That a Parliament is the proper Body
of the King its Head; that it is a worldly and dark Constitution, the Interest
of the Nation, not of the Saints: and what it has formerly done to establish
our Bondage, how little it would have done toward a Reformation, had they had
their Freedom and Privileges; and what an irrational and brutish thing it
must needs be, if chosen by the People in their present condition, and sitting
under another power in possession. And we must conclude, That a Parliament is
not a seasonable remedy; and the Subscribers also, if they consider it, must
confess, a Parliament is as Egyptian or Babylonish as a King. It has been my
mind a long time, I shall desire my Country men to bear with me if I offend,
That a Government, wherein there is the least designation of Providence, yea,
if it be but the product of success, if it have in it any thing of Love or
Union, or the least spark or spirit of Honesty and Justice, I should prefer it
at this time much before a Parliament of England; where I fear there will be
little but violent storms of Contention.

It Is true, the Parliament has been a nursing Mother to good people, and was
kind to her nursling, while it was a nursling and a child; the more, because
she was fallen out with her husband the King, and so expected to have some help
from her child against him: I doubt her love was not natural, but as a nurse
and hireling, for her own advantage; if she had ever thought it should have
been weaned and taken from her, she would not have been so kind to it. But her
breasts has been long dry, and she grew froward and imperious, and therefore
'twas but time for the child when it grew to be a man, to leave sucking, and
to shift for it self. If godly and honest men were a Body knit and joynted
together, they need not fear standing upon their own legs, and being weaned
from Parliaments; neither have we any reason to return to her, being in a
womanish rage and distraction, for her loss of that absolute Power she lately
had, and unjustly took upon her. But if these Subscribers and other New-lighted
Men have a mind to be Children again, and to go to School to their Tutors and
Governors, a Parliament, let them but lay down the Sword, and if Madam Nurse do
not whip them back into Uniformity, to their old Baptism and Ministry, and at
least to the Directory and Orthodox Catechism, let them never trust an unknown
Friend more.

Before I leave this Article, I have a little serious advice to commend to you
my friends the Subscribers; I observe when you come to sum up your blessed
Cause, you strangely jumble together heterogeneous matter of the Kingdom of
Christ, the Privileges of Parliaments, the Liberty of the Subjects; and
elsewhere, A right to our Native Privileges, and the just Liberty of every
man. In confounding these things without giving them their place and order, you
seem to me to be either extremely ignorant of your Cause, the Kingdom of
Christ, or else in opposition to this present Power, have departed very much
from it, in mingling such old worldly things with it; which are old Terms, but
surely have no place in this new Kingdom.

For, make the Kingdom of Christ what you will, it consists either in the
person or spirit of Christ, as the anointed of God; or in the Saints, being
partakers of the same anointing: Now for you to place the power only in a
Parliament, whose original is in the choice of an ignorant, carnal, and divided
people; of members like themselves, without mentioning Christ, or his
Designation and Ordination to govern, or the anointing and grace of his Spirit
in his Saints; you do in this wave the Interest of Christ and your own Cause, I
fear, because you would oppose these Governors, who have a shadow of some such
thing, viz. the appointment of Providence, and some of them a spirit of wisdom,
largeness and righteousness, to govern. What ever these are, it is not your
Interest to give the Common people of the Nation, that are malignant, or
neutral and indifferent, or offended at you, equal privilege with the Saints.

For the Liberty of the Subject; what is it more than to be under the
Government of our Sovereign Lord the King, and to hold our Lands of him, or
some mean Lord, under such Suits and Service? or to governed by his Laws and
Ministers, Civil and Ecclesiastical? What Liberty else had we? and what is this
to the heirs of the Kingdom of Christ, where the Saints shall reign as Kings?
Or would you gratify the Common people, in pleading the Liberty of every man,
what will be their portion when Christ reigns? Will it not be, think you, at
best to bow to the soles of the feet of the Saints? It Is true, there is a large
righteousness in Christ's Kingdom, and he will distribute Justice to every man,
but not in the way wherein this has been, and is now spoken of by you; but in
first advancing his Saints, and in making others their servants.

And what are our Native Privileges? Is it not, to be born in our own Parish,
to be Christened by our own Minister, to go to our own Parish Church to Divine
Service, to follow our Trades and Callings, while the King secured our Estates
by his Laws, and our Religion by his Bishops and Canons? Alas, we were born in
Egpyt, in the house of Bondage; me thinks you are very much entangled with the
Customs and Manners of Egypt, when you talk at this rate, and very ignorant of
what you profess the Kingdom of Christ, and the Dignity of the Saints; or else
you do out of discontent, throw your selves back into the common state of the
Nation, being angry with your Brethren.

I am of this opinion, that there is a peculiar Friviledge and Right of Power
or Government due to honest men, that have with the jeopardy of their lives,
rescued themselves from Slavery; which is their due, not by a Natural birth, as
Men; nor by a Spiritual birth, as Christians; but by a birth of Providence (if
I may so call it) whereby they are brought forth into a Distinct, Outward, and
Military Body, and entrusted with the power of the Sword, and so of the Nation:
That Government that deryed these poor people the common Freedom of Life and
Being, is totally dissolved; their Enemies overthrown, and they that were the
Tail, made the Head; endowed with the most absolute Power. It Is a thing that
the Protector has seemed a long time to design, and that good people have
talked of, That Honest men should only have place and power; and yet now we
have it, we either mind it not, or know not which way to settle it: I do
heartily wish, that we understood what a Prize we have in our hand, and had
light and judgment, either to keep it justly, or to resign it wisely.

Your third Article is this, The unadvised and unwarrantable changing of
Government, and swearing thereunto, etc. This is the chief of your witness, The
great offense taken against the Protector, and indeed the chief difference
'twixt you and him; the very substance of your Paper, other things being either
appurtenances and flourishes, or petty inconsiderable things, brought in to
make number and weight: but here is the stress of the business, and the chief
ground of your quarrel, now you come to the point; it is an unadvised and
unwarrantable act, and, swearing thereunto: You differ not in Principle, or in
your Spirits, or in Work and Ends, only the Protector has rashly and
unadvisedly clapped up a Government, which you cannot warrant to be sound and
good; or a private thing, that has no public Warranty; neither the consent of
the People, nor of the Honest party. I must confess, to form a standing
Government for three Nations so unadvisedly, upon such slight and sudden
Council; and to have no more Law, Authority, or Reason from men, nor any thing
from Heaven to warrant it; and then as rashly by Oath to engage to it, and so
to involve himself in it, as to render himself uncapeable of better Counsels,
and a better way if it should appear, is not a thing justified by that light
either of Religion or Reason that I understand: And therefore, though I can
submit, either to a forced and imposed, or an undue Authority or Government,
(for I think all the Governments now in the world are no better) yet if I may
speak my mind freely, it is this; To huddle up a business of so vast a
concernment, as the Government of three Nations, in a corner, in such haste,
upon so slender advice, without a Commission either from God or men, and to
bind it by an Oath, is unjustifiable, and does require repentance in them that
did it.

But, though I do agree with the Subscribers, That this act is unadvised and
unwarrantable, yet it is upon a different ground; for they say, That change of
Government and swearing thereunto does put a necessity upon the chief
Undertaker thereof, to overthrow the very Foundation of a Commonwealth; this is
as they judge. Now I judge, that one great reason why that Government and
Instrument was set up and sworn to, was to uphold the Foundation of the old
Commonwealth: and this they did, as I suppose, in some kind of opposition to
the Fifth Monarchy men; who, as these men judged, would have led them by their
unsettled principles into a notion or cloud of a New Kingdom, from the very
Foundations of an old Commomwealth; and to avoid this danger, they took the
materials that were next, old Laws and Parliaments, and a new Protector and
Council, which are all Fundamentals of Government, and so patched up the
business in haste and fear, lest they should lose all their footing in a
Commonwealth.

Now here I think was their error, That they did re-build what was really
pulled down, and maintain what God had destroyed; and set themselves and that
Power that God had given them, upon a rotten Foundation, which is dark and
unclean, full of wrath and curse; which has put a necessity upon the chief
Undertaker, to uphold an old ruined House, and all the Breaches, Confusions,
perplexed Suits and Quarrels, Enmities and Miseries occasioned by our late
Civil Wars and Distractions; the weight of which must needs be so heavy, that
he cannot but now feel that he did unadvisedly in taking up the burden of it.

The Reasons why I thus judge, are, First, The ancient Form of this Kingdom or
Commonwealth, and the Government thereof, is certainly dissolved; and the heart
or life of its Union broken, by that irreconcilable breach 'twixt the Head and
Body, the King and his Parliament, or People, A Kingdom so divided cannot
stand; in its most essential or integral parts, by a continued War, which could
never be composed, but in the utter destruction of one party. The Union betwixt
these two principal parts being broken, there necessarily followed, by degrees,
a dissolution and mouldering away of all the other parts; so that at last,
there is not one stone left upon another, no one piece of the old Building
whole: If there be any thing standing, it is not in its place, nor upon its own
Basis, but upheld by force unduly, and to serve another Power, so miserably
broken and sunk, like a millstone cast into the sea, so that none knows where
her parts are, or which way to reunite them. All things are set at such a
distance and enmity, in judgment, principles and affections, and things gone
so far into Oaths and new Engagements; so many new Ways and Forms set up one
upon another, and the old so confounded, that they that have the power to do
it, cannot move one step rationally cowards a recovering the old frame.

The ancient Government being irrecoverably lost, and the Kingdom divided into
two Armies, and the Kings Army subdued and wholly vanquished; you will easily
conclude in what a condition the Conquerors are; which is this, A General of a
gallant conquering Army; commanding all the Forces in three Kingdoms; in
excellent order and discipline; soundly joynted and knit together in love and
affection; confirmed by long experience, in great service, with great success;
that could never be divided by policy, nor shaken by force or difficulties; a
religious, praying, believing, as well as a fighting Army; having the royal
stamp of such a constant success, as made them famous and terrible to the world.

Within this Army lay the hearts and affections of all the Honest people of the
Nation, having placed all their Safety, Liberty, and Lives in it; did heartily
engage their Prayers, Purses, and Persons with them, as their only strength
against their Enemies.

In this Army, and the Honest people in it, and with it, was said all our
Privileges, our Peace and Freedom, together with the Honor of the Nation, and
all the good things that had been prayed for, spoken of, and expected in
Reformation; and as secure as the Sword and Honest hearts could keep them,
preserved and safely lodged within the strength of an Host: or Army encamping
about them: an Army being a Government as ancient, as natural, as honorable, as
rational, and as just, as any other kind of Government; I may say more, and
for us at this time, most vigorous, united, absolute, and safe.

This Army, with these People, under their General, having undoubted right to
the Sword, which none would or could question; the Malignants felt the power
and truth of it, being overcome by it; the Honest party have their Lives and
Liberties secured by it: there was the truest sense and reason of the Nation
for their standing; and the same sense and reason for convenient pay, according
to ways and methods accustomed and beaten out for them.

This Army and People had an absolute Freedom (with consent and in right
judgment) to do what they would, and to dispose themselves into what state
their reason should direct them. For as the opposite Army, had it prevailed,
the King had been free to have settled himself upon what terms he and his party
could have agreed upon, and none could resist: so this party, for ought I know,
were as free to choose their own way and ground, to secure themselves and their
Liberties, according to the best justice and wisdom they have.

In this case, what might a General door not do? or what might be his work,
having such an opportunity? so free, none to oppose; all laid level and flat
before him; His Forces mighty, his Commission bright and clear, his people and
friends united to him, full of vigor and life, fresh as the morning; though
dappled with some spots of Division, troubled with some mists of Fancies, and
some youthful extravagant Conceits. But me thinks here was an excellent ground
to stay a while upon, and to spend some time in cherishing the life and power
of Godliness; in strengthening of Amity and Union; in waiting upon, and
encouraging the growth of Light, till it had dispersed those morning mists,
which did darken the face of things, in humbling our souls, confessing our sins
and unworthiness, and in seeking a way of the Lord. If we had spent some time
in searching the records of Scripture, in reading and examining what was in the
hearts of Gods hidden and holy ones, in enquiring what God might speak in all
the Saints, or any one poor Saint; here might we have dwelt in our tents, and
with much ease kept the peace, and rejoiced together in our liberty and safety;
and taken a full time to consider and advise, where we were, what our rights
were, what might be the design of God in these great Revolutions? and to what
purpose God had brought forth his people into this outward condition, distinct
from other people, and put such characters of grace upon them; in heaping, so
many victories upon them in answer to their prayers: and seeing he had bestowed
those favors upon them severed from others, owning them rather. than others, to
be his own people: whether these distinguishing Mercies did not instruct us to
reserve our selves in a distinct state, wherein we might, even in outward
things, walk according to Religion and Godliness, and not mingle our selves
again with the world in its profane courses and customs; or to have staid here,
at least, to know whether God had any more work for us to do, or any further
favor to bestow upon us. And lastly, not to stir from this ground, till we were
carried on and lead forth by the same Providence, by the same light and general
consent of honest hearts, that carried us on in all our work, and brought us
hither. And that truly had been but just and due to the Lord, That he that had
the guiding of us in our troubles, and had delivered us, by answering of us, in
calling upon his name together, should have been attended upon in the same
public way, and had the dispose of us and our deliverance in the same way of
direction, by his Word and Spirit, in the hearts of his own people, by which
they were gotten.

But now when we had gotten our Freedom, not to attend the moving of the same
stream of Light and Providence, of a united and general seeking the Lord, in a
free and open way; but for the then General to step into a private way, by a
private spirit, of a sudden; it may be, not willing to bear the burden of so
great a trust, or to bear the censure of setting up himself in so absolute and
arbitrary a Power, etc. or, it may be, a modest distrust of himself, or a doubt
of the spirits of his Army; or, whether it was a passion and offense taken
against some opinions and ways of Honest people, or an opinion of and
inclination to the old English Government; or an ignorance of, and present
mindlesness of his own standing, and the foundation of his life and power, I
know not: but evil there was in it, I fear. Let it be unadvised or ill advised,
I doubt 'twas the counsel of some who had too great a power with him, either
some wile States man, ignorant of the inward life and spirit of our work; or I
most suspect some Lawyers, who wanted a great Name to begin their Writs, and
uphold their Forms of Law. What ever was in it, to change a Commission for an
Instrument, to blot out that Royal stamp set upon him by divine Providence, and
to assume another from private hands; and to have the Coin both adulterated and
clipped, his Power mingled with others of a baser sort, and much diminished,
'twas unadvised.

To extinguish an honorable and natural relation to a good People, full of life
and love to him, engaged together by suffering, experience, and mercies, and to
accept of a relation to the whole body of the Nation, full of filth and
rottenness, unnatural to him, yea, hating and rejecting of him; who, to heal
their Breaches and to recover their Losses, are as the Horseleach, that cries,
Give, give; and being as unsatisfied as the Grave or as the barren Womb, that
never says, It Is enough; they rage and fret against him, because he does no
more for them: to Head such a Body was unadvised.

To leave a standing that was large and free, where he might have breathed out
his heart amongst his Brethren in righteous honest ways; and walked upright in
the full stature of what Light and Religion he had; and to go into the noisome
and filthy Forms of the world, where his spirit is bowed down to old Laws and
Customs, that have been always acted by a spirit of cunning, formality and
falsehood, exceeding improper for a spirit of Simplicity, Truth and Nakedness;
an outward pomp and state that used to be kept up and filled with flattery and
deceit; the manners of Egypt, and where are Lice, Frogs and Sores, etc. the
plagues of Egypt, and certainly uneasy for an honest heart: this was unadvised.

And to change a Power that was his own, inherent in himself, formed and
begotten by Providence, free and large; in which he might have done all
honorable and just things: to change this for a borrowed one, and that from we
know not who; and this, not only limited and lessened, but manacled and
fettered by an Instrument, Laws, Parliaments, be they good or bad, wise or
foolish: this was unadvised.

And for him, who was as a natural Head and Father to the honest people in
their Military state, to go and impose himself upon the whole Nation,
undesired, unchosen: 'twas unwarrantable.

And he being the Right of the Honest party, who were brought forth by him to
this state, and he brought forth by their Prayers, Hearts and Courage, to what
he was; for him to go and dispose of himself, without their consent, in a thing
of so great concernment, it could not but be an offense to their spirits: and
was unwarrantable.

And to bring all their Labors and Adventures, all their expense of Blood and
Treasure, all the Victories and Success, that were one common Stock and
Treasury, to expend them, and dispose them to a final issue and settlement,
without their knowledge and consent; and that those things that were won by the
Sword, should be presently worn by the Robe; and that were gotten by the Faith,
Prayer, Spirits, and Lives of Honest hearts, should be presently spent upon Law
and Policy: it is unwarrantable.

It Is true, he might have given the Charter of the Laws, the common Protection
that he did to the Charter of London, or to the Charters of the Universities,
being necessary to preserve Property 'twixt man and man, 'twas but just and
rational to uphold them as subordinate to him in their present work, for the
administration of Justice; but to incorporate with them, to swear to them, to
become subject to them, they being so great strangers and enemies to him and us
in that way in which we now are: was both unadvised and unwarrantable.

Now we are declaring our judgments, let us speak our thoughts of the Swearing
to this Instrument. I think, with the Subscribers, 'twas unadvised and
unwarrantable, but not of such dangerous consequence as they imagine: I would
not encourage men in breaking Oaths, though rashly made, 'twere to add sin to
sin; but yet I Will tell you my thou^hts, that this Oath is likely to follow the
former Protestations and Covenants, being much of the same nature; for if the
matter or subject of an Oath cease and die, the Oath also ceases. A woman is
bound to her husband no longer than he lives; therefore, if we Swear to dying
and perishing things, their death does discharge us. Besides, the People to
whom the Protector has sworn, will not accept of him nor his Government, but
have refused him in open Parliament, and why he should be bound to them that
will not engage with him, I know no reason. It was not intended that this new
Obligation should dissolve the former Standing and Relation; that being more
natural and substantial, this New one, but a circumstance and form, and an
addition to the other: Therefore let him wear it as a garment, for ornament or
state, as long as 'twill last, 'twill wear out as a vestment, when the life and
body, his Military power will endure. He may therefore essay it, as David did
Saul's armor, but when he feels it burthensom, he will say, He cannot skill of it,
and cast it off: These withs and new cords will not bind Samson next time
danger is upon him, I imagine he will break them in pieces, and leave his new
Subjects that refuse him, for his old Friends that love him; or else keep them
in a state of subjection as Servants, and these in a state of favor as
Brethren; them as a Concubine, and these as a Wife.

Thus do your thoughts and my thoughts freely pass their judgments upon the
Protector and his Actions; what pretty chequer-work our thoughts make! how we
do ring the changes? we agree and we differ, and it matters not much whether we
agree or differ. You say and I say, this Instrument and Oath was unadvised and
unwarrantable; you judge, That it necessitates the Protector to destroy the
Foundation of a Commonwealth: I judge, That it necessitates him to uphold the
Foundation of an old decayed Commonwealth. You think his new government will
destroy the Foundation of a Conmonwealth: he thinks your new Monarchy will
destroy the Foundation of a Commonwealth. It may be, I think, both parties
would do it, and would not do it; that both of you would uphold the old, and
you would have a new, but know not well how to do either.

These are our thoughts shot at rovers; it may be they hit, it may be they miss
the mark. Indeed the thoughts of man are very vain things, and know very little
of that divine Wisdom that moves and carries on the spirits of men in these
great revolutions: and therefore, neither you nor I shall be so foolish, I
hope, as to insist upon them, or make much account of them, it is enough we have
freedom to give them vent. If they may do any good, so? If they be vain, let
them die and perish? But for us to think, a State bound to steer their course
by our judgments, is a little too much; if they should, contrary judgments
would keep them in perpetual instability: therefore, Governors, as they should
not refuse any light, so they should not be swayed by opinions and parties, for
interest, but follow faithfully, steddily and uprightly, righteousness and
truth, as it manifests it self to their own souls.

Now, we have taken the liberty of expressing our thoughts, which are various
and uncertain, let us consider, if there be not something more serious and
certain to be our guide in point of Government; a more sure Word of Prophecy or
Scripture, to which, we should do well to take heed: and in that sure Word we
shall find these two things, in Romans 13.1. The Powers that be, are ordained of
God. The Emperors of Rome, that then were the powers, had usurped the ancient
Rights of the Senate and People of Rome; and Nero, then Emperor, was a
notorious beast: he got this power by his mothers poisoning the former Emperor,
and kept it, by his poisoning the son, the true heir; and yet, this power that
then was in being, was ordained of God: The word signifies an ordering or
disposing things in their place, and that by Institution or Command. Be the
powers good or bad, he that knows how to manage ill things to good ends, in
wisdom orders them, and commands obedience to them: whence follow these
Observations,

I. First, That God does himself wisely order and dispose of power; it being
his own, he gives it to whom he pleases, pulls down one, and sets up another,
as he has use of them.

II. Secondly, He can and does ordain power, according to his mind, in wisdom
and purity, through and by, not only unadvised and unwarrantable but wicked
and abominable means, and to wicked persons.

III. Thirdly, Christians should look through the mist of weakness, yea,
through the thickest vail of wickedness, to the brightness of Gods hand, in
setting up of power; and ought willingly to acknowledge the excellency of one,
though clouded with the darkness of the other.

And then I would enquire, whether this present dispose of power, wherein it
seems to be turned aside, or turned back, into wordly ways and forms; or to
make a halt in them, and not to go forward into the Kingdom of Christ, be not
in great wisdom? The Reasons of the Question are:

I. First, I question, whether, that Saints, as Saints, are fit to Govern? and
am satisfied, That they that offer at it, are in no wise prepared for it;
having neither the wisdom, nor power, nor the love and righteousness, that will
fit them to govern in Christ's name and way: and therefore, in love to them, I
do dread the miserable consequences and miscarriages of such a power in such
hands.

II. Secondly, I doubt, whether the World be ripe for such a dispensation of
power, if we had it; for such a dispensation, when it comes, will make a
separation 'twixt the Precious and the Vile, in persons and things: and that
spirit that pretends to such a dispensation, does intend such a thing: but yet,
not judging by the nature of things, but by the outward likeness or unlikeness
of things and persons to it self, would thrust down violently all those persons
that differed from them, and those things that were offensive to them, and as
unreasonably exalt those that did agree with them; and this, the very nature of
that dispensation which they profess, would lead them to. Now, while things are
thus indigested, as they are, and mixed, there is some notable good, and great
usefulness in many things and persons, which, we have great reason to think,
their present standing to be in darkness and evil; many good men and things
likewise, lie scattered abroad in various forms, and mixed with many evils: and
therefore, for men, being in present passion and offense, and in great weakness
and darkness, to undertake to judge and separate all these, what monstrous
errors must needs follow? Therefore I enquire, whether, while things are in
this confusion, a way and spirit of Government, suitable to it, and that has
something of Religion, something of worldly Policy, be not best? And, whether
those that are more spiritual in their designs, and in the eagerness of their
spirits, to such a way, be not in mercy laid aside, till they and the matter be
riper and fitter? And whether such have not reason to be content, that the
World should be thrash'd a while longer with the violence and hardness of its
own ways of government, till it be fit to be fanned, and, till he come whose
fan is in his hand, rather than to torture their spirits and the world too,
with that which they cannot possibly effect, nor the world bear.

The Apostle gives one reason more of subjection to the powers that be, ver. 4.
He is the minister of God to thee for good: The safety of thy person and
family, the peace of the country, the liberty of thy religion, the enjoyment
of thy goods, are administered from God to thee by them; therefore, subject for
conscience sake, to Gods wise ordination, who knows what Governments are fit
for a people; and to Gods mercy, that conveys so great blessings by that means.

This we cannot be insensible of, that we do by this Government enjoy great
quiet, peace, and security, in our Religion, Relations, and Estates, to our
selves, and to the Nation, being not molested by any at home, nor by dangers
abroad; we may therefore observe, That personal weakness, in attaining a Power,
makes that Government, to him that has it, harder, but to the people, easier.
I think it is so with us, that though the Protector, by this unadvised and
unwarrantable change of Government, has brought a heavy burden of cares,
dangers, and sore travel upon himself, yet I know not, but that the people are
both eased, as to burdens at home, and secured from dangers abroad, by it.
This very consideration, That we reap the quiet fruit of his hazards and toil,
does affect my heart with a very great desire of giving him all the ease and
relief that I am able; for let men fancy what they will, so great and general a
Liberty for the Honest party, guilty of so many distasteful and offensive
Infirmities, with so great Divisions and Distractions, and their Enemies, so
many and malicious, is to me a wonderful mercy; and is purchased for us, by the
chief instrument of it, with perilous difficulties, and abilities stretched to
the utmost.

I fear, that out of an officious desire of removing and avoiding offense on
both sides, I have been more large and intent, than the nature of the subject
does require; and therefore am resolved, the principal things being already
discoursed, lightly to pass over what follows, only with some short
Observations.

The fourth Article contains the same thing, with part of the former, and
begins thus; As a consequence and fruit of this forbidden tree, many of the
choice servants of God, etc. are imprisoned, without knowing their accusers,
etc. or a fair and public trial, according to the Fundamental Laws the Land.

I. First, Government is indeed a Forbidden tree; it will not subject it self
to be questioned by any, its work and authority being above private and
captious reasonings.

II. Secondly, Our Government, is in the substance and life of it, Military,
and the Sword is active and vigilant, like that which the Cherubin had, which
turned every way; therefore, which way soever danger comes, be it from Friends
or Foes, it turns its edge against their faces, as you complain in your former
Article, and is as hard as it is quick, it spares none to preserve a public
Peace: This Sword is not borne in vain, but is a revenger, to execute wrath
upon them that do evil, Romans 13.4.

III. Thirdly, This tree of life, the Kingdom of Christ, is fenced with a
flaming Sword, you cannot press into this Paradise or Kingdom, by such force as
you use; you cannot take it from others by violence, it is indeed within you;
and you must bring forth the fruit of it, by your lips, for others, and there
only it is to be tasted.

IV. Fourthly, Military Government, as ours is, knows no form of Law; or, at
least, will not submit it self to the Law, though it may require private
Differences to subject to it, yet is it self above Law.

V. Fifthly, I doubt the trial of such Gentlemen, etc. according to the
Fundamental Laws, would not be to them a fuir trial, but a foul one, for it
could not but cut them off, as the Law now, stands; and therefore, the
Protector chooses a fair imprisonment, rather than a bloody trial, not willing
to trust their lives in the hand of the Law, a Judge and a Jury; which to me is
a testimony, that his Government, is not only in this, but in all things else,
more fatherly to you, than the Laws for which you plead.

Give me but leave to tell you the frequent thoughts of a spectator upon these
transactions; they are these:

Animad. I. That in the truest love of my heart, to them that are imprisoned,
yea, in the same love I have to my self, I have thought, that while their
spirits are thus acted, it is better for them to be in a Prison, than upon the
Throne; to be under Restraint than in Action.

Animad. II. That our Governors had much the better of the Prisoners, in
meekness, moderation, and long-suffering, from what I have observed: In their
desires of agreement, slowness to wrath, tenderness in inflicting restraint,
seeking of peace after they were restrained; as if they would not touch a hair
of their heads, only bind their hands from doing mischief.

Animad. III. That the Prisoners were more fierce, and did more injury to our
Governors, than our Governors to them, so that our Goevrnors are indeed the
sufferers; for how small a thing is a gentle outward restraint? But tongues are
swords, and when sharpened with Zeal, furbush'd with Scriptures, Praying,
Preaching, they cut deep into Name and Spirit; for public persons to be
sentenced and condemned in the name of God, in public Assemblies, as thieves,
oppressors, perjured persons, hypocrites, apostates: If it be but in passion
and discontent, it is a cross; but if there be any thing of the truth or
righteousness of Man in it, or the displeasure of God, 't would be a sore
crucifying to any private person, and must be much more, to persons in
authority, Government and public Safety suffering with them.

There is an Objection in your former Article, which is a branch of this
subject: They are imprisoned, say you, for declaring their Consciences;
concerning which, I shall barely propound these Questions:

Quest. I. Whether there be in any of these wordly things, an act of pure
Conscience? Or whether the subject matter, being outward things, as Government,
Power, etc. Conscience be not at least mixed with Interest, Faction and Passion.

Quest. II. Whether there be not reason to judge, (according to the rate that
Conscience now goes at) that the Protector is bound to keep Peace, and prevent
a War; by the law of Conscience to preserve other men's lives, as well as by the
law of Nature to save his own.

Quest. III. Suppose one Conscience has a mind to keep Peace, another has a
mind to make War, which of these should we, that are indifferent people, count
the best Conscience?

Quest. IV. If in matters of public Concernment, the Consciences of public
persons and private persons justle; which of them do you think should take
place?

Quest. V. If two Consciences cross each other in their motions, whether that
which has most light and strength, and is most pure, should not yield to that
which is darker and weaker.

Quest. VI. Whether then the Subscribers, who profess Conscience only, and
stand in the single right of Conscience, ought not to yield to the Conscience
of Governors, cumber'd with reason of State, public Affairs?

I dare not engage too far in this point of Conscience, nor be too serious in
it, therefore have I thus slightly passed it over.

The fifth Article says, Under pretense of Necessity, still to continue the
heavy burdens of Taxes, Customs, Excise, etc.

Animad. I. An Army is necessary, till there be a Government established, by
the declared consent of the People, and that voluntary.

Animad. II. It Is probable, such an established Government, were it never so
firmly united, yet would not, as the state of Affairs are at this time, be
without a standing Army, though well im proved and reduced.

Animad. III. It Is the original and great Quarrel twixt us and the King, who
should have the Militia; and we have prevailed, and got the Sword into honest
men's hands; he that designs the overthrow of the Army, gives the whole Cause
back to the Cavalier, and opens a way for him to return to his power and
malice: 'twas force, not law or reason, which subdued him, and it must be
force, not law or reason, that still subjects him.

Animad. IV. He that propounds a Power to stand now without an Army, requires
from another, what he would not do himself; he does but declare against the
Sword, that he might get it into his hands: and this is the meaning, I think,
of this Paper, to tell us of Peace, to persuade others to lay down the Sword,
that they may take it up.

Animad. V. An Army is as necessary to preserve the Subscribers, as any sort of
people, they being as much obnoxious to the malignity and rage of the people,
as any others; and would first feel the wane of a Guard.

Animad. VI. If an Army be necessary, Pay is necessary; and so, Taxes, Customs,
etc.

But indeed, It Is not Saint-like to complain of Taxes, or to resist them. It Is
the cry of the Malignant, and of the poor Neuter, Taxes, Excize, etc. and they
may be pitied; for alas, they lose their Religion, and yet pay for our Liberty,
to maintain that which is grievous to them: but we that once would have given
half of our Estates, for half that Freedom that we now enjoy for our souls, in
the things of God; now to complain, shows, either no love, the freedom of our
souls, less, or our money, more.

I think, it is visible, that our Governors impose no more than is necessary,
and that they strain and stretch things to the utmost, being unwilling to
exceed the lowest rate of Taxes; and that they really pinch themselves to save
the people.

The sixth Article says, Notwithstanding the fair pretenses and promises of
Reformation, yet what abominable and horrible Impieties, Injustice, and
Oppression, etc.

I could wish you did but see, how ill it becomes Saints to bestow their
Rhethorick upon Sin, to set it forth in its bravery; and how ill it becomes
Sin, to wear such gay clothes of high language from your mouths? And how sin
is cherished, in being led forth into open view, by the hand of her best
friend, Enmity, and enmity 'twixt brethren; and that you knew, that the pure
and good spirit of love that covers sin, that buries it in inward sorrow, or in
Christ his grave, or draws forth grace and mercy to wash it away, that is the
spirit, that is sins only enemy.

These great Epithites and Strains being misplaced, I doubt, they are also
unjust; passionate and affected speech of others evils, are commonly inordinate
and injurious. The particulars are:

I. First, Receiving the Honors, Profits, Customs, Benefits, etc. coming in
formerly to the Crown: If this be abominable and horrible, its very common: I
believe, there is scarce a Gentleman of the Subscribers, or any other person of
quality, but receives, either Honor or Profit, that formerly belonged to the
Crown: For, both the Honor and Profits, are shared generally amongst all sorts,
Fee-farm Rents, and other Lands, the Honor and Power of all Committees over the
people, to sequester, to levy money, to dispose livings, are of the Crown.

II. Secondly, Tenths and First Fruits: It Is the continuing things in name,
Jewish, but now in their use, Moral and Christian, as subservient to mercy, in
relieving hundreds of poor families: And these upheld, not in opposition to
light, nor in a superstitious love to the things, but, because they yet know
not, nor do you instruct them, how to take them away without great injury to
many people, that have no other livelihood in the earth. Love is the royal law,
the fulfilling of the law; it may, and must, rule all things, yea, both Law and
Gospel too; it makes that lawful, which were otherwise unlawful; and that
unlawful, (if against love) which were other wise lawful: And therefore, a man
may be a Pharisee in contending against Tithes, as well as in a rigid
observance of them, if he either omit or oppose the weightier matters of the
law, judgment and mercy; such a spirit seems to carry you in this zeal, to
sacrifice Tithes and First Fruits, without either judgment, to show how it may
be done in justice and righteousness, and without mercy, in considering the
poor Ministers that live only upon them.

III. Thirdly, The next branch of abominable and horrible Impieties, is, The
exalting of Sons, Servants, Friends, etc. (though some of them known to be
wicked men) to the highest places, etc. What Servants or Friends are preferred,
that are suspected to be wicked, I know not, being no Courtier, but for Sons,
they stand higher, and are obvious to most men's knowledge or observation: I
dare not say, neither do I know that any of them are wicked; they are young men,
and may have weakness; but wickedness is a malicious opposing of good* and
practicing evil.

But would you consider the Protectors family, as an object of greater Envy,
and subjected to more danger and malice than others are, may they not deserve a
little more favor than ordinary? and what great matters have they? The eldest
son is a Justice of Peace in the Country, the second son commands the Forces
in Ireland, wherein there may be some favor showed to him, being an Employment
possibly beyond his years and experience; I doubt this is the Offense, and the
rather, because the fame goes he inclines to a differing party: For his sons by
marriage, The Deputy of Ireland is a friend to the Subscribers, and may help to
balance some kindness that goes another way: For the Master of the Horse, if
he do but perform that part of a righteous man, to regard the life of his
beast, you will not judge him a wicked man, nor unworthy of his Preferment; But
if the Protector should be an indulgent father, and err in an excess of
natural affection in preferring his children, it may find a better name than
abominable and horrible impieties: For Gideon and Nehemiah, It Is not said
expressly, that I know, in Scripture, what they did for their children; but
there was as a good man, and as good a Governor, Samuel, who had but two sons,
and he made them Judges in Israel, and yet very ill men, that were covetous,
took bribes, perverted judgment, 1 Samuel 8.3. and yet he was not thus upbraided.

IV. Fourthly, The last particular of these horrible and abominable Impieties,
is so many Officers in the Army, and both Officers and Soldiers to receive
their pay in a time of peace, etc. What number of Officers, what their Pay is,
and how they spend it, I do not know, being a stranger to all these things,
only I would advise you of a mistake to call this a time of peace; for though
the Enemy be not in the field, he is in the house. The enemy is broken and
scattered, but you cannot say, he is not: if he were not, we are enemies one to
another: there is war in every man's heart, tongue, and would be in the hands,
if they were not bound by an Army; There is nothing at all done in the Nation
toward a civil or religious Peace or Accord, nothing declared wherein we agree
either in Church or State.

This very Paper of yours cannot but be interpreted War: for so great a number
of people (a little Welsh Army) to declare against the present Power, to
dissuade the people from their obedience, to endeavor to set up another, and
that upon fighting principles, is undoubtedly War; therefore if you would have
the Army reduced, study to be quiet, and to follow your private occasions, for
these insurrecting practices to disturb the people, and molest the present
Government, do necessitate and establish the sword amongst us; and therefore we
that do desire Peace, and an Ease of our Burdens, have cause to complain of
the unquietness of your spirits, and of all that go fretting and railing about
to raise up strife and War.

The seventh Testimony mentions the sad effects of the secret Design of
Hispaniola, etc. I am not able to judge absolutely of the good or evil of this
Work; but this I know, it is not safe to judge by the Success, especially at
first; for we our selves succeeded but ill in the beginning of these wars; I
fear you do but take advantage of our loss, to express your enmity: for if we
are not mistaken in you, you are for war with all the world, and therefore
cannot be against the Design, though you grieve for the Success; and 'twere well
if you don't mis-call the Affection, and say it is Grief fox the Loss, when it is
anger or enmity at the persons, and then you do not grieve, but rejoice at the
evil that befalls your brethren.

What ever the nature of the Design be, or what ever the Success may be, this I
have observed, that this Quarrel with Spain, and about the West Indies, has
been long in the hearts of many honest people, and that the well-affected of
England have had a greater antipathy to this proud, cruel, and most
antichristian Nation, the Spaniard, than to any Nation in Europe: Though the
Design was laid in private, yet the public Declaration shows a true English
and Protestant spirit, rather to engage in war than to submit to the
Inquisition, and the usurped Tyranny over the West Indies: I confess I much
desire and love a General Agreement of Godly men in public and great Affairs;
but if there be the spirit, reason and justice of the good party, I cannot but
allow it, though it want the vote and outward suffrage.

Your last Witness is various, consisting of diverse parts, I confess I do not
well understand all things in it: First you testify for your selves, with what
hearts you joined with the Parliament and Army against the King and his Party,
that you had no other design, save as they were enemies to our Lord Christ,
etc. I know your spirits are at a very great distance and enmity against the
King and his Party, and therefore cannot think you intend to bespeak their good
thoughts of you: yet your declaring only against the enmity, not against
Office or Person, and your care of the general good of the Nation, particular
benefit and just liberty of every man, and your grief that any just cause is
given them to stumble, etc. or complain that they are deprived of their
freedom, and several ways oppressed, etc. These Expressions make me doubt that
you intend some subtle glances of favor to that Party, which does mind me of
an observation that I have made upon my own and others spirits: That if any
through Offense at the great Weakness or Miscarriage of the honest party, do
separate from them, and oppose them, they are, though unwillingly and
unwittingly, carried into the spirit of the Malignants; we may hate their way,
and to confederate with their persons or actions, yet our spirits may be
tainted. The Nation is cleft into these two great Parties, the Royal and the
Reforming party; or the Kings party and the Army party; and he that by
discontent goes far from the one, will be carried off to the other before he is
aware: there is a kind of necessity, if the affections do engage, 'twill be
with one of these two: Enmity strangely transforms the mind, and leads it into
things exceeding contrary to it self, and its own interest, to things
destructive to Friends, Relations and a man's own Life; therefore if malice
prevail, 'twill make very honest men malignants presently; and hence it was
that Elijah in a fit of anger became an enemy to Israel, and interceded against
them, Romans 11.2. as we have formerly observed.

You say, That it never came into your hearts to think or intend the pulling
down of one person to set up another, or one unrighteous Power to promote
another: If you did (as you say) join against the King only as an enemy to
Christ, his kingdom and people, then you might design (and for ought I know
justly) the pulling down of one that was an enemy, and setting up another that
was a friend to the kingdom and people of Christ; But this I doubt is not your
intention (however this clause came in against the King, save as an enemy) for
it follows, nor one unrighteous Power to promote another; by which, and other
things in your Paper, you seem to make Government by one, or Monarchy, to be an
unrighteous Power.

Because you seem to me to be either dark or various, in this Article, I shall
freely give you my Animadversions, if they may be of use to you, I shall be
glad.

I. First, Power in one as supreme, is not unrighteous, because in one: That
which is most agreeable to rule, is most righteous: Government by one as head,
is most agreeable to the highest rule, the kingdom of Christ, which is a
Monarchy, to the rule of Scriptures, to Nature, to Reason, to the Laws and
Customs of Nations: And Power in the hands of one as supreme, with the
assistance of a double Council; one more superior of the principal and
honorable Worthies, and another more large of the wisest and justest of the
people, is I think the best Constitution, and according to a divine pattern;
therefore if either Heavenly things, Scripture, Nature, Reason or Custom be a
Rule, Monarchy is more righteous than Oligarchy or Democracy.

II. Secondly, If the kind of Government be admitted, let us come nearer and
see whether this person have right to be this One supreme, or to be Protector;
for this Person is chiefly concerned in your Paper, as you say in your
Postscript, which puts us again upon the consideration of the Person, you have
an account of him in 19, 20, and 21 pages, which is more it may be than will be
judged fit for me to write, either by him or you: I am very sensible that I
write as Paul says, 2 Cor. 11. Not after the Lord, but as it were foolishly,
not in that wisdom that becomes one that professes the Lord, but foolishly, and
knowing it to be weak, yet cannot avoid it, the foolishness of men's ignorance
and malice necessitating and bowing me to it.

The common right of Succession, according to law, the Protector has not: if
this be rule, the Kings power was righteous, this unrighteous.

The Right of the Protector to be supreme, is not in relation to the people of
the Nation in general, except it be by conquest: If you look upon him in this
large consideration, his Power seems to be forced, there being no Law or
Consent of the People to make him so; but the honest party are indeed the
foundation of his Power: For they, and those that have adhered to this Cause,
have by these Revolutions gotten the Power into their hands, not as Saints, but
as the effect of Providence, arising out of the Nature, Reason and Necessity of
things as they now are.

I shall barely assert this, and not now stand to prove it, or to give the
reason of it, supposing the Subscribers and others ready enough to receive it,
and resolved to keep it; neither do I see how honest men can resign this
Advantage they have, without giving up themselves and all they have, to their
Enemies rage: If we have a right to be superior to others, the Protector has a
very natural right to be our Chief, standing upon our shoulders, and has, I
think, as good a Title to be Supreme over this people, as any Gentleman in
Wales or others, have to be a Committee man, Justice of the Peace, Captain, or
to enjoy any Lands, or Revenues gotten by the sword: He that denies him to be
what he is, may as well deny the whole party all the Advantage they have gotten
by the war: I think we ought to consider the honest party, as a distinct people
from and above others, and then his right to be their head, stands upon those
two grounds expressed by the Israelites to David, 2 Samuel 5.1, 2.

I. First, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh, thou art natural to us, and
we to thee, of the same kind of life, spirit and heart, the same bone and
strength of Faith, Zeal, Power and Godliness: Of the same flesh, the same sense
of good and evil, the same affections to God and Religion, the same gifts, the
same interest, the same liberty for the same conscience, the same peace, the
same enemies, loved and hated by the same, only He more eminently.

II. Secondly, Also in times past, thou wast he that leddest out and broughtest
in Israel: Thou have deserved to head us, for thou have had the Command of us,
and have led us forth upon Designs wisely, and brought us back with safety and
victory, therefore thou shall be Captain over Israel.

I shall only let you see now the difference between the person pulled down,
and this one set up, or the Righteousness and Mercy of this Power above that:
That person was not only a stranger to us, but an enemy: This is according to
rule, Deuteronomy. 17.15. From among thy brethren shall thou set a King over thee: And
according to promise Jer. 30.21. Their nobles shall be of themselves, and their
Governor shall proceed from the midst them: And secondly, the other had the
right of birth from an ill root: but this of merit and worth.

III. Thirdly, That is a righteous Power which fulfils its end, and administers
that good to the people that is appointed by God, and that good that is both
general or public, and visible to all: Now the end and use of this Power that
is evident even to nature and common reason, is to administer Safety and Peace
to this Nation, and especially to honest people; and this the Protector does
do, and is excellently furnished with Abilities for that purpose: First in the
might, vigor, vigilance and courage of his spirit in resisting and suppressing
the most industrious and unwearied Attempts of our old Enemies: Secondly, in a
wise and large comprehending and moderating the Divisions and Factions amongst
our selves, if his spirit should despond or flag in the first, or narrow and
shrink into any one party, and turn enemy to any others, 'twere a plain gap
opened for ruin to come in upon us: I must be so foolish as to tell you my
thoughts, when I have considered the desperate malice of his and our enemies,
the cross and violent winds that move men's minds, the continual tempests of
the peoples rage, I have judged him the fittest man in the earth to govern us
in this Scene of Action, and that Power was most rightly and duly placed in
him: Let him have all the advantages of an Army, of civil Honor and Title of
Protector, let him be allowed, all his weakness, his heights and heats, his
policy and compliance, if he keeps the Ship from sinking, he deserves the honor
of a good and right Pilate: Several persons and parties have different
apprehensions of the work of this Power, that it is to, set up the kingdom of
Christ, after our way, says the Presbyterian; after our way, says the
Subscribers; to advance our way, say the Independents; to encourage godly
spiritual men, say another sort; to give absolute liberty, say others; but
these are but private opinions in things, and notions that are disputable and
remote from Government, urged by Faction and Partiality, dangerous shelves and
rocks; but to preserve us in Peace and Safety from violence, blood and
confusion, is a work unquestionably evident in the Light of God, of Nature, of
Religion, of Humanity; and so far as he does this, he fulfils the end of power
at this time.

Now observe the difference 'twixt that which was pulled down, and this set up:
That had Names and Titles, By the Grace of God, Defender of the Faith, etc. but
either void and empty things, or filled with contrary and opposite qualities;
either living to ease and worldly pomp, or else in enmity to the grace of God
and true Faith: this is unrighteous, to have Power, and not to fulfill it; but
in this Power we have stuff, substance and ability to perform the work of
Power, which is, to protect us.

IV. Fourthly, There is yet a fourth and higher sense wherein a Power may be
said to be righteous (i.e.) with the righteousnesness of God or Christ, which
is proper only to Christ and his kingdom, whose Scepter is a righteous
Scepter: who is that King that shall reign in Righteousness, and whose Princes
shall rule in judgment, Isa. 32.1. and the work of Righteousness shall be
Peace, etc. ver. 17. Now if this be your witness, that this Power is not thus
righteous, we are of the same mind, and so I suppose is he that has the
Power: so we admit your witness true, but not in judgment, being against a
thing not in question nor challenged; for alas, what is there amongst us that
looks like the Majesty, Beauty, Judgment, Peace and Glory of such a Kingdom?
We are poor dark creatures, pudling in the dirt and rubbish of a broken world,
only striving for a being and subsistence, with the best humane diligence,
wisdom and honesty we have; but if this be the intent of your testimony;

I. Why may not we testify more largely of persons, Churches and Ministry,
that there is none righteous, no not one, all have sinned and come short of
this glory; neither Ruler nor People righteous with this righteousness, no
Church nor its Rulers, no family nor its ruler, no person in his own soul, and
the Government of it, is thus righteous; but iniquity, deceit, vanity,
impurity, injustice defiles us all, in all things.

II. Whether a Testimony against the Subscribers be not more just; that they
pretend to and profess for this righteous kingdom, as if they had it amongst
them, and would or could set it up, if they had power, whereas they are as
weak, as dark, as sinful as other men.

But here lies I think a great mistake amongst us, and that which much troubles
us, We had high looks, expected great matters, while we have only looked at
the promises and prophecies, and what is contained in them, but have not humbly
and soberly considered our own present state, which is indeed miserably corrupt
and wretched; This has raised expectations of greater Matters than it pleases
God to do for us, or I fear will do till we return into our selves, and are
more sensible of our own great insufficiency for such things that we dream of;
being disappointed, we vex and free against Governors, expecting they should be
Gods to us, when we ought indeed to put our mouths in the dust, and confess we
have all sinned, and come short of that glory which we have professed.

It is not meet to say this kingdom is far from us, though there be a truth in
it, as Christ tells them that looked that the kingdom of God should immediately
appear, Luke 19.11. that he was to go into a far country, etc. But this
however I may say: We we far from the kingdom of God, being in darkness,
enmity, in sin, guilt and wrath, and administering little else one to another.

And therefore this desire and hopes of great Glory, Honor and Dominion to be
dispensed to us, and the wrath that is amongst us for want of it, is I judge, a
lusting after a fleshly kingdom and glory, and that to our selves and our own
party; whereas the kingdom of Christ will save all the Saints and the earth
too; and it rises from a vain pride of our selves, and some excellency we think
to be in our gifts and ministries, without a sense of that deep and inward
corruption that is within; Therefore before this kingdom come that you speak
of, I expect a more pure Ministry, like that of John Baptist, That will make
crocked things straight; rough things, plain; and exalt the valleys, bring down
every mountain; that all flesh may see the salvation of God. This Ministry will
level these high thoughts of yours; and therefore, in stead of quarrelling for
a Kingdom, know you are but Servants, and be willing to travel and work with
your brethren, in that mean and low state in which they are, for peace and
safety.

Let me desire you to consider a serious word of reproof to you: You are gotten
a step higher than your Brethren in notions, are exercised with the thoughts of
a future and more excellent state of things, and busy your heads and minds in
pleasing speculations about Christ's Kingdom. First, I fear, this is a very
imperfect, if not a false view, of the Kingdom of Christ; because, this Kingdom
is within, enjoyed and possessed before it is seen, or seen by its own light
when we do enjoy it. Secondly, If it be a true sight or view that you have, you
do abuse that light. First, by applying the rule of God and Christ to man, by
measuring the creature with the law of the Creator, or requiring that of poor
man, which is the proper work of Christ himself. Secondly, You by this light or
knowledge, administer nothing of the thing it self, which is Love, Peace,
Righteousness, but your own passion, Wrath and Contention. Thirdly, You, as the
Pharisees, sit in Moses chair, get into the highest seat and places of
Scripture, of everlasting Righteousness; and by that light, bind heavy
burdens upon others, but touch them not with one of your fingers; live not the
least branch of that righteous and glorious Kingdom in your souls, families, or
any of your conversations. Fourthly, if you had Power, and so opportunity, to
show how little you have of the Spirit of this righteous Kingdom, you would be
the most pitiful creatures that I know in the earth; the most deceived, and so
the most unhappy, because deceived in the greatest thing, and in that which is
your and our happiness.

You are now ending your witness; We suppose you have spoken all the ill that
you knew, and all that you could rake up against them; and he that will speak
all the ill he can, will speak more than is true. Now you have done witnessing,
you proceed to judge: You say, We suspect and judge them to be great
transgressers therein: At last, all mounts but to suspicion, no evidence or
demonstration; and you suspect, witness, and judge your selves; you might leave
the judgment to another; and suspect and judge, it is a judgment upon
suspicion. I would not quibble upon words, if I did not think you did the
tiling: That all this that you have writ, is but a suspicion and a rash
judgment, drawn up in private, in your own dark and suspicious thoughts,
wherein you evidence nothing; and therefore, I do think, you might have left
out Witness and Testimony in your Paper: And my Reasons are,

I. First, A true spiritual witness convinces of sin; now, I think, this will
not convince them, because, it does not me, who am a stander by, and ready to
receive a Testimony against them. Your Paper renders them to me rather better
than worse, and your selves rather worse than better: I did really think your
Spirits had been more pure and simple in opposing them, than now they do appear.

II. Secondly, A true witness convinces of righteousness, as well as of sin: I
find nothing here, either of their righteousness or Christ's righteousness,
brought forth, to blot out or forgive their sin.

III Thirdly, The two Witnesses spoken of in Scripture, which you think are
your pattern, are Olive Trees, and empty the golden oil out of themselves; they
pour forth light and healing love; now, I find not any drop of this oil here,
either to enlighten them to come to God out of their sins, nor love or grate to
heal or strengthen them, but a bare dry accusation of sin, and threatening of
judgment.

IV. Fourthly, Those Witnesses stand before the Lord of the whole earth, and
declare what they see in him; which is undeniable truth: but you testify what
you hear abroad, and what is in the mouths of the most profane people;
therefore, I confess, I would have you have higher thoughts of
Saints-witnessing, than to name such a Paper by it.

After some other particulars, which I will not meddle with, you do Disclaim
all adherence to, Owning of, or Joining with these Men in these ways.

You may separate from them in some particular ways, but, I think, you are
really one with them in their hearts and spirits: There is the same Good in
them that is in you, and the same Evil in you that is in them: One in Nature
and Grace, one in Cause and Quarrel, one in Religion, Liberty and Safety; and
therefore disclaim, and utterly disclaim: but, brawling makes not a separation
'twixt brethren, nor every scolding a divorce 'twixt husband and wife; me
thinks your Union appears in your Disclaiming of them. For,

I. First, If you were not one with them, you would not be so much concerned in
their miscarriage, not so much ashamed and grieved, as you express, for their
evils; it is your feeling either the same or the like evils in your selves, that
does wound and prick your hearts.

II. Secondly, You likewise find and feel the same Good in them that is in
your selves, under their sins and sufferings which troubles you; if you did
not, you would retire privately, and suffer them to sink and perish in their
own ways.

III. Thirdly, There is much jealousy in your minds; this jealousy arises
from a secret union. You are within, sensible of some very good thing in the
Protector, to which you have a right; and being jealous that his heart is not
with you, nor for your way, you are enraged against him: yea, were you not
sensible of a good spirit in him, and that much allied to you, I am persuaded,
you neither would nor durst be so bold with him, as you are in your Paper. For
if you thought him of a right Royal stamp, one that consulted only how to
maintain his Greatness by force and policy, or, that his Judgment were but as
hard to you as some Presbyterians, you would not thus provoke him; but would
rather study how to deserve and preserve your present Liberties, by a quiet and
sober use of them, than to adventure the loss of them, by offending of him. You
know the Sword is in a Brothers hands, which are tied up by love and
conscience, and that makes you so bold with him and his Power.

IV. Fourthly, You here seem to disown and disclaim them; Alas, if your spirit
were another from them, you might retire without noise: But you are by
Interest, and by the frame of your Spirits engaged to the same kind of public
Work; and therefore you may, as men that are angry, talk much more than you
intend, and in a heat tumble out your passions, which differ much from your
dispositions; for, I think, you neither can nor will leave them, nor the Work:
for this contest, is not at all a division of Enemies, but an offense of
Brethren; not in the main substance of your business, but in some remote
things; which, either more sight and experience, or else the necessity of
interest and safety, will overcome.

Before you go, you would have some good company with you, and therefore, you
desire all the Lords people to withdraw from them. If you have not a very good
company to follow you, you will, I hope, be so good natured as to abide with
them, or stay for them, till they come to your light; for you are not so
melancholic as choleric, nor have you so good a Cause and Conscience (in your
present contests) as to live alone with it.

But tell us whither you would have us to withdraw; whether into our own souls,
to mind a more inward and spiritual work, or into our families, callings and
congregations, to attend the worship of God in a private way, and to leave
Government and outward National work, to them that are engaged in it. But, I
fear, you rather invite us into Wales to join with you there, or to raise a
party here in England to begin another War: and if this be your mind, I shall
only in telling you, why the Lords people cannot join with you, take my leave
of you.

I. First, We were urged and pricked on to the former War by a necessity of a
being; for the spirit of the King and Bishops were such, that we could not live
(with a Liberty of our Consciences) under their Government: Now having obtained
this, though it be with great expense of Blood and Treasure, yea, of many of
our outward Rights and Liberties, yet we had rather sit down quietly in this
Freedom, with safety, than hazard this and all we have left us, by a New War.

II. Secondly, War is a violent and desperate medicine, to be applied only in
case of necessity upon incurable Enemies, whose spirits are set at such a
distance from, and enmity to the light of Godliness it self, that they are
beyond the reach of conviction; such beasts are fit for the sword, who never
felt nor knew any power but outward force; But for brethren that have been and
are enlightened, and become subject to the leadings of conscience, though they
be fallen into a temptation and snare: the remedy for such is not carnal but
spiritual, and that is Light to be administered with patience and long-suffering
to the conscience, and that too, so long as there is any spark of life, or any
sense at all of the fear of the Lord left in them; being by it, capable of
reproof and instruction, they should be attended upon with suitable means, in
love and mercy. If all means of this kind should prove ineffectual, and that
they should go on to sin wilfully, after they have received the knowledge of
the truth, yet an outward Sword would be improper, they being prepared and
reserved for a greater punishment; a certain fearful looking for of judgment
and fiery indignation, Heb. 10.26, 27.

But I believe, you cannot think that our Governors are gone so far back into
obstinate and wilful Wickedness; for those things about which you differ, are
disputable things, and remote from Godliness, propounded and prosecuted with
much carnal zeal, and offensive weakness: And therefore it cannot be
interpreted Wilful Ignorance, not to be convinced, but Weakness: And alas, do
not we see they are in a continual hurry, tossed with dangers, striving all
they can for life, which occasions passions that darken the mind? Their
spirits must needs be disturbed and distempered with a multitude of worldly
perplexing Cares, and therefore it is no wonder they take in or give forth no
more light, or that their spirits and way is dark and misty: From a State so
sick as ours is, so dangerously shaken, cannot be expected any acts of clear
Judgment, nor any progress in the work of Reformation. And now, while their
Enemies are plotting Mischief, and watching for Advantage, and all they can do
is little enough to preserve our Safety; for us, in this season, to impose our
own Opinions upon them, and to withdraw from them, and threaten them with
Division and War for not following them, is very unseasonable and unbrotherly,
and weakens their hands that should be strengthened for our Defense.

Thirdly, We do see, that in all reason a New War amongst our selves, would
open a way for the common Enemy to destroy both parties; it is well if all
united can subsist against them: But our Divisions are their great hope, and
the life of their Cause, the only thing that supports their spirits, and
hardens them in opposition. You complain in your Paper, That they are offended,
and that stumbling blocks are laid in their way: But its evident, That nothing
keeps them at such a distance from us and conviction, as our differences
amongst our selves, which gives them hopes of recovering all; and those hopes
uphold pride and enmity. Therefore, to war upon our Brethren, were to take
their work out of their hands, and to betray that remnant that is left us, to
the sword first, and then to their malice.

Fourthly, We are indeed weary of War, and do find that it is at best but a
sad carnal thing: For, though this War was undertaken with some Honesty and
Simplicity, against a Malignant and Oppressing Enemy, yet we see no cause of
glorying or boasting of it; for we find, the Sword is a devouring thing, it
wastes Treasure, impoverishes a Nation, and loads it with Taxes: We complain of
Taxes, it is not the fault of Governors, but the nature of the Sword is such, it
has a great Mouth, and must be fed or worse, and to begin New War, would
multiply Taxes, as we multiply Armies and Forces.

War devours our Privileges, Rights and Freedoms; it is Iron that breaks all
into pieces, it is rough and hard, and will tear down Councils, Laws,
Governments, Property and Freedom: It Is not the men that use it, but the nature
of the Sword and its ministry, is to tread down all things before it; and those
that are exercised in it, must either obey its commands, and follow its rules,
or else the Sword it self will go from them, or be taken from them, and be
employed against them: This the Sword has done amongst us; and they that draw
it again, will certainly waste what is left us of Right and Property, and leave
us quite destitute.

War wastes the peace and quiet of men's minds, and fills them with Fury: For,
Every battle of the Warrior is with confused noise, and garments rolled in
blood, Isa. 9.5. Blood strangely stains the nature of man, makes him brutish,
uncivil, unsubject to Law and Authority, and fills the minds of men with
sounds, and voices of Confusion and Division, of Fire and of Wrath; which makes
men tumultuous, proud, cruel and imperious: Men, after a War, are an unquiet
Sea, apt to be moved upon every discontent to War again: And this Blood rouls
and tumbles in your Fancies, that you know not how to settle to a quiet life,
but long to be in action again.

Although there was a Righteousness and Justice in our late War against our
Enemies, yet it was not so pure a work, but if we look back upon it, we may see
cause of Repentance; both from the nature of the work, and from the subject
upon whom it was administered. War, when it is a Dispensation from God, yet it
is a very low one, it is Sensual, Earthly and Devilish; if not in it self, yet
the corruptions of man mingling it self with it, make it so; which, though it
condemn not the Sword absolutely, yet it may make the ministry unpleasing to a
humane and Gospel Spirit: The subject upon which 'twas administered, was mixed;
there was a Legal Right the King and Bishops had: There was in some a Legal
humane Honesty and Innocence, with much Ingenuity, natural Piety and
Conscience; which when we consider, we cannot be without some relenting toward
them, and repenting of that Violence and Wrath wherewith we prosecuted them. So
that we are more ready to repent of War against Enemies, than to begin one upon
Friends: Our spirits, our light we hope rises higher, into Meekness, Love and
Moderation; so that though we condemn not former works, yet there may be a more
excellent way: And, if it were to do again, considering all things, we should
be cooler than we were, and not so hasty to War.

Therefore it would become us all, to wash our souls in Sorrow and Repentance,
to wipe away the spots and defilements of War, and the guilt of Blood, of
Violence and Wrath. It would be an excellent thing in our Governors, to begin
and Order a Universal Humiliation for the Evils of the late War; To offer up
public Peace Offerings, and to beg pardon of the Lord, and peace in our
spirits and consciences, that he that creates Peace, would be pleased to give
it to us, first within, and then without: This, I think, would be the only
foundation of Peace, the only way to soften our minds to others, and others
to us, and to cleanse us from inward rancor, and from guilt, which makes men
wrathful, contentious and unquiet.

Fifthly, While the Sword is necessary for our Defense, as we yet conceive it
is, we think it in the best hands, and best settled where it is; Because it is
by Providence disposed to them in the ordinary course of War, the generality of
them having carried on the work from the beginning, therefore they have a Right
to their Power and Command: And we judge it wisely disposed by Providence into
such hands, who are large in their spirits, to comprehend and to take into
Employment and Love, all sorts of Honest men: Whereby, the Sword is more easy,
the work more secure, and greater hopes of Peace. Whereas if we should join
with you, to get the Sword into your hands, the Sword will be the Sword still,
and in men's hands of narrower spirits, which would make it more dangerous and
more cruel: So that we must deal plainly with you, if we attempt a New War, we
shall but fight away that little of Money, that little of Right and Freedom,
that little of Love and Peace that is left; and fight our selves into new
Troubles, new Sins and new Defilements of our Brethrens Bloods, which will be
Blood of a deep dye; and at last have no fruit but this, To be in worse hands
than we are: who, though they seem to have more Light, yet we are sure have
less Love, and so most unfit to Command the Sword.

You have therefore no hope to draw us into your Design, if it be war; let us
then persuade you to withdraw from it, and from those that would seduce you
into it: It Is my earnest request to you, that you would wait at Jerusalem in a
holy and humble serving of the Lord, till you have power from on high, and then
if our Governors do not prevent you, by bringing forth some better fruit, you
will be able with wisdom and power to convince and restore them, or to carry on
the work of the Lord upon your selves and others, in spirit and judgment: And
leave these men to the Lord, who will either lead them out of these present
mists, if they humbly and sincerely attend upon him, or if they be unfaithful
to him, he to whom they have appealed, and whose servants they are, will judge
righteous Judgment upon them.

Finis.
THE POSTSCRIPT.
YOur Postscript is very reproveable, but not administering to me any material
thing wherein I might really serve you, I choose rather to wave is than to
trouble you and my self with it: My intent and endeavor has been, not to
wound, but to heal your spirits, and if I have lanc'd, it has been only to
let out that corruption, which I know, must needs be painful to you; for it is
some of that corrupt matter within, not the evils of others without, that is
the true reason of your great Trouble and Discontent.


