Sad and Lamentable NEWS From several parts of ENGLAND.

BEING A true Relation of the great Losses sustained by those strange Winds,
and impetuous Tempests, on Tuesday the 18th of February, both by Sea and Land.
The number killed and wounded in the City of London, and other places, by the
blowing down of Chimneys, and the tops of stately Houses; the violent Storm of
Rain, mixed with Lightning at Hereford, Worcester, Norwitch, and other famous
Cities, the like not known in many Ages. The renting and tearing of many
gallant Churches and stately Fabrics; so that there was scarce any safety for
Man, Woman, or Child, either within or without Doors: The blowing down of many
dwelling Houses in several parts, as also great Barns, Stables, and Cow-houses,
where many Cattle were killed and destroyed. The tearing up of great Trees by
the Roots, and the filling of Highways so exceeding full, that Carriers and
Travelers can hardly pass.



LONDON, Printed for Charles Tay, 1662.

Sad and Lamentable NEWS From the North, East, and Western parts OF England.
THe great and violent storms that lately happened in the City of London and
other parts adjacent, are as strange to ^elate as they were then dreadful to
behold; the like having not bin in ma^y Ages, both for the continuance and
impetuousness thereof; and to begin with what befell in this Southern Climate,
the City of London had its share; for in Covent Garden, near the Fleece Tavern,
a Lady received her last breath being killed by the roof of the house falling
into her Chamber, and two little Children were miraculously preserved in the
same house* being immediately before that terrible blow happened carried down
stairs. Another person of quali^y had her Br^ins beat out by the fall of a
Chimney, and many were lamentably hurt and bruised in several places, to the
number of 17. amongst whom a poor Porter in Fleetstreet, felt the bitter pain
of that sad Tempest, having his right Arm shivered almost to pieces, by the
vehement fall of diverse Bricks and ^iles from off a house near the Pageant, the
top of the said Pageant being soon after likewise blown down, the fall thereof
being so great, that it beat down the sides of many houses, doing great harm to
the inhabitants; the other likewise in Leaden Hall street was exceedingly rent
and torn, and the Temple in Cheapside somewhat defaced about the top, but
blessed be God no great harm done to the people.

This great Tempest continued for many hours, doing much harm to many stately
houses, which by the fall of Chimneys and flying about both of Bricks and
Tiles, some Horses were killed in the open streets, besides one Coach horse
standing in the Coach, near Grays Inn had his Brains beat out by the Bricks
that descended from the houses. But that which is most sad and grievous is, the
great ruins that befell the Country people in several places, where it is said
above 2. were killed and hurt; for sad were the objects all along the Road from
Cambridge to London, the Barns and Out houses being in many places levelled to
the ground, and many Cattle overwhelmed and smothered with the Timber, Th^tch
and Rubbish; their dwelling houses were also pitiously rent and torn and little
safety in many of their habitations. The Wind-Mils also in many places were
laid flat to the earth, and the May-Poles also about Tottenham High Cross,
Waltham, Ho^sdon, and other places, became no longer standing Triumphs.

Great were the cries of the people in many Towns, to see such a devastation of
their Corn and ^oods; nay, the fields, Woods, and Groves, seemed to mourn for
the loss of their stately Cedars, there being in many places great Trees torn
up by force and violence of the Wind by the roots: And this extended many
miles, even to the North East, and VVestern parts: for not only at Lin in
Norfolk, Cambridge, Huntingdon, Hartford, Buokingham, Northampton, and in
Leicestershire, but also as far as Hereford in the West of England, the storm
was exceeding great, and very considerable the losses, sustained by those great
and strange winds: for on Tuesday morning the 1^th of February about two of the
clock began a most violent storm of Rain mixed with Lightning, which con^inued
about two hours: after which followed such an impetuous Tempest of wind that
never was the like known in those part, continuing till almost noon very strong
and high, being scarce any safety within Doors or without* and not a Church nor
House in the City, but has received loss. The poor Country people resort
thither daily, complaining of their great sufferings by this violent storm,
some having their awelling houses blown down, some their Barns* some their
Stables, Beasts, and Cow-houses, their Horses and Cattle being destroyed and
killed in them.

The like happened at VVorc^ster, Gloucester, Tenisbury and other Towns and
Vi^l^ges in those parts; and the High ways are so full of fal^ Trees, tha^
Carriers* W^ggoners, and other Travelers can hardly pass; and it is to be
feared that many have suffered great shipwreck at Sea, many Fishermen being
likewise reported to be cast away at the mouth of the River of Thames.

We also hear, that the same day there was very great and violent storms in
Yorkshire Lincolnshire, and those parts, and that there is very much harm done
by these strange Winds, and that many Cattle have been killed by the fall of
Houses

Such sto^mes have not been known those many years, and indeed scarce heard of
since the year 1625. at which tim^ blessed be God, Providence was pleased to
divert it from ^ning to these Kingdoms, for the Eastern Countries underwent
the terror thereof, especially at Constantinople, where on Monday the 29th, of
June there began a m^st terrible Tempest; with so violent and c^nti^u^^ Thunder
and Lightning, that all the City showed as if it had been on fire: At the end
whereof fell a storm of H^il, whose force brake both Tiles and Glass^s, so tha^
st^nes were taken up of an hundred and ^i^ty Drams and the next morning some of
them being weighed they were of about seven or eight Ounces a piece, where ^i^h
m^^y were sore wounded: And the third of July after, there fell out another
Tempest of Thunder and Lightning, which burned some and slew many Cattle in the
Field.

Sundry such examples we may read of in History, but those which seemed most
terrible, are such mentioned in the Reign of Tarquin, in whose days fell out
one of the most terriblest Earthquakes that ever was: First, there arose
furious and vio^ent Winds, which tare up Trees by the Roots, made Birds fall
to the Earth, uncovered houses* and overthrew many; then followed Thunder are
Lightning, which made the night like noon day; then fearful Thunder Bolts,
which brake down stately Buildings* and slew many men; the Sea was wonderfully
troubled, after which came such a violent heat, that men were not able to
endure it but were forced to cast off their clothes and hide themselves under
ground; the Sky was so dark and dust so great, that one could not see another,
so that flocking together, many fell down dead. Many Cities were ruinated, much
people perished, many mountains and Hills fell and became plains, many Rivers
were dried up, Fountains and Springs brake up where never was any before, and
almost all the houses in Antioch were demolished.

Thus did the Lord pour down heavy Judgments upon a wicked and sinful people;
for many are the Plagues which God sends sometimes upon a people to make them
see their iniquities; and sometimes they are great and of long continuance, to
stir up and induce a sinful people to observe the works of the Lord, and fear
his Glorious Name: O that the inhabitants of this Island would take up a
lamentation for the sins of England, crying to the Lord night and day, renting
their hearts, and not their garments that his Divine Majesty would be pleased
to divert those judgments threatened to this sinful Land, and to preserve us
from violent Storms, Famines Plagues, and Sicknesses; for by turning to the
Lord, is the only way to remove his judgments; and if we seek the face of the
Lord, and turn to him, and call upon his Name, and forsake our evil ways, then
will the Lord hear from Heaven, pardon our Sins and heal our Land.

The loss sustained by these great and violent VVindes, ^is said to amount to
above one Million of Money; besides the loss of many ships 7 being reported to
be sunk, coming for London laden with Suffolk Chee^e, and other necessary
provisions: ma^y Boats were also cast away* and great detriment an^ d^mage done
by fire the same day, which happened on Tuesday the 18th of this instant February.

FINIS.

