Sedition Scourged, OR A VIEW OF THAT Rascally and Venomous PAPER, ENTITLED, A
Charge of High Treason exhibited against OLIVER CROMWELL, Esquire for several
Treasons by him committed.

LONDON, Printed by Hen. Hills, for Rich. Baddeley, within the Middle Temple
Gate, 1653.

Sedition Scourged, OR, A View of that Rascally and Venomous Paper, Entitled,
A Charge of High Treason, exhibited against Oliver Cromwell, Esquire etc.
THE Invention of Printing was doubtless at the first one of the most laudable
and profitable discoveries that could have been made by man. By it Letters,
which had long been under the rubbidge of Barbarism, were restored to their
former luster, and conveyed through Europe; by it the Gospel, sullied and
blemished by the corruptions of Popery, (God in his wisdom so ordaining) after
it was a little more purely taught, became to be dispersed, maugre Rome, and
her Superstitions; by it there is not only better communication of knowledge
for the present, but greater hopes of preserving it for the future: And yet so
unlucky has it been, that since the mystery of it grew common, and the
permission in a manner general, it has been a pestilent Midwife to these
accursed brats, Error in the Church, and Sedition in the State. Nor indeed if a
man may dare to speak it, are the Governors themselves wholly blameless for
such inconveniences. For Printing being ever accounted among the Regalia of
every Government, as well as Coining, etc. it should be looked on with such a
jealous and strict eye; there should be such a circumspect care of prevention,
and such painful pursuance of misdemeanors, as would be required against the
most dangerous crimes. For Libelling (which is never better assisted than by
this way) has not only abroad in all ages found its several severities, but,
even at home, is Felony at Common Law, Cooks Instit. part. 3. chap. 76. for it
may not only ruin the reputation of a private man, but introduce tumult and
combustion in the State it self. And if the inward man be once disturbed, the
outward will be, and if the imagination be troubled, the hands will soon be at
work.

But I have digressed in the very beginning, though I think not so far, but
that those that neglect it, may find the inconveniences.

Amongst the other things which have been spawned in this age, both to the
dishonor of our Maker, and the disturbance of mankind, there was lately
published; and (as much as lay in them) dispersed, a piece of Paper, with this
title,

A Charge of High Treason against Oliver Cromwell Esquire for several Treasons by
him committed.

A Paper so sottishly impudent, and so ridiculously malicious, that were but
the generality of the people in their senses, and not mad with desire of
novelty and prepossession, it were so unworthy the taking notice of, that there
were no greater confutation of it, than to read it. But since that it happens
in matters of this nature, that by the privatness of dispersion, and withal
their aiming at great and eminent persons, they are conceived to contain in
themselves somewhat considerable and of important consequence, I thought it
worth my pains to give it a perusal, and not to let it bark without a whip at
the tail. For though Bridewell, and the Pillory, may teach the Offenders, and
the Fire the Papers, yet it is only Reason that can encounter their Folly; and
sober Debate that must overthrow their Madness.

And since the thing talks big, and threatens an impeachment of High Treason,
we shall take the pains once for all to teach him what it is, and show him how
much he misses of his aim and application.

Treason, Crimen laesae Majestatis, as they say, or any offense, which aiming
secretly at the lives of the Supreme Governors for the time being, or at the
Government it self, was in the several times made Capital, but ever varied and
altered according to the variations and turns of Government. That which
concerned the Generality of Government, as Coining of money, killing of a
Justice upon the Bench, etc. which concerns the very being of the public
peace, remaining firm, the other moveable and alterable, as for Example, by the
25. of Edw. 3. chap. 2. confirmed and quoted by many other Statutes, it is
Treason to compass the death of the King, Queen, or Prince; This the Act of
July the seventeenth 1649. expressly repeals, enacting it Treason to do any
thing against the form of the Commonwealth; but for Coining, etc. of money,
confirms it. Nor indeed does this want its reason, for the persons and
Governments determining, and ceasing, their protections also cease, and
consequently the obedience in the Subject. For how can a man offend against a
thing that is not in being? but for those material Supporcers of Government,
that is to say, for preserving the Laws, traffic among the people, and the
like, they are things so necessary and immutable, that if they once change or
perish, a whole nation changes or perishes with them, whereas for the outward
form of Government, it has its several changes and shapes, according to the
variation of times, and revolution of circumstances.

We shall have occasion to apply this in the following Discourse; to say only
thus much for the present, that the Lord General, according to your own
positions, has done nothing against the Act of Edw. 3. and according to the
positions of Reason, as little against the Act of July 1649. for he only
changed the Governors, but the form of the Republic it self is preserved, and
by this means established. So that here we find him not to be so great a
Traitor, but I believe upon view of the whole, a person quite the contrary.

For the People whom he calls Lords, he must be taught, that though the people
be the primary cause of Government, and the End thereof, and may by their
consent, or disapprobation, either ratify or vacate any form thereof, yet for
the administration and execution of Government, its a thing the practice whereof
is not feasible by the people and the effects of it, if it were endeavored,
would be monstrous beyond all imagination. For to imagine that all the people
of this Nation, of so many different humors, interests, and parties, would
consult together as a few men, is as impossible as that all the letters of a
Printinghouse carelessly cast abroad, should without any other assistance
compose this Book. But if the people be the end of Government, that which most
aims at the good of the people, comes the nearest that end; and sance the
people in regard of the variety of humors, can neither well determine, nor
consent about the circumstances of their own safety, he certainly does a very
laudable action, that turns doubtful emergencyes, and dangerous junctures of
time, into their advantage; It is as true as any thing that is said, Salus
Populi Suprema Lex; but to continue on the Metaphor, it is the Physician, that is
to say, The Wise man in power, that must be the Judge, not the patient, that is
to say, the Multitude, in danger. So that by priority of cause we find the
People Lords Remote, and Lords intended, but secondarily and in effect, we find
the Governors Lords effective, and executive, the Being of the one being
Metaphysical and abstracted, the Being of the other natural and active. So
that whoever offends against the Magistrate in being, trespasses against the
People themselves, in the person of their Magistrates, the Majesty of the
Magistrate being so joined and allied to the majesty of the people, that as the
Statuary did his own picture in Minerva's, in such a manner, that if there were
the least injury offered to his, it would also blemish that of the Goddess;
even so, whoever blemishes a Governor, blemishes also the people governed,
Governors being the understanding, the discourse, and the defense of the
people.

But of all men he has certainly made a very indiscreet choice in fixing upon
this person whom he has chosen, a man, that as he has already acquired the
Reputation of one of the greatest Captains of his time, or, for any thing I
know, that ever was, so doubtless he will send down to Posterity a name as dear
and venerable for the Love of his Country as any man of any nation. The
hazards and exploits which he did in the first War are very well known, though
God had not at that time lifted him up to this eminency, yet he that had seen
him at Marston. Moor would have said our liberties were not a little obliged to
him. Wonderful was the presence of God with him at the defeat of Hamilton; And
when once our liberty was restored, since we could not defend our selves
without offending, how soon he over ran Ireland and Scotland with his
Conquests, is unnecessary to tell here, when all Europe stands amazed at it.
Yet even this man, that in all the Offices both of a Citizen and a Soldier
has given such faithful devoirs to his Country, while he is covered with
laurels, and makes us enjoy the real fruit of his victories, must have his Soul
pierced and transfixed through with all the venomous ugly slanders that the
Devil can put into the mouth of a cankered malice.

But general returns are like general criminations, such as will neither
satisfy nor fasten. To lay open therefore the importunate malice of this
rascally paper, and withal the better to detect the vanity and insufficiency
of his pretenses, you may take it thus, with some brief animadversions, because
the main things he insists on we have answered before, and for the form of it,
we shall not much trouble our selves, since it is as easy, villanously to frame
a Libel in the form of an Indictment, as it is Atheistically, in the form of a
Catechism. Examples of both which we have had within these few days.

A Charge of High Treason exhibited against Oliver Cromwell, Esquire for several
Treasons by him committed.
FOr that he the said Oliver Cromwell not having the fear of God before his
eyes, but being instigated by the Devil, did Traitorously and Villanously by
force of Arms, dissolve the late Parliament of the Lords the People of England,
who they the said Parliament did represert as the Supreme Authority of the said
Lords the people of England, and for that he the said Oliver Cromwell being a
hired Servant to serve the Lords the people of England in the Conduct of them
the said Lords the people of Englands forces, against their enemies, of their
the said Peoples Liberties, Rights, and Privileges, and notwithstanding the
high trust reposed in him, the said Oliver Cromwell, so to do, yet the said
Oliver traitorously conspired many times, before the said Oliver did dissolve
the said Parliament, by force of Arms wickedly and traitorously, thereby to
render the said Lords the people of England utterly incapable for ever, to
recover their Liberties, Just Rights, and Privileges, and did become Master of
all the Strong holds, Arms, Forces, Magazines, Armies, Navyes, and made, and
still does make no other use of them, but to overawe and force the Lords the
people of England aforesaid, to an Obedience and Compliance to his the said
Oliver Cromwells Tyrannical will and pleasure, contrary to the intent of the
trust reposed in him, and contrary to all the Solemn Engagements, and
Declarations of him the said Cromwell, which did invite the foresaid Lords the
people of England to a cheerful contribution of their assistance to the
carrying on of the War against the Common Enemies of their Liberties, Just
Rights, and Privileges: And further, that he the said Oliver Cromwell, did in an
unheard of manner, summon and require upon great penalties, diverse persons and
members of the Lords the people of England, to take upon them the Supreme
Authority of this Commonwealth, and accordingly upon the fourth of July they
the aforesaid persons summoned by virtue of the aforesaid Traitors summons did
appear at White Hall, in or nigh the City of Westminster in the County of
Middlesex, where they received an Instrument of Parliament containing these
words, I Oliver Cromwell do appoint you ( meaning the aforesaid persons summoned
by his wartant, to make their appearance there, and then as aforesaid, that is
to say, on the 4. day of July 1653. at White Hall) to be the Supreme Authority
of this Nation, and all Territories or Dominions thereunto belonging; and
notwithstanding he the said Oliver in so doing did commit the highest of
Treasons that could be committed; for that he the said Oliver did not entreat
the Lords the people of England, to elect their Representative, according to
their undubitable rights, and that he would with their Army, stand by them as
Servants, as in duty he and they (viz. the Army) ought to have done; the which
if they had done, their late act of dissolving the Parliament, had not been
Treason, because they (viz. the late Parliament) contrary to their trust,
endeavored to make themselves perpetual, contrary to the Law of the Land, and
the intent of the trust reposed in them, and after the so many demands by
Petitions of the Lords the People, for them to surrender their power to a new
Representative equally chosen; now for that the said Oliver Cromwell did not
restore the people rights in Election, upon the dissolving of the Parliament,
he has made that to be Treason, which otherwise would not have been Treason.

For the dissolution of the late Parliament, there has been enough said to an
fro about it, and it has both by the Declaration of the Army, and other pieces
writ, besides the Confession of the Grand Politic Informer himself, and this
very Pamphleteer (though conditionally) as may appear by the last line of this
Paragraph. The necessity of which thus appearing, I shall mention no otherwise,
but only observe thus much, in passing, that it is not the dissolving of the
late Parliament that sticks in their stomachs, for that they are satisfied well
enough with, but they are unsatisfyed because the Nation is not turned wild
into an irregular and dangerous Liberty, and consequently permitted either to
return into new quarrels, or reduced under its former Tyranny. For certainly,
no man would else, considering the different impressions that the late Civil
Wartes have made upon the minds of the people, permit them to a choice of their
own Governors, they being so divided and discomposed, as for the present they
are, and working and being unquiet as the Sea after a storm.

For the General being a hired Servant to the people of this Nation, it is very
true, as well as every Magistrate; since in one Relation they are Servants, in
another, Masters, Servants in Intention, Masters in Execution, since without
Mastery they could not serve, and it is but the same thing under a different
notion.

For keeping of Arms in his hands, and preventing such an Extravagant
Election, as the Pamphet aims at, is as much as to say in plain English, that
he made choice of a very good way for the security of the people, and took care
to put it in execution. For the former way being so dangerous, and the course
chosen, which since was effected, and which we repent not of, it had been
madness to have endeavored an end, and yet neglected the means, or to say
better, put the same means into other hands for contrary ends. And therefore
since, if the people had made use of that freedom, there had been little
reason to have trusted the elected, without great consideration of their
persons and garbling, and that this was a business which could not be done but
by a third power, it was rather thought fit, to stay, till he that can stop the
raging of the Sea, would quiet the peoples minds, to select some particular
worthy persons, of good life and conscience, out of the several Counties, to
that High and Supreme Trust.

It Is also false, that they were summoned under great penalties, when the very
Summons it self, I cannot tell how printed at that time, speaks little more
than a bare Summons, or Intimation; And for the reason of delivering a
Parchment sealed, there has been so much said of that matter, in the Grand
Politic Informer better Informed, p. 10, 11. that it is needless to
transcribe any thing hither.

When they were invested with this power, and begun to settle to the business,
that is, advancing the Gospel in its purity, the Reglement of the Law, stating
the Accounts of the Nation, and those corruptions which have infected all
professions; they had turned their back from the Plough, if upon a few
seditious addresses, of a rabble of Apprentices, and no body knows what, they
had deserted so great a beneficial work, and to have suffered things to relapse
into their former confusion.

Before I have done with this Paragraph, I must needs admire the acumen of the
man, who says that my Lord has made that Treasonable, which otherwise would
not have been Treason. This is a subtilty above Scotus himself, a Treason
conditional, ex post facto, whereas our Law ever adjudges Treason out of the
matter of fact it self, not by actions after the fact, and in moral things, the
Act is judged good or bad according to present circumstantiation, not following
contingencies or subsequent Actions. But look whither he has brought himself;
He grants the dissolving of the late Parliament not to be criminal, but only by
consequence, which consequence is invalid, and so justifies the action, and so
confutes all he had said before.

But further, he the said Oliver Cromwell having not the fear of God before his
eyes, and being instigated by the Devil, did contrive or caused to be contrived
a certain book, called, A Copy of Draughts of Acts of Parliament, out of which
this mock-Parliament are to take their lessons, and out of which the late Act
of Marriages was taken, and in which is the invention of unheard of Cruel
Torment as well for those that offend or opppose him and his confederates in
this unheard of Tyranny, as for the Transgressors of the laws of Civil
Societies.

Par. 2. For this Book of the Laws which he talks of, he is to be acquainted,
that My Lord General had not the least hand in that Book; for the late
Parliament called a company of select Gentlemen together, to consider the
abuses and corruptions of the Law. These Gentlemen, after long and patient
debate, found the reformation of a great many other things very needful, and
according to the directions of the Parliament, drew up several means of
redress, which were entered into a Book, and presented ready for debate, and
what necessity there was for taking away some corruptions of the Law, not the
Law it self, is a thing so visible that it needs not be insisted on.

For the Act of Marriages which this man seems much to quarrel at, it would be
known that marriage, being the means of the propagation of the people, and
consequently of the continuance and preservation of Government, ought by all
wise Statists to be lookd upon as the greatest concernment of it, because that
it being a means of succession, and the only direction of Inheritance, there
depend so many formal circumstances on it, and so many inconveniences are
prevented by a Public Solemnization thereof, as there is scarce in any other
thing belonging to a Commonwealth. And that this should be put into the hands
of the Civil Magistrate, whose power Circa Sacra, we shall not now meddle with,
is neither so strange nor ridiculous, since the essence of marriage being
promised, and that promise fit to be known and registered in order to
Legitimation, and prevention of stealths and carryings away, there cannot be
any person fitter than the Civil Magistrate. And we shall leave it proposed to
the Divines, whether there be any thing in Scripture, or by direct consequence
from Scripture, that restrains the Solemnization of Marriages to the Ministry,
but that it is rather a devise set a foot by the Popes, to enrich their Clergy,
at the time that Christianity became to be clouded and infected with
Superstition.

And further, the said Cromwell has by himself, and others, forced this
mock-Parliament to take away the body of our Laws that has been our Bulwark,
and defense, and only weapons counted against absoluteness, to the end and
intent that thereby the Lords the People of England, may be subject to the
will, pleasures, and intended Tyranny of him the said Cromwell; All which
considered, we humbly pray, the Lords the people of England, that Justice may
be had against this abominable Traitor and Enemy to God and Mankind, Oliver
Cromwell.

Par. 3. This charge were a heavy one indeed if it were true, but it is so
monstrously false, as there needs not much to be spoken unto it; for what
benefit could the General make by alteration of the Laws, since in every
action every man will propose to himself one thing or other? or where did he
ever appear in any action or any debate tending this way? But to matter of
fact; The laws (which he calls our Bulwark and defense) are so far from being
taken away, that the superfluities and inconveniences, the tedious and
vexatious proceedings are only taken away, to as much prejudice to the life of
the Law it self, as it is to purge a gross body of its noxious and corrupt
humors.

And to the end that this may be effected, it is desired, that upon the 16. of
October 1653. being the next coming, that all the people of England would as
one man, as well Masters Sons, as Servants, repair into every County Town, or
some other convenient place within England and Wales, appear armed with such
weapons of war as with convenience they can, then and there to elect and choose
such and so many persons as the people of the respective Counties, Cities and
Boroughs, wont to choose to represent them in Parliament.

And further we do hereby declare, that such of the Army as shall join in this
our shaking off this yoke, shall be received into the favor of the Lords the
people of England, and be continued in their trusts of Arms; for our
Encouragement, we know this of old since man was placed upon the earth, that
the triumphing of the wicked is but short, and the joy of the hypocrite but for
a moment; for a long time their Tabernacle have only prospered, though they be
robbers, and such as provoke God, and that make the upright man the greatest
sufferer, yet for all this the multitude of their lies shall not make all men
hold their peace.

The close of this business shows the aim of the writer of it, that is to say,
a double sedition, both of the People and Soldiery, so extravagant in the
proposition to the people, that it has produced no other effect, than the
remembrance of the bare proposition of his folly; so foolish in that to the
Soldiery, that it is not like to be entertained with any thing by them but
laughter. For my part, to either of them, I have only this to say; That since
it has pleased the Lord to make his own arm bare, and to conduct us through
all these changes and turns of Providence, into this estate of Liberty wherein
we now stand; it behooves us as men following the meek and gentle doctrine of
Christ himself, not only to walk in humility and obedience to the present
powers, who are of God, but also to be duly and sincerely thankful to that hand
which has taken off from our necks that iron yoke of Monarchy. and put us into
that condition of Liberty, which we and our posterity, if we can but know our
own happiness, are likely, with Gods blessing, to enjoy.

The End.

