The Sad and Lamentable Case of the Tenants of the late Deane and Chapter of
Durham, (consisting of about One hundred Families) briefly Stated.
THat the Tennants and their Ancestors have for many hundreds of years enjoyed
their respective Farms under the Prior and Covent of Durham, and after the
dissolution in Henry the Eight his time, under the Dean and Chapter of Durham,
by certain Customary Tenures and Services to be performed by them upon the
Borders of England, against the Frontiers of Scotland.

That in Queen Elizabeth's time they were prevailed withal to take Leases,
which was settled by Decree by Consent, between the then Dean and Chapter, and
the aforesaid Tennants of Durham, That they should receive Leases according to
the form prescribed in that Decree, paying Three years Fine at the renewal of
their Leases, after the expiration of One and twenty years.

That when the Surveyors came down to Survey their Estates in pursuance of a
Bill of Sale, the said Tenants made their right as aforesaid unto the premises
to appear; whereupon the Surveyors made a large and ample Certificate on their
behalf, and returned the same in the Survey of their respective Farms.

That the said Tenants did address themselves to the Committee for Removing
Obstructions in the Sale of Deane and Chapters Lands, who upon mature
deliberation, did allow of the said Tennants Claim as aforesaid, and Ordered a
Reprize to the said Tennants in the purchase of their several Farms, in
pursuance of the Decree, as by the Order of that Committee more fully appears;
which Order of Allowance was left at Gurney-house for the Contractors and
Purchasers to take notice of.

That the said Tennants being miserably impoverished by reason of the late
Wars having Armies quartered upon them for the most part of five years, and
most of their Farms being not above the value of three pounds per Annum, were
not able to come up to London, and to bear the Charge of passing Conveyances
for their respective Farms, and therefore resolved to submit to whosoever
should purchase their Estates, and become their Landlords, resting confident
that according to their said Claims and Orders of Reprizal, they would allow
the said Tennants to renew their Leases under them, as formerly they did in the
time of the Dean and Chapter; But the said Tenants do find the contrary; and
notwithstanding that they and their Ancestors have for these 400 years enjoyed
their respective F^rmes upon the Tenures and Services aforesaid; and
notwithstanding that their Case is different from the Case of all other
Tennants to Deane and Chapters in other parts of the Nation, yet are many of
them thrown out of their ancient Possessions, and left in the Streets in a
miserable Condition, with their Wives and Children to beg their Bread; there
being such instances to be given of the Inhumanity of some of the Purchasers to
the said Tennants, that it is incredible what unchristian-like hardship has
been done unto them.

The Tennants do most humbly pray, That their Petition (remaining in the hands
of a Member of Parliament) Remonstrating their Sad and Lamentable Condition,
may be Called for, and Read in Parliament; that the Oppressed may be relieved,
and that so many Families may not be left to perish, for want of seasonable
relief.




