THE SECRETARY OF THE Scots Army, His Relation to the Commissioners concerning
the King, how his Majesty came within two miles of London; the Garrisons he
marched through, and his coming to the Scots.

With the whole proceedings between his Majesty and the Scots, and his march
northward with their Army; With the Resolutions and Intentions of the Scots
Army.

Also the Treaty between the King and General Leven; And the Copy of the
Articles for the ^er of Newarke, with all the Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition,
Bag and (...).

These being ^^^^ined by the original Papers, are commanded to be printed, and
are published according to Order of Parliament.

LONDON: Printed by Elizabeth Purfl^w, May 11. 1646.

A Messenger from the General of the Scots Army, being one of the Secretaries,
is come to the Scots Commissioners, and makes this Relation.
THe King is now with the Scots Army: The first time that we can learn where
His Majesty was after he came out of Oxford, was on Saturday the second of May
Instant, and then he was within some two miles of London* as is told the Army,
and on Monday night, May the fourth, His Majesty lay in Stamford upon a bed
with His Clothes on all night, and that Morning passed two of the Parliaments
Guards, but could not be known, because His Beard was shaved, and His Lock cut.

On Tuesday Morning His Majesty came to Southwell to the Scots Army, and
General Leven having Intelligence that His Majesty was come into their
Garrison, for some Officers that were upon the Guard that saw Him, had some
suspicion of Him that it was the King, who making it known, a search was made
three hours before they could hear where he was; and about noone His Majesty
sent to General Leven, letting him know he was there (and that he was then
with the French Agent) and that he would cast Himself upon them, where upon
there was advertisement given to the ^cots Commissioners of His Majesty's being
there, who with General Leven went to His Majesty and caused Him to remove
His Quarters to Kellam, Lieutenant General David Leslyes Quarters, where there
was much amazement to see into how low a condition His Majesty was brought.

General Leven had some Treaty with His Majesty about the surrender of
Newarke, desiring Him to give Order to Bellasys the Governor for the delivery
thereof, and His Majesty offered to surrender it to them, but General Leven
answered, that to remove all jealousies they must yield to have it to be
surrendered to the Parliament of England: and His Majesty was prevailed with to
send to the Governor to give Order for the surrender thereof to the Parliament
of England accordingly, which was greed wednesday the 6. Instant by the
Comissioners, as may appear by the following Articles; After which agreement
the Scots Forces (being willing to ease the Country there-abouts, who have
been so long charged with so great an Army) with all cheerfulness and
willingness, removed their Quarters Northward, the King still remaining with
Lieutenant General David Lesly, and care being taken for fresh Clothes, and
other refreshments for His Majesty: and the General taking care to remove to
some more convenient, and fresh Quarters, and being resolved to take care and
charge of His Majesty. until both Kingdoms be agreed, to which to submit for
the disposing of His Majesty's Person.

There are few Armies without some disorder, by some that cannot be prevented,
yet the chief of those that manage the business amongst our Brethren of
Scotland and our Commissioners, carry on all things with great wisdom, and it
is hoped will prevent all differences, as may appear by this ensuing Letter
from the Commissioners Quarters.

Gentlemen,
YOu are all now satisfied where the King is, though perhaps you will not know
whilst this come to your hands, that he is this afternoon marched away
Northwards with all the Scots Army, both Horse and Foot, we believe it is
only into fresh Quarters, till the desires of the Parliament may be signified
unto them, how they would have the Army disposed of, we have found a very
exceeding fair correspondencie with the old Scots General, and all the
Commissioners, who have been ready to comply with us in all reasonable
demands, as we on the other side have not been wanting to express to them
the like respects in any thing within our power, and for the Kings being in
their Quarters, they do assure us that as His Majesty was unexpected, so they
will use all care, that His abode with them shall not be in the least manner
prejudicial to the intrest of the two Kingdoms; The Governor of Newarke has
come out to us, and is wondrous fair conditioned, and promises to submit to
whatsoever we shall advise, and will be careful to preserve all things in the
Garrison for the public use, till the time of Surrender.

May the 7. BALDERTON.


Articles agreed and concluded the sixth of May, 1646. between the
Commissioners her^ under named Authorized by the Committee of the Parliament of
both Kingdoms, of England and Scotland, on the one part, and the Commissioners
hereunder named, authorized by the Governor of Newarke, Lieutenant Genera^l to
His Majesty, of the Counties of Nottingham, Lincoln, and Rutland, and
Governor of the Town and Castle of Newarke of the other party, touching the
yielding and surrendering of that Garrison, and the Castle, Forts* and Sconces
thereunto belonging, to the Committee of both Kingdoms, for the use of the
Parliament of England.
1 THat the To^n^ and Garrison of Newarke, with the Castle, Forts Scorces
Ordnance Morter-peeces, Arms, Ammunition, and Provisions, and necessaries of
War, (not hereafter expressed) be surrendered on Saturday next at ten of the
clock, into the hands of the Commi^tee of both Kingdoms, or whom they shall
appoint for the use of the Parliament of England, without imbezling any of them.

2 That the Governor of the said Garrison, shall march away with his servants,
Horses, Arms and proper goods to any Garrison he shall name, not besieged or
blockt up or to his own house, there to remain unmolested, submitting to all
Ordinances of Parliament: And also, that the said Governor shall have liberty
upon desire, any time within three months to pass beyond Seas, and to have
Passes granted for himself, and servants accordingly.

3. That all Officers in Commission, or that have been formerly in Commission,
shall march away with their Horses, Arms, and their proper goods the common
Soldiers of Horse and Foot with their Money, clothes and Swords* to any
Garrison not besieged or blockt up, or to their own houses as they shall make
choice of; and those that have not money, to have free quarter in their march,
and not to march above ten miles in one day unless they please, and to have a
Convoy and Carriages provided for the carrying away their goods, Hostages being
given for their return of the Convoy and Carriages, and such goods as cannot
be removed, the owners shall have three months liberty to dispose of them.

4 That all such Officers and Gentlemen, now in the Garrison who shall desire
to depart this Kingdom, shall upon significan^^ thereof to the Commissioners
of both Kingdoms, any time (...) three months have Passes for that purpose,
for themselves and servants, engaging themselves during their stay, to do no
dis-^ervice to the Parliament.

5 That all such Officers and Soldiers, as by reason of Sickness, Wounds, or
otherwise, as are not able to march out at the same time appointed, shall have
liberty to stay in the Town, or some other convenient place, till they be
recovered, and such as are not able to provide maintenance for themselves,
shall have care taken of them.

6 That all Noblemen and Gentlemen in the said Garrison shall have liberty to
march forth the same with their Horses and Arms, and their known meniall
servants, with their Horses and Swords to their own houses, their to remain
unmolested, submitting to all Ordinances of Parliament, and to have liberty to
carry away their own proper goods, then, or at any time within three months,
or to have Passes for themselves and servants to go beyond Sea upon desire
within three months; and in the mean time, to engage themselves to do
nothing to the dis-service of the Parliament.

7 That all Clergymen in the Garrison, shall have liberty, with their Horses,
Servants, and their own proper goods, to march to any Garrison unblockt up or
not besieged, or to their own houses, there to remain unmolested, submitting
to all Ordinances of Parliament.

8 That the Major, Aldermen, and Inhabitants of the said Garrison, shall not be
molested in their persons, privileges, goods, or estate, (submitting to all
Ordinances of Parliament) and to enjoy the same liberty, and to have the same
protection as all other Towns have which are in the power of the Parliament.

9 That the Ladies, Gentlewomen, Wives, Widows, Children and Servants,
belonging to any of the persons mentioned in the former Articles, or any other,
shall have liberty to march forth of the said Garrison, with their Coaches,
Horses, and proper goods, as in the sixth Article: And if any of them, by
reason of sickness, or any other just reason, cannot march forth, then they
shall have liberty to stay there till their recovery, and then to depart
unmolested.

10 That all prisoners now in the said Garrison, Castle, or Fort, or any other
prisoners of war, taken by either party since the siege began, shall
forthwith upon signing these Articles be set at liberty, unless they be
detained for criminal offenses charged upon them, not as Soldiers.

11 That all persons comprised within these Articles grounded upon the summons
of the 27. of April, which began this present Treaty, be recommended to
compound with the Parliament for their estates, as coming in before the 1. of
May. so as they do effectually prostrate any compositions within two months
next ensuing the date hereof.

12 If any of the persons abovementioned shall violate any of these Articles,
or any part of them, they shall loose the benefit of all the said Articles.

13 That for the performance of these Articles Hostages may be mutually given,
and that a cessation of Arms continued by both sides till the time of
surrender, according to the Articles; and that guards and convoys be appoited
to protect the Gentry and Soldiers (in their march) from violence.

Signed by us the Commissioners of the L. Bellasis. Thomas Ingram Bryan Balmes
Iarvis Nevill Robert Sutton Simon Fanshaw Air Gilby Darsie Atkins Standish
Thomas Bristow Cler.
Signed by us authorized by the Commissioners of both Kingdoms. Elexander
Popham Francis Thornhaugh John Hutchison. Henry Gray Richard Thornton (...)
T^is^^ton John Archer Walter Scot Gilbert C^r^^. Archibald Douglas
vera copia.

FINIS.
Die Mercurii May 21. 1646.
ORdered by the COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, That Sir Benjamin Rudyard do
from this House give Thanks to Mr. Torshel And that Mr. Hollis do from this
House give Thanks to Mr. Herle for the great pains they took in the Sermons
they preached upon the 12th day of May last past, at the entreaty of the House
of COMMONS at St Margarets Westminster, it being a day of Public Thanksgiving,
and to desire them to print their Sermons; And it is Ordered that none shall
presume to Print their Sermons without leave under their hands writing.

H. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint John Bellamy to Print this Sermon.

SAM. TORSHEL.


