I S^tse.
a group of men and women exhuming human bones A FUNERAL GIFT
Job 34 15 All flesh shall perish together and man shall turn again unto dust.

A Funeral Gift: OR, A PREPARATION FOR DEATH.

WITH Comforts against the Fears of approaching Death: And Consolations against
immoderate Grief, for the loss of Friends.

By the Author of the Devout Companion.

All the Days of my appointed time will I wait, till my Change come, Job 14.14.
LONDON, Printed for Henry Rhodes next Bride Lane in Fleet Street, 1690.

Price Bound One Shilling.

TO THE TRULY HONORED The LADY, J. C.
Madam,
YOur virtuous Requests, to which your Merits gave the force of a Commandment,
obliged me to send my Devout Companion into the World; and, Madam since it has
met with so Candid a reception by your Ladyship, whose early Piety proves so
exemplary; a Second Obligation presents it self, wherein I esteem it a kind of
Sacrilege to defraud you of being a Patroness to that, which you may so justly
challenge.

Prayer and Meditation are the Golden Rules toward a good Life; and we can
never miscarry in this dark World, if we walk by the Light of a sincere
Conscience: For with these Holy Guides we implore the Almighty, to cleanse our
Hearts from all vain and unlawful Thoughts, our Mouth from all foolish and idle
Words, and our whole Lives from all wicked and unprofitable Deeds.

That which I offer now, Madam, to your Divine Consideration, is Mortality; a
Theme which some never care to hear of, others are negligent in preparing for
it, and many use their utmost endeavors to put it, as an Evil day, far from
them; but all their Strategems are in vain, for Death is so potent, and bears
such sway that none can resist his invincible Power; none is exempted from the
silent Grave, nor none knows how soon they may be called: Well-complexion'd
Nature, indeed, may struggle here for a time, but at last must yield it self to
that pale Messenger.

Our chief Business here, is to trim our Lamps, and be vigilant; to sow the
immortal Seed of Hope, and expect hereafter to reap the increase: To deprecate
the Almighty, not to cut us off in the midst of our Folly; nor suffer us to
expire with our Sins unpardoned: But to make us first ready for that Celestial
Kingdom, and then to receive us into eternal Glory.

This, Madam, is the only intent of this ensuing Treatise: and may these short,
but plain Directions have that influence on those Persons, which stand in need
of these Divine Truths, is the hearty and earnest Prayer of,

Madam, Your humble and Faithful Servant, in Christ Jesus, E. S.

A FUNERAL GIFT, OR, A PREPARATION FOR DEATH.
Meditation I. Upon remembering our Creator in the Days of our Youth.
TO remember thy Creator, was one of the choicest Expressions in the Royal
Preacher's Sermon: For who is he that is Young, knows whether he shall live to
be Old? and yet that voice which sounds those words so loud to the whole
Universe, is scarce audible in the Ears of many.

II.
This is one of the Divine Chanter's most harmonious Lessons; and yet the
sordid World is not pleased with the Tune: It Is a wonder! that the best of
Schoolmasters, should have so few Disciples, being his Rhetoric is so Divine
and Excellent: and yet it is a Text, which though they will neither hear nor
read, they cannot choose but see, for the whole World upon it is a Commentary:
every Creature we behold Preaches this Doctrine, which we supinely sleep out
with our Eyes open.

III.
Nature wears this Memento in her Forehead; the very brute Beasts in this can
reason with us; and Man could not so soon forget his Maker, did he but remember
himself: But alas, Youth loves not to be put in mind of a Heavenly Being,
'twould clog his Memory and make him think of his Prayers too often.

IV.
Piety will but cool his Blood, Religion makes him look Old; the thoughts of
Heaven and the other World, will create in him a greater Gravity than becomes
his years: his Sanguine Complexion informs him, he is not in a fit Temper to
study Divine things, he may serve God time enough, when he is at leisure.

V.
Thus these temporal Objects of Pleasure, drive away our thoughts from
Celestial Dignities, and those purer Joys which attend it. We can spend the
Beauty of our years in Vice, and think to please God well enough with the
Deformities of old Age: We can revel away our Piety and Time in vain Delights
and Pleasures, and think our selves strong enough to force Heaven, and become
Religious when we are withered with infirmities, and have nothing left us but
Repentance and a Tomb.

VI.
We are so well satisfied with the sweetness of Sense, that we are careless of
any other Felicity; and so much delighted with the Happiness of Sinning freely,
that we could willingly be of that Religion, where Vice is most tolerated.

VII.
We place our Devotion with the Epicure in Natures riots; Sportful meetings are
our Religious Exercises, and a Sermon is as tiresome to us as a Funeral: to
hear of our end in the midst of our Jollity, sounds like the Lecture of Death,
and the unwelcome Echo of the Grave. Let the Preacher exhort us never so well,
to remember our Maker, we had rather follow Satan's Doctrine to enjoy the World
as long as we can, and think of Heaven when we have nothing else to do.

The Prayer.
O Lord, shall the Lusts of the World, be greater in my Soul than the love of
thee? Shall the temporary Delights of Sin drown the memory of thy Glory? my
Life is but a Span, and yet I beseech thee, shorten that rather than it should
be spent in a neglect of thee: better this earthly Tabernacle should be
dissolved, than become a Theater for Sin to revel in.

II.
Let me pay Nature her due Debt, sooner than perhaps she would call for it,
rather than run in Score with thy Justice: It Is better I should die and be lost
in the Memory of the World, than ever forget thee: thou formedst me from
nothing, not to sin, but to serve thee, and have imprinted in me a Ray of thy
self, that I might not seek my own, but thy Will, nor pursue the World, but
Heaven.

III.
Make me therefore to see the solid and ravishing Consolation that is in
serving thee; and that joy which accompanies thy Grace, that so I may no longer
follow my Sense but my Savior: it is none of the least Sins of our Youth, that
we are careless and forgetful of thee our Creator: and no wonder we are so
insensible of the joys to come, that live in such a constant and continued
neglect of Heaven.

IV.
Make me therefore, O my God, to Consider, that had I the Fruition of all that
I can wish, or long for here, I should not only be satisfied, but in the end
find how miserable he is, that sets his Heart on any thing, but thy self;
teach me therefore so to enjoy the World, that I lose not thee, nor the Memory
of that blessed reward thou have promised to them that honor, and truly fear
thee. Amen.

Meditation II. The remembrance of Death, a powerful Remedy against Sin.
THe serious remembrance of Death shakes off all Sense of Vanity, and turns
Honey into Wormwood, and the Expectation of it, says Chrysostom, permits us
not to be sensible of those Delights and Pleasures, which we daily enjoy, and
indeed what is it not able to perform? When duly considered, it not only takes
Possession of some parts, but on the whole Fabric of Man's Body.

II.
Death spares no Age, nor Sex, nor bears any respect to degrees of Dignity. The
Young die as soon as the Old, and the Infant may end its few days in the
Cradle; some may expire their last Breath, by Poison or a Fall; others by a
slow Rheum or a quick descent of Humors; some may lie oppressed with the Waves
of Affliction, and others may be Thunderstruck from Heaven.

III.
Among so many dubious, various and sudden Accidents, what Security, or what
Appetite can we find to sin amidst so many incertainties? Therefore since we
die daily, let us think upon Times Hourglass, where the Sand empties the upper
Glass and fills the lower; and consider it is so with Life, every moment
something slides away, the present Life empties and flows into another. Nothing
here is certain to us, not the hour of the Day, nor a moment of Time.

IV.
Happy are they who wisely use every day and hour, as their last, and employ
every moment of time toward the securing their Eternity. They will with
readiness abstain from their wickednesses, who believe every hour and moment
decreed to be their last Could we bestow on the improvement of our Souls, the
time we so vainly trifle away, our day would be short enough, not to seem
tedious; and long enough to finish our appointed Task.

V.
O vain and fruitless Hope! how many do thou deceive and flatter, with thy
deluding Promises of old Age, and yet cuttest them off in the midst of their
years! That may happen to one, which happens to many. How many has Death
prevented in the midst of their Excess of wickedness, and cut off half the
Crime? How many fall with a mind full of revenge, though with an innocent hand?
How many have been snatched away in the Attempt, and have received the due
reward of their Impieties? many in the very moment of a wicked Action begun,
have been forced to leave their evil Designs unfinished.

VI.
Now should thou be in the number of those, what hour? Nay, what moment is
more certain to thee, than to another? who can expect a Crime from such a
thought? when with that Crime he expects Death, and with Death, just
Punishment? No prudent Man will sport in the midst of a Storm, or at the brink
of a Precipice contrive mischief. No man is facetious, being unarmed, in the
midst of his armed Enemies. Then how much more supine and careless is he, who
in the perpetual fear of Death, when every hour is dubious, every moment
uncertain, dares presume on those things which procure an unhappy Death to
Eternity?

VII.
O foolish and unwise! Whither do we run on, in a full Career, and hasten so
much to be punished for ever? Why do we not betimes follow that prudent Council
of the Son of Syrach, who like a wise Schoolmaster delivers to us this
Epithete: In all thy works, says he, remember thy latter end, and thou shall
not sin.

Prayers against sudden Death.
ALmighty and everlasting God, who at first breathest into Man the Breath of
Life, whereby he became a living Soul: But when thou take away that Breath he
dies, and is turned again to his Dust from whence he was taken. Look upon me I
beseech thee in Mercy, through the Merits of thy alone Son in whom thou art
well pleased, and not on my Sins who have in a high manner provoked thy
Justice. By his agony and bloody Sweat, by his bitter Death, the Price of my
Redemption, deliver me from sudden and unprovided Death.

II.
O Blessed Jesu! by all thy Labors and Pains, by thy precious Blood and sacred
Wounds, by thy last Exclamations, and bitter Cries upon the Cross, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit. Most
earnestly I beseech thee, not to hasten my Departure out of this World in thy
heavy Displeasure, but in thy tender Pity and Compassion, remember that I am
Dust and Ashes; thou have made me, and formed me throughout, O do not suddenly
cast me Headlong from thee, into the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimestone,
from whence there is no Redemption. But Grant me I beseech thee, a hearty and
sincere Repentance, a true sorrow for sin, a broken and contrite Heart, which
thou O God wilt not despise: That so living here in thy fear, I may at the last
die in thy Favor, and Praise and Bless thee to all Eternity.

Meditation III. What Life is.
LIfe is as a Flower of the Field, which in the Morning is green, but in the
Evening it is dried up and withered; it is as smoke which ascends up and
vanishes to nothing; it is a bubble, Dust, Froth, a drop of Dew; it is Ice, a
Rainbow, a wasted Torch, a Spring-day, a most inconstant April, a Spiders-web,
a slender Stalk, a small Cloud, a Bladder full of Wind.

II.
Life is like brittle Glass, a tender Leaf, a fine Silk Thread, a Golden Apple,
fair to the Eyes, but infirm within. Many such things may the Life of Man be
compared to, whose Body is subject to many Diseases and Pains while it lives
here, and at last to Death it self; and then it is so far from being prized and
valued, that it is not to be endured above Ground, but laid to rot in the
Earth, and become a Feast for Worms.

III.
Poor miserable Mortals! what Riches do we seem to heap up, what Honors do we
invest our selves withal, and what Pleasures do we pretend to enjoy? Yet all
these are but a Dream, short and vain: They have slept out their sleep, and all
the Men whose hands were mighty have found nothing, says the Psalmist, Psalm.
76.5. O Man, thou dreamest thou were Happy and Blessed. But of all those things
which you enjoyed, and hoped for, what do you retain? These were the Dreams of
those that waked, and the mere Toys of Dreamers.

IV.
Life therefore, what is it? Seek but to know, and you soon will find, that the
time of humane Life is a Point; Nature, Inconstancy: Sense, Obscurity: And the
whole Body a Composure easily corrupted. The mind roving and unstable; Honors,
Smoke; Riches, Thorns and Briars; Pleasures, Poison; and all things
appertaining to the Body, are like a River which yields both Salt water and
Fresh. Every thing accommodating the mind, is a Dream. Life is indeed a
Warfare, as St. James tells us, and the Habitation of a Stranger in a foreign
Land: The Storehouse of innumerable Miseries, and Fame after Death is buried
in Oblivion.

The Prayer.
O Lord, what is our Life? It is but a Vapor which is soon vanished and gone:
thou have given us a short Portion of time on this side the Grave; our
Condition is vain, unsatisfied and full of disquiet, and we have no hope but in
thee, O Lord: O teach us to number our days, that we may apply our Hearts unto
Wisdom, to remember, and to know our latter end, that so we may never Sin
against thee.

II.
Grant that we may live, as though we were always dying, being of mortified
Souls and Bodies, of bridled Tongues and Affections, and that instead of
heaping up Riches, we may strive for a Treasure of good Works, laying up in
Store for the time to come, that having recovered our Strength, lost by the
Commission of our Sins, when we go hence and are no more seen, we may have a
residence in those heavenly Mansions which are prepared by thee our Lord and
Savior, Amen.

Meditation IV. That we ought continually to watch and pray.
WAtch, said our Blessed Lord, Because ye know not at what hour the Son of Man
will come. The Romans watched in their Arms, yet sometimes without their
Shield, that they might have nothing to rest upon to attract them to sleep: it
is therefore thy Duty, O drowzy Mortal, to watch with vigor, and well armed.
Ardent Prayers to the Almighty, are the true Arms of Christians; and the Shield
which encourages sleep, is the vain hope of a longer Life.

II.
The frequent Cries of the Roman Soldiers, were, Wake, Wake. Thus they
encouraged one another to Constancy in watching: The Heavens themselves, the
seat of God's Glory, waking, and incessantly toyling, admonish thee to watch.
If thou art not grown deaf like the Adder, or fallen asleep in Carnal security,
hear the Voice of Christ, Watch and Pray: and St. Mark in his holy Gospel tells
thee, that Christ in the Conclusion of his Sermon, thrice repeats these Words:
Mark 13. Take ye heed, watch and pray, for you know not when the time is, Verse
33. Secondly, Watch ye therefore, for ye know not when the Master of the house
comes, at Even, or at Midnight, or at the Cockcrowing, or in the Morning, lest
Coming suddenly he find you sleeping, Verse 35, 36. Lastly, And what I say unto
you, I say unto you all, Watch, Verse 37.

III.
And with the same Admonitions, by the mouth of St. Matthew, he cries to us,
Watch ye therefore, for ye know not what hour your Lord does come, Matt. 24.42.
and again, Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day, nor the hour, wherein
the Son of Man comes, Matt. 25.13. the same he repeats, upon the Mount of
Olives, Watch and pray, that ye enter not into Temptation, Matt. 26.41.

IV.
Upon the same Text, he Preaches in St. Luke's Gospel, Watch ye therefore, and
pray always, Luke 21.36. the same watchfulness, how often does St. Paul
reiterate these Claps of Thunder upon us, to awaken us from sleep. We are deaf,
yea dead indeed, if these loud Exhortations will not rouse us. Whoever thou art
that sleep in Viciousness, awake: Thou can not plead ignorance, in the
Egyptians fate, when the destroying Angel entered Egypt, and made a vast
Slaughter, both upon Man and Beast, so that Pharaoh's heart was hardened to his
own Destruction.

V.
Remember the Lot of the ten Virgins, when there was at Midnight, a great Cry
made, and they that were prepared were admitted to the Nuptials; but the
drowsy Sleepers were excluded. Do thou remember the Folly of the gluttonous
Servant, when his Lord came unlooked for, and at an hour when he least thought
of him? Or have thou considered the vigilant Master of his Family, who wakes at
all hours, that the Thief can have no opportunity to break the house open. And
Lastly, do thou remember thy Savior was born at Midnight, and peradventure
he may come at that hour to judge the Universe. Therefore watch, as if every
day were thy last.

The Prayer.
GRacious God, let thy Grace reform our Lives and Manners, that we may watch
diligently, and pray without Ceasing: keep our mouth from slander, guile and
deceit: let us never incline to Actions of injustice or uncleanness, in
partaking with Thieves, or Adulterers, either in their Sin or Punishment; that
when thou who art the righteous God of the World, shall appear in perfect
Beauty, with a consuming Fire before thee, and a Tempest round about thee, with
Terrors and glorious Majesty, calling the Heavens and the Earth together, to
judge thy People, thou may gather us among thy Saints in Glory.

II.
O let the dayspring of thy Favor, visit us from on high, that we may seek
thee with an early Devotion, pursue after thee, with a Constant and Active
Industry, and at last possess thee with the firm Comprehensions of Love and
Charity: That in this World we looking for thee in Holiness of Living, longing
and thirsting after thee with fervent Desires, may for ever hereafter, behold
thy Power and Glory. Give us the Mercies and the Portion of thine inheritance,
that so we may Honor thee, by an eternal Oblation of Praise and Thanksgiving
in the highest Heavens. Amen.

Meditation V. Death often to be thought of.
MAny in this World live, as if they thought they should never die, nor in the
least consider their Latter end. It was a Custom with some of old, whenever
they intended a sumptuous Feast, to put a Deaths-head into a Dish, and serve it
up unto the Table.

II.
Which being meant for a significant, though silent Orator, to plead for
Temperance and Sobriety, by minding Men of their Mortality, and that the end of
their eating should be to live, and that the end of their living should be to
dye, and the end of their dying to live for ever, (for even the Heathens who
denied the Resurrection of the Body, did yet believe the immortality of the
Soul,) was looked upon by all sober and considering Guests, as the wholsomest
part of their Entertainment.

III.
And since it is true, (what is said by Solomon) that Sorrow is better than
Laughter, for by the sadness of the Countenance the Heart is made better;
Whereupon the Royal Preacher concludes it better of the two, for a Man to go
into the House of Mourning. I cannot but reason within my self, that when the
Heart of Fools is in the House of Mirth, there can be nothing more friendly, or
more agreeable to their wants, than to invite such Men to the House of
Mourning, and there to treat them with a Character of the most troublesome Life
of Man, (which being impartially provided, will serve as well as a
Death's Head,) during the time of their floating in this Valley of Tears.

IV.
For this is useful to all, by way of Instruction, not to be amorous of a Life,
which is not only so short, as that it cannot be kept long; but withal so full
of trouble, as that it is hardly worth keeping. Nor by consequence to dote on a
flattering World, which is so little to be enjoyed; and its Enjoyments also so
full of vexatious mixtures.

V.
Again it is useful to encourage us, not to stand in fear of Man, that must
submit to the King of Terrors, and whilst he lives can but kill the Body. Nor
to scruple at the paying that common Debt we owe to Religion, as well as
Nature; that God may give us an Acquittance, as well as Mortality: We having
received an Ensurance from the infallible undertaker, that the way both to
save, and prolong a Life, is Religiously to lose it, or lay it down.

VI.
Again it is useful to admonish us, (after the measure that we are negligent,)
to Merchandise with the Talent of our time, for the unspeakable advantages of
Life eternal; and to do all the work we can, whilst it is Day, because the
Night comes, when we shall be able to work no more.

VII.
Lastly, it minds us as to be doing, because our Lord comes, and is at hand:
so to be vigilant and watchful, because we know not in what hour. In a word;
the more transitory, and the more troublesome the Life of Men shall appear to
be; by so much the better will be the Uses, which we are prompted to make of
its Imperfections.

The Prayer.
TEach me O Lord, to number my days, that I may apply my Heart unto true
Wisdom; and be more ready to go to the House of Mourning, which is the Temple
of the Wife; than to enter into the House of Mirth, the School of the Scornful:
Suffer me not to set my Affections on things here below, that flourish for a
time, and then fade away: but grant that I may place my Affections on Heaven
above, where thou fittest at the Right hand of the Father, for evermore.

II.
Set Scourges over my Thoughts, and the Discipline of Wisdom over my Heart,
lest my Ignorance increase, and my Sins abound to my Destruction; let my
Repentance be speedy and perfect, bringing forth the Fruits of a holy
Conversation. Give unto me a Faith that shall never be reproved, a Hope that
shall never make me ashamed, a Charity that shall never cease, a Confidence in
thee that shall never be discomposed, a Patience that shall never faint, a
noble Christian Courage, that shall enable me to glorify thy Name, and rejoice
in thy Mercies in the day of Recompense, at thy glorious Appearance. Amen.

Meditation VI. Of the Shortness of Humane Life.
THe days of Man are but few, yet they are as many as Nature designed him; and
his Glass is run out, without being broken, unless it be by the hand of Time.
The whole Duration of time it self, is but the Nonage of Eternity; and
therefore Moses, (as the Psalmist) spoke very aptly, when he addressed his
Speech to God; A thousand years in thy sight, are but as yesterday, when it is
past, Psalm. 90.4. which is infinitely less than was yesterday when it was
present.

II.
And it is the same in effect with that Expression of David, the Psalmist Royal;
who said his Age was as nothing, in respect of him, who is all in all; and that
as great as some Men do seem to be to themselves and others, Every Man is but
Vanity at his best Estate, Psalm. 39. what he is at his worst, 'twill be
impossible to express: unless we shall say with David too, that he is
altogether lighter than Vanity it self.

III.
Now if a thousand years are but as yesterday, and as yesterday when it is past
too, how short a thing is the Life of Man in Comparison? How short, when
compared with the long Line of Time? How nothing, when compared with the Circle
of Eternity? Threescore and ten are all the years which are allowed by Moses to
a natural Man's Life; and though some are so strong as to arrive at Fourscore,
yet that overplus of years is but Labor and Sorrow.

IV.
They do not live, but linger, who pass that Tropic of their Mortality. From
after Threescore years and ten, they are but survivers to themselves; at least
they feel themselves dying; and their Bodies become their Burdens, if not the
Charnel-houses or Sepulchers, wherein their Souls lie buried.

V.
The vulgar Historians thought fit to call it, Eorum Amplius, which we cannot
better express in English than if we call it, their Surplusage of Life; When
Nature in them is so strong, as to shoot beyond her own Mark. Her Mark is
Threescore and ten, if Moses himself has set it right; or place it further at
Fourscore; farther yet, at an Hundred; the Life of Man, we see, is short,
though it should reach the very utmost that Nature aims at.

The Prayer.
WHat did thou bestow our Reason on us for, O Lord, but to hearken unto the
voice of thy Law, that the Celestial Oratory of thy word might at least win us
from an ignorant Profaneness? Shall Heathens that had no other end, no other
reward for their Piety, than some temporary Applause, or the inward Triumphs of
their Spirits for doing well, outstrip us in the Beauties of a moral Life; and
we that have higher and purer Hopes, be scarce honest for thy sake?

II.
Shall they that knew thee not, be more passionately good than we that have
found out Heaven, and expect Eternity to succeed? Though it was not in the
Power of Man to find thee, till thou did reveal thy self in Christ; yet now
having so richly and fully shown us the Treasures of thy Love, shall we not
strive to do something for thy Glory?

III.
Make us, we beseech thee, to consider the Advantages that are in thy Service,
the Happiness that attends Obedience, and that Crown which is the reward of
Faith: that so our Affections being mortified unto these perishing Objects here
below, may be enlivened only with Desires after those eternal Excellencies that
are in thee. Amen.

Meditation VII. That we ought to seek early after God.
SUch Lovers are we of Heaven, that we think it no sin to serve our selves
first, and make our Creator wait the leisure of our Devotion. Miserable
Creatures, whose Religion reaches no higher than their Bodies, for whose very
Superfluities we study to provide, whilst our brighter part lies all naked, and
unthought of.

II.
Such Strangers are we even to our own Souls, so insensible of the Joys to
come, that we look no higher than the World, and in sphearing all our Hopes,
within Mortality, as if we had nothing durable beyond our Breath, suffer
Eternity to be forgotten.

III.
We cannot live without our Maker, and yet how do our Lives neglect him? How
eager, how ambitious are we after an Enjoyment here, but carry not the smallest
Passion for his Glory? The Jollities of the World swallow up all thoughts of
Heaven, and in the Pleasures of Sense we can drown Immortality.

IV.
Is there any thing dearer than our Lives, and yet even these are of no value
in respect of a better? The very Exigences of Nature are trifles to the
Concernments of our Souls; it is better to starve, than die for ever and lose
God; it is better to go naked than not to be clothed with Immortality; it is
better we should want here, than hereafter that fullness which knows none.

V.
And yet how many are there, that had rather lose Heaven than the World, pawn
their Consciences sooner than want, and for a Fortune sell away their
Christianity? How many make sin their Study, and think it a Credit to invent
new Methods of impiety; and are such careful Providers for Eternity, that they
will be labouriously wicked; and for a profitable iniquity, think it no loss to
be privately Damned?

VI.
Are there not nobler ways of living than by losing our Names and Souls at
once? is infidelity a preservative against Misery? And must we build our
Supports on the Ruins of our Faith? Piety makes no Man poorer, nor does
Religion rob us of our Enjoyments, but makes them sweeter.

VII.
Our Contentments are not lessened, but enlarged and lengthened by adoring the
Giver; nor is the further from, but the nearer to a Blessing, that begins with
Heaven, and prefers his Savior before the World. Designs thus founded are not
ever unfortunate, and he that contrives for his Soul as well as his Body, shall
learn a Policy will baffle the World, and nonplus its wisest Generation; when
after all his Losses he shall find a reward richer than all the Revenues of the
Earth together.

The Prayer.
ANd yet so insensible are we, O Lord, of thy Glory, and our own Felicity, that
we can entertain any thing with more Pleasure than the thoughts of an Eternity.
We can spend the allowance of our time in Sin, and sacrifice even all our years
to Vice; but count a Moment too long, too much to be employed in thy Service:
We can dwell and drown our selves in Pleasures, and think a few spare minutes a
fair Gift of time for our Devotion.

II.
But as thou have made us for thy self, O Lord, enable us to continue so, that
as we have received all we have from thy Bounty, we may sacrifice all our
Desires to thy Glory: knowing as nothing in this Life can make us happy without
thee; so nothing can make him miserable, that has thy Kingdom for his
Inheritance.

Meditation VIII. That Affliction is necessary to all Persons.
THere is no Person on this side the Grave, that is exempted from Affliction,
and whom God has not visited one way or other, and sent his Rod for an
Ambassador to declare his Will, as either by the loss of an affectionate
Husband, a most endeared Wife, a darling Child, or else by some pungent and
grievous Sickness, or by some eminent Miscarriage in point of Honor and
Estate; or if by none of all these, yet at least he has been threatened, by the
woeful Examples of other Men.

II.
And it is evident from that difficult, but useful Text, Mark 9.49. That we
must be every one Seasoned with Salt, or Fire; that our putrid Affections must
be eaten out here, or else our Persons destroyed hereafter; but Blessed be he
who shall preserve us in Tears of Brine, that he may not consume us in Fire of
Brimstone; and we ought to smile on those Stripes, which are meant to drive us
to Immortality.

III.
Let us not think our selves too wise to be thus instructed; or too old, to be
thus educated; or too great to be thus corrected. Perhapsthe Rabbis of our
Schools, are in the School of Jesus Christ, no more than humble Abcedarians;
they that are aged enough by Nature, may have hardly yet attained to be Babes
of Grace; and they who brandish the Sword of Justice, are themselves under
God's Lash.

IV.
And since we cannot ever enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, unless we receive
it as little Children, let us therefore, as little Children, down on our knees
before our Father; let us Confess that we have sinned, let us ask him
Forgiveness, and promise never to do the like.

V.
He will not cast away his Rod, until he sees that we have kissed it; and that
we can say with the Prophet David, it is good for us to have been afflicted.
For whom his Menaces do not better, they accidentally make worse; and if we
harden our Hearts, we do but weighten his hand.

The Prayer.
SO miserable, has Sin made us, O Lord, that we are all become the Sons and
Daughters of Afflictions; we have lost, not only Paradise, but Heaven too;
forfeited not only the Pleasures of this Life, but also the Joys to come, and
with the true Comforts of the World are stripped of thy Favor too.

II.
He whom thou made the Monarch of the Creatures, groans under the Bondage of
Sin; and by the misery of his Crimes, has cancelled almost the Glory and
Miracles of thy work. And now might we have been extinguished in our Guilt, had
not he, who is the brightness of thy Glory dropped a new Life into our eclipsed
Natures, by the Power of his Blood and Merits; and by reconcilcing us to thy
self, given us an Admission to better and more enduring Pleasures.

III.
Grant therefore, that having obtained Mercy, we may walk accordingly; that
being bought for Heaven, we may no more sell our selves to Sin, nor vainly
prefer a few moments of Pleasure, before an Eternity of Joy; that so, when our
Souls shall expire with our Breath, they may be transplanted to those Heavenly
Mansions that never fade, and enjoy the Pleasures of Eternity in the Bosom of
thy Glory.

Meditation IX. That Affliction is a Mark of God's favor.
THat God is never so much in wrath, as when he will not vouchsafe to strike. I
remember Spartianus observes of Geta, much what Tacitus did of Tiberius: He
made so much of those Persons whom he designed for Slaughter, that his
Embraces, and his best Looks became more dreadful than all his frowns.

II.
Yet considering how rarely it is given to one and the same Man, to sit with
Dives at his Table, and to lie with Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom; to have his
good things here and hereafter too; I cannot but say of many Persons, whom the
World calls Happy, that they who have most of God's Bounty, may yet have least
of his Love, and Favor.

III.
For seeing it is true, what the Scripture says, That whom God loves he
chastneth, and scourges every Son whom he receives, Heb. 12.6. we may with
good Logic infer that whom he chastneth not, he does not love; nor receive any
Son whom he does not scourge.

IV.
It was shrewdly said of Solon, (if we believe Herodotus,) that the Minions of
the Earth, are but the sport of Heaven. God often lends them a kind of
Happiness, only to show them he does but lend it; at once does prosper their
Branches, and curse their Root; turns them loose into Plenty, as fit to be
fatted for the Shambles.

V.
And now methinks the difference may be this, betwixt a good Man afflicted, and
an ill Man prosperous, that the first does seem to be clearly under God's
curse, and the second to be beyond it; that indeed a tormented, but this a
desperate Patient.

The Prayer.
DO thou therefore, O Lord, elevate our Souls, and withdraw them from these
beggarly Elements, to purer and more Celestial Addresses: Let thy Kingdom be
not our refuge only, but our Choice, and the perfect Resolution of our Souls,
to despise the Flatteries of the World, for that Glory which nothing but our
Sins can deprive us of.

II.
And as thou have made us for thy self, O Lord, enable us so to continue, that
as we have received all that we have from thy Bounty, we may sacrifice all our
Desires to thy Glory: knowing that as nothing in this Life can make us Happy
without thee; so nothing can make him miserable that has thy Kingdom for his
Inheritance.

Meditation X. Of Man's Original, being born to die.
IT is demonstrably proved we must one day die, because we did one day begin to
live. All that is Born of a Woman is both mixed and compounded, after the Image
of the Woman of whom it is born; not only mixed of the four Elements, but also
compounded of Matter and Form: and all things compounded must be dissolved,
into the very same Principles of which at first they were composed.

II.
Hence are those pangs and yerning of the Flesh and the Spirit, of the Appetite
and the Will, of the Law in the Members, and the Law in the Mind* the one
inclining toward Earth, from whence 'twas taken; and the other toward Heaven,
from whence 'twas sent.

III.
The truth of this had been apparent, if it had been only taken out of
Aristotle's School; but we have it confirmed out of Solomon's Porch too: for in
the day when Man goes to his Long Home, when the Grinders cease, and the
Windows be darkened, and all the Daughters of Music are brought low, when the
Silver Cord is once loosed, and the Golden Bowl broken, so as the Mourners are
going about the Streets; then the Dust shall return to the Earth as it was, and
the Spirit shall return to God that gave it, Eccles. 12.3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

IV.
When God himself was pleased to be born of a Woman, he submitted to the
Conditions of Mortality, and had but a short time to live; for he expired by
Crucifixion before he was full thirty four years of Age.

V.
Man has a short time indeed, as he is born of a Woman, for he comes forth as
a Flower, and as a Flower he is cut down. He flies also as a shadow, and
continues not. And therefore Epictetus did fitly argue the very great
fickleness, and frailty of Worldly things: First, because they were made, and
therefore had their beginning; next because they are made ours, and therefore
must have a speedy end.

VI.
For if we will be but so just, and so impartial to our selves, as to Arraign
our Bodies at the Tribunal of our Reason, they will be found, by Composition,
no more than well complexion'd Dust. Dust thou art, said God to Adam, Genesis
3.19. Dust and Ashes I am, said Abraham to God, Genesis 18.27. He knows says
the Psalmist, Whereof we are made, he remembers we are but Dust, Psalm. 103.14.

VII.
Were it not that the Spirit of Man goes upward, whilst the Spirit of a Beast
goes downward to the Earth, there would be no Pre-eminence of the one over the
other; for all go unto one place, (as to the Center of the Body,) All are of
the Dust, and all turn to Dust again, Eccles. 3.19, 20.

VIII.
Which shows the Vanity and Sickness of those Men's Souls, who erect such strong
and stately Sepulchers for their Bodies, for fear the poor Man's Dust should
fully their's; as if they did not remember, that Man is born of a Woman, and
that his very Foundation is in the Dust, Job 4.19. he may have the more Vanity,
but not the more Understanding for being in Honor, and may the sooner be
compared to the Beasts that perish, Psalm. 49.12.

IX.
The Protoplast was formed of the Dust of the ground, Genesis 2.27. and however
his Posterity has been distinguished, by issuing out from that Fountain
through several Channels, yet their Original Extraction must needs be vile; (if
any thing can be vile which is of God's own making) for all Men descended out
of the very same Eve; and so by Her out of the very same Adam; and so by Him
out of the very same Earth.

The Prayer.
WE know, O Lord, that thou created'st us after thine own Image, and
designed'st us for to die, as soon as we were born; but thou have sweetened the
Bitterness of it to us, by first tasting of it thy self; and have taken away
the Sting of it, that when ever it comes it will prove to us an advantage.

II.
Dust we are, O Lord, and to Dust we must return, High and Low, Rich and Poor,
from the Swayer of the Scepter, to the Drawer of Water, must one day appear
before thee: O then! in thy tender Mercy and Compassion have Pity upon poor
Dust and Ashes: Let not those many failings we are guilty of in this World, any
ways hinder thy Mercy in sealing our Pardon, but receive us graciously.

III.
Bring down, and subdue in us every vain Thought, and every proud Look, that
exalts its self against thee; mortify in us all sensual Lusts and vile
Affections; and bring our Souls and Bodies under the Discipline of true
Obedience to thee, and thy Holy Will; that having learned to deny all
ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we may live Soberly, Godly and Righteously in
this present evil World, and at last arrive to thine Heavenly Kingdom to live
for evermore. Amen.

Meditation XI. Memorials hourly necessary, upon the four last things: Death,
Judgment, Hell and Heaven.
MOst freely went that Blessed Father St. Augustine to work, when he expressed
himself in this manner, I inherit sin from my Father, an excuse from my Mother,
Lying from the Devil, Folly from the World, and Self-conceit from the Pride and
arrogant Opinion of my self. Deceitful have been the Imaginations of thy Heart,
Crooked have been thy ways: Malicious thy works. And yet have thou taken the
Judgments of God in thy mouth; desiring nothing more than to blind the Eye of
the World with a counterfeit Zeal.

II.
But all such Hypocrites, God will judge, and will not be mocked. For as the
Devil has his Sieve, with which the good escape, and the bad remain: So God
has his Fan which scatters the wicked, but retains the Godly. And when he
shall separate the Goats from the Sheep; the Wheat from the Tares; when the
Just and the Wicked shall appear before him: and every Man shall be put in the
Balance, I fear, O my Soul, thou will then be found many Grains too light.

III.
Thy only Remedy then, is this proper Medicine, to prepare thy self against
that great and terrible Day; and to furnish thee with those Directions, that
may make thee a true Convert, of an impenitent Sinner. Recall to mind those four
last Remembrances: Memorials hourly to be thought, and so necessary to be
retained in thy Memory, as the Christian use of them may prepare thee before
Death summon thee; and in this vale of Misery, fit thee for thy Heavenly Voyage
to Eternity.

IV.
And yet whilst I entertain thee with these Precepts, I find thy Condition to
be dangerous: For if thou seriously ponder them in thy mind, and lay them home
to thy Heart, the very thoughts of them cannot choose but startle thee: and if
thou neglect them, which are so useful for thy Salvation, thou will stand
amazed, when they encounter thee.

The Prayer.
O Lord remember me in thy Mercy; and so prepare my Memory; that these four
necessary Remembrances, may never depart from me. Let me be prepared for Death
before it come, that it may never surprise me unprovided, whenever it shall
come! Let me think of that dreadful day of Judgment; and judge my self before I
am judged, that I may not when I am weighed in the Balance, be found wanting.

II.
Let not me forget there is a Hell for the damned; and consider that it is
better by timely fearing, to avoid it: than by never dreaming of it, to fall
headlong into it. Lastly, let me think of Heaven, that it is the Habitation of
the Blessed, and that none but those that are of a clean Heart shall dwell in
it. O cleanse thou my Heart, that I may be prepared for it, and with piritual
Joy be received into it.

Meditation XII. On Death.
IT is strange that Death should be such a Stranger to thee, when he so daily
visits thy Neighbors. Thou have been familiarly acquainted with many, whose
Habitations are not now to be found; which have enjoyed the Pleasures of Sin
freely; others who have enlarged their Barns and Storehouses carefully;
others, who have in a splendid manner arrived to Honors highest Pinnacle, and
could deliver their Commands with Grandeur and Magnificence: And now behold!
All these have endured Death's Arrest, and were forced to obey his grim Command.

II.
And now consider, having made their Beds in the dark, They have left their
Houses unto others; they are gone unto their Graves, and must not return again!
their Substance they have left unto others: and Strangers are become their
Heirs. They are rooted out from the Face of the Earth, and now they consider
the Vanity of their Desires: How they, who laid Land to Land while they were
here, are now content with a small scantling in their return to their last home.

III.
Poor Shell of Corruption, what do thou think of these things? I am certain,
that great Revenues, swelling Honors, smiling Pleasures are dangerous and
pernicious Eye-sores to a dying Man. He looks back upon his Honors, and
enquires of them, if they can relieve him: but like false hearted retainers,
they fly from him, and present their Service to another; so quickly have they
forgot their dying Master.

IV.
He looks back then upon his Revenues, those Goods of Fortune, his inchested
Treasures, and asks of them, if they cannot Ransom him? But alas, they have no
such Commission: they reserve themselves for his Prodigal Successor, or
succeeding Rioter: for they were so poorly used and employed by him, that they
have quickly forgot their dying Master. At last he looks back upon his unhappy
Pleasures, which now torment him more, than ever they did delight him; and he
would be informed of them, if they can allay, or any ways mitigate his Pain?
But alas, they soon leave him, for they find nothing near him, that can give
them Entertainment.

V.
An easy farewell then have these taken of their dying Master. But thou, poor
Sinner, have no Honors to transport thee; no Fortunes to detain thee; no
Pleasures to ensnare thee: For the first, the Countenance of Greatness never
shone upon thee; for the second, Worldly Wealth could never yet so burden thee:
And for the last, though thy Youth might affect them, the infirmities of Age
have now estranged them from thee.

VI.
And yet the voice of Death is more terrible to thee, than the loud Report of a
roaring Cannon. No Note more doleful, or Summons more fearful; in this thou art
in some measure excusable; because Death is fearful to all Flesh. Plant not thy
hopes so upon Earth, as if thou intendedst never to go from Earth, or to return
to it from whence thou wast taken. If thou can find nothing on Earth worthy
to entertain thee, thou art in the unhappiest Condition that may befall thee.

VII.
O think then of that time, even now while thou have time, when thy poor
languishing Soul, finding thy Eyes shut, thy Mouth closed, and all those Senses
of thy Body perished, by which she used to pass forth, and be delighted in
these outward things wherewith she was affected, shall return unto her self:
and seeing her self all alone and naked, as one afflicted and affrighted with
exceeding Horror, shall through Despair fail and fall under her self: O whither
will thou fly in hope of Succor, to comfort thy poor Soul, in such a time of
Danger.

The Prayer.
EVen to thee will I fly, O God of my Salvation, for thou will not suffer my
Soul to descend to Corruption, such is thy loving kindness, as thou have
promised to make all my Bed in my Sickness. And because nothing is more certain
than Death; nothing more uncertain than the hour: and that the pale Messenger
may appear less fearful unto me, send thy Holy Spirit to Comfort me; that being
inwardly armed by thee against the Assaults of Death, and fury of my Ghostly
Enemy, I may fight a good Fight, and with Fortitude cry out: O Death! where is
thy Sting? O Hell! where is thy Victory?

Meditation XIII. Upon Judgment.
I Tremble to think of that dreadful day, and yet know not how to avoid it!
Judged I must be, and who will answer for me? An infallible Witness I have
within, to accuse me: Sins of Omission, and of Commission to impeach me; Sins
of Ignorance, Knowledge, and of Malice to convict me: though any one of these
were sufficient to condemn me.

II.
But perhaps thou will be upon the Enquiry, to know for what thou art to be
brought to Account for? And the occasion of thy appearing before the great
Tribunal Seat of Judgment? Solomon will furnish thee with a ready Answer, and
informs thee, it is even for all thy Thoughts, Words and Works. For God will
bring every Work into Judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be Good, or
whether it be Evil, Eccles. 12.12.

III.
And that it may appear, that thou shall be accountable for all these: First,
touching thy Thoughts: of these thou shall be judged; For froward Thoughts
separate from God. Wisd. 1. and He shall judge the secrets of Men. Their
Conscience also bearing Witness, and their Thoughts the mean while accusing, or
excusing one another, Romans 2.15.

IV.
Next, thou shall give an Account of all thy Words. Of every idle Word that Men
shall speak, they shall give Account in the Day of Judgment, Mat. 12.36.
Thirdly, thou shall be accountable for all thy Works. For we must all appear
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done
in his Body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor.
5.10.

V.
Immortal, but afflicted Soul, can thou hear all this, and not dissolve thy
self into Tears? When not only in thy Bed of Sickness, by a secret Divine
Power, all those Works which thou have done, be they Good or Evil, shall be
presented, and appear before thee; but in that great and fearful day of
Account, when all Flesh shall come to Judgment: All these in Capitals shall
appear written before thee.

VI.
Not one Bosom Sin, were it never so closely committed, subtly covered, or
cunningly carried, but must be there discovered. Adam shall be brought from his
Bushes, and Sarah from behind the Tent-Door, and miserable perplexed Man shall
say to his Conscience, as Ahab said to Elias, Have thou found me, O mine Enemy?
What innumerable Bills of Inditements then will there be preferred against
thee? To all which, thou must hang down thy Head, and plead Guilty?

VII.
O how art thou fallen into the Gall of Bitterness and Misery! what can the
Thoughts and the Imaginations of thine Heart say for themselves, but that they
have been evil continually? What can the words of thy Mouth speak for
themselves, but that they have been full of all filthiness and obscenity?
Lastly, what can the works of thine hands plead for themselves, but that they
have been laden with Transgressions and Iniquities.

VIII.
But perhaps thou have some fond hopes of a Pardon, and so like some deluded
Offenders, by flattering thy self with a vain hope of Life, alienatest thy
thoughts from thinking of a better Life. But do not so deceive thy self; for if
it be not by saithful Repentance sought for here, there is no hope for any
Pardon there to be procured; nor for any Appeal to be there admitted; not one
minutes reprieve granted, nor one moment of Adjournment of Death's heavy
Sentence. That severe Sentence of eternal Death, Depart from me, shall be the
Sentence: to lose whose Countenance, and depart from his Presence, is to bring
thy Soul into endless Torments.

The Prayer.
O My God, thou who have appointed a time for every Man to die, and after that
to come to Judgment; make me to remember my End; that fitting my self for it, I
may cheerfully encounter it, and so prepare my self for that Judgment which
shall come after it.

II.
O make me walk in thy light, now while I have light to walk in; and to work
out my Salvation now while I have time to work in. For time will come, (unless
we walk here as Children of light) when we shall have neither light to walk in,
nor time to work in. O inflame my Heart with thy Love: and teach me thy
Judgments, and my Soul shall live.

Meditation XIV. Upon Hell.
HArk! how the Damned cry out, that while they were here on Earth, they lived
better than thou, and yet they undergo the Sentence of Damnation! thus they tax
God's Mercy, and indulgence toward thee of Injustice and Partiality. Such is
those Damned Souls Charity, mean time thou live securely, feedest
deliciously, and put the thought of the evil day from thee, by walking
foolishly in the ways of Vanity.

II.
Little desire then may thou have, sinful Man, to see Death; having so little
hope of Life after it. Had some of those damned Objects, who are now lost for
ever, received those many sweet Visits, Motions and free Offers of his Grace;
those opportunities of doing good, and many means of eschewing evil; no
question but they would have been as ready to entertain them, as thou have been
to reject them.

III.
Think with thy self, how happy had that Rich Glutton been, if he had rewarded
poor Lazarus with some few Crumbs from his Table. Had it not been far better
for him, to have given to the Poor all that ever he had; To have disrobed
himself, and exchanged his purpled Garments for Rags of Poverty, than to dwell
in everlasting Burnings?

IV.
How happy had that rich Man in the Gospel been, if instead of increasing his
Barns, he had enlarged his Bowels to the Poor! little dreamt he, how soon his
Soul should be taken from him; when he addressed his Care for so needless a
Provision. His thoughts were so taken up with Building his Barns wider; that he
never considered, How Tophet was ordained of old; how it was made deep and
large; the Pile thereof Fire and much Wood; and how the Breath of the Lord,
like a stream of Brimstone, does kindle it, Esaias 30.33.

V.
Turn unto thy self, O my Soul, and see whom thou can find in more Danger of
falling into that place of Horror, than thy self? How have thou bestowed thy
time? how have thou employed thy Talent? have thou not laid it up in a Napkin?
or have not thou worse improved it, by employing it to some ignoble Ends? have
not many been damned for less than thou have committed? and did it grieve thee
to repent of what thou had done, that thou might escape that Condemnation?

VI.
Many a wretched Soul lies there tormented for less Offenses than ever thou
transacted; and have thou yet turned to the Lord, that thou may be pardoned?
It is written in what hour soever the Righteous commits iniquity, his
Righteousness shall not be had in Remembrance, Ezck. 18.24. Now if the
Righteousness of him shall be forgotten by committing iniquity, who leaves
what he once loved, relinquisheth what he once professed; what can we think of
the Repentance of that Sinner, who returns again to his Sins, like the Dog to
the Vomit, or like the Sow to her wadowing in the Mire?

VII.
How many have ascended even up to Heaven, and amongst the Stars have built
their Nests: and yet have suddenly fallen from that Glory, by glorying in their
own Strength, and so drenched themselves into endless Misery? And this was the
Reason of their lost Estate, because they aspired unto that Mountain to which
the first Angel ascended, and as a Devil descended.

VIII.
And can thou excuse thy self of being one of that number? Have thou not
sometimes made a fair show to the World of plausible Arguments of Piety? have
thou not been sometimes like the King's Daughter, all glorious without? but how
soon did thou lose this Glory, and fall from that seeming Sanctity or Holy
Hypocrisy, into open Profaneness and Impiety?

IX.
And now what will become of me in this extremity! the Wages of sin, I know, is
Death; a Death that never dies, but lives eternally: where nothing shall be
heard but weeping and wailing, groaning and howling, sorrowing and gnashing of
Teeth. How grievous then shall be my Anguish! how endless my Sorrow and
Sadness! when I shall be set apart from the Society of the Just, deprived of
the sight of God; delivered up unto the Power of the Devils, and forced along
with them into unquenchable Fire, there to remain to all Eternity?

X.
With what dejected Eyes, and a trembling Heart shall I poor Sinner stand,
expecting the supreme Judge; when I shall be banished from that blessed
Country of Paradise, to be devoured in the gaping bottomless Pit, where I must
never have the Prospect of a Glimpse of light, nor feel the least drop of
Refreshment: but be tormented for Millions of years: and so tormented, as never
to be from thence delivered: where neither the Tormentors become wearied; nor
they die who are tormented.

The Prayer.
O My dear Lord, look upon the price of thine own Blood. Thou have bought me
with a great Price: O deliver thy Darling from the Power of the Dogs: remember
me in Mercy, whom thou have bought, O let me not go down into the Pit: neither
let the Deep swallow me up.

II.
For who shall Praise thy Name in the Deep, or declare thy Power in the Grave
of Silence? O thou who art a God of infinite Majesty, though the Terrors of
Death, and Torments of Hell encompass me, yet art thou my Savior, my Succor,
and wilt deliver me: and my Soul shall live to Praise thee evermore.

Meditation XV. Upon Heaven.
O How should I look up to thee, that have so provoked thee? O thou Mansion of
the Saints; thou Portion of the Just; thou City of the great King; thou
Heavenly and most happy Kingdom; where thy blessed Inhabitants are ever living
and never dying; where thy glorious State is ever flourishing and never
declining.

II.
I must Confess to my great Grief and Shame, that I have no Interest in thee. I
have unhappily lost thee, in losing my Soul, by selling it to Vanity. I
sometimes resolved to Play the part of a wise Merchant, and to sell all I had
for the purchase of one Pearl. But I held the Purchase at too dear a Rate, and
therefore I have deservingly lost the Jewel.

III.
Foolish Sinner, could thou find any thing of greater weight to entertain thy
best thoughts, or bestow thy Care, than the Salvation of thy Soul. Did thou
think it so easy a Task to get Heaven, by an earthly Purchase; yet had thou
but taken half so much Pains to deserve Heaven, as thou have done to win Hell:
Thou might have challenged more Interest to Heaven, than now thou can.

IV.
Many Summer Days, and long Winter Nights have thy Follies taken thee up: And
these seemed short unto thee, because thou tookest delight in those short
Pleasures of Vanity: but to bestow one short hour upon Devotion, how many
Distractions did that meet withal; and how long and tedious seemed that hour,
because the Task was wearisome, and thy wandering mind was not inclined to so
serious a work.

V.
And can thou now think that so Rich a Kingdom would reserve it self for
thee; when thou would neither knock to be admitted entrance, nor seek after
so great a Happiness? Health, thou art well informed, comes not from the Clouds
without seeking, nor Wealth from the Ground without digging; and yet Heaven
thou think is got by sloth: but great Prizes are not so purchased.

VI.
For as the Gate of the Blessed is strait, and few there be that enter; so are
our Tribulations many, that we may be of that few which may gain Admittance.
But I hear thee now cry out, as one that had some Sense of his Misery, and of
the loss he has incurred by Sins committed. Thou do now bewail thy past
Follies, and correct thy self for so great a neglect; thou know not how to
allay thy Passion, till Reason inclines thee to this Meditation.

VII.
Miserable Sinner, I cannot behold this Earth I tread on without blushing; nor
can I think upon Death without sorrowing; the Day of Judgment, without
trembling; Hell, without shaking; nor of the Joys of Heaven without
Astonishment. For Earth, I loved it so well, as the remembrance of Death,
became sorrowful. For by it I understood I was to be brought to Judgment; and
from thence, having no defensive Answer, to be hurried down to the place of
torment, and consequently to forfeit all my Title and interest in Heaven.

VIII.
These Meditations ought to make a deep impression upon our Minds; for to
acknowledge our Infirmities, may make us the speedier look for a Remedy, and by
degrees find a happy Recovery; join then all thy Faculties, and offer up thy
Prayer to the Throne of Grace, that God in his Mercy would look upon thee.

The Prayer.
GRacious God, though I am altogether unworthy to lift up my Eyes unto Heaven,
or to offer up my Prayers unto thee, much less to be heard by thee: yet for his
Merits and Mercies sake, who sits at thy right hand, and makes intercession
for me, reserve a place in thy Heavenly Kingdom for me.

II.
Dear Lord, in thy House are many Mansions, O bring me thither, that I may join
my voice with those voices of the Angels, and sing Praises to thy Holy Name,
who sit in the highest Heavens for ever, World without end. Amen.

Meditation XVI. The remembrance of the four last things reduced to Practice.
I Find my Soul like a dry ground where no water is! and wheresoever I turn my
self, I find Affliction and Misery on all sides surrounding me. What shall I
do, or where shall I fly? When I repose my self from the World in some
withdrawing Room, intending to forget this lower Orb, and prepare my self for
the Joys of a better Life: while I begin to commune with my own thoughts in the
secret Chamber of my Heart, I become so affrighted with the Representment of
those four last Remembrances, as I wholly forget what I intended to speak.

II.
My Tongue begins to cleave to the Roof of my Mouth, my Moisture is dried
within me; those Active Faculties of my Soul leave me: And my understanding
departs from me. O Death! how bitter is the Remembrance of thee? with Terror
thou summonest me; and like a surly Guest thou rushest upon me, and resolvest
to lodge with me! then immediately I feel my self wounded; and so mortally as
not to be cured.

III.
O how my Divine Eyesight grows dim, my panting Breast beats; my hoarse Throat
ratleth, my Teeth grow black and rusty, my Countenance grows pale, all my
Members stiff; every Sense and Faculty fails; and my wasted Body threatens a
speedy Dissolution! yet desires my poor Soul to be a Guest, though there is
cold Comfort to be found in such a forlorn Inn.

IV.
But what are all these Terrors of Death to the dreadful Day of Judgment, when
at the voice of the Archangel, and sound of the Trumpet, all the little heaps
of Dust shall rise! where none shall be exempted, but all judged. How terrible,
in Majesty, will that great Judge appear to such, as in this Life would neither
be allured by his Promises, nor awakened by his Judgments?

V.
How doleful will that Echoing voice sound in their Ear, Depart from me, I know
you not! And how ready will that officious Jailer be, upon the delivery of this
heavy Sentence, to cast them into utter darkness; a place of endless Torments:
where the Cursings and Howlings of Fiends and Furies shall entertain their
melodious Ear; deformed and hideous sights shall entertain their Lascivious
eye, loathsome Stenches their delicious Smell: Sulphur and Brimstone their
luscious Taste; Graspings and Embracings of Snakes, their amorous Touch; and
Anguish and Horror every Sense.

VI.
Where those miserable damned Souls shall be tormented, both in their Flesh and
Spirit. In their Flesh, by Fire ever burning, and never decaying: and in their
Spirit by the Worm of Conscience ever gnawing, and never dying! where there
shall be Grief intolerable Fear horrible, Filth incomparable; Death both of
Soul and Body without hope of Pardon, or Mercy.

VII.
And now to close with the last; the loss whereof exceeds our Sufferings in all
the rest. When we consider our unhappiness not only to get Hell, the Lake of
Horror and Misery; but to lose Heaven, the place of endless Joy and Felicity:
what Heart can ponder on it, and not resolve it self into a Sea of Tears, in
Contemplation of it?

VIII.
What can the wretched Soul imagine, when she lifts up the light of her mind,
and beholds the Glory of those immortal Riches, and withal considers how she
has lost all, for the petty Concerns of this Life; O how can she be less than
confounded with Anguish, and cry out in the affliction of her Spirit, when she
shall cast her Eyes upon this worthless Earth, and take a full Prospect of this
uneasy World, and perceive how her sight was intercepted by a foggy Mist. Then
presently looking up, admiring the Beauty of that eternal Light, she instantly
concludes, that it was nothing else but Night and Darkness she here embraced.

IX.
O how then she faints, falters, and fruitlesly desires, that she might have
some small Remnant of time allotted her; what a sharp Remedy; what a severe
manner of Conversation would she enter upon? What great Promises would she
endeavor to perform? and with what strict Bonds of Devotion would she
seemingly bind her self? but then all will be in vain, for the Decree is gone
forth, and as she had her full swing of Pleasures here, so she must have her
just measure of Torments hereafter.

The Prayer.
MOst Gracious and dear Lord, out of thy boundless Compassion, look upon my
grievous Affliction. Keep not silence at my Tears, for I am a Stranger with
thee, and a Sojourner as all my Fathers were. I have none to fly unto, but
thee; and so highly have I provoked thee, that unless thou take Pity, and
receivest me, for his Blood, which was shed for me, I am lost eternally.

II.
O thou good Shepherd, call me thy lost sheep home; for I am lost unless thou
call me; Lost for ever, unless thou savest me.

Meditation XVII. With Comfort Faith applys her self to the sick Man's
Conscience.
WOunds cannot be cured, before they be opened. Neither do we doubt, but by
ministering some fitting Prescriptions, our endeavors will bring forth such
good Effect, as you shall find great ease in your Afflictions. You tell me, how
the remembrance of your End is very terrible to you: not so much in regard of
your fear of Death, as of that dreadful Day of Judgment, which attends it.

II.
For you find in your self such an infinite and unsupportable weight of sins
pressing down your Soul even to the Gates of Hell, as less than grieve you
cannot; else were you insensible of the loss of a Soul. Trust me, Sinner, so
far am I from condoling with you, as I rejoice in your sorrowing: for this
Sense of your Sins, leads you to a Remedy, which had you not been afflicted,
and brought even to the brink of the Pit, you had still lived in supine
Carelessness.

III.
Now may you say with the Royal Psalmist, It is good for me, that I have been
afflicted; Else you might have gloried in your Sins, and have perished for
ever. Be then of good Comfort: and suffer not Cain's desperate Conclusion to
take possession of your Spirits: for I must tell you; He sinned more in saying,
Greater is my Sin than can be pardoned; than in murdering his Brother: for as
in the one, he laid violent hands on the image of God; so in the other he
detracted from the highest and dearest Prerogative belonging to him.

IV.
For there is no Attribute wherewith he is more delighted, than to be styled a
God of Mercy. We may safely then conclude, that Despair is of a more high and
heinous Nature than any sin. For tell me, has not God himself with his own
Mouth promised, and is he not able, and willing to perform what he has
promised? That, at what time soever a Sinner does repent him of his Sin, from
the bottom of his Heart, He will put away all his wickedness out of his
remembrance, Ezekiel. 18. though late Repentance then be seldom true, yet true
Repentance never comes too late.

V.
The good Thief on the Cross, had no sooner repented him of his Sin, and
Confessed Christ, but he was even at the last hour received to Mercy: which
Example, as it admits no Liberty to encourage any to presume, so it is a
Fortification to others against Despair.

VI.
Indeed there is nothing that endangers Man's Salvation more, than by giving
way to delay: yet when the sorrowful Soul heartily repents him of what is past,
and with a constant Religious resolve, intends to redeem the time to come; his
pious Tears, devout Prayers, Holy Resolves will find ready Admittance to the
Throne of Grace. For as his Mercy is above all his Works, so will he extend it
in a large manner, on that Work which stands in most need of his Mercy.

VII.
This your long Experience has observed and plenteously tasted, else have your
Sojourning years been ill bestowed, that he is Gracious, Merciful, and of
Long-suffering: and it has been evermore the Property of this good and careful
Shepherd to call home those that were wandering, and to embrace those that were
returning. It has been ever the Condition of this valiant Joshua, to exhort you
to fight, and then to assist you in the Conquest.

VIII.
Come then tell me, are you weary and so heavy laden, that you must faint by
the way, if you be not refreshed? Go to him that has invited you, and you will
receive Comfort! be not then wavering in your Faith, but take fast hold of his
Promises, who will not fail you: and rely on his Mercies, who in your greatest
straits will deliver you.

The Prayer.
BLessed Jesu, how justly might thou have reproved me with, O thou of little
Faith! O it is but a little one; the least Seed in the Garden: but, O Lord, I
beseech thee increase it; and pray unto thy Father, that my Faith fail not! So
shall my Heart be purified, I become justified, and have access to thee by
Faith: and hereafter live with thee and thy faithful ones in the inheritance of
the Just.

Meditation XVIII. Hopes Address to the Sick Penitent.
A Froward Patient requires a rough hand, and a resolute Heart. I am not
ignorant of your Disease; and your Malady relies much upon my Cure; therefore
be not doubtful of your Recovery, if you do but ingenuously discover to me your
infirmity.

II.
I am not altogether unacquainted with my Sister Faiths late visit to you:
whose sound Cordial Comforts would have wrought such powerful Effects in you,
as you might have had less occasion for any other Receipts, had you discreetly
applied what was so seasonably, and Soveraignly ministered.

III.
But before I begin with you; let me so far prevail on your Temper, that you
would remove from your too much dejected and depressed Spirit, all those
unbeseeming Thoughts which perplex your quiet: and be not so great an Enemy to
your self, as to reject that, which may rectify your State: and of a
Faint-hearted Soldier, become a Courageous Warrior.

IV.
To prepare you the better for this spiritual Encounter: my first Essay must
be, to remove those scales from your Eyes, which by long continuance are grown
so thick, that they cast a Mist before your knowledge. For though I have been
long a Stranger to you; yet let us now renew our Acquaintance; the which, you
will not repent of: for I never yet lodged in that Soul, which esteemed me not
a welcome Guest.

V.
Many before this time had untimely perished, had they not by me been
seasonably supported; by Land and Water, have I offered my self a Friendly
Companion: and have firmly stuck to them who relied on me, in time of greatest
danger or opposition. And when no Token of Deliverance appeared: No hope of
Liberty approached: I with this Anchor brought them to the Haven safely:
Planting them so securely, as no Peril could interpose their Security.

VI.
And now tell me, is my Strength so weakened, as I cannot perform what I have
formerly so happily effected: indeed I must inform your flender Judgment, that
I am unalterably the same, and do find the same Spirit in those, to whom I
apply my Cure; the Accomplishment of which is always my principal Care.

VII.
Take then for an Helmet, The Hope of Salvation, 1 These. 5.8. Look for the
blessed Hope, Tit. 2.13. Let thy Flesh rest in Hope, Psalm. 16.9. Be ye of good
Courage, all ye that hope, Psalm. 31.24. For I must tell you, Hope deferred
makes the Heart sick: but the righteous has hope in his Death, Prove. 13.12,
14.

VIII.
For so well and surely is her Foundation grounded, as Hope makes not ashamed,
Romans 5.5. Rejoice then in Hope: be patient in Tribulation, Romans 12.12. So shall
the God of Hope, fill you with all Joy. To whch fullness I recommend you; where
you may cheerfully say with Holy Job, that perfect Pattern of Patience: I know
that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the
Earth. And though after my Skin, Worms destroy this Body; yet in my Flesh shall
I see God: whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not
another, Job 19.25, 26, 27.

The Prayer.
O My Merciful Lord God, who bindest up the Wounds of every Contrite and truly
penitent Sinner: Suffering him not to be tempted more than he can bear: but out
of the abundance of thy Compassion, give him an issue out of his Temptation:
make me ever with a Religious fear, so to put my trust in thy Mercy, as I may
never be swallowed up of my Misery.

II.
And seeing we are saved by Hope: Give unto me such a saving Hope; as neither
too much Confidence may make me presume: nor the too perplexing Consideration
of my many Sins bring me to a Despair of Pardon.

III.
Be near me, Dear Lord, in the hour of my Visitation: let the Enemy have no
Power over me: but so shadow me under the Wings of thy Mercy; that the
remembrance of thy Judgments may rouse me sleeping; and the Memory of thy
Mercies raise me waking; to render Praise unto thee, as my Hope is in thee, my
help from thee, O Lord everlasting. To whom with thee, and the Holy Ghost,
three Persons, and one God, Lives and Reigns together, World without end. Amen.

Meditation XIX. The Exercise of Charity.
CHarity is cold, and such Companions are not easily entertained: nor such
Guests kindly received; where the one bids us give that we may receive: the
other Commands us to bestow all that we have: and when all is distributed, to
expect our reward in Heaven. But this sowing of Bread upon the Waters, is of
too hard a Digestion to be reaped by a foolish Worldling: and yet it must be so
sown, or your Harvest is lost for ever.

II.
You are here planted in a vale of Misery, and the true Exercise of Charity
will cover all your Scarlet sins with the white Robe of Mercy. And to confer on
your peaceful Progress the higher Honor; if you will resolve to leave the
World, and receive her, who is despised of it, she will conduct you safely to
the Kingdom of Glory.

III.
St. Paul informs you, 1 Cor. 13.13. says he, Now abides Faith, Hope, and
Charity, these three, but the greatest of these is Charity. Have thou an
earnest Desire to be instructed in what most concerns you; to be edified in
what most imports you? It is not knowledge but Charity that must work this good
effect in you. For Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifieth, 1 Cor. 8.1.

IV.
Would you be persuasive in Oratory; or powerful in Prophecy; or an useful
Almoner for your Souls safety? You must necessarily be accompanied by Charity;
or you are but as sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal, 1 Cor. 13.1. your Power
to remove Mountains, shall not remove in you the least Molehill of your sin.
Your bestowing all your Goods to feed the Poor, shall not make your Soul Rich,
if Charity be wanting.

V.
Seeing then the Tongues of Men and Angels are but Tinklings and very Sounds
without Charity; Knowledge becomes fruitless without the edifying Help of it;
Prophecies, be they never so Mysterious; Sciences, be they in their own Nature
never so commodious, are altogether unprofitable without Charity: Let all your
things, says the Apostle, be done with Charity, 1 Cor. 16.14. Follow after
Charity, 1 Cor. 14.1. Above all things put on Charity, Col. 3.14. and St. Peter
advises us, Above all things have fervent Charity: for Charity shall cover a
multitude of sins, 1 Pet. 4.8. and again, add to Godliness, Brotherly kindness;
and to Brotherly kindness Charity, 2 Pet. 1.7.

VI.
And now, seeing I have here given you a full draught of Charity: by a due
Examination of your self, you will easily find whether she be in your Heart or
no: for by these Divine Effects you shall find her to be yours. For Charity
suffers long, and is kind, envies not, vaunteth not it self, is not puffed
up, 1 Cor. 13.4. You shall likewise know, even by your outward Behavior,
whether or no you have received Charity, or given her Harbor: For Charity does
not behave her self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked,
thinks no evil, 1 Cor. 13.5.

VII.
You shall perceive likewise by the very joy of your Heart, whether Charity
have taken up there her Residence. For she rejoices not in iniquity, but
rejoices in the truth, 1 Cor. 13.6. Lastly, you shall gather by your
Constancy, whether or no you hold Correspondency with perfect Charity: for
Charity never fails, 1 Cor. 13.8.

VIII.
Well may I then conclude, with that Glorious light of the Eastern Church, St.
Augustine, whose Sense is, where Charity is absent, no good thing can be
present; and where Charity is present, no good thing can be absent. Again,
there is not any thing, be it never so little, being done in Charity, but is
esteemed for great: and there is nothing, be it never so great, but being done
without Charity, is accounted little.

IX.
To close then all in one, seeing Charity is one in all: we see how all Answer
Amen, all sing Alleluja, all are baptized, all obey the Commands of their
Mother the Church: yet are not the Children of God discerned from those of
Satan, but by Charity. If then you desire to live, learn to love: so shall you
be conducted to that City, where there Reigns perfect Charity.

The Prayer.
DEar Father, thou who art perfect Charity; purify my Heart throughout, that I
may prepare a Room therein fitting to entertain thee. Though Charity grow Cold
in the World, let my Desires become so weaned from this present lower Earth,
that my Charity may witness for me, that I am preparing for those upper Regions
of Eternity.

II.
Give me a liberal Heart, that freely Communicating to the necessity of thy
Saints, and constantly relying on thy Promises, through a firm Faith and Hope
reposed in thee, I may at last come unto thee; and of a poor Sinner become an
happy Saint in thy Kingdom; There to sing Alleluja amongst those glorious
Saints and Angels for ever.

Meditation XX. The Souls flight to Heaven.
SO ineffably sweet were these Comforts which I tasted; and so plenteously
flowing were those Fountains, from whence they were derived; that from thence I
gathered, that if there were such Comforts in the days of Mourning, what would
there be in the day of Rejoicing? If such spiritual Delights presented
themselves in a Prison; what incomparable Pleasures might be expected in a
Palace? if such joys in the days of our Captivity, what may be looked for in
that day of Jubilee.

II.
In the Consideration whereof; never did chased Heart long more thirstily after
the Waterbrooks, than my poor wearied Soul did after her Heavenly Bethesda. O
how shrilly, methought, did the Cries of the Saints under the Altar sound in my
Ear? How long! Lord! how long! shall I sojourn in this Pilgrimage of Cares;
this Valley of Tears; and become a Stranger to that inheritance of lasting
Joys; the only sight whereof would make me happy, and from this Wilderness of
sin bring me to the Sinah of Glory!

III.
Unhappy Soul, that I have dwelt with the Inhabitants of Kedar, that my
Habitation is prolonged! For if Holy David, a Man according to God's own Heart,
sometimes said, how much more may I miserable one say, My Soul has been too
long an Inhabitant? Long, and too long, have I sung by those waters of Babylon.
So that now I will say, It is good for me that I have been afflicted; that I
might learn thy Statutes, Psalm. 119.71.

IV.
O Lord had thou never afflicted me; I had never sought to know thee: And now
my Soul melts for heaviness, Psalm. 119.28. not for that thou have afflicted
me, but that my Soul has been so long divided from thee. I have longed too much
after the Onions and Garlic, and Fleshpots of Egypt: but now with gushing
Eyes do I return unto thee, and hope in thy good Pleasure thou will receive me.

V.
I have solemnly engaged my self never to take any more delight in worldly
Vanities, I have suffered too much to be now taken, or delighted with them. And
now after my loathing of these Puddles of Vanity, I have longed after those
ever running Streams of Eternity.

VI.
How has my Soul thirsted after thee; how greatly has my Flesh longed for
thee? my Soul has thirsted after thee, the living Fountain; O when shall I
come, and appear before thee? When will thou come, O my Comforter? and when
shall I receive thee, who art my Hearts desire! O then shall my Soul be
satisfied, when thy Glory shall appear, after which I have so long hungered for.

VII.
Then shall I be filled with the fullness of thine House, after which I have
sighed! then will thou refresh me with the Brook of thy Pleasure, after which I
have thirsted! in the mean time, let my Tears become my Bread Day and Night,
until such time, as my Soul hears those Comfortable words from thee, Son be of
good Cheer, I am the God of thy Salvation.

The Prayer.
O Thou great and Heavenly Shepherd, who did lay down thy precious Life, for
us thy poor Sheep, who were gone astray; feed me with my Sighs, refresh me with
my Sorrows! my Redeemer will doubtlesly come, for he is good: Neither will he
delay his Coming, For he is Gracious, and his Mercy endures for ever.

II.
O hasten thy Coming for thine Elects sake! That at my return to the Land of
innocence and Pleasure, I may eat of the desired Sacrifice of the Supper of the
Lamb, that was slain from the beginning, for the Sins of every sorrowful and
returning Sinner. O grant me Sorrow here, and joy hereafter, through Jesus
Christ, who is my hope, the Resurrection of the dead, the Justifier of a
Sinner, and the Glory of all faithful Souls. Amen.

Meditation XXI. Upon the Misery of humane Life, and Blessedness of eternal
Life.
I Am a Sojourner and a Stranger here, as all my Fathers were, I am tired with
Travel, and long to be at my Journeys end; I am an Inhabitant but with great
Expenses, and greater Danger, this seeming Pleasure has produced me much true
Sorrow, bitter Sighs, and aching Hearts, uneasiness of Body, distraction of
mind; I have importuned for help in this lower World, but can find none, no
Creature on Earth to relieve me, or support me.

II.
I have seen Delights to be folly, and Laughter Distraction, Men of low Estate
to be Vanity, and of high degree fallacious; their Understanding, their
Labors, and help all vain; for who can ransom the Soul of his Brother, or make
an Atonement to God for him? sure Man must let that alone for ever.

III.
My walking Substance is a mere shadow, and my repose unquietness; I endeavor
for Holiness, but cannot attain it; I seek for Happiness, but cannot find it;
Satan beguiles me of it, the World attracts me from it, and my own Soul stands
in opposition to my Contentment. My Understanding defrauds me, my Affections
contrive against me, and my Memory decline; me; those things which I would do,
I cannot perform: and I daily commit those things, which my Conscience checks
me to the contrary. So that all that I am, or can expect to be in this Life is
nothing but Vanity, and Vexation of Spirit.

IV.
And what can my Thoughts raise from this? Or where shall I be comforted? it is
thy Mercy, O Lord, is the only expedient, that can relieve me: thou, O Blessed
Jesus, art unto me Life eternal, and by thy Sufferings, Death is to me an
advantage; while my Body sleeps, it shall rest secure, and that Rest shall be
perfectly Blessed; I shall rest from Labor, Sorrow and Sin; my sleep shall be
safe, and my beatifical Vision happy; while my Body sleeps in the Dust, my Soul
shall awake to Righteousness; when my Soul is dismantled of Flesh, and Flesh of
fading Beauty, my Spirit shall be adorned with the Robes of thy Glory.

V.
While my Dust is driven with the wind upon the Surface of the Earth, my Spirit
shall fly to the highest Heavens; then shall my Eyes be opened, to behold my
Soul with Purity and Perfection; no dark Veil of Nature shall obscure me,
defect of Senses hinder me, or foggy Clouds of sin hover over me; my
Understanding shall be transparent, my Affections pure, and my Memory perfect.
I shall there be fully satisfied in beholding the Spirits of just Men made
perfect, ravished in enjoying the Presence of Angels, and Blessed in retaining
the Divine Goodness.

VI.
There can be nothing wanting, where there is such Perfection; where humane
Happiness is eternally united to the Blessed Trinity, where I am Christ's, and
Christ is God's, and the Holy Comforter abides with us for ever. O most
splendid Condition of my sinful Body, and blessed Change of my immortal Soul,
the one is sown in Corruption, that it may rise immortal; the other lays down
Corruption, to inherit Glory.

VII.
But wretched Sinner, even in this Happiness I am still miserable, I found out
my quiet, but neglect to enjoy it; Death reaches to me a Crown, but I refuse to
accept it; I am so prone to affect my own unhappiness, to delight in Labor,
and complain of Rest; why do I dwell among these Objects of Vanity? the World
loves me not, nor I it: and why do I thus dote upon my Enemy? with its frowns,
it afflicts me, with its Smiles, it betrays me; and there is nothing in it but
Vanity and Misery.

VIII.
Go then out cheerfully, O my Soul, from this dark Prison of thy Body, to that
bright Celestial Palace; there God is thy Father, and Heaven thy Country; thou
art here Forlorn, Poor, Wretched and Naked, dispossessed of Graces, and robbed
of Goodness, thou have there large Treasure, and of great Price, a Heavenly
Mansion, and a goodly Heritage; Christ has long ago purchased it, and is now
gone before to prepare it.

IX.
Here in this Life, thou longest much to behold what thou never saw; but in
the other, are great and glorious things prepared for thee, such as no mortal
Eye has seen, Ear heard, neither can it enter into the Heart of Man to
conceive; how earnestly then should thou long to behold them? and much more
earnestly to enjoy them? how willingly should this make thee say with Holy
David, My Soul is a thirst for God, yea, even for the living God, when shall I
come and appear before the Presence of God?

X.
Alas, Thou art here my Soul, but groping in the dark, daily committing Errors
and Mistakes, every minute stumbling and falling into Sin, Shame and Sorrow; in
great Dangers of the Miseries of humane Life, but in greater Danger of eternal
Torments.

XI.
All that thou can pretend to know here, is to Confess thy self ignorant:
Thou only know things here by their Events, but there thou shall know them,
in their primitive Causes; thou art here tired out in gaining this imperfect,
feeble, and empty Knowledge, there thou shall be delighted in knowing all that
is desirable, by knowing him, in whom are laid up all the Treasures of Wisdom
and Knowledge; these transitory drops of Joys are full of Bitterness; but those
Rivers of eternal Pleasures, flow from the Fountain of eternal Sweetness. Thou
have here the Pomps and Vanities of the wicked World to delight thee; but thou
have there a far greater, and more exceeding weight of Glory to surround thee:
thou art here enclosed by the Misery of Life; but thou art there enlarged, by
the Blessedness of Death.

XII.
Blessed Lord, all this by Grace I know and steadfastly believe, and yet
carnally I am still blind and ignorant, unable to discuss, and unwilling to
desire those things which belong unto my Peace: but when thou with thy precious
Eye Salve, shall once anoint my Eyes, and open them, to behold the Beauty of
thy Heavenly Temple, I shall then ardently affect it, and unfeignedly long for
it; I shall then most readily forsake these brittle Walls of frail Mortality,
to dwell with thee in perfect Holiness and endless Happiness, that Frailty may
be swallowed up by Immortality, and Immortality rewarded by Eternity.

The Prayer.
ALmighty God, which were, and art to come, who have sweetened, and taken away
the Sting of Death, by thy perfect obedience; and have perfumed the Grave, by
the Fragrancy of thy blessed Sufferings, suffer me not in my last hour, for any
Pains of Death, or Terrors of Hell, to fall from thee: let me seriously
consider, that this Life is miserable, and that a happy Death, is truly
Blessed; acquaint me every day with the remembrance of it, and bless me every
hour, with an earnest Desire to it; that I may with willingness cast off all
Sin and Misery, and joyfully put on the Robe of Immortality.

II.
Prepare me, O Lord, for that Blessed hour, and in my greatest Agonies and
Extremities, when all the Comforts of this mortal Life shall fail, then Lord
Jesus forsake me not, neither be thou far from me. Moreover, give me then that
inward Joy, and blessed Comfort of thy Holy Spirit, that may uphold and comfort
me in all the Terrors and Amazements of this dark and obscure Passage, in all
the dreadful Temptations of the Devil, and my own accusing Conscience. Let thy
Spirit witness to my Soul, that I am thy Chosen; purify me, and take away my
Dross, powerfully Protect me by thy saving Grace, so shall I assuredly be made
a Partaker of thy Heavenly Kingdom.

Meditation XXII. In time of Sickness.
HEar my Prayer O Lord, which I make unto thee, upon my Bed of Sickness:
incline thine Ears unto me; in this time of my trouble, O hear me, and that
right soon.

Behold thou have made my days as it were a Span long, and my Age though it be
great in respect of others, yet it is nothing in respect of thee: for verily
every Man living is altogether Vanity.

II.
My days are consumed away like Smoke, and my Bones are burnt up, as it were a
Firebrand.

There is no Health in my Flesh because of thy displeasure, neither is there
any Rest in my Bones, by reason of my Sin.

My wickednesses are gone over my Head, and are a sore burden too heavy for me
to bear.

But I will confess my wickedness, and be sorry for my Sin.

III.
O Lord be merciful unto me, heal my Soul for I have sinned against thee.

Call to remembrance, O Lord, thy tender mercy, and thy loving kindness which
has been ever of Old.

O remember not the Sins of my Youth, nor the Offenses of riper years, but
according to thy mercy think thou upon me.

IV.
Cast me not away in the time of Age, forsake me not now that my strength
fails me.

Go not far from me, O God, my God haste thee to help me.

Thou O God have taught me from my youth up until now: Forsake me not therefore
in my old Age, when I am Gray Headed.

V.
The days of our Age are Threescore years and ten; and though some be so strong
that they come to Fourscore (which is a mercy wherewith thou have Crowned me
thy unworthy Servant) yet is their strength then but Labor and Sorrow, so soon
passes it away and we are gone.

But, Lord, suffer me not to go hence in thy Displeasure; O suffer not my Sun
to go down in thy wrath, nor my days to be shut up in the darkness of thine
Anger.

VI.
But as thou art pleased to bring me to my Grave in a full Age, like as a shock
of Corn comes in his Season; so let me be gathered at last like Wheat into thy
Heavenly Granary.

And let mine Age be renewed as the Eagles in thy Kingdom of Glory.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, World without end. Amen.

VII.
Thou in whose hands are the Keys of the Grave, and the issues of Life and
Death.

Thou in whose Power alone it is to kill, and to make alive, and to bring down
to the Grave, and to raise up again.

Thou who had Compassion upon Peter's Wives Mother, by recovering her out of
a Fever.

Lord if thou will, thou can make me whole.

VIII.
Thou who did show thy mercy to those Daughters of Abraham, the Woman that
for twelve years together was diseased with an Issue of Blood, and another, who
by the space of eighteen years was so bowed together, that she could in no wise
lift up her self, thou did loose both these, and many more from their long
infirmities.

Lord if thou will, thou can make me whole.

IX.
Thou who did restore to Life the young Maiden that was dead, Lord if thou will, thou can restore me to my Health, who am an aged Sinner, and a sick
feeble Creature.

Thou can mitigate my Pains, and renew my Strength, and lengthen my days.

For thou make our Beds in our Sickness, and art the Lord of Life and Health,
and Strength; even thou art the Almighty God and the Horn of my Salvation, O
thou ancient of days.

X.
But, Lord, as for these outward Blessings, I wholly submit my self and them
unto thy good Pleasure.

If it be thy Blessed Will to have the days of my Pilgrimage prolonged upon
Earth, make me to live always to thy Glory, and to my own Souls Comfort: as
thou do add days to my years, so do thou likewise add Repentance to my days.

XI.
But if thou think it more expedient for me, that I should die than live,
then welcome my Death and Dissolution, without which, there is no entering into
Life eternal, nor hopes of being with Christ: Welcome Jesus, who by thy Death
have taken away the Sting of Death: Welcome that Cup, whereof thou my dear
Savior have drank before me, and which, even to the very Dregs, thou have
drank off for me.

XII.
And therefore I will readily take this Cup of Death, which thou have begun
unto me, and Praise the Name of the Lord. I will Praise thy Name O sweet
Savior, who give me this Cup of Death, the Cup of Salvation.

I will Praise thy Name, who have born all our Sicknesses, for us and all our
infirmities.

XIII.
I will Praise thy Name, who art the Physician of Souls, and call all such
unto thee, as are weary and heavy Laden, that thou may refresh them.

Amongst which great number, behold me, O Lord, thy poor and aged, thy weak and
sick Servant; weary in my Bones, and laden with my Sins.

But, Lord, I come unto thee, in obedience to thy Call; and of those that come
near unto thee, thou castest none out. Lord, I come unto thee, for ease and
refreshment.

XIV.
O my beloved Savior Jesus, in the midst of the weariness of my Body, in the
midst of the load and burden of my Sins, in the midst of the Sorrows which are
in my Heart, O let thy Comforts and Consolations refresh my Soul.

XV.
And when the snares of Death compass me round about, let not the Pains of Hell
take hold upon me. But by all the Merits of thy Nativity, Death, Resurrection
and Ascension, I beseech thee to seal unto me, in thine own precious Blood, and
by thy most Holy Spirit, the full-Pardon of all my Sins, and to admit me, who
am thy own Purchase, to a Participation of thy Glory.

A Prayer for a Happy End in time of Sickness.
O Most glorious Jesus, Lamb of God, Fountain of eternal mercy, Life of the
Soul, and Conqueror over Sin and Death, I humbly beseech thee, of thy Goodness
and Compassion, to give me Grace so to employ this transitory Life, in virtuous
and pious Exercises, that when the Day of my Death shall come, in the midst of
all my Pains of Body, I may feel the sweet refreshings of thy Holy Spirit,
Comforting my Soul, and relieving all my spiritual necessities.

II.
Lay no more upon me, than thou shall enable me to bear, and let thy gentle
Correction in this Life, prevent the insupportable Stripes in the World to
come: give me Patience and Humility, and the Grace of Repentance, and an
absolute renouncing of my self, and a Resignation to thy Pleasure and
Providence, with a Power to perform thy Will in all things, and then do what
thou please to me; only in Health or Sickness, in Life or Death, let me feel
thy Comforts refreshing my Soul, and let thy Grace pardon all my Sins. Amen.

Meditation XXIII. Thanksgiving for Ease in Sickness, or Recovery out of it.
BLessed by thy Name, O Lord, for blessing the means which are applied unto me.

It is thy hand, and the help of thy mercy, that thou have relieved me.

The Waters of affliction had long since drowned me, and the Stream of Death
had gone over my Soul, if the Spirit of the Lord had not moved upon these
Waters, and led me forth besides the waters of Comfort.

II.
O spread, most gracious God, according to thy mercy, thy hand upon me for a
Covering; and also enlarge my Heart with Thanksgivings, and fill my Mouth with
thy Praise.

Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me Praise his Holy Name,
who has saved thy Life from Destruction, and Crowned thee with mercy and
loving kindness.

III.
Grant Lord, that what thou have sown in Mercy, may spring up in Duty.

Let my Duty and Returns to thee be so great, as my necessities of thy Mercies
are.

O Let thy Grace so strengthen my purposes of amendment, that I may sin no
more, lest thy threatening return upon me in Anger, and thy sore Displeasure
break me in pieces.

IV.
What am I, O Lord? what is the Life, and what are the Capacities of thy
Servant, that thou should do thus unto me?

Praised be the Lord daily, even the Lord that helps us, and pours his
Benefits upon us.

He is our God, even the God from whom comes Salvation; God is the Lord by
whom we escape Death.

V.
In the midst of the Sorrows which were in my Heart, thy Comforts O Lord, have
refreshed my Soul.

It is thou, O Lord, who have made my Flesh and my Bones to rejoice.

Behold, happy is the Man whom God Corrects; therefore despise not the
chastising of the Almighty.

VI.
For he makes sore and binds up; he wounds, and his hands make whole.

In the midst of Judgment, he remembers Mercy.

Lord thou have lifted up the light of thy Countenance upon me.

Yea, Lord, thou have put gladness into my Heart; O be thou pleased graciously
to add Thankfulness to it.

VII.
I will lay me down in Peace, and take my Rest, for it is thou Lord only which
make me dwell in safety.

O Lord, I give thee humble and hearty thanks, for thy great and almost
miraculous bringing me back from the bottom of my Grave; what thou have further
for me to do or suffer, thou alone know.

VIII.
Lord give me Patience and Courage, and all Christian resolution to do thee
Service; replenish me evermore with thy Grace, to submit to thy Holy Will; and
let me not live longer than to Honor thee, through Jesus Christ.

Lord I have been sick and feeble, and thou have recovered my strength; I am
very aged and greatly stricken in years, yet thou art still pleased to add unto
my days; sanctify therefore, good Lord, the remainder of my Life, and sweeten
unto me the approaches of my Death.

A Prayer of Thanksgiving.
MOst Gracious God, whose mercy is as high as the Heavens, and whose truth
reaches unto the Clouds; thy Mercies are as great and many as the moments of
Eternity; thou have opened wide thy hand of Providence to fill me with
Blessings, and the sweet Effects of thy loving kindness; fill my Soul with
great apprehensions, and impresses of thy unspeakable Mercies; that my
Thankfulness may be as great, as my necessity of Mercies are.

II.
O Lord, thou have heard my Prayers, and have broken in sunder the Bonds of
Sickness, and have delivered my Soul from trouble and heaviness; thou have
snatched me from the snares of Death, and saved me from the Pains of Hell. O
let my Soul rest in thee, and be satisfied in the Pleasures of thy mercy, that
when thou shall call all the whole Universe to judgment, from the rising of the
Sun to the going down thereof, I may in thy Heavenly Kingdom sing Praises to
thee, for evermore, Amen.

Meditation XXIV. Comfortable refreshments at the hour of Death, to be used by
those who are present.
GOd so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life, John 3.16.

If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the Propitiation for our Sins, and not for ours only, but
for the Sins of the whole World, 1 John 2.1, 2.

II.
Verily, verily I say unto you, he that hears my Word, and believes in him
that sent me, has everlasting Life, and shall not come into Condemnation: but
is passed from Death unto Life, John 5.24.

All that the Father gives me shall come unto me, and him that comes to me, I
will in no wise cast out, John 6.37.

III.
Why art thou so full of heaviness, O my Soul, and why art thou so disquieted
within me, put thy trust in God, for I will yet give him thanks for the help of
his Countenance, Psalm. 42.6.

In my Fathers House are many Mansions, John 14.2.

What things were Gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ, Phil. 3.7.

IV.
For our Conversation is in Heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior,
the Lord Jesus Christ.

Who shall Change our vile Body, that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious Body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all
things unto himself, Phil. 3.20, 21.

I press toward the Mark for the price of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus, Phil. 3.14.

V.
Set your Affections on things above, not on things of the Earth.

For ye are dead, and your Life is hid with Christ.

When Christ, who is our Life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him
in Glory, Colos. 3.2.3.

In whom we have Redemption through his Blood, even the forgiveness of our
Sins, Col. 1.14.

VI.
If in this Life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all Men most miserable,
1 Cor. 15.19.

For we know, that if our earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we
have a building of God, an House not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens.

For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our House,
which is from Heaven, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2.

For our light Affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding eternal weight of Glory.

The things which are seen, are temporal; but the things which are not seen are
eternal, 1 Cor. 4.17, 18.

VII.
I am in a great Strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with
Christ, which is far better.

For to me to live is Christ, and to die is Gain, Phil. 1.21.

Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus, Phil. 2.5.

None of us lives to himself, and no Man dies to himself.

For whether we live, we live unto the Lord: and whether we die, we die unto
the Lord: Whether we live therefore or die, we are the Lord's, Romans 14.7, 8.

VIII.
I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, write; from henceforth Blessed
are the dead, which die in the Lord; even so says the Spirit, for they rest
from their Labors, Rev. 14.13.

I am the Resurrection and the Life, says the Lord: He that believes in me,
though he were dead, yet shall he live, and whosoever lives, and believes in
me shall never die, John 11.

I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon
the Earth. And though after my Skin worms destroy this Body; yet in my Flesh
shall I see God: whom I shall see for my self, and my Eyes shall behold, and
not another, Job 19.25, 26, 27.

IX.
We brought nothing into this World and it is certain, we can carry nothing
out. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away; Blessed be the Name of the
Lord, 1 Timothy 6.7. Job 1.21.

O Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory?

The Sting of Death is Sin, and the Strength of Sin is the Law.

But thanks be to God, which gives us the Victory, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57.

Lord, now let thy Servant depart in Peace according to thy word, and, receive
his Soul into thy Fatherly Protection. Amen.

A Prayer for a sick Person, when there appear small hopes of Recovery.
O Father of Mercies, and God of all Comfort, our only help in time of need; we
fly unto thee for Succor in behalf of this thy Servant, here lying under thy
hand, in great weakness of Body. Look graciously upon him, O Lord; and the more
the outward Man decays, strengthen him, we beseech thee, so much the more
continually with thy Grace and Holy Spirit in the inner Man.

II.
Give him unfeigned Repentance for all the Errors of his Life past, and
steadfast Faith in thy Son Jesus, that his Sins may be done away by thy mercy,
and his Pardon sealed in Heaven, before he go hence, and be no more seen. We
know, O Lord, that there is no word impossible with thee; and that if thou will, thou can even yet raise him up, and grant him a longer continuance
amongst us.

III.
Yet, forasmuch, as in all appearance the time of his Dissolution draws near,
so fit and prepare him, we beseech thee, against the hour of Death, that after
his Departure hence in Peace, and in thy Favor, his Soul may be received, into
thine everlasting Kingdom through the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ,
thine only Son, our Lord and Savior. Amen.

A Commendatery Prayer for a sick Person, at the Point of Departure.
O Almighty God, with whom do live the Spirits of just Men made perfect, after
they are delivered from their earthly Prisons; we humbly commend the Soul of
this thy Servant, our dear Brother, into thy hands, as into the hands of a
faithful Creator, and most merciful Savior; most humbly beseeching thee, that
it may be precious in thy sight.

II.
Wash it, we pray thee, in the Blood of that immaculate Lamb that was slain, to
take away the Sins of the World; that whatsoever Defilements it may have
contracted in the midst of this miserable and naughty World, through the Lusts
of the Flesh, or the Wiles of Satan, being purged and done away, it may be
presented pure, and without spot before thee.

III.
And teach us, who survive, in this and other like daily Spactacles of
Mortality, to see how frail, and uncertain our own Condition is, and so to
number our days, that we may seriously apply our Hearts to that Holy and
Heavenly Wisdom whilst we live here, which may in the end bring us to Life
everlasting, through the Merits of Jesus Christ thine only Son our Lord and
Savior. Amen.

Meditation XXV. Of the uncertainties of our Lives, and that we ought always to
be prepared for Death.
HOw many ways are there, whereby to frustrate the intents and ends of Nature?
How many are there buried before their Birth? how many Men's Cradles become
their Graves? how many rising Suns are set, almost as soon as they are risen?
and overtaken in darkness in the very dawning of their days? how many are
there, like good King Josias, like righteous Abel, and Enoch, who are taken
away speedily from amongst the wicked, as it were in the Zenith or Vertical
Point of their Strength and Luster?

II.
It is in every Man's Power to be Master of our Lives, who is but able to
despise his own; nay, it is in every ones Power who can but wink, to turn our
Beauty into darkness; and in times of Pestilence, how many are there can look
as dead, by an Arrow shot out of the Eye into the Heart? For one single way of
coming into the World, how many are there to go out of it before our time? (I
mean before Nature is wasted within us.) Many are sent out of the World, by the
Difficulties and Hardships of coming in.

III.
We are easily cut off, by eating and drinking, the very Instruments and Means
of Life. Not to speak of those greater Slaughters, which are commonly committed
by Sword and Famine, (which yet must both give place to surfeit,) Death may
possibly fly to us, as once to Aeschylus, in an Eagles Wing, or we may easily
swallow Death, as Anacreon did in a Grape.

IV.
We may be murdered, like Homer, with a fit of Grief: or fall, like Pindarus,
by our Repose: we may become a Sacrifice, as Philemon of old, to a little Jest.
Or else as Sophecles, to a witty Sentence. We may be eaten up of Worms, like
mighty Herod, or prove a Feast for the Rats, like him of Mentz.

V.
A Man may vomit out his Soul, as Sulla did in a fit of Rage; or else like
Coma, may force it backwards. He may perish by his Strength, as did Polydamas
and Milo. Or he may die, like Thalna, by the very excess of his Enjoyment. He
may be Provender for his Horses, like Diomedes: or Provision for his Hounds,
like Actaeon and Lucian. Or else like Tullus Hostillius, he may be burnt up
quick with a flash of Lightning.

VI.
Or if there were nothing from without, which could violently break off our
thread of Life, (and which being a slender thread is very easily cut asunder)
we have a thousand intestine Enenemies to dispatch us speedily from within,
there is hardly any thing in the Body, but furnishes matter for a Disease.

VII.
There is not an Artery or Vein, but is a Room in Natures Workhouse, wherein
our Humors as so many Cyclops's are forging those Instruments of Mortality,
which every moment of our Lives are able to sweep us into our Graves: an
ordinary Apoplexy, or a little Impostune in the Brain, or a sudden Rising of
the Lights, is enough to make a Man Die in Health; and may Lodge him in Heaven
or Hell, before he has the Leisure to cry for Mercy.

The Prayer.
THou did make us for thy self, O Lord, and when we by our Sins and Follies
had for ever lost thee, thou did restore us to thy self again, that we might
not be eternally deprived of thee our only good: O fill us with perpetual
Meditations of thy Love: Let those Joys which are so much above our thoughts be
ever in them; let our inability to comprehend the Happiness of thy Kingdom,
heighten the Piety of our Ambition after it more, that we may walk in some
measure worthy of so Divine a Purchase.

II.
Prepare us with all those Heavenly Graces that may entitle us to it, and with
all those spiritual Desires that may make us breath and long after it; that so
our Hearts being there before, we our selves may come after, and being
transported in our Desires, may be also in our Persons, to everlasting
Enjoyments; and as our Lives are uncertain in this World, grant that we may be
ready prepared, that Death comes not upon us unawares. Amen.

Meditation XXVI. On the Frailties of our Lives.
OUr Houses of Clay, as Eliphaz the Temanite, fitly calls them, Job 4.19. seem
as false and frail, as the Apples of Sodom; which being specious to the Eye,
did fall to Crumbles by every Touch. The Frame of our Building is not only so
frail, but (as some have thought.) so ridiculous, that if we Contemplate the
Body of Man in his Condition of Mortality, and by reflecting upon the Soul, do
thereby prove it to be Immortal, we shall be tempted to stand amazed at the
inequality of the Match: but to wonder at our Frailty, were but to wonder that
we are Men.

II.
Yet sure if We, that is our Souls, (for our Bodies are so far from being Us,
that we can hardly call them Ours,) are not capable of Corruption, our Bodies
were not intended for our Husbands, but for our Houses, whose Doors will either
be open, that we may go forth, or whose building will be Ruinous, that needs we
must; we cannot, by any means possible, make it the place; for though our
Bodies, as says our Savior, are not so Glorious as the Lilies, yet, says
Job, they are as frail.

III.
And by that time, with David, they wax old as does a Garment, how earnestly,
with St. Paul, shall we groan to be clothed upon! 2 Cor. 5.2. to be clothed
with New Apparel, whilst the Old is as 'twere turning? For when Christ shall
come in the Clouds with his Holy Angels, at once to restore, and reform our
Nature, He shall change our vile Bodies, that they may be changed like unto his
Glorious Body.

IV.
But here I speak of what it is, not what it shall be; though it shall be
Glorious, yet now it is Vile; though it shall be Immortal, yet now it is fading;
though it shall be a long Life, it is now a short one; it is indeed so short,
and withal so uncertain, that we bring our years to an end, like a Tale that is
told, Psalm. 90.9.

V.
Death comes so hastily upon us, that we never can see it, till we are Blind.
We cannot but know, that it is short, for we fade away suddenly like the Grass;
and yet we know not how short it is, for we pray that God will teach us to
number our days, Psalm. 90.12.

VI.
This we know without teaching; that even then when we were born, we began to
draw toward our end, Wis. 5.13. whether sleeping, or waking, we are always
flying upon the Wings of Time; even this very moment, does set us well on
toward our Journeys end; whether we are Worldly, and therefore study to keep
Life; or Malcontents, and therefore weary of its Possession; the King of
Terrors, will not fail, either to meet, or overtake us.

VII.
And whilst we are Traveling to the very same Country, (I mean the Land of
Forgetfulness, without considering it, as an Antichamber to Heaven or Hell,)
although we walk thither in several Roads; it is plain that he who lives
longest, goes but the farthest way about, and that he who dies soonest, goes
the nearest way home.

VIII.
I remember it was a Humor, I know not whether of a Cruel, or Capricious
Emperor, to put a Tax upon Child-births; to make it a thing exciseable, for a
Man to be born of a Woman. As if he had farmed God's Custom-house, he made
every Man Fine, for being a Man; a great instance of his Cruelty, and as good
an Emblem of our Frailty; our State of Pilgrimage upon Earth.

IX.
For we arrive at this World, as at a Foreign and strange Country; where I am
sure it is Proper, although not Just, that we pay Toll for our very Landing,
and then being Landed, we are such transitory Inhabitants, that we do not so
properly dwell here as sojourn.

X.
All the Meat we take in is at God's Ordinary; and even the Breath which we
drink, is not ours, but his, (which when he takes away, we die, and are turned
again into our Dust.) insomuch that to expire, is no more in Effect, then to be
honest: to pay back a Life, which we did but borrow.

The Prayer.
THou have brought us from nothing, O Lord, that we might see thy Salvation;
that we who might have been for ever without thee, might through the knowledge
of thy self be made Partakers of thy Glory.

II.
O enliven us, that we may give up our selves wholly to thy Service, and
perpetually study to do something to the Honor of thy Name, that we may not
throw away those Souls on the Vanities of the World, which thou have given us
for thy self, and to be employed in thy Service: But that, sacrificing our
Wills to thine, and our Lives to a perfect Love of thee, we may find that joy
which accompanies thy Grace here, and that Glory which knows no end or change
hereafter in thy Presence for evermore. Amen.

Meditation XXVII. That Death frees us from the Vexations, Troubles and Cares
of this mortal Life.
A Short Life and a Merry, is that which many Men applaud, but as the Son of a
Woman, has but a few days to live, so even those few days are full of trouble.
And indeed so they are, in whatsoever Condition a Man is placed: for if he is
Poor, he has the trouble of Pains, to get the Goods of this World.

II.
If he is Rich, he has the trouble of Care, to keep his Riches; the trouble of
Avarice, to increase them; the trouble of Fear to lose them; the trouble of
Sorrow when they are lost. And so his Riches can only make him the more
illustriously Happy.

III.
If he lives as he ought, he has the trouble of Self-denials; the trouble of
mortifying the Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts, Col. 3.5. the trouble of
being in Deaths often, 2 Cor. 11.23. the trouble of Crucifying himself, Romans
6.6. and of dying daily, 1 Cor. 15.31.

IV.
If to avoid those Troubles, he lives in Pleasure, as he ought not, he has the
trouble of being told, that he is Dead whilst he lives, 1 Timothy 5.6. the trouble
to think that he must die; Eccles. 41.1. the trouble to Fear, (whilst he is
dying) that he must Live when he is Dead, that he may die eternally.

V.
Not to speak of those Troubles which a Man suffers in his Nonage, by being
weaned from the Breast, and by breeding Teeth; in his Boy-age and Youth, by the
bearing the yoke of Subjection, and the rigid Discipline of the Rod; in his
Manhood and riper years, by making Provision for all his Family, as Servant
General to the whole.

VI.
Not to speak of those Troubles, which flow in upon him from every quarter,
whether by Losses, or Affronts, Contempts or Envying, by the Anguish of some
Maladies, and by the Loathsomeness of others; rather than want matter of
trouble, he will be most of all troubled, that he has nothing to vex him.

VII.
In his sober Intervals and Fits, when he considers that he must die, and
begins to cast up the Account of his Sins, it will be some trouble to him, that
he is without Chastisement, whereby he knows he is a Bastard and not a Son,
Heb. 12.8.

VIII.
It will disquiet him not a little, that he lives at rest in his Possessions;
and become his great Cross, that he has Prosperity in all things. Not only the
Sting and the Stroke, but the very remembrance of Death will be bitter to him;
So says Jesus the Son of Sirach, Wisd. 4.1. Verse 1.

The Prayer.
ANd yet how hardly can we endure even the smallest trouble for thy sake, O
Lord? So insensible are we of thy Goodness, so forgetful of thy Power, that we
do not only in our wants condemn and accuse thy Providence, but are ready even
to turn Infidels in our misfortunes.

II.
Make us therefore O Lord, to see the Vanity both of the World and our own
Hearts, the Pleasures of it may neither drown, nor the Crosses of it deject our
Hope or discourage our obedience. Let that Glory which thou have promised to
those that conquer the World for thy sake, be ever in our Eye; that so, in what
Condition soever we are in, we may still be found Crowned and Triumphing in
Faith; above all the Troubles and Vexations of this World.

Meditation XXVIII. That many have desired Death, rather than Life.
MAn that is born of a Woman, is so full of trouble to the Brim, that many
times it overflows him. On one side or other, we all are troubled, but some are
troubled on every side, 2 Cor. 4.8. insomuch that they themselves, are the
greatest trouble unto themselves; and it is a kind of Death to them, they cannot
die.

II.
We find King David so Sick of Life, as to fall into a wishing for the Wings of
a Dove, that so his Soul, might fly away from the great impediments of his
Body. He Confessed, that his days were at the longest but a Span, Psalm. 39.5.
and yet complained they were no shorter.

III.
It seems that Span was as the Span of a withered hand; which the farther he
stretched out, the more it grieved him. He was weary of his groaning, Psalm.
6.6. his Soul did pant after Heaven, Psalm. 42.1. and even thirsted after God,
Verse 2. and he might once more have cried (though in another Sense) Woe is me,
that I am constrained to dwell with Mesech, and to have my Habitation among the
Tents of Kedar!

IV.
I Remember that Charedemus compared Man's Life to a Feast, or Banquet. And I
the rather took notice of it, because the Prophet Elijah did seem (in some
Sense) to have made it good. Who after a first or second Course (as I may say)
of living, as if he had surfeited of Life, Cried out in haste, it is enough;
and with the very same breath, desired God to take away; for so says the
Scripture, 1 King. 19.14.

V.
He went into the Wilderness (a solitary place, and there he sat under a
Juniper Tree, (in a Melancholy posture) and requested of God, that he might
die (in a very disconsolate and doleful manner) even pouring forth his Soul in
these melting Accents, It is enough now, O Lord, take away my Life, for I am no
better than my Fathers.

VI.
And if Elijah's days were full of Trouble, how were Job's overwhelmed, and
running over with his Calamities? when the Terrors of God did set themselves
in array against him, Job 6.4. how did he long for Destruction; Verse 8, 9. O
(says he) that I might have my request, that God would grant me the thing that
I long for! Even that it would please him to destroy me, that he would let
loose his hand, and cut me off.

VII.
How did he Curse the day, the day of his Birth, and the Night wherein he was
Conceived? Job 3.1, 3, 4, 5. etc. Let that Day be darkness, let the shadow of
Death stain it, let a Cloud dwell upon it, let Blackness terrify it. And for
the Night let it not be joined to the days of the year. Let the Stars of the
Twilight thereof be darkened; neither let it see the dawning of the Day.

VIII.
And what was his reason for this unkindness to that particular Day and Night,
save that they brought upon him the Trouble of being a Man born of a Woman: For
we find him complaining a little after, Why died I not from the Womb! why did I
not give up the Ghost, when I came out of the Belly? Job 3.11, 12.

IX.
And then for the Life of our Blessed Savior, who is called by way of
Eminence, the Son of Man; and as his Life was short, so it was full of Trouble.
He was called, vir Dolorum, a Man of Sorrows, and was acquainted with grief,
Isa. 53.3. for the whole Tenor of his Life was a Continuation of his
Calamities.

The Prayer.
O Lord, though perhaps I am not so bad as some; yet I am so bad in my self,
that the Leper in the Gospel is a Beauty to my Soul, Lazarus's Corpse a
Comeliness to my Sores; yet were I more impotent than the Cripple of Bethesda,
more Leprous than the nine, whose Ingratitude was more loathsome than their
Disease; were those Legions, ejected by thy word, received in me, were I as bad
as Satan could wish to make me: yet I know thy Goodness, and I do not doubt thy
Power, but thou can cleanse me and ease me of all my Troubles, Vexations and
Infirmities; and bring me at last to thy Heavenly Kingdom. Amen.

Meditation XXIX. Of improving our Time.
IF Man's time be but short, it concerns us to take up the Prayer of David,
Psalm. 39.4. that God would Teach us to know our End, and the number of our
days, that we, like Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20.6. may be fully certified how short
our time is. It concerns us to take up the Resolution of Job, 14.2. all the
days of our appointed time, incessantly to wait till our Change comes.

II.
It concerns us, not to say with the rich Man in the Parable, Luke 12.18. We
will pull down our Barns and build greater, and there we will bestow all our
Fruits and our Goods. Much less may we say with that other Worlding, Verse 19.
Souls take your ease, eat, drink and be merry, for ye have much Goods laid up
for many years: For alas! how can we know, silly Creatures as we are, but that
this very Night, yea this very minute, either they may be taken from us, or we
from them? there is such a Fadingness on their Parts, and such a Fickleness on
ours.

III.
But rather it concerns us to say with Job, Chap. 1.21. Naked came we into the
World, and naked shall we go out of it. Or rather yet, it concerns us to say
with David, Psalm. 39.12. That we are Strangers upon Earth, and but so many
Sojourners, as all our Fathers were; for whilst we consider we are but
Strangers, we shall, as Strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly Lusts,
which war against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2.12. Heb. 11.13.

IV.
And so long as we remember we are but Sojourners upon Earth, we shall pass the
time of our Sojourning here in fear. And behaving our selves, among the
Gentiles as a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an Holy Nation, a peculiar
People, we shall show forth his Praise, who has called us out of Darkness into
his mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.9.12.

V.
Next let us consider, that since our Life is uncertain, as well as short, it
concerns us immediately, to Labor hard in the improvement of this our Span
into Eternity; to employ our very short and uncertain time, in making a
seasonable Provision against them both; I mean its shortness, and its
uncertainty.

VI.
For shall we be lavish even of that, which is so easily Lost, and of which we
have so very little, and every minute of which little, does carry such a weight
with it, as will be either a kind of Pulley to help to raise us up to Heaven,
or else a Clogg to pull us down to the lowest Hell? of whatsoever we may be
wasteful, we ought to be Chary of our time, which does incontinently perish,
and will eternally be reckoned on our Account.

VII.
Now the way to provide against the shortness of our Life, is so to live as to
die, to the greatest advantage to be imagined; so to die, as to live for ever.
What Tobit said to Tobias, Tob. 4.21. in respect of wealth, [ Fear not my Son,
that we are made poor, for thou have much wealth, if thou fear God, and depart
from all sin, and do that which is pleasing in his sight.] He might have said
as well in respect of Wisdom, and by Consequence as well in respect of long
Life. For as the Fear of the Lord is solid Wisdom, and to depart from evil is
understanding, Job 28.28. So honorable Age is; not that which stands in the
length, nor that is measured by number of years, but Wisdom is the Grayhair
unto Men, and an unspotted Life is old Age, Wisd. 4.8, 9.

VIII.
To be devoted like Anna, to the House of God, so as to serve him Night and Day
with Fasting and Prayer, Luke 2.37. and not to Content our selves with that
which is merely lawful, or barely enough to serve turn, but to study the things
that are more excellent, to strain hard toward Perfection, to forget those
things that are behind, and to reach forth unto those things that are before,
pressing on toward the Mark, for the price of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.13, 14.

IX.
This is to amplify our lives, and to frustrate the Malice of our Mortality;
and as the want of Stature, many times is supplied in thickness; so this is to
live a great deal in the little time of our Duration.

The Prayer.
STrengthen us therefore, O Lord, against the Vanities of the World, and raise
up our Thoughts to the Contemplation of thy Glory, level in us every proud
Thought that dares exalt it self against the Power and Purity of thy Law; and
sanctify us for thy self and thy Service more, that the Practice of a Holy
Life may be, as it ought, our chiefest Employment, that so when we depart
hence, we may be received to thee, and being seen no more here, we may behold
thee in thy Heavenly Kingdom. Amen.

Meditation XXX. Motives not to defer our Repentance, to a future time.
TO provide against the uncertainty of our time, the way to do that, is to
distrust the future, and to lay hold upon the present; so to live every hour,
as if we were not to live the next. Having a short time to live, our time to
repent cannot be long. And not assured of the morrow, it is madness not to
repent to day: when we see many Persons of the most promising Countenances, and
the most prosperous Constitutions, not only snatched away by an early, but
sudden Death, Why should we not seriously consider, that we may be of their
number, having no Promise to the contrary, either within or without us?

II.
What happens to any Man, may happen to every Man; every Man being surrounded
with the same measures of Montality. It Is true indeed, that we may live till we
are Old; but it is as true, that we may die whilst we are Young; and therefore
the latter Possibility should as well prevail with us for a dispatch of our
Repentance, as the former too too often prevails upon us for a delay.

III.
Nay if we procrastinate our Repentance, in hope of living till we are Old. How
much rather should we precipitate it, for fear of dying whilst we are Young?
(if yet it were possible, to precipitate so good and necessary a work, as a
solid, impartial, sincere Repentance.)

IV.
For as to repent whilst we are Young, can never do us the least prejudice; so
it may probably do us the greatest harm, to post it off till we are Old: Nay,
it may cost us the loss of Heaven, and a sad Eternity in Hell, if we defer our
Repentance (I do not say till we are Old, but if we defer it) being Young, till
one day older than now we are.

V.
And shall we defer it beyond to day, because we may do it as well to morrow?
This is madness unexpressible. For as it is true, that we may, so it is as true,
that we may not. Our knowledge of the one, is just as little as of the other.
(Or rather our ignorance is just as much) and shall we dare to tempt God, by
presuming upon that which we do not know?

VI.
Are Heaven and Hell such trivial things, as to be put to a bare adventure?
Shall we play for Salvation, as 'twere by fillipping Cross or Pile? implicitly
saying within our selves, If we live till the morrow, we will repent and be
saved; but if we die before Night, we will die in our Sins, and be damned for
ever.

VII.
Shall we reason within our selves, that though we know our own Death, may be
as sudden as other Men's, yet we will put it to the venture, and make no doubt
but to fare, as well as hitherto we have done? What is this, but to dally with
the Day of Judgment, or to bewray our dis-belief, that there is any such thing?
its true, we may live until the morrow, and so on the morrow we may repent.

VIII.
But what is this to the purpose, that it is certain enough we may, whilst it is
as doubtful, whether we shall? is it not good to make sure of Happiness, by
repenting seriously at present, rather than let it lie doubtful, by not
repenting until anon? Methinks we should easily be persuaded to espouse that
Course, which we are thoroughly convinced does tend the most to our advantage.

IX.
When the rich Worldling in the Parable, Luke 12.22. was speaking Placentia to
his Soul, Soul take thine ease, alleging no other Reason, than his having much
Goods for many years; nothing is fitter to be observed, than our Savior's
words upon that occasion, Stulte, thou Fool, this Night shall thy Soul be
required of thee; then whose shall those things be, which thou have provided?

X.
However the Men of this World, have quite another measure of Wit, and do
esteem it the greatest prudence to take their Pleasure whilst they are Young,
reserving the work of Mortification for times of Sickness, and old Age, when
'twill be easy to leave their Pleasures, because their Pleasures will leave
them: yet in the Judgment of God the Son, the Word and Wisdom of the Father,
It Is the part of a Block-head, and a Fool, to make Account of more years, than
he is sure of days or hours.

XI.
He is a Sot, as well as a Sinner, who does adjourn and shift off the Amendment
of his Life, perhaps till twenty or thirty, or forty years after his Death.
It Is true indeed, that Hezekiah, whilst he was yet in the Confines and Skirts
of Death, had a Lease of Life granted no less than fifteen years long; but he
deferred not his Repentance one day the longer, 2 Kings 20.6.

XII.
And shall we adventure to live an hour in an impenitent Estate, who have not a
Lease of Life promised, no not so much as an hour? shall we dare enter into our
Beds, and sleep securely any one Night, not thinking how we may awake, whether
in Heaven or in Hell? we know it is timely Repentance, which must secure us of
the one, and it is final impenitence which gives us assurance of the other.

XIII.
What the Apostle of the Gentiles has said of wrath, may be as usefully spoken
of every other provoking Sin, Ephesians. 4.6. Let not the Sun go down upon it. Let
us not live in any Sin until the Sun is gone down, because we are far from
being sure we shall live till Sunrising.

XIV.
How many Professors go to sleep, (when the Sun is gone down, and the Curtains
of the Night are drawn about them,) in a State of Drunkenness or Adultery, in a
State of Avarice or Malice, in a State of Sacrilege or Rebellion, in a State
of Deceitfulness and Hypocrisy, without the least Consideration, how short a
time they have to live, and how very much shorter than they imagine?

XV.
Yet unless they believe the y can Dream devoutly, and truly repent when they
are sleeping, they cannot but know they are damned for ever, if the Day of the
Lord shall come upon them as a Thief in the Night, and catch them napping in
their impieties, 1 These. 5.2.4. 2 Pet. 3.10.

XVI.
Consider this all ye that forget God, lest he pluck you away, and there be
none to deliver you, Psalm. 50.22. Consider it all ye that forget your selves,
that forget how few your days are, and how full of Misery. Consider your Bodies
from whence they came; and consider your Souls, whither they are going.
Consider your Life is in your Breath, and your Breath is in your Nostrils; and
that in the management of a moment, (for the better, or for the worse) there
depends either a joyful, or a sad Eternity.

XVII.
If our time indeed were certain as well as short (or rather if we were
certain, how short it is,) there might be some Color, or Pretense, for the
putting off of our Reformation. But since we know not at what hour our Lord
will come, Matthew. 24.42, 43, 44. this should mightily engage us, to be hourly
standing upon our watch, Hab. 2.1.

XVIII.
Next let us consider, that if our days, which are few, are as full of trouble;
it should serve to make us less fond of Living, and less devoted to
Selfpreservation, and less afraid of the Cross of Christ, when our Faith shall
be called to the severest Trials.

XIX.
O Death, (says the Son of Sirach, Eccles. 41.2.) acceptable is thy Sentence
to the Needy, and to him that is vexed with all things. The troubles incident
to Life, have made the bitter in Soul to long for Death, and to rejoice
exceedingly when they have found the Grave, Job 3.20, 21, 22.

XX.
If the Empress Barbara had been Orthodox, in believing Men's Souls to be just
as mortal as their Bodies, Death at least would be capable of this Applause and
Commendation, that it puts a Conclusion to all our Troubles.

XXI.
If we did not fear him, Who can cast both Body and Soul into Hell, Matthew.
10.27, 28. We should not need to fear them, Who can destroy the Body only;
because there is no Inquisition in the Grave, Eccles. 41.4. There the wicked
cease from troubling: And there the weary are at rest. There the Prisoners lie
down with Kings and Counselors of the Earth. The Servant there is free from
his Master. There is sleep and still silence, nor can they hear the voice of
the Oppressor, Job 3.14, 17, 18, 19.

The Prayer.
O Lord God of my Salvation, thou have delivered me from the Captivity and
Bondage of Sin and Misery, fill my Heart with holy Sorrow and Compunction
whenever I trespass against thee; and teach me so to deny my self, to mortify
my Affections, to crucify my Lusts and all the Temptations of the Flesh, that
I going on my way Mourning and Weeping, despising the Pleasures of this Life,
may (when thy great Harvest shall come, and thy Reapers the Angels shall
separate the Wheat from the Tares) come before thee with Joy, and escape
everlasting Burnings, through the Mercies of Jesus Christ. Amen.

Meditation XXXI. The Sick Man's last Will and Testament.
IN the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, I a poor Sinner, of sound and
perfect Memory: being daily read in the Lecture of Man's Mortality, how all
Flesh is Grass, and the Beauty thereof as the Flower of the Field; which this
day flourishes, to morrow withers: and that it is every Chriftian's Duty to
Prepare himself before Death come, lest it find him unprovided at such time as
it shall approach.

II.
Moved I say, with these Considerations, I have here made this my last Will and
Testament as follows. First, I bequeath my Soul into the hands of my gracious
Redeemer, by whose most precious Blood I was Ransomed: and by whose Merits and
Mercies I hope to be Glorified.

III.
And forasmuch as there was no safety out of the Ark; nor no Salvation now
without the pale of the Church, figured by the Ark: and that the Tares from the
Wheat must be severed: And the Sheep and the Goats must not into one Fold be
gathered.

IV.
Here in the Presence of God, and his Holy Angels; for the discharge of my own
Conscience, and the Satisfaction of others, who, perchance, have in their
Opinions been divided, doubting much how I in Points of Religion stood
affected; do I make a free and public Confession of my Faith: Being that
Cement by which we are knit unto her, and made Members of her.

V.
I believe the Holy Catholic Church, to be the Communion of the Faithful,
whereof I desire to live and die a Member: to suffer for which I should account
it an Honor: holding this ever for a Principle; that none can have God for his
Father, that will not take this Holy Spouse, the Church, for his Mother.

VI.
There is no Article in the Apostles Creed, which I do not believe for
Catholic and Orthodoxal, with the Exposition thereof, and every Clause or
Particle thereof in such manner, as it has been universally received by the
Holy Catholic Church, and holds in Consent or Harmony with the Holy Scripture,
the Christians Armor; by which, and the constant Practice of Piety, every
faithful Soldier of Christ may be enabled to pull down those strong Holds of
his spiritual Enemy: and by Possessing his Soul in Patience, obtain a glorious
Victory.

VII.
With all due Reverence I esteem of those two Sacraments; Baptism, and the
Lord's Supper, the one to cleanse and purify us at our entering: the other to
strengthen and sanctify us Living: and to glorify our Souls at their
departing. As with my Heart, I believe unto Righteousness, so with my Mouth, do
I confess unto Salvation.

VIII.
Neither do I profess my self such a Solifidian, asto hold Faith sufficient to
Salvation without Works: Neither such a Champion for good Works, as to hold
Works effectual without Faith. As Faith is the Root, so are Works the Fruit.
These are ever to go hand in hand together: otherwise that fearful Curse which
our blessed Savior sometimes pronounced upon the barren Fig Tree, must be
their Censure.

IX.
And now in this day of my Change, as in this Confidence I have ever lived; so
my Trust is that in the same I shall dye: that in the Resurrection of my
Savior Christ Jesus is my Hope: And in his Ascension is my Glory. For, I
believe that my Redeemer lives, and that with these Eyes I shall see him.

X.
And having thus returned a due Account of my belief; my next thing is, to
remember that Message returned by Isaiah the Son of Amos to Hezekiah: set thine
House in Order, for thou shall die, 2 Kings 20.1. for it is a Maxim, when the
outward part is orderly disposed, the inward cannot choose but be better
prepared.

XI.
To remove then from me, the Cares of this present Life, that I may take a more
willing adieu of the World before I leave it, weaning my desires from it, by
addressing my self to a better: for live he cannot in the Land of the living,
who prepares not himself for it before his arriving.

XII.
And now my Worldly Cares are drawn near unto their Period. Seeing then I am
sailing toward my Harbor; let me strike Anchor: that taking the Wings of the
Morning, I may fly to the Bosom of my dear Redeemer: go forth then my Soul,
what fear thou? Go forth, why tremblest thou? thou have had enough of these
Worldly Pleasures; for what foundst thou there but Anguish? turn then thy Face
to the Wall, and think of the I and of Promise.

XIII.
Thou have now but a little time left thee: the remainder whereof is justly
exacted by him that made thee. Sighs, Sobs, Prayers and Tears, are all the
Treasures that are left thee: and precious Treasures shall these be to thee, if
presented by Faith to the Throne of mercy; for the Enemy can never prevail,
where Christian Fear, and constant hope possesses the Soul.

XIV.
Let thy desire then be planted, where thy Treasure is placed; and as one
ravished with a spiritual Fervor, cry out and spare not, with that devour
Father St. Hierom, Saying, Should my Mother tear her Hair, rent her Clothes,
lay forth those Breasts which nursed me, and hang about me; should my Father
lie in the way to stop me, my Wife and Children weep about me; I would throw
off my Mother, neglect my Father, contemn the Lamentation of my Wife and
Children, to meet my Savior.

XV.
And less than this, O my Soul, thou can not do; if thou call to mind what
thou leavest; to whom thou go; and what thou have in Exchange for that thou
losest. For what do thou leave here, but a World of Misery? to whom go
thou, but to a God of Mercy? and what haft thou in Exchange, for a vile, frail
and corruptible Body, but immortal Glory? Whatsoever thou had here, was got
with Pain, kept with Fear, and lost with Grief: whereas now thou art to possess
eternal Riches without Laboring; and to enjoy them without fear of losing.

The Prayer.
O God, my Heart then is ready, my Heart is ready; too long have I sojourned
here, and made my self a Stranger to my Heavenly Country. It is high time for
me then to discamp* and to leave these Tents of Kedar: that I may rest without
Laboring; rejoice without sorrowing; and live without dying in the Celestial
Tabor; saying with that Vessel of Election, I desire to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ, even so Lord Jesus, come quickly.

A Prayer, when we hear a Bell ring for a Person at the Point of Death.
OEternal God, I humbly thank thee, for speaking in this voice to my Soul, and
I humbly beseech thee also, to accept my Prayers in his behalf, by whose
occasion this voice, this sound is come to me. For though he, and all of us,
have highly offended thee, yet do thou in mercy receive us, and grant, that now
his Soul being ready to depart from hence, to thy Kingdom, it may quickly
return to a joyful reunion to that Body which it has left, and that we with
it, may soon enjoy the full Consummation of all, in Body and Soul.

II.
I humbly beg at thy hand, O merciful God, for thy Son Christ Jesus sake, That
thy Blessed Son may have the Consummation of his Dignity, by entering into his
last Office, the Office of a Judge, and may have Society of humane Bodies in
Heaven, as well, as he has had ever of Souls; and that as thou hate Sin it
self, thy hate to sin may be expressed in the abolishing of all Instruments of
Sin, the Allurements of this World, and the World it self; and all the
temporary Revenges of Sin, the Stings of Sickness and of Death; and all the
Castles and Prisons, and Monuments of Sin in the Grave.

III.
Let time be swallowed up in Eternity, and hope swallowed in Possession, and
ends swallowed in infiniteness, and all Men ordained to Salvation, in Body and
Soul, be one entire and everlasting Sacrifice to thee, where thou may receive
Delight from them, and they Glory from thee, for evermore. Amen.

Meditation XXXII. Of this Life compared with Eternity.
FOrasmuch, as Man who is born of a Woman, has but a short time to live, and
is full of Trouble: so Man, as regenerate and born of God, has a long time to
live, and is full of Bliss. A Life so long that it runs parallel with Eternity;
and therefore (without an abuse) we cannot use such an Expression as length of
time.

II.
It is not a long, but an endless Life; it is not Time, but Eternity, which now
I speak of. Nor is it a wretched Eternity, of which a Man may have the
Privilege, as he is born of a Woman; but an Eternity of Bliss, which is
competent to him only as born of God.

III.
And of this Bliss, there is such a fullness, that our Heads are too thick to
understand it. Or if we were able to understand it, yet our Hearts are too
narrow to give it Entrance. Or if our Hearts could hold it, yet our Tongues are
too stammering to express and utter it. Or if we were able to do that, yet our
Lives are too short to Communicate and reveal it to other Creatures. In a word,
it is such, as not only Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, but it never has
entered into the Heart of Man to conceive. Incomprehensible as it is, it is such
as God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9.

IV.
If we compare this Life, with that of Job's which is full of Trouble, it will
several ways be useful to us; for it will moderate our Joys, whilst we possess
our dear Friends; and it will mitigate our Sorrows, when we have lost them; for
it will mind us, that they are freed from a Life of Misery, and that they are
happily translated to one of Bliss. Nay if we are true Lovers indeed, and look
not only at our own Interest, but at the Interest of the parties to whom we vow
affection, we even lose them to our advantage, because to theirs.

V.
Lastly, it sweetens the solemn Farewell, which our immortal Souls must take of
our mortal Bodies; we shall desire to be dissolved, when we can groundedly hope
we shall be with Christ; we shall groan, and groan earnestly to be uncloathed
of our Bodies, with which we are burdened; if we live by this Faith, that we
shall shortly be clothed upon with our House from Heaven, 2 Cor. 5.7, 23, 24.
We shall cheerfully lay down our Bodies in the Dust, when it is to rest in
Peace: who will certainly raise us by his Power, that we may rest and Reign
with him in Glory. Amen.

The Prayer.
HOw hardly can we be persuaded, O Lord, to forsake the vanishing Pleasures of
this Life, for thy Glory and our own Happiness? How unwillingly should we lay
down our Lives for thy sake or the Gospels, that can so hardly part with one
Sin in obedience to thy Law?

II.
Thy Yoke is easy, and thy Service a perfect Freedom; and yet we count thy
Sanctuary a Prison, thy Law a trouble, and can scarce Sacrifice so much time to
our Devotions, as to pay unto thee the Honor due unto thy Name.

III.
Pardon and Pity this Corruption of our Frames; and teach us whether we live or
die, to delight in that for which thou made us; even to glorify thee: That
so whenever this earthly Tabernacle shall be dissolved, we may receive our
Change with Joy, and be carried by Angels to an everlasting Inheritance, there
to remain to all Eternity. Amen.

Meditation XXXIII. COMFORTS against the Fears of DEATH, and Consolations
against immoderate Grief for the loss of Friends.
IF it be a Blessing of the virtuous to Mourn, the reward which attends it, is
to be Comforted; and he that pronounced the one, promised the other. I doubt
not, but that Spirit, whose Nature is Love, and whose Name Comforter, as he
knows the occasion of our Grief, so has he salved and seasoned it, with
supplies of Grace, pouring into our Wounds no less Oil of mercy than wine of
Justice.

II.
Yet since affection owes Compassion as a Duty to the afflicted, and Nature
has ingrafted a desire to find it; that which dies to our Love, is always
alive to our Sorrow, and we might have been kind to a less loving Friend; but
finding in him, so many worths to be loved, our Love wrought more earnestly
upon so sweet a Subject, which now being deprived of, our Grief to our Love is
not inferior, the one being ever the Balance of the other.

III.
The Scripture moves us to shed Tears for the dead, a thing not offending
Grace, and a right to reason. For to be without remorse, at the Death of
Friends, is neither incident nor convenient to the Nature of Man, having too
much Affinity to a savage Temper, and overthrowing the ground of all Piety,
which is mutual Sympathy in each others Miseries. But as not to feel Sorrow in
sorrowful Chances, is to want Sense; so not to bear it with Moderation, is to
want understanding: The one brutish, the other effeminate: and he has cast his
Account best, that has brought his Sum to a proper Medium.

IV.
It is no less Criminal to exceed in Sorrow, than to pass the limits of
Competent Mirth: for excess in either, is a disorder in Passion, though that
sorrow of Friendship be less blamed of Men, because if it be a Crime, it is
also a Punishment, at once causing and creating Torments. It is no good Sign in
the Sick to be Senseless in his Pains; and as bad it is to be unusually
sensitive, being both either Harbingers, or Attendants of Death.

V.
Let our condoling, since it is due to the Dead, testify a feelingof Pity, not
any pang of Passion, and bewray rather a tender than a dejected mind; Mourn, so
as your Friends may find you a living Example, all Men, a discreet Mourner,
making Sorrow a Signal, not a Superior to Reason.

VI.
Some are so obstinate in their own Will, that even time, the natural Remedy of
the most violent Agonies, cannot by any delays assuage their Grief: they
entertain their Sorrow with solitary Muses, and feed their Sighs and Tears with
doleful Accents: they Pine their Bodies, and draw all pensive Consideration to
their minds, nursing their Heaviness with a Melancholy humor, as though they
had dedicated themselves to sadness, unwilling it should end, till it had ended
them: wherein their Folly sometimes finds a ready effect; that being true,
which Solomon observed, that as a Moth the Garment, and a Worm the Wood, so
does sadness persuade the Heart.

VII.
But this impotent softness fitteth not sober minds, we must not make a Lives
profession of a seven Nights Duty; nor under Color of kindness to others, be
unnatural to our selves: if some in their Passions drive their Thoughts into
such Labyrinths, that neither Wit knows, nor Will cares how long, or how far
they wander in them, it discovers their weakness, but deserves our
Meditation.

VIII.
The Scripture warns us, not to give our Hearts up to heaviness, yea rather
to reject it as a thing not beneficial to the Dead, but prejudicial to our
selves: Eccles. 38. allows but seven days of Mourning, judging Moderation in
Grief, to be a sufficient Testimony in Good Will, and a necessary rule of
Wisdom.

IX.
Much lamenting for the Dead, is either the Child of Self-love, or of rash
Judgment, if we should shed our Tears for the Death of others, as a Mediocrity
to our Contentment; we expose but our own Wound, even perfect Lovers of our
selves. If we lament their decease, as their hard Determination, we Tax them of
ill deserving, with too peremptory a Censure, as though their Life had been an
arise, and their Death a leap into final Perdition; for otherwise a good
departure craveth small condoling, being but a Harbor from Storms, an entrance
unto Felicity.

X.
Our Life is a due Debt to a more certain Owner than our selves, and therefore
so long as we have it, we receive a benefit; when we are deprived of it, we
have no wrong: We are Tenants at Will, of this Clay-farm, not for term of
years; when we are warned out, we must be ready to remove, having no other
Title but the owners Pleasure: it is but an Inn, not an Home: we came to bait,
not to dwell, and the Condition of our entrance was, in short, to depart. If
this Departure be grievous, it is also common, this to day to me, to morrow to
thee; and the Case equally afflicting all, leaves none any cause to complain of
injurious usage.

XI.
Natures Debt is sooner exacted of some than of others; yet there is no fault
in the Creditor, who exacteth but his own, but in the Greediness of our eager
hopes, either repining that their Wishes fail, or willingly forgetting their
Mortality, whom they are unwilling by experience to see Mortal: yet the general
Tide wafteth all Passengers to the same Shore, some sooner, some later, but all
at the last: and we must fix our minds upon our time when it is come, never
fearing a thing so necessary, yet ever expecting a thing so uncertain.

XII.
God has concealed from us, the time of our Death, leaving us resolved between
fear and hope of longer continuance. He cuts off unripe Cares, lest with the
notice and Pensiveness of our Divorce from the World, we should lose the
Comforts of necessary Contentments, and before our dying day, languish away
with expectation of Death.

XIII.
Some are taken in their first step into this Life, receiving at once, their
Welcome and Farewell, as though they had been born, only to be buried, and to
take their Pasport, in this hourly middle of their Course; the good to prevent
Change; the bad to shorten their impiety.

XIV.
Who is there that has any Virtue eternized, or deserts commended to
Posterity, that has not mourned in Life, and been bewailed after Death, no
assurance of joy being sealed without some Tears? Even the Blessed Virgin the
Mother of God, was thrown down as deep in temporal Miseries, as she was
advanced high in spiritual Honors; none amongst all mortal Creatures, finding
in Life more Proof than she of her Mortality.

XV.
For having the noblest Son, that ever Woman was Mother of, not only above the
Condition of Men, but above the Glory of Angels, being her Son only without
temporal Father, and thereby the Love of both Parents doubled in her Breast,
being her only Son without other issue, and so her Love of all Children expired
in him: as he was God, and she the nearest Creature to God's perfections, yet
no Prerogative exempted her from Mourning, or him from dying: and though they
surmounted the highest Angels in all other Preheminences; yet were they equal
with the meanest Men in the Sentence of Death.

XVI.
And however the Blessed Virgin, being the Pattern of Christian Mourners, so
tempered her anguish, that there was neither any thing undone that might be
exacted of a Mother, nor any thing done that might be mis-liked in so perfect a
Matron; yet by this we may guess with what kindnesses Death is like to befriend
us, that durst cause so Bloody Funerals in so Heavenly a Progeny, not exempting
him from the Laws of dying, that was the Author of Life, and soon after to
honor his Triumphs, with a glorious Resurrection.

XVII.
Seeing therefore, that Death spares none, let us spare our Tears for better
uses, being but an Idol-Sacrifice to this deaf and implacable Executioner. And
for this, not long to be continued, where they can never profit, Nature did
promise us a weeping Life, exacting Tears for Custom, at our first entrance,
and to furnish our whole Course in this doleful beginning; therefore they must
be used with Discretion, that must be used so often; and where so many Debts
lie yet unpaid, which must be satisfied by Tears of Repentance.

XVIII.
Since we cannot put a Period to our Tears, let us at least reserve them: If
Sorrow cannot be shunned, let it be taken in time of need, since otherwise being
both troublesome and fruitless, it is a double Misery, or an open Folly. We
moisten not the ground with precious Waters, they were distilled to nobler
ends, either by their Virtues to delight our Senses, or by their Operations to
preserve our Healths.

XIX.
Our Tears are water of too high a Price, to be prodigally poured in the Dust
of any Graves. If they be Tears of Love, they perfume our Prayers, making them
Odor of sweetness, fit to be offered on the Altar of the Throne of God: if
Tears of Contrition, they are water of Life to the dying Souls, they may
purchase Favor, and repeal the Sentence, till it be executed, as the Example
of Ezechias does testify: but when the Punishment is past, and Verdict
performed in effect, their pleading is in vain, as David taught us when his
Child was dead, 2 Kings 11. saying that he was likelier to go to it, than it,
by his weeping, to return to him.

XX.
Learn therefore to give Sorrow no long Dominion over you, wherefore the Wise
should rather mark than expect an end; meet it not when it comes, do not
invite it when it is absent: When you feel it, do not force it, for the brute
Creatures have but a short, though vehement Sense of their Losses. You should
bury the sharpness of your Grief in the Grave, and rest contented, with a kind,
yet mild Compassion, neither less decent for you, nor more than agreeable to
your Nature and Judgment.

XXI.
Your much Heaviness would renew a multitude of Griefs, and your Eyes would be
Springs to many Streams, adding to the Memory of the dead, a new occasion of
Complaint to your own discomfort; the Motion of your Heart measures the
beating of many Pulses, which in any Distemper of your quiet with the like
stroke will soon bewray themselves sick of your Disease.

XXII.
The terms of our Life, are like the Seasons of the year; some for Sowing, some
for Growing, some for Reaping; in this only different, that as the Heavens keep
their prescribed Periods, so the Succession of time have their appointed
Changes. But in the Seasons of our Life, which are not the Law of necessary
Causes, some are reaped in the Seed, some in the Blade, some in the unripe
Ears, all in the end; this Harvest depending upon the Reapers Will.

XXIII.
Death is too ordinary a thing to seem any Novelty, being a familiar Guest in
every House; and since his coming is expected, and his Errand known, neither
his Presence should be feared, nor his Effects lamented; what wonder is it to
see fuel burned, Spice bruised, or Snow melted? and as little fearful it is to
see those dead, that were born upon Condition once to die.

XXIV.
Night and Sleep, are perpetual Mirrours, figuring in their darkness, silence,
shutting up of Senses, the final end of our mortal Bodies: and for this some
have entitled Sleep the eldest Brother of Death: but with no less Convenience
it might be called one of Death's Tenants, near unto him in Affinity of
Condition; yet far inferior in right, being but Tenant for a time, of that
Death, which is the Inheritance: for by Virtue of the Conveyance made to him in
Paradise, that Dust we were, and to Dust we must return; he has hitherto
showed his Seigniority over all, exacting of us not only the yearly, but hourly
Revenue of time, which ever by minutes we defray unto him.

XXV.
So that our very Life, is not only a Memory, but a part of our Death, and the
longer we have lived, the less time we have to come, what is the daily
lessening of our Life, but a continual dying? and therefore none is more
grieved with the running out of the last Sand in an Hourglass, than with all
the rest; so should not the end of the last hour trouble us any more, than of
so many that went before, since that did but finish the Course, that all the
rest were still ending: not the quantity, but the quality commends our Life;
the ordinary Gain of long Livers, being only a great burden of Sin.

XXVI.
Let your mind therefore Consent to that which your Tongue daily craveth, that
God's will may be done, as well here upon Earth, as it is done in Heaven, since
his Will, is the best measure of all Events; there is in this World continual
enterchange of pleasing and greeting Accidents, still keeping their Succession
of times, and overtaking each other in their several Courses.

XXVII.
No Picture can be all drawn of the brightest Colors, nor an Harmony consorted
only of Trebles: shadows are useful in expressing of Proportions, and the base
is a principal part in perfect Music: the Condition of our Exile here allows
no unmingled Joy, our whole Life is temperate between sweet and sour, and we
must all look for a mixture of both.

XXVIII.
The Wise so wish: Better, that they still think of worse, accepting the one,
if it come with liking, and bearing the other without impatience, being so much
Masters of each others Fortunes, that neither shall work them to excess; the
Dwarf grows not up to the highest Hill, nor the Tallest loses not his height
in the lowest Valley; and as a base sordid mind, though most at ease, will be
dejected: so a resolute Virtue in the deepest distress is most impregnable.

XXIX.
They evermore most perfectly enjoy their Comforts, that least fear their
afflictions; for a desire to enjoy carries with it a fear to lose: and both
Desire and Fear are Enemies to quiet Possession, making Men rather Owners of
God's Benefits, than Tenants at his Will. The cause of our Troubles are, that
our misfortunes happen either to unwitting or unwilling minds; foresight
preventeth the one, necessity the other: and he takes away the smart of
present Evils that attends their coming, and is not frighted at any Cross,
but is armed against all.

XXX.
Where necessity works without our Consent, the Effects should never greatly
afflict us, Grief being insignificant where it cannot help, needless where
there was no fault committed; if Men should lay all their Evils together, to be
afterward by equal Portions divided among them, most Men would rather take
that they brought, than stand to the Division.

XXXI.
Yet such is the partial Judgment of Self-love, that every Man judges his own
Misery too great, fearing if he can find some Circumstances to increase it, and
making it tolerable, by thought to induce it; when Moses threw his Rod from
him, it became a Serpent ready to sting him, and affrighted him, insomuch as it
made him fly; but being quietly taken up, it was a Rod again, serviceable for
his use, and no way hurtful.

XXXII.
The Cross of Christ, and Rod of every Tribulation, seeming to threaten
Stinging and Terror to those that shun it: but they that mildly take it up,
and embrace it with Patience, may say with David, thy Rod and thy Staff have
been my Comfort. Affliction much resembles the Crocodile; fly, it pursues and
frighteth; followed, it flies and fears; a shame to the Constant, and a
Tyrant to the Timorous.

XXXIII.
Soft minds, that think only upon Delights, admit no other Consideration, but
in flattering Objects, become so effeminate, as that they are apt to bleed with
every sharp impression; but he that uses his Thoughts with Expectation of
Troubles, making their Travel through all hazards, and opposing his Resolution
against the sharpest Encounters, finds in the Product facility of Patience,
and eases the Load of most heavy Troubles.

XXXIV.
We must have temporal things in use, but eternal in Wish, that in the one
neither Delight exceed (in that we have no Desire, in that we want) and in the
other our most delight is here in desire, and our whole Desire, is hereafter to
enjoy; they straiten too much their Joys, that draw them into the reach and
compass of their Senses, as if it were no Facility, where no Sense is Witness:
whereas if we exclude our passed and future Contentments, Pleasures have so
fickle an assurance, that either as forestalled before their Arrival, or
interrupted before their end, or ended before they are well begun.

XXXV.
The Repetition of former Comforts, and the Expectation of after Hopes, is ever
a relief unto a virtuous mind: whereas others not suffering their Lives to
continue in the Conveniences of that which was, and shall be divided, this day
from yesterday and to morrow, and by forgetting all, and forecasting nothing,
abridge their whole Life, into the moment of present Eternity.

XXXVI.
How ought we then to submit our selves to God's Will; let him strip you to the
Skin, nay to the Soul, so he stay with you himself; let his Reproach be your
Honor, his Poverty your Riches, and he in lieu of all other Friends: think him
enough for this World, that must be all your Possession for a whole Eternity;
and in all your Crosses and Afflictions in this Life, humbly say with Holy Job,
The Lord gave, and the Lord takes away, blessed be the Name of the Lord. Te
Deum Laudamus.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
Meditation I. UPon remembering our Creator in the days of our Youth, Page 1
The Prayer, p. 4.
Meditation II. The remembrance of Death, a powerful Remedy against Sin, p. 6.
Prayers against sudden Death, p. 9.
Meditation III. What Life is, p. 11. The Prayer, p. 13.
Meditation IV. That we ought continually to watch and pray, p. 14. The Prayer,
p. 17.
Meditation V. Death often to be thought of, p. 18. The Prayer, p. 21.
Meditation VI. Of the shortness of humane Life, p. 22. The Prayer, p. 24.
Meditation VII. That we ought early to seek after God, p. 26. The Prayer, p.
28.
Meditation VIII. That Affliction is necessary to all Persons, p. 29. The
Prayer, p. 31.
Meditation IX. That Affliction is a Mark of God's Favor, p. 33. The Prayer,
p. 34.
Meditation X. Of Man's Original, being born to die, p. 35. The Prayer, p. 39.
Meditation XI. Memorials hourly necessary, upon the four last things, Death,
Judgment, Hell, and Heaven, p. 40. The Prayer, p. 42.
Meditation XII. On Death, p. 43. The Prayer, p. 47.
Meditation XIII. Upon Judgment, p. 47. The Prayer, p. 51.
Meditation XIV. Upon Hell, p. 52. The Prayer, p. 56.
Meditation XV. Upon Heaven, p. 57. The Prayer, p. 60.
Meditation XVI. The remembrance of the four last things, reduced to Practice,
p. 61. The Prayer, p. 65.
Meditation XVII. With Comfort, Faith applies her self to the sick Man's
Conscience, p. 66. The Prayer, p. 70.
Meditation XVIII. Hopes Address to the sick Penitent, Ibid. The Prayer, p. 73.
Meditation XIX. The Exercise of Charity, p. 75. The Prayer, p. 79.
Meditation XX. The Souls flight to Heaven, p. 80. The Prayer, p. 83.
Meditation XXI. Upon the Misery of humane Life, and the Blessedness of eternal
Life, p. 84. The Prayer, p. 90.
Meditation XXII. In time of Sickness, p. 91. A Prayer for a happy end, in time
of Sickness, p. 97.
Meditation XXIII. Of Thanksgiving for Ease in Sickness, or Recovery out of it,
p. 98. A Prayer of Thanksgiving, p. 102.
Meditation XXIV. Comfortable Refreshments, at the hour of Death, to be used by
those who are present, p. 103. A Prayer for a sick Person, when there appear
small hopes of Recovery, p. 107. A Commendatory Prayer for a sick Person at the
Point of Departure. p. 108.
Meditation XXV. Of the uncertainty of our Lives, p. 110. The Prayer, p. 113.
Meditation XXVI. On the Frailty of our Lives, p. 114. The Prayer, p. 118.
Meditation XXVII. That Death frees us from the Vexations, Troubles, and Cares
of this mortal Life, p. 119. The Prayer, p. 121.
Meditation XXVIII. That many have desired Death, rather than Life, p. 122. The
Prayer, p. 125.
Meditation XXIX. Of improving our time, p. 126. The Prayer, p. 130.
Meditation XXX. Motives not to defer our Repentance to a future Time. p. 131.
The Prayer, p. 139.
Meditation XXXI. The sick Man's last Will and Testament, 139. The Prayer, p.
145. A Prayer when we hear a Bell ring for a Person at the Point of Death, p.
146.
Meditation XXXII. Of this Life compared with Eternity, p. 147. The Prayer, p.
150.
Meditation XXXIII. Comforts against the Fears of Death, and Consolations
against immoderate Grief, for the Loss of Friends, p. 151.
The End of the Contents.

