A SECOND LIST Of the Names Offices, and Rewards of Parliament men, for their
hearty Endeavors to ruinate both KING and KINGDOM.
The second CENTURIE.
I Gave you in my last the names of those Members of the House of Commons
(observing which were Officers of the Army, contrary to the self denying
Ordinance) together with such sums, Offices, and Lands as they had given to
themselves for services done against the King and Kingdom, now according to my
promise I appear a second time unto you, with a Scrole containing what further
Offices and rewards, have been bestowed, upon those who call themselves
Parliament men, but are indeed no other then the betrayers of their King and
Country, these are they who have suppressed the Monopolies of Soap, Tobacco, they
have monopoliz'd our lives, which they offer up on all occasions as sacrifices
to their ambitious desire of Sovereignty, they have monopoliz'd our wives and
daughters, whom they abuse at their pleasure for the sating of their monstrous
lusts, they have monopoliz'd our Estates, so that no man is master of what he
has, all civil propriety be taken away, they Sequestring men's Lands, and
plundering them to a penny, upon very slight and trivial grounds, and indeed
without any ground at all, save for the enriching of themselves, these are
they, that with the King of Ammon promise us liberty, provided we will permit
them, to bore out our right eyes first, who bave eased us of the payment of a
penny, and instead thereof constrain us to disburse millions, yea, all we
have, and yet afterward cast us in prison there to starve with hunger, those
and such like are those glorious liberties, to which this Parliament has
restored us.

Cornelius Holland given unto him South-hampton house.

Sr. Henry Vane made master of the Roles, for his eagerness against the King
on all occasions, besides, 2000. l. given him out of the Earl of Canarvans
estate, he and his son are both Members of the House of Commons, and though
they received their first being from his Majesty, are the maddest dogs of all
the whole pack against him.

The Lord Gray (son to the Earl of Stamford) who is now in arms for the
Parliament in the North, and under pretense to suppress Insurrections,
plunders the poor Country people of all they have, has received as a gratuity
from the two Houses, the Queens Manor house, Park, and Lands at Holdenby,
and has ever since his receipt of them, continually cut down the woods, it
seems he is fearful he shall not long enjoy them.

Sir William Purfoy, a great demolisher of Crosses and Images, I wonder how he
forbore to do outrage on his own face, it looks so like Saint Dunstanes,
with a pair of tongues at his nose, he was the hammer that beat down all the
ancient monuments in the Earls Chapel at Warwick, and in St. Mary's Church,
for which he received at one time a thousand pounds, at another time five
hundred pounds, and has also had bestowed on him a great share out of Sr.
Henry Comptons Office, worth 300. l. per annum.

Sir Thomus Middleton, Major General for five united Counties, received 2000.
l. from the Parliament, and made General for Denbigh.

Sir Arthur Haslerig, Governor of Newcastle, given him 3000. l. the Bishop of
Durhams house with the Park, and manor of Aukland.

Mr. Yarrington given him 1000. l. out of the estate of Sr. John Owen, and Sr.
Henry Lingen, Humphrey Salway, once the Kings Remembrancer, given unto him the
Bishops of VVinchesters house at Taunton worth 2000. l. per annum.

VVelde^, a Col. of Horse, given him 1000 l. out of Sr. John Harrisons estate,
and does not he well deserve it.

Tom Scot the Brewers Clarke, whose brains work perpetually like bottle ale
against his Majesty, and who once said openly in the house, that the King was
guilty of all the innocent blood that has been shed and for it ought to be
brought to a legal trial, and to be hanged, given him 2000 l. also an Office
in Brewers Hall, worth 500. l. per annum.

Nol Cromwell Prince of the Faction, given him at one time 2000 l. at another
time 500 l. and since his obtaining the last victory against the Scots, given
him two thousand pound more.

Wait, a Member of the House of Commons given him 600 l. out of the Earl of
VVorcesters estate, also Mr, VVallinghams place worth 400 l. per annum.

Harlow a Col. given unto him 1000 l. pounds, and an Office in the Exchequer
worth 500 l. per annum.

Blackiston a Tailor of New Castle, a Member of the House of Commons, and can
so well clip and snip the Crown, and cut in pieces all the robes of the
prerogative, given unto him 2000 l. out of the Earl of Norwich his estate; and
an Office in the Excise worth 300 l. per annum.

Sr. Ralph Aston given unto him 1000. pound.

Al. Sidney given unto him 500 l. and he made Governor of Dover Castle, Edmond
Ludlow, given unto him 600 l. and he made Governor of Newarke.

Harvey a great stickler against his Majesty, and a desperate upholder of the
faction, and no marvel, for they gave him at one time 1100 l. out of the
estate of the Lord Andover, and he is at this time possessed of the Bishop of
Londons, and manor of Fulham.

Gilbert Gerhard, the second son of Sir Gilbert Gerhard, the plot finder,
given him 200 l. also the Clarkship of the Assize in Norfolk worth 500 l. per
annum.

Sr. Thomas Honiwood, given him 600 l. out of the estate of the Earl of
Cleaveland, and made receiver of Yorkshire.

Sr. William Compton, given him a thousand pound out of the Lord Astleys estate.

Bloise a Col: given him 600 l. out of sir Edward Mosel^yes estate, and made
Governor of Exceter.

Sir Thomas VVithrington given 1000 l. and he made Commissioner of the great
Seal worth 1500 l. per annum.

James Scawin given him 1000 l. and he made an Officer for the Excise, worth to
him 500 l. per annum.

Edward Cook given unto him 4000 l. out of the Marquess of New-castles estate.

Smith son a Major, given unto him 1500 l. out of the estate of the Lord
Grandison, and he made Governor of Warwick.

Sr. Henry Heyman given him 5000 l.

H^utchinson given him 1000 l. and he made Governor of Oxford.

Norton a Col. given him 1500 l. pounds, and he made Governor of South hampton.

Charles Fleetwood Colonel, given 1600 l. and he made Governor of Abington.

Reynolds given him 2000 l. with Abington and the lands belonging thereto.
worth 400 l. per annum.

Edward Sexby given him 600 l. and an Office in Goldsmith Hall, worth 300 l.
per annum.

Captain Gray given him 300 l. at one time, at another time 600 l.

I cannot but inform you, that these Commissioners of both Houses of
Parliament, viz: Mr. Adam Lawrence, Mr. Dierrick Hoosts, Mr. Maurice Thompson,
and Mr. Nicholas Corsells, who were employed to the States of Holland, and to
the Burgomasters of the several Cities to negotiate for the relief of the
protestants in Ireland, having given up their accounts, it appears that they
have received of the well effected in Holland for the relief of the
Protestants in Ireland, the full sum of one and thirty thousand two hundred
and eighteen pounds, which computed with that which has been levied in
England since the war, amounts to full three millions whereof the poor
Protestants of Ireland have received barely but twenty thousand pounds, the
rest is in the Chests of our purse Reformers, these are thy worthies oh
England, to whom thou offrest up thy self a bloody sacrifice.

Charles Loolen given him 600 l. with 400 l. more out of the estate of sir John
Srangewaies.

Thus do our Reformers cut out large thongs out of other men's sides, and give
away franckly that which is none of their own, as a week since they bestowed
no less then six hundred pounds upon several Messengers, who came one upon
the neck of another, with the unfortunate news out of Scotland, it might be
proved that they have squandred away the better part of forty thousand pounds
since this war upon Spies and Messengers these are they that have eased us of
one King, to the end themselves might all turn Tyrants, who have charitably
diverted us from a war with a forreig^e Enemy, to the end we might sheath our
swords in our own bowels, that so upon our dead carcasses they might mount
the throne of the Kingdom, these are they, that under pretense of purging the
errors, have lef^ us ^o Church at all, but it fares with the people of
England, as it was once with the Israelites of old when they had no King to
rule over them, every man does that which is right in his own eyes, these are
they who have imprisoned and abused the most virtuous Prince in Europe, have
quite marred the most reformed Church in Christendom, and who will (without
Gods great mercy) be the ruin of the sometime) most renowned and worthy
English Nation, so tha^ they shall cease from under Heaven.

FINIS.

