A Sad and Lamentable ACCOUNT Of the Strange and Unhappy Misfortune of Mr. John
Temple, The Person who Leaped out of the Boat under London-Bridg, and was
Drowned on Friday the 19th of this Instant April. Together with the Manner of
finding him, and the Circumstances that attended this Gentleman's Ruin, with an
Account of the Paper left by him in the Boat, etc.
With Allowance.
VArious are the Misfortunes of Mankind, and proceed from different Causes, and
by different Ways, but what here we shall relate, is very strange and
surprising, and has for some days past, appeared so to many Judicious Persons:
But to come nearer to the purpose.

On Friday Morning, Mr. John Temple, a Gentleman of a considerable Estate, and
for his many Acquirements much beloved and esteemed, left his Lodging in or
near White Hall, and taking water, directed the Waterman to Row him down the
Thames, calling at some places by the way, to enquire (as the Waterman
conjectures) for Friends; appearing as he had done a while before very
Melancholy and Discontented, or at least somewhat disturbed and troubled in
Mind, and with that Waterman he shot the Bridge; but whatever at that time came
into his Thoughts, he attempted not, as the Waterman perceived, what afterward
unhappily fell out, yet contrary to expectation; he Landed at one of the Wharfs
on this side Billings-G^te, and dismissing the Boat, in a short time came back
to the Old Swan Stairs, and took another Boat, which he ordered to shoot the
Bridge without any certain Directions whether to go: And whilst the VVaterman
was passing through, looking forward to guide his Boat from running on the
Piles, or Starlings, the said Gentleman expressing somewhat, though not fully
understood, by reason of the roaring of the Water, plunged into the Stream, so
that though he used what endeavor he could to take him at the Rising, he could
not see him to give him any assistance: But looking where he had sat, he found
a written Note, and in it or by it a Shilling; his Hat was taken up floating at
a considerable distance.

This creating much Discourse about Town, and his Friends (who were very
considerable) coming to hear of it, offers of Reward were made to such as could
find his Body: Whereupon four Boats, and several Men in them, with Ropes and
Grablers, searched the Thames a great part of Sunday, using all Opportunities
to find the dead Body; and so fortunate were they at last, as to find him in a
Ballast Hole, or Whirl-Pit, near Pickle-Herring Stairs, by taking hold of a
Boss-rope that had Entangled him in his Pocket. He had a Watch, and things of
value in his Pocket, and by his side a Silver-hilted Sword, and very good
Apparel. The dead Body was brought to the VVater-Bailiffs House, near
Fishmongers-Hall, and there in a rich Coffin, and Laced Shroud, exposed to
View, whilst the Coroners Jury sat on him,

He was Married to a Gentlewoman of a considerable Fortune, and accounted to be
worth in Estate about 3000 l. per Annum.

The Paper he left imported, That having taken upon him an extraordinary
Business, which ^e could not Accomplish, had incited him to do what he did, or
that it could not be stopped by (...) easier way. This is the Sum of this
unfortunate and unhappy Accident, and may it stand (...) a Warning to others,
to prevent the like Misfortune for the future.

London, Printed by W. D. in Bartholomew-Close. 1689.


