THE SECOND HUMBLE ADDRESS Of those who are Called ANABAPTISTS IN The County
of Lincoln.
Presented to His MAJESTY, CHARLES the Second, King of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, etc.
May it Please Your Majesty,
ONce more to permit Your Distressed (yet Faithful) Subjects, to spread their
Innocence and sorrow of Heart before You; it seems it must needs be that
Offenses do or shall come; but the Woe is deservedly their Portion (only) by
whom the Offense comes: And were it not that we had that strong Fort Innocence
to fly unto, we durst not in this miserable Day once dare to make our Address
unto You.

But having this to support us in this Tottering Age, we therefore boldly (yet
in all Humility) solemnly declare, That notwithstanding the many wicked
Practices spoken of, or done against Your Majesty and Government; yet is our
Hearts and Hands Clean and Pure here-from, as utterly Abominable, and held in
great detestation in our Judgments and Principles, as is further Declared by
our Address formerly; according to which former Address, we hold our selves
bound, as also by Your great Favors to us vouchsafed, when by Your Princely
Favor permitted to be present with Your Self, we are abundantly engaged; so
have we made it, and so shall we make it (the God of Heaven and Earth assisting
of us) our great Care to Discharge our Duties in every Respect to the utmost of
our Ability, as becomes the Children of God, and Subjects to the King.

We have not wanted hearty Desires to signify our Opinions and Resolutions
touching the Government of this Nation, and of our deportment under the same,
by a general Agreement of all our Brethren, in the same Form of Profession with
us, but have been prevented partly by the unseasonableness of the time; and
partly by the negligence of some betrusted in the Business; and partly by the
unhappy Tumults and Disturbances made and committed by men who fear not to
speak evil of Dignities: And Lastly, We are altogether Incapacitated for such
an undertaking by your Majesty's late Proclamation, prohibiting all Meetings of
such as are denominated Anabaptists.

O King, we must confess there is too notorious Cause for severity, since
Clemency and Mercy has been abused; but the abusers of Mercy ought (only) to
feel the smart of their misdoings: But Oh let the Innocent have the Reward of
their Innocence, even the Continuation of Mercy, so will Your Throne be
Established in Righteousness.

When we read Your Letter from Breda, and the Revival thereof in Your
Declaration for Ecclesiastical Affairs; and Your Princely Promises to us, when
by Your Clemency permitted to be present with Your Self.

O King, when we remember these things, we are ready to say (not why was the
Kings Proclamation so hasty, but) why was the extention thereof so large? Shall
the Righteous suffer with the Wicked? God forbid. Must your peaceable Subjects
be judged Rioters, whilst many unpeaceable ones (such as Swearers and
Drunkards) are freed from that judgment? The Lord will not accompany such
proceedings.

Our humble Request from these Premises are, That there may be a Righteous
distinction in the Administration of Punishment; lest the Cries of the Innocent
and their ruined Families come up before the Lord, whilst your Prisons are
filled with such as whose Prayers have come up to the Throne of Grace on Your
Majesty's behalf, and can approve their hearts to the Lord in respect of
Loyalty and good Fidelity to Your Majesty, and Civil Government of this Nation
under Your hands.

It is indeed matter of sorrow, to see how the notorious profane do rejoice at
the present sufferings of the innocent; who therefore are occasioned to pray,
that wisdom may be given from God unto Your Majesty to execute the Law justly,
punishing the Evil-doer, and preserving all that do well.

But to avoid Prolixity (O King) be pleased to know, that Your poor Subjects
dare not refuse their innocent Meetings, wherein their work is sincerely to
Worship God, and pray for Your Majesty, and for all men as in duty they are
bound, seeing the Authority by which they are dehorted from the neglect of
their Assemblies, Heb. 10. 25. is greater than any, whereby Your Majesty can
enjoin the neglect thereof.

And therefore though it cost us the loss of all that we have and are, as to
things of an outward consideration; yet dare we not shrink from so great a loss.

Yet are we Resolved in the strength of God, not to Rebel against any of Your
Majesty's Commands: But in case we cannot conscionably Act, we humbly purpose
and heartily pray for strength to suffer patiently and joyfully; and therefore
cheerfully and faithfully do once more subscribe our selves Your Humble and
Obedient, though at this instant your Imprisoned and Distressed Subjects and
Petitioners,

Thomas Grentham Will. Burton John Thorpe Rich. Crawforth Valentine James
Richard Drewry John Kelsay John Skiritt John Lupton John Watts Edward Sharp
Charles Warwike Will. Lillye John Allan Robert Drewry Christoph. Ording Rich.
Hanson John Green Will. Pridgon Daniel Cheesman Ralph James Rob. Cox Tho.
Brampton John Norfolk Richard Mathin Will. Smith Tho. Renolds Rich. Wray Will.
Heart Tho. Muksworth.
Subscribed in behalf of themselves, and the several Congregations unto which
they are Relared in the County of Lincoln.

LONDON, Printed by Simon Dover, in Martins near Aldersgate, 1660.


